Deep Carbon Emissions from Volcanoes
Diffuse CO 2 degassing from both volcanic and tectonic structures is a large contributor to the global geological CO 2 emission, but is difficult to measure due to the large areal extent that may be in play, and the large number of degassing sites throughout the globe. Measuring the CO 2 degassing rates into volcanic lakes and from submarine volcanism have significant technical challenges. In the following we review the state of the art of volcanic CO 2 measurements and present a catalogue of reported, quantified emissions from geological sources. These measurements are then extrapolated to produce estimates of the global volcanic CO 2 flux. These estimates are compared with previously published estimates of total CO 2 emissions, silicate weathering rates and the rate of carbon consumption during subduction. We then examine the dynamic role of CO 2 within magmatic systems and the magnitude of CO 2 released during eruptions.

Our current estimates of volcanic carbon emissions are poorly constrained due to a lack of direct measurements. Measuring CO 2 in subaerial volcanic plumes is a challenge, because while CO 2 typically makes up ~10 mol% of volcanic gas emissions (the majority of which is normally water vapor), mixing with the atmosphere rapidly dilutes the volcanic CO 2 signature. Nevertheless, technological advances and an increase in the number of volcanoes studied have greatly increased our knowledge of volcanic CO 2 fluxes over the last 10 years. One of the main goals of this work is to update global geological CO 2 flux estimates (e.g., Kerrick 2001 ; Mörner and Etiope 2002 ; Fischer 2008 ) using the recently acquired volcanic CO 2 flux data.

The main focus of this work is the role of volcanism in producing CO 2 in the atmosphere and oceans. Volcanic CO 2 sources can be divided into several categories, direct and diffuse degassing from active arc and rift volcanoes, diffuse degassing from inactive volcanoes and regional diffuse degassing from intrusive plutonic structures with associated crustal metamorphism. We focus here on non-eruptive degassing because, as shown below, continuous emission of CO 2 from multiple sources appears to dominate short-lived eruptive emissions from point sources.

The principle elements of the multifaceted and complex geological carbon cycle are summarized in Figure 1 . The main sources of carbon are active and inactive volcanism from arcs and rift zones and metamorphism of crustal carbonates. The main sinks for geological carbon are silicate weathering and carbonation of oceanic crust. Knowledge of both the total magnitude of carbon ingassing during subduction and carbon released from volcanism and metamorphism would allow quantification of the evolution and relative distribution of volatiles in the crust and mantle ( Dasgupta and Hirschmann 2010 ).

Notwithstanding the uncertainties in our understanding of CO 2 degassing from Earth, it is clear that these natural emissions were recently dwarfed by anthropogenic emissions, which have rapidly increased since industrialization began on a large scale in the 18 th century, leading to a rapid increase in atmospheric CO 2 concentrations. While atmospheric CO 2 concentrations have varied between 190–280 ppm for the last 400,000 years ( Zeebe and Caldeira 2008 ), human activity has produced a remarkable increase in CO 2 abundance, particularly in the last 100 years, with concentrations reaching ~390 ppmv at the time of writing. This situation highlights the importance of understanding the natural carbon cycle, so that we may better determine the evolution of the anthropogenic perturbation.

Over long periods of time (~Ma), we may consider the oceans, atmosphere and biosphere as a single exospheric reservoir for CO 2 . The geological carbon cycle describes the inputs to this exosphere from mantle degassing, metamorphism of subducted carbonates and outputs from weathering of aluminosilicate rocks ( Walker et al. 1981 ). A feedback mechanism relates the weathering rate with the amount of CO 2 in the atmosphere via the greenhouse effect (e.g., Wang et al. 1976 ). An increase in atmospheric CO 2 concentrations induces higher temperatures, leading to higher rates of weathering, which draw down atmospheric CO 2 concentrations ( Berner 1991 ). Atmospheric CO 2 concentrations are therefore stabilized over long timescales by this feedback mechanism ( Zeebe and Caldeira 2008 ). This process may have played a role ( Feulner et al. 2012 ) in stabilizing temperatures on Earth while solar radiation steadily increased due to stellar evolution ( Bahcall et al. 2001 ). In this context the role of CO 2 degassing from the Earth is clearly fundamental to the stability of the climate, and therefore to life on Earth. Notwithstanding this importance, the flux of CO 2 from the Earth is poorly constrained. The uncertainty in our knowledge of this critical input into the geological carbon cycle led Berner and Lagasa (1989) to state that it is the most vexing problem facing us in understanding that cycle.

While recent estimates of geological emissions of CH 4 ( Etiope et al. 2008 ) clearly indicate that these emissions are significant compared with geological CO 2 on the global scale, in this work we focus on CO 2 emissions, and use the most recent volcanic CO 2 flux data to update the measured global volcanic CO 2 flux.

CO is emitted directly from volcanoes, with a CO 2 /CO ratio that varies between ~10 and ~1000 depending on the oxygen fugacity and temperature of the fluid co-existing with melt prior to outgassing. OCS is also directly emitted within volcanic plumes, but in even smaller relative amounts than CO, typically 1000–10,000:1 for CO 2 :OCS ( Mori and Notsu 1997 ; Burton et al. 2007a ; Oppenheimer and Kyle 2008 ; Sawyer et al. 2008a ). OCS is the most abundant S bearing gas species in the atmosphere, contributes to stratospheric sulfuric acid aerosol generation ( Crutzen 1976 ) and is an efficient greenhouse gas ( Brühl et al. 2012 ). Its budget is dominated by emissions from oceans and anthropogenic processes. From a total global output of ~1.3 Mt/yr of OCS only 0.03 Mt is estimated to arise from volcanism ( Watts 2000 ). CS 2 is the final trace carbon gas emission from volcanoes, with a similar flux and chemistry to OCS.

CO 2 is not the only carbon-containing molecule emitted from the Earth. In order of decreasing emissions, CO 2 , CH 4 , CO and OCS all contribute to the total carbon budget. Mörner and Etiope (2002) estimated that the global emission of CO 2 from Earth degassing was ~600 million tonnes of CO 2 per year (Mt/yr, 1 Mt = 10 12 g), with ~300 Mt/yr produced from subaerial volcanism, and another 300 Mt/yr produced from non-volcanic inorganic degassing, mostly from tectonically active areas ( Chiodini et al. 2005 ). For comparison, Cadle (1980) estimated that volcanic activity produces 0.34 Mt/yr of CH 4 . Mud volcanoes in Azerbijan were estimated to produce ~1 Mt/yr of CH 4 , however the global flux from mud volcanism is not known. Hydrocarbon seepage of CH 4 globally is estimated to produce between 8 and 68 Mt/yr ( Hornafius et al. 1999 ). Etiope et al. (2008) estimated that global CH 4 emissions from geological sources to be 53 Mt/yr, a significant proportion of the geological C output.

Directly quantifying volcanic CO 2 fluxes in the atmosphere is challenging due to the relatively abundant concentration of background CO 2 , currently ~390 ppm. To put this in context, a strong volcanic CO 2 source such as Mt. Etna, Italy, produces a gas plume where 1 km downwind the average concentration of volcanic CO 2 is only ~4 ppm (based on calculations with VOLCALPUFF plume dispersal model, Barsotti et al. 2008). Thus, an in situ measurement 1 km downwind needs to resolve a mere 1% excess CO 2 compared with the background concentration. Most volcanoes emit less CO 2 than Mt. Etna, so this is an optimistic scenario. This difficulty has led most researchers to focus on measurements of the volcanic emissions close to the source, using in situ and proximal remote sensing techniques. In such measurements, volcanic CO 2 fluxes are normally determined by measuring the ratio of volcanic CO 2 to another volcanic gas, typically SO 2 due to the ease with which its flux can be measured (Oppenheimer et al. 2011), and then calculating the CO 2 flux as the product of the CO 2 /SO 2 ratio and the SO 2 flux. The objective of the majority of the following techniques in the context of quantifying CO 2 fluxes is therefore the determination of the CO 2 /SO 2 ratio in the volcanic gas.

An exception to this combined CO 2 /SO 2 and SO 2 flux approach was adopted by Marty and Le Cloarec (1992) who utilized global volcanic flux estimates of 210Po and 210Po/CO 2 ratios measured in direct sampling (see below) to derive estimates of global CO 2 fluxes.

Direct sampling of a volcanic gas can be achieved with the use of Giggenbach bottles (Giggenbach and Goguel 1989), where high temperature fumarolic gases are collected in an alkaline solution for later laboratory analysis. This approach allows both bulk and trace gas species to be quantified, but the fact that the most abundant gas component, H 2 O, can condense in the tube leading to the alkali solution bottle means that H 2 O is challenging to quantify, and therefore absolute concentrations of the other species can be difficult to define. Air contamination is difficult to avoid, and can further increase the difficulty in determining the original volcanic gas concentrations. Such measurements require working in extremely close proximity to the degassing vent, and are ideally performed on the hottest and most highly pressurized emissions (to avoid air contamination), making their collection challenging and potentially hazardous. In addition, some of the most voluminous volcanic gas sources release very little volatiles from fumaroles, instead the bulk of the emission is open-vent degassing from craters. These plume emissions are impossible to sample without air contamination with such an approach.

The MultiGas approach (Shinohara 2005) has greatly simplified the measurement of volcanic CO 2 /SO 2 ratios, allowing automatic, unattended analysis of volcanic plumes for extended periods of time (Aiuppa et al. 2007). This instrument combines a near-infrared spectroscopic measurement of CO 2 and H 2 O concentrations with a solid-state chemical sensor for quantification of SO 2 and H 2 S. The relatively low cost, low power requirement and ease of use of the instrument make it probably the most convenient and cost-effective way of determining in situ CO 2 /SO 2 ratios available today. Some potential errors can arise, however, due to the different response time of the CO 2 and SO 2 sensors. Typical response times for the near-infrared optical technique used to measure CO 2 is ~1 s, while response times for SO 2 chemical sensors is typically longer, e.g., ~13–31 s for an Alphasense chemical sensor (Roberts et al. 2012). This means that fast changes in chemical composition or concentration are challenging to capture, however through the use of longer integration times problems arising from diverse sensor response times can be avoided. Quickly changing gas concentrations could instead be captured in theory with an optically based SO 2 measurement.

CO 2 emissions from fumarole fields can be determined through the introduction of a known flux of a tracer gas, such as SF 6 , and then measuring the volcanic CO 2 /SF 6 ratio in the downwind gas emission. Mori et al. (2001) successfully used this approach to measure CO 2 flux emissions from fumarolic vents on Izu-Oshima (Japan), Kirishima (Japan) and Teide (Canary Islands, Spain).