10 Most Outrageously Expensive Private Jets
--- ADVERTISEMENTS ---

8. Embraer Legacy 650 (worth: $30 million) source First released in 2011, the Embraer Legacy 650 is a perfect aircraft for businessmen and celebrities who need to move frequently from one country to another. The aircraft has three separate large cabins, 240 cubic feet for your baggage, a high-tech entertainment system, a galley, and the largest lavatory compared to the aircrafts in its class.

source One of the world’s richest celebrities, Jackie Chan, purchased an Embraer Legacy 650 for his own use; he even painted his personal logo using China’s flag colors.

7. Bombardier BD-700 (worth: $45 million) source This $45 million corporate jet is one aircraft that could bring its 19 passengers to long distances on top speed, non-stop.

source The richest man in the world Bill Gates owns one of these babies and has reportedly used the jet to fly him to countries for his commitments with regard to his charity foundation.

6. Sukhoi Superjet 100 (worth: $50 million) source The Sukhoi Superjet 100 that was introduced to the market in 2001 could be the biggest private jet on this list. Owners of this superjet can customize the passenger seating of this plane for up to 100, so they could turn this luxury jet into a venue for one of the massive private parties in the air.

5. Bombardier Global 8000 (worth: $66 million) source Known as the most economic and eco-friendly private jets in the market, this aircraft could be one of your best choices; that is, if you have $66 million on hand.

source According to the developer’s website, this jet provides enough cabin space that will keep you comfortable even in long-haul flights (this jet, by the way, boasts that it is the farthest-reaching business aircraft yet) and a spacious galley, plus an entertainment system to enjoy your movies during your flight.

4. Airbus ACJ319 (worth: $80 million) source This highly customizable Airbus ACJ319 private jet could be the aircraft of your dreams. At the rear of this plane is a bedroom to make sure that you get your quality sleep even if you’re flying out of the country.

3. Boeing 757 (worth: $100 million) source This type of aircraft is usually used for commercial flights; however, if you have the same bank account as presidential candidate and billionaire Donald Trump, a Boeing 757 with gold-plated seat belts might just be your choice for your private aircraft. A one hour flight will cost you more than $10,000, including fuel. During his campaign, Donald Trump spent more than half a million dollar on private travels in one quarter.

source Donald Trump, pictured here with another privet jet as he was attending a press conference with the american female wrestlers, reportedly bought the Boeing 757 at $100 million from Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen. Trump’s Boeing is covered in gold and has the Trump logo almost everywhere.

source Thanks to a Rolls-Royce engine, this Boeing is one of the fastest airplanes in the world. It can fly at more than 500 miles per hour. It’s also extremely spacious. Normally, a Boeing 757 can carry close to 250 passengers. Trump’s 757 has only 43 seats!

source Donald Trump’s plane is equipped with a dining room, a bedroom and a private guest room. It also features a bath with 24-karat gold faucets and seat buckles.

source Finally, in case you wonder what to do on board this expensive flying toy, Donald Trump’s Boeing has it’s own a cutting edge theatre system equipped with 18 IMAX-level speaker…. and 1000 movies on demand!

2. Boeing 747-8 VIP (worth: $150 million) source “A palace in the sky”– this is what most people call the Boeing 747-8 VIP aircraft. One very wealthy client paid a couple of million dollars for this passenger plane, turned VIP private jet to have a built-in dining room, an office, a stateroom, and lounges.

1. Airbus A380 (worth: $500 million) source Technically, this aircraft alone is only worth $300 million; however, its owner, Prince Al-Waleed bin Talal of Saudi paid another $200 million to personalize his own private aircraft. This double-decker jet has a built-in elevator and its interiors is nothing but, you’ve guessed it, gold!

source CLICK HERE TO LIKE THIS This is the largest private jet in the world. The amenities are nothing short of exceptional. Among other things, this jet includes a lounge, a dining room made with top quality marble, a bar with curtains designed to look like tents of the Arabian Desert, a cinema room, a gym, and a silk bed. I guess it’s called the ‘Flying Palace’ for a reason!