Douglas E Rowland
Brief Bio

Douglas Rowland is an astrophysicist in the Space Weather Laboratory of the Heliophysics Division at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. His research interests include ring current particle acceleration, electric field and electron density instrumentation, low-frequency waves in the magnetosphere and their effects on particle transport, acceleration, or loss, and the coupling of the magnetosphere to the ionosphere. His primary research activities have involved the analysis of CRRES and Polar electric field and particle data, and the development of sounding rocket electric field instrumentation to address problems in ionospheric physics and M-I coupling, as well as the analysis of the electric field and thermal plasma data from ionospheric sounding rockets.He is a Co-Investigator on the C/NOFS Vector Electric Field Instrument and has been involved in verifying magnetic and EMI cleanliness as well as providing science support for the flight software design. In addition he is a Co-Investigator on the RBSP EMFISIS instrument suite and has provided or is providing instrumentation for fifteen sounding rocket payloads. He is the PI for the PISA impedance probe, to be flown on MidSTAR-2 in 2012, as well as the NSF Firefly CubeSat, and FireStation, an experiment on the ISS.

Research Interests

Electrodynamics of the Earth's ionosphere

Ion-Neutral coupling processes in the Earth's Thermosphere

Explorer and Cubesat missions to study the coupled M-I-T-M system

Earth's Magnetosphere

Space Weather in Geospace

Positions/Employment

9/2005 - Present Space Scientist NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA GSFC Greenbelt, MD

11/2003 - 9/2005 NRC NASA Postdoctoral Fellow National Research Council, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD

10/2002 - 10/2003 Postdoctoral Research Associate School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN

Education

Ph.D., Physics, University of Minnesota, 2002B.S., Caltech, 1994

Publications

Refereed

Wygant, J., D. Rowland, H. J. Singer, et al. M. Temerin, F. Mozer, and M. K. Hudson. 1998. "Experimental evidence on the role of the large spatial scale electric field in creating the ring current." Journal of Geophysical Research, 103: 29527-29544 [10.1029/98JA01436]