Trump Speech At GOP Convention In Burlingame Met With Protests
BURLINGAME (CBS SF) – The California Republican Party convention kicked off in Burlingame Friday, as a large group of protesters gathered outside ahead of a planned lunch banquet with presidential frontrunner Donald Trump.

RELATED: Former Calif. Gov. Pete Wilson Endorses Ted Cruz

PHOTOS: Donald Trump Welcomed By Protesters In Burlingame

Trump arrived at the Hyatt Regency San Francisco Airport at 1333 Old Bayshore Highway in Burlingame shortly after noon. CHP officers pulled off the side of Highway 101. The candidate hopped a fence and entered through the back of the hotel.

RAW VIDEO: Trump Arrives At Hotel

Trump made reference to his arrival when he spoke to party members.

“That was not the easiest entrance I’ve ever made,” the frontrunner said. “It felt like I was crossing the border actually. I was crossing the border, but I got here.”

RAW VIDEO: Trump Says Arrival Like ‘Crossing The Border’

The move was prompted after protesters attempted to storm the front of the hotel, shortly before noon.

#trump Protestors broke through the barricades and are running Towards the hotel. #CaGOP @CBSSF — Emily Turner (@turner_loose) April 29, 2016

Protestors have jumped barricade and stormed front of hotel. Police running to stop them pic.twitter.com/aPLi05hDce — Maria Medina (@mariaCBS5) April 29, 2016

• ALSO READ: Protesters Burn Trump’s Effigy, American Flag After Speech

As the controversial real estate mogul closes in on securing the party’s nomination for president his rallies have drawn protests nationwide, including at a rally in Orange County Thursday night.

More than 10,000 people replied on Facebook that they were either interested or planning on attending protests against Trump outside the convention.

Protesters gathered as early as 7:30 a.m., according to KPIX 5 reporter Emily Turner.

Around 9:30, one protester who made it to the convention floor was escorted out.

Nancy Mancias of CODEPINK claimed to be the protester who was forced from the convention floor.

tossed out of the #CAGOPConvention for saying Stop Hate #DumpTrump — Nancy Mancias (@nancymancias) April 29, 2016

Outside the convention hall, KPIX 5 reporters Anne Makovec and Maria Medina, along with KCBS Radio reporter Doug Sovern, witnessed a growing crowd of protesters.

Road now closed outside #CAGOPConvention, security drum tight, CHP prowling freeway ramps. Unprecedented for @CAGOP pic.twitter.com/fnb8ElzPie — Doug Sovern (@SovernNation) April 29, 2016

Already hundreds of demonstrators massed outside #CAGOPConvention, mostly protesting Trump, who speaks at noon pic.twitter.com/78BROteHzr — Doug Sovern (@SovernNation) April 29, 2016

#Trump protestors just created human barricade on street blocking traffic pic.twitter.com/dCmS7hXNA4 — Maria Medina (@mariaCBS5) April 29, 2016

#Trump protestor told me she's willing to get arrested blocking traffic to get her message across pic.twitter.com/quVqeMIAhP — Maria Medina (@mariaCBS5) April 29, 2016

Protesters blocking traffic made it difficult for one Trump supporter to arrive at the convention.

#Trump supporter jumps metal barricade to get to hotel, need police help after surrounded, followed by protestors pic.twitter.com/NPtwuYUgye — Maria Medina (@mariaCBS5) April 29, 2016

Around 11:00 a.m., protesters were able to unfurl a banner from inside the hotel.

Amid the protests, Trump tweeted Friday morning that he is nearing the 1,237 delegates needed to clinch the Republican nomination.

We are now at 1001 delegates. We will win on the first ballot and are not wasting time and effort on other ballots because system is rigged! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 29, 2016

• ALSO READ: Activists Demand Google Drop Republican Convention Sponsorship

All three remaining Republican presidential candidates will speak this weekend as the convention continues with a dinner banquet this evening featuring Ohio Gov. John Kasich and a lunch banquet on Saturday with Texas Sen. Ted Cruz.

Former Hewelett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina, recently announced as Cruz’s running mate, will host a dinner banquet on Saturday night.

Burlingame police said in a statement on Thursday night that they are preparing for the expected protests against Trump by drawing officers from law enforcement agencies throughout San Mateo County for assistance.

• ALSO READ: Pepper Spray Flies As Trump Supporters, Protesters Clash In SoCal

“Planning efforts are focused on guaranteeing that protesters are freely able to exercise their First Amendment rights, while ensuring the safety of both the protesters as well as those attending various events at the convention,” Burlingame police said.

Trump’s rally in Costa Mesa Thursday night drew large protests that resulted in multiple arrests, according to Costa Mesa police.

TM and © Copyright 2016 CBS Radio Inc. and its relevant subsidiaries. CBS RADIO and EYE Logo TM and Copyright 2016 CBS Broadcasting Inc. Used under license. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. Bay City News Service contributed to this report.