Cheesemakers rush to defend wooden-board aging in wake of FDA statement
Gouda cheese ages on wooden boards in this 2009 photo at the Bleu Mont Dairy in Blue Mounds. The cheese industry is defending wooden board aging after a statement from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration termed the practice unsanitary. Credit: Mark Hoffman

SHARE

By of the

On a given day in Wisconsin, 30 million pounds of cheese ages on wooden boards, a process cheesemakers say is essential to producing a high-quality product.

Now the industry in Wisconsin and nationwide is scrambling to ensure the time-honored practice can continue, after a statement issued by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration declared the aging of cheese on wooden boards to be unsanitary.

Though the agency backtracked on the statement this week in response to pressure from state officials in Wisconsin and Vermont, the industry is mobilizing to defend its practices.

"It would be devastating to us, if that would be a categorical rule," said Rene Weber, vice president of operations for EMMI Roth USA.

Many common varieties of cheese, such as Parmesan, cheddar and Gruyère, are aged on wooden boards, which cheesemakers say enhances the flavor and texture of the cheese. Wood absorbs excess moisture from the cheese and allows colonies of flavorful bacteria to form.

After a nationwide outcry in response to the agency's initial statement on wooden-board aging, the FDA backtracked Tuesday, stating that while it had concerns about the safety of the practice, it would "engage with the artisanal cheese-making community to determine whether certain types of cheeses can safely be made by aging them on wooden shelving."

The FDA's reversal came in response to a letter written by Ben Brancel, secretary of the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection, urging the FDA to reconsider its position.

"A prohibition on the use of wooden boards would reverse the position taken by FDA and state food safety regulatory agencies across the country for many years — a stance which appears to have had no ill effect," Brancel wrote.

According to the FDA, the new statement was simply a clarification of its Current Good Manufacturing Practice standards, which require that surfaces in contact with food be sterilizable.

Wood cannot be adequately sterilized, the FDA initially asserted, because it is porous. Small amounts of dangerous bacteria, such as Listeria, could remain after cleaning the surface.

Subject to debate

However, the science supporting the claim was unclear. The FDA's statement cited two recent studies showing that Listeria was not completely eliminated from wood by sterilization procedures. But a 2013 report by the Wisconsin Center for Dairy Research disagreed that the practice is dangerous.

Studies indicate that the cheese-aging process introduces a beneficial population of bacteria, called a biofilm, to the wood, which inhibits the growth of dangerous pathogens.

"One of the papers the FDA cites is actually favorable to use of wood, as it demonstrates such an effect," said John Umhoefer, executive director of the Wisconsin Cheese Makers Association.

The long history of curing cheese on wood is further evidence for the safety of the practice, industry officials say.

"There's never been a recall that was a result of contamination by wood boards," said Bob Wills, owner of Cedar Grove Cheese in Plain and Clock Shadow Creamery in Milwaukee.

State regulations generally allow the use of wooden boards under certain conditions. The Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection allows the method, "if you use certain wood, if you use cleaning and sanitation protocols that they have in place," said Marianne Smukowski, of the Wisconsin Center for Dairy Research.

For many types of cheese, aging the cheese on wooden boards is essential to the identity of the cheese.

"If you would forbid the wood categorically, a lot of cheeses would disappear," EMMI's Weber said.

Willi Lehner, owner of Bleu Mont Dairy in Blue Mounds, hopes that the outrage over the FDA statements will serve as a wake-up call.

"The artisan part of cheesemaking is being sapped out of us because of all the rules and regulations that are being imposed on us," he said.

On Tuesday, politicians in Wisconsin began mobilizing in support of the cheese industry.

In a statement, state Sen. Dale Schultz (R-Richland Center) called on policy makers to work together to ensure the future of the Wisconsin cheese industry.

"What we need is a bipartisan approach which puts politics a far second and the cheese industry and Wisconsin workers first," he said.

Despite the reversal by the FDA, cheesemakers are still jittery.

The prohibition "would've been very damaging for us who are trying to make high-quality pieces of cheese," Weber said. "The nervousness I think is still there until the final statement of the final ruling is out."