Science proves salt lamps help people with anxiety. Here’s how
Share Source: himalayansaltshop.com

Ever heard of a Himalayan salt lamp? In a world overrun with stress and anxiety, these uncomplicated, natural household objects are making in impact on society in a big way.

Everything around us emits ions, both positive and negative. Do you notice how being outdoors or camping can give you more energy and make you feel rejuvenated? That’s because there are no positive ions, which are emitted by the vast amounts of technology surrounding us, like our cellphones, laptops, and televisions. These ions cause trauma and chemical imbalances in our bodies, and too many could lead to crippling anxiety and apprehension.

Enter the Himalayan salt lamp. How could this simple mineral possibly bolster your health and lower your anxiety levels? We’ll show you.

1. They counter positive ions

These lamps emit boundless amounts of negative ions, effectively countering the bombardment of positive ones that surround us. The bigger the lamp, the more positive ions it emits. So pick a large one, or a lot of small ones, and evenly displace them around your house.

2. They make you healthier

The negative ions not only counter positive ones, but also make you healthier. The rocks contains up to 84 trace minerals that your body needs. It also strengthens your bones, regulates your body pH, and balances the water content in your body.

3. They give you energy

The lamp’s negative ions increase oxygen flow to the brain, says WebMD. This combats lethargy, gives you more energy, and causes you to be more alert and responsive to your surroundings.

4. They clean the air around you

Besides sweeping the air for positive ions, the negative ions negate the radioactive waves emitted by our electrical devices, and furthermore protects us from airborne toxicities and any sort of bacterium that could be floating around us.

5. They fight disease

The “electric smog,” or the cloud of radiation that comes from your devices is known to cause cancer, and your negative ions neutralize that. They likewise lower high blood pressure, reducing the chance of heart attacks and strokes.

6. They help you sleep

The best place for a Himalayan salt lamp is in the bedroom. It’s numerous health benefits make you fall asleep easier, and cause you to feel healthy and energized when you wake up. The constant intake of negative ions makes your slumber less fitful, and helps you get more out of your rest.

Please SHARE this with your friends and family.

Like us on Facebook to get more stories