'Narrow escape': Inch away, bite could have killed, doctor says
The 8-year-old Santa Rosa girl mauled by a neighbor's pit bull this week was released from the hospital Friday, hours after her mother condemned the dogs as untrustworthy and urged lawmakers to take action to prevent such attacks in the future.

Annette Rojas was driven from Santa Rosa Memorial Hospital to her mother's cottage near the Sonoma County fairgrounds, where she was greeted by friends, relatives and neighbors.

"Fortunately, it's one of those narrow-escape situations. She's a very lucky girl," said Dr. Gary Mishkin, an emergency room physician who was among those who treated Annette. "An inch in any direction and the injuries could have been life-threatening. If rescuers had not come to her aid, and if the bites were an inch lower, it could have been fatal."

Mishkin said emergency room personnel had used plastic surgery techniques when Annette was brought in Wednesday to reduce the likelihood of permanent scarring to her face. In all, she suffered more than 50 wounds to her face, arms, neck, back and chest.

"Her wounds on her face are healing very rapidly," Mishkin said at a press conference. "The face is going to probably heal with minimal obvious scarring."

The girl's psychological trauma will take longer to heal, he said.

Annette was attacked by a 70-pound, un-neutered pit bull named Smokey who escaped Wednesday from the house next door on Santa Barbara Avenue and attacked the girl while she played in her backyard.

Although not singling out pit bulls, Mishkin urged lawmakers to take action to help deter similar attacks by vicious canines.

"I see dog bites and animal bites on a routine basis," Mishkin said. "I've seen children who've almost had their face torn off by the family dog. You are not allowed to bring a lion into your backyard, and I think there has to be more concern and legislation for certain kinds of breeds."

Annette's mother, Norma Flores Rojas, said her daughter was "doing well. She feels happy. She feels loved."

Speaking in Spanish through an interpreter, Rojas said she was appearing at the press conference for a simple reason: "I want people to see the suffering of a mother and her child."

The pit bull bit Rojas on her legs, right forearm and a finger when she responded to her daughter's screams for help and tried to pry open the dog's mouth. She said the attack had lasted two or three minutes.

Rojas praised two neighbors -- Hector Preciado, 24, and Jesse Revas, 20 -- who rescued Annette from the dog. "That was an intervention from God," she said.

Pit bulls, she said, "are not to be trusted. I think they are a risk to other kids. ... I think that these animals are a threat and that Sonoma County should have some kind of law to put a muzzle on them."

She also said Smokey had taken an unusual interest in her daughter even before the attack, coming to the fence and snarling when the girl was laughing or playing in her backyard.

"I approached my neighbor, and she responded that the dog would only be in that residence for one more week," Rojas said. "I teach my kids that an animal is an animal, and they need to be approached with caution."

Her neighbor, Geraldine Whitaker, 74, said in a previous interview that she had taken care of Smokey for a family friend for the past "four, five or six months. ... I don't put any blame on anyone except that damn dog."

Sonoma County animal control investigators are examining who was responsible for Smokey and under what conditions he was kept. Among other things, they are determining whether the dog's owner or custodian knew of the animal's propensity for violence and took steps to control it.

Dr. Gary Greensweig, chief medical officer for the St. Joseph Health System in Sonoma County, said the Rojas family had received countless letters from well-wishers. "There has been an outpouring of love and affection for the family," he said.

Greensweig also said that the girl's wounds "are both physical and spiritual or emotional. ... These are post-traumatic experiences. They come back on people, and they take time."



Humane societies around the Bay Area have a range of policies on providing spaying and neutering for pit bulls. Animal experts say a spayed or neutered dog may be less aggressive than pit bulls that have not undergone the procedure.

-- The Peninsula Humane Society and SPCA, (650) 340-7022, has recently started offering free neutering and spaying for pit bulls and pit bull mixes to San Mateo County residents. In addition, it will pay these owners $10 for having their dogs fixed.

-- The East Bay SPCA, (877) 474-8349, has been offering free neutering and spaying for pit bulls and pit bull mixes to Alameda and Contra Costa county residents since 2004.

-- The Humane Society of Sonoma County, (707) 284-1198, has just started a program offering free neutering and spaying for pit bulls and pit bull mixes to area residents.

-- The San Francisco SPCA, (415) 554-3084, occasionally offers free spaying and neutering for pit bulls and pit bull mixes and is trying to raise money to offer it free all the time. But for now, there is a cost.

-- Humane Society Silicon Valley, (408) 727-3383, charges a fee for neutering and spaying dogs of all breeds.

-- Contra Costa Humane Society, (925) 279-2247, does not offer free neutering and spaying but has financial assistance for needy dog owners.

-- Marin Humane Society, (415) 883-3383, charges for spaying and neutering all breeds of dogs.

-- SPCA of Solano County, (707) 448-7722, does not offer any veterinarian services.

E-mail Jim Doyle at jdoyle@sfchronicle.com.