Isuroon: Mpls Needs a Halal Food Shelf
UPDATE: Since this article was posted, Isuroon Ethnic Food Shelf received $18,558.25 in SEED donations from Seward shoppers for the month of December 2014. This is a new record for SEED donations at Seward Co-op.



Imagine emigrating to a faraway nation. The culture, the alphabet, the weather, and everything you encounter on a daily level is completely alien to you.

Strangest of all, the food is so foreign that you can't eat it. It's meat (maybe?) but you're not even sure what animal it's from. Regardless, you have no money to buy it, even if it was something you could eat. You're a complete stranger, stranded, poor, and hungry.

New Minnesotans from East Africa encounter this daily, according to newly formed non-profit Isuroon in Minneapolis. Often, newly arrived immigrants too poor to shop aren't able to find food shelves offering food that their religious views will allow them to eat. The food they need must be "halal" - that is, permissible for Muslims to eat or drink under Islamic law. For this reason, Isuroon Executive Director Fartun Weli said in comments to Hennepin County Commissioner Peter McLaughlin recently (video via The Uptake), the Muslim immigrant community in Minneapolis needs an ethnic food shelf. In addition to halal food, such a food shelf would need offer whole grain, whole foods, and limit the processed foods available to customers. Somali elders aren't familiar with or are simply baffled by processed food, so they won't eat it. (Imagine a Somali elder encountering Spam in a food shelf. Free, yes, but it's hard for newcomers to understand what Spam even is.)

Here's the main problem according to Fartun and Isuroon: No food shelves in Minneapolis offer halal foods.

Isuroon's mission is to create such a food shelf, but securing funding has been difficult: The non-profit needs $150,000 just to start work. When Isuroon came to Seward Co-op to apply as a SEED recipient, Fartun told us that a donation from the co-op's SEED program would not only help the "bottom line," it would help to legitimize Isuroon as a viable non-profit, too. Seward's December donation will probably be the largest and primary funding for Isuroon's food shelf to date.

"Isuroon" is a Somali word that means "woman taking care of herself," and while Isuroon's webpage says they are a group dedicated women's health and wellness, they see the entire Somali community in Minneapolis as part of their mission, too. Imam Hassan Mohamud, a legal advocate for Isuroon, tells the story that Mohammed had to give advice to his community but the community was angry and wouldn't listen to him. He spoke to his wife and asked, "What should I do?" His wife gave him advice which he followed and and the community opened up and began to listen to Mohammed.

"This is the importance of the woman in our community," he said. (Quote via The Uptake video.)

During this month of so many holidays, sharing, and generosity, Seward shoppers have an opportunity to make a huge impact through SEED donations for Insuroon. All of the food shelves to whom Seward donates SEED money do crucial work, but this is an opportunity for Seward shoppers to help create something that doesn't exist, something that some of our new Somali neighbors desperately need.

So remember in December....round up at the register!







Fartun Weli and Christine Dietsche tabling at Seward Co-op.

(Photo courtesy Isuroon)