Pig Horoscope: Yearly Overview Horoscope
Pig Overview

After an extremely favorable Rabbit year, you'd expect a letdown, but that's not likely. Here come another 11 favorable months for you, and you're likely to be in the center of a lot of action! You might find the pace to be a bit much at times, but if you go with it, you'll score some major successes. It's time to take risks, and you want to be especially bold when it comes to education, travel, networking and communication, as these can all flourish in a Water year. If you were smart last year, you kept in step with the Rabbit's slower pace. If you didn't, you might want to start this year somewhat deliberately before revving up your engines and flying with the Dragon!

Pig Rating

70% (11 favorable months and 1 unfavorable month)

Pig Career

Hopefully you sowed plenty of seeds last year. Now, are you finally ready to reap a harvest? Your career will pick up, but it's looking to be the kind of year where you will have take initiative -- and possibly step outside your comfort zone -- to make it happen. Demand what you deserve. Take new opportunities. Be bold and confident if you decide to switch careers. The Dragon is all about unleashing your enterprising self, so what are you waiting for? With your excellent interpersonal skills, this could indeed be the start of something truly great for you! Best of all, it's likely your skill set -- and your salary -- will increase. You deserve it.

Pig Relationships

Did you have nice, quiet time in your relationship last year? Well, the Dragon is about to barge in and shake things up -- although not necessarily in a bad way. The Dragon loves big changes and drama. Is there a wedding in your future? Time to finally end a relationship that's gone stale? This year is about getting real when it comes to love. Don't expect to be able to beat around the bush -- just be honest about what you need and you may get it. If you're single, this might be a whirlwind of a time for you. Romance? Passion? Drama? Absolutely, all three! Know this, though: Romances that start now might burn out quickly, so save your heart for the right person.

Pig Health

Most of the upcoming year is looking encouraging for you. Health-wise, keep up the great work; in fact, it might be a good year to push yourself even further. You know that wall you haven't been able to break through with your fitness level? It's time to power through and knock it down! Similarly, how about those eating habits you've been meaning to change? If you aren't careful, you could lose energy and vitality in a very busy year. Pamper yourself with enough alone time, well-cooked meals and the freshest ingredients you can find. A healthy body and clear mind can launch you further into success this year!

Pig Wealth

Two years in a row of mucho moolah! Well, maybe not a ton ... but you're likely starting to earn a bigger salary while finding new ways to make money. Keep at it this year. This is a good time to rise in the ranks with your job. If you play your cards right, you could end up far ahead in 2013. Keep budgeting and putting away money for necessary purchases this year. Once your bank account is in great shape, you might be tempted to spend, spend, spend. Indulge a little bit, but save more.

More from Astrology.com