Target : Company : Military and Veteran Support
For years, we’ve donated funds and volunteer hours to local and national veteran and military organizations that align with our areas of focus: education, social service and the arts. Read on to learn about the organizations, events and programs we sponsor.

On November 11, Target brought together more than 1500 team members and Mission Continues volunteers for a day of service and remembrance. Volunteering in 15 schools and 15 different cities, each team worked toward the same goal—to build an America where every returning veteran can serve again as a citizen leader, and where together we honor the fallen by living their values through service.

Target School Library Makeovers were recently completed at elementary schools on bases in Norfolk, Virginia and San Diego, California. Read the story to see the results.

We provide annual support to this program, which helps keep military families connected by having deployed parents read aloud to their children on DVD.

Target sponsors the Military Child Education Coalition Annual Conference, where educators, senior military leaders, corporate leaders and military family members share knowledge and inspiration to support military-connected children.

Target proudly partners with Our Military Kids, providing grants to children of deployed and severely injured National Guard and Military Reserve personnel.

Target offered program support to Civic Enterprises, which conducted groundbreaking research on veterans returning from the war, and how volunteerism can ease their transitions home.

Volunteers from Target stores and distribution centers participate in Operation Gratitude’s annual Holiday Drive, assembling care packages for troops stationed overseas.

Target is a national sponsor of this $3 million scholarship competition in which students record a broadcast script based on a patriotic theme. Local VFWs judge the competition, which culminates in a Target-sponsored trip to Washington, D.C.

After members of Camp Keating in Afghanistan were attacked by Taliban-allied militants, Target worked with the American Legion to provide supplies and donations.

Support for Our Military

We're proud to provide extensive resources and services to Target team members with a connection to our nation’s military.

Military Service Network

This internal social network for Target team members offers outreach, resources and support to soldiers and family members before, during and after deployment.

Reservist Pay and Benefits

Target provides benefits for activated reservists that surpass those required by law—including pay differential and optional medical coverage for dependents.