Public Sex Offender Registry
Conditions of Use:

DISCLAIMER & INFORMATION As mandated by federal legislation, the Mississippi Sex Offenders Registration Law was enacted requiring the Mississippi Department of Public Safety (MDPS) to maintain a registry of persons residing in this state who have been convicted of certain sexual offenses or attempted offenses. Individuals included within the registry are included solely by virtue of their conviction record and state law. Persons who have been arrested or charged with a registrable sex offense or a child- victim oriented offense are not required to register unless the arrest or charge results in a conviction. This information is being made available on the Internet to facilitate public access to information about persons who have committed sex offenses to enable you to take appropriate precautions to protect yourself and those in your care from possible harm. MDPS has not assessed any specific risk of re-offense with regard to any individual prior to his or her inclusion within this registry, and has made no determination that any individual included in the registry is currently dangerous. The reason for providing this information is to make it more easily available and accessible, not to warn about any specific individual. MDPS updates this information regularly, to try to assure that it is complete and accurate. However, this information can change quickly. You are cautioned that information provided on this site may not reflect the current residence, employment, school attendance, status, or other information regarding an offender. The information in this registry is provided to MDPS by criminal justice agencies and representatives. MDPS compiles and provides this information but does not independently confirm the accuracy of all information. Furthermore the database is compiled based, in part, upon information provided by the convicted offender and such information is not independently verified by MDPS. As such, the registry may contain erroneous information. It is your responsibility to make sure the records you access through this site pertain to the person about whom you are seeking information. A positive identification of an individual cannot be conclusively established by comparing name, date of birth, social security number or other information with that provided in this registry. Comparisons based on appearance may also be misleading, and cannot establish a positive identification without some possibility of error. Positive identification of a person believed to be a sex offender cannot be established unless a fingerprint comparison is made. This information is made available for the purpose of protecting the public. Anyone who uses this information to commit a criminal act against another person is subject to criminal prosecution. The sale or exchange of sex offender information for profit is prohibited. Misuse of this information is a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail not more than six (6) months, or both. Any person who provides information to a law enforcement agency regarding a sex offender which the person knows to be false is subject to criminal prosecution. This is punishable by a fine not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) or imprisonment in the State Penitentiary for not more than five (5) years, or both fine and imprisonment. To correct erroneous information in the Mississippi Sex Offender Registry or to report a change in sex offender information, including a change of address, contact the MDPS via e-mail, mail or telephone at the below listed number and addresses. For questions regarding the information included in thisregistry, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questionssection or contact MDPS via e-mail at msor@mdps.state.ms.us , telephone (601)-987-1540 or regular mail to: Department of Public Safety Sex Offender Registry Post Office Box 958 Jackson, MS 39205 Click Hereto browse the Mississippi Code for the full text of § 45-33-21 et seq. CAUTION! No private or commercial enterprise has been authorized to provide links to this site on the enterprise’s web page. MDPS is not responsible for any banners or other material that such providers may add to what you see on your computer screen while trying to view our site via a link provided by an outside enterprise. If you are accessing this site by reason of such a third party’s link, your use of this site could be monitored by the third party. You can directly access this page and avoid potential monitoring of your use of this site by a private or commercial enterprise or other third party provider by going to: http://www.dps.state.ms.us/.

Mississippi SOR

Post Office Box 958

Jackson, MS 39205

601-987-1540

By clicking the I agree button, I accept the Conditions of Use as stated above.

Welcome to the Mississippi Sex Offender Registry web site, which lists registered sex offenders in Mississippi. Once you have read and acknowledged the disclaimer below, you may search the database by a specific sex offender’s name, or obtain listing of registrants within a specified distance of an address, or obtain a listing of registrants within a specified Mississippi ZIP code. Also, you may use the map application to search your neighborhood or anywhere throughout the state to determine the specific locations of registrants.