Opiates handed out like candy to 'doped-up' veterans at Wisconsin VA
John and Lorraine Ward, parents of veteran Jacob Ward, visit their son’s grave marker near their home in Coon Valley. Jacob Ward died of a drug overdose. Credit: Darren Hauck/ Center for Investigative Reporting

By ,

Doctors at the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Tomah hand out so many narcotic painkillers that some veterans have taken to calling the place "Candy Land."

They call the hospital's chief of staff, psychiatrist David Houlihan, the "Candy Man."

Current and former hospital staff members describe patients who show up to appointments stoned on painkillers and muscle relaxants, doze off and drool during therapy sessions, and burn themselves with cigarettes. They told The Center for Investigative Reporting that Houlihan himself "doped up" or "zombified" their patients and that workers who raised questions have been punished.

Data obtained by CIR shows the number of opiate prescriptions at the Tomah VA more than quintupled from 2004, the year before Houlihan became chief of staff of the hospital, to 2012, even as the number of veterans seeking care at the hospital declined. In August, a 35-year-old Marine Corps veteran died of an overdose in the inpatient psychiatric ward.

"It's a system that's gone completely haywire," said Ryan Honl, a Gulf War veteran and graduate of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point who in October resigned from his position as a secretary in the hospital's mental health clinic after two months, filing a federal whistle-blower complaint on his way out.

The problems at this rural medical center underscore the difficulty the VA is having maintaining standards of quality patient care, even after a national scandal forced VA Secretary Eric Shinseki to resign in May.

The exponential growth in the use of narcotics transformed the Tomah VA from a conservative prescriber of painkillers to one typical of runaway opiate prescription practices throughout the VA health care system.

During the same period, the number of pills handed out skyrocketed. In 2004, the Tomah VA dispensed about 50,000 oxycodone pills to roughly 25,000 veterans. By 2012, that number had grown to 712,000, the data shows.

'A ton of questions'

Last March, the VA's inspector general found that Houlihan had on average prescribed the equivalent of 25,000 milligrams of morphine to each of the 128 patients he saw in 2012, a level investigators said was "at considerable variance compared with most opioid prescribers" and "raised potentially serious concerns" that should be brought to the attention of the federal agency's leadership.

Independent experts who reviewed CIR's findings said it was disturbing that the top prescriber of painkillers was a psychiatrist, charged with treating mental, rather than physical, ailments.

"There are a ton of questions here. It doesn't seem right at all," said Stephen Xenakis, a psychiatrist and retired brigadier general who served as commanding general of the Army's Southeast Regional Medical Command.

After extensive news coverage of the VA's national opiate epidemic, the agency vowed to limit prescriptions and offer alternative pain treatment. The number of veterans on VA-prescribed opiates has declined by 6% over the last year.

But insiders say problems in Tomah continue, suggesting the agency does little to rein in rogue prescribers, who are able to write escalating numbers of prescriptions with impunity.

"Houlihan is a symptom of failed leadership from Washington on down," said Honl, the former employee. "They turn the other way while veterans, who expect to be taken care of after the politicians send them to war, suffer."

For his part, Houlihan said there is nothing unusual about his prescription practices. Many veterans had come to the Tomah VA after receiving large doses of opiates in private practice or during their military service, he said, and he worked to taper them back to safer levels.

He maintains that doctors at the Tomah VA are relying increasingly on Suboxone, an opiate used to help veterans fight addiction to other narcotics — though he had no statistics to back that claim.

"The problem is there is a lot of chronic pain," Houlihan said. "You don't hear a lot of veterans complaining about me."

Two days before Jason Simcakoski died of an overdose in the Tomah VA psychiatric ward, the head of the unit, Ronda Davis, discussed his care with Houlihan.

Simcakoski had checked himself in, citing an addiction to painkillers and severe anxiety that was destroying his relationship with his wife and 11-year-old daughter. The Marine Corps veteran's medical record shows Houlihan advised Davis to add Suboxone to his existing cocktail of 14 drugs, which included anti-psychotics, tranquilizers, muscle relaxants and the opioid painkiller tramadol.

"They had my boy on so many meds that it blew my mind," said Simcakoski's father, Marvin, a building contractor from Stevens Point who visited his son the day he died. "They like people to be zombies over there so they don't have to care for them."

An autopsy report prepared by the University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics declared the cause of death to be "mixed drug toxicity."

In Washington, the VA's director of media relations, James Hutton, would say only that the agency is "looking into the situation" in Tomah. He said no senior agency officials would be willing to comment.

Doctor's checkered career

Houlihan joined the VA in Wisconsin after a decade of private practice in Iowa, where he worked for a Dubuque medical group. In April 2003, he was disciplined by the Iowa Board of Medicine for being "inappropriately engaged in a social relationship with a patient," hiring a current or former patient and bringing a patient's medicine home with him.

Houlihan did not fight the medical board's findings. In an interview, he downplayed their significance, blaming them on contentious divorce proceedings.

In February 2004, Houlihan let his license to practice medicine in Iowa lapse. By then, he was working as a psychiatrist at the Tomah VA. In August 2005, he was appointed chief of staff, charged with overseeing care for veterans across western Wisconsin.

Houlihan remains on the job, while pharmacists who have raised questions about his prescription practices were fired or resigned in protest, according to the inspector general. One was let go after he refused to dispense controlled substances, citing concerns about patient safety and drug diversion.

"There were outrageous refills, patients who told us they lost their drugs for the fifth time," said Ron Pelham, who resigned as the hospital's chief pharmacist in May 2013.

Jacob Ward's parents say he was among those drugged at the facility. Ward, an Iraq War veteran, sought inpatient care for post-traumatic stress disorder after going AWOL from his unit in 2005.

His father, John Ward of Coon Valley, said his son was tortured by nightmares and dulled his emotional pain with marijuana and alcohol after a tour as a cavalry scout. The elder Ward was relieved when his son checked himself into the VA in Tomah, he said, but found him unrecognizable when he went to visit.

"They narcotized him until he was in la la land," John Ward said.

Jacob Ward's quality of life continued to deteriorate after his time at the Tomah VA, according to his father. He became a full-blown addict and, in 2008, he joined two roommates in an armed robbery of a sports bar in La Crosse.

In 2009, a circuit judge sentenced Jacob Ward to 10 years of probation rather than prison — provided he seek treatment at the Tomah VA. There, "they drugged him again," his father said.

On Sept. 4, 2013, Jacob Ward died of an overdose of heroin and cocaine in a Milwaukee apartment. He was 27.

This story was originally published by The Center for Investigative Reporting. Learn more at cironline.org and contact the reporter at aglantz@cironline.org.