Washington Football Ditches Controversial Name for Redhawks
DISCLAIMER: This website is a parody and is not endorsed nor affiliated with Sports Illustrated. This website was created by Native advocates created to help us all imagine how easy and powerful changing the mascot could be. See our press release for more details.

As the 2017 football season winds down, it is clear that the Washington football team is not going to make it to this year’s playoffs. As DMV fans start to look towards 2018 for hopes of a better season, there is more than potential draft picks to mull over.

Wednesday morning the Washington football team franchise released a new name, logo, and mascot for the 2018 football season. The rebranded Washington logo features the head of their new mascot: the Redhawk. Washington fans will recognize the maroon and gold colors of their home team “kept to commemorate the enduring legacy of the Washington football team franchise.”

The team’s statement reads, “In a time of deep divisions, football has always been and always will be a great unifier. Under the values of courage, commitment and achievement, the Washington football team is proud to announce the Washington Redhawks, a mascot everyone can cheer for.”

For years the team has been embroiled in legal and public controversy after Native Americans protested the mascot, stating the term “Redskins” is a racial slur. Team owner Dan Snyder says of the name change, “It is a symbol of everything we stand for: strength, courage, pride, and respect—the same values we know guide Native Americans and which are embedded throughout their rich history as the original Americans.”

The Washington Redhawks now join over 2,000 universities, professional teams, and public schools who have already changed their sports teams' names for similar reasons. In 2005, the National College Athletic Association issued a decision that it would bar teams from certain activities that used Native-themed mascots unless they explicitly have permission from a tribe, like Florida State University Seminoles. The athletic apparel company Adidas offers free design work and financial help for public schools looking to abandon racist mascots. Before the Washington Redhawks made their announcement, twenty-eight high schools had already stopped using the “Redskins” mascot. In the world of sports, the NFL has been one of the last leagues to see this kind of change.

According to a 2017 Forbes Magazine report, that the Washington football team was the fifth most valuable franchise in the NFL, and are the eleventh most valuable sports franchise in the world, valued at approximately $2.95 billion.