Ann Coulter Credits White Nationalist As "Intellectual Influence" On Her Anti-Immigrant Book
Conservative author Ann Coulter credited a 1992 National Review article for her attacks on progressive immigration policy, which have culminated in her latest book, Adios, America. The author of that article, Peter Brimelow, has been labeled a white nationalist by the Southern Poverty Law Center and is the editor of the anti-immigrant website VDARE.com.

Ann Coulter First Became "Interested In Immigration" After Reading National Review Article By Peter Brimelow

Ann Coulter's Latest Book Claims Progressive Immigration Policy Will "Turn Our Country Into A Third World Hellhole." From the publication materials for Adios, America: The Left's Plan To Turn Our Country Into A Third World Hellhole: Ann Coulter is back, more fearless than ever. In Adios, America she touches the third rail in American politics, attacking the immigration issue head-on and flying in the face of La Raza, the Democrats, a media determined to cover up immigrants' crimes, churches that get paid by the government for their "charity," and greedy Republican businessmen and campaign consultants--all of whom are profiting handsomely from mass immigration that's tearing the country apart. Applying her trademark biting humor to the disaster that is U.S. immigration policy, Coulter proves that immigration is the most important issue facing America today. [Regnery.com, accessed 6/10/15] Coulter Says She First Became Interested In Immigration After Reading An Article By Peter Brimelow In National Review. While promoting her book during a June 8 interview with Tom Piatak of Chronicles magazine,Ann Coulter credited Peter Brimelow as an "intellectual influence" and the reason she "first became interested in immigration" (emphasis original):

TP: How did you first become interested in immigration? A: Peter Brimelow's front page article in National Review. [But] then I never wrote about it. I was practicing law then, and you know you live in a bubble in college and law school. I suppose I believed all the Jack Kemp nonsense. I read that cover story in National Review and realized I'd been had. I've been lied to. Oh my gosh! It was the only time I remember completely changing my mind about something. Of course there wasn't that much to change because immigration wasn't something I had ever thought about. I was like a lot of Americans to this day, you just go along: We're a nation of immigrants, immigration is a wonderful thing, aren't they hard workers, blah, blah, blah. And since I become a writer, Peter has been haranguing me, demanding to know why I haven't written about immigration. I kept telling him, because you said it all. I've nothing new to say. So I am pleased that with this book--you have to get to chapter 7 and you start hitting things that, I think, surprised even Peter. He wanted me to start the book at chapter 7: Just skip everything before, everybody knows that first stuff, Ann. But I had to stay: If only everybody did know that stuff. [Chronicles, 6/8/15, via Right Wing Watch]

Brimelow's 1992 National Review Article That Inspired Coulter Claimed That Immigration Is Forcing The U.S. To "Swallow" What Will Be "An Unusually Large And Spicy Immigrant Meal." In a 1992 National Review article, Peter Brimelow lamented the impact of immigration on the U.S., saying "the American ethnic mix has been upset" due to a surge of non-white immigrants. Brimelow suggested pursuing a "public policy" which "could even restore the status quo ante 1965, which would slowly shift the ethnic balance back." [VDARE.com, first published by National Review, 6/22/92]

Peter Brimelow Is The Editor Of VDARE.com, A Publication With White Nationalist Authors

Peter Brimelow Is The Editor Of VDARE.com, And Admitted That "White Nationalist" Authors Write For The Site. In 2006, Brimelow admitted that some of the authors who write for VDARE.com are "white nationalist," but said that does not mean they are "white supremacists":

We also publish on VDARE.COM a few writers, for example Jared Taylor, whom I would regard as "white nationalist," in the sense that they aim to defend the interests of American whites. They are not white supremacists. They do not advocate violence. They are rational and civil. They brush their teeth. But they unashamedly work for their people--exactly as La Raza works for Latinos and the Anti-Defamation League works for Jews. Get used to it. As immigration policy drives whites into a minority, this type of interest-group "white nationalism" will inexorably increase.[VDARE.com, 7/24/06]

Brimelow Appeared At A Press Conference On "Why The GOP Must Win White America For Victory In 2012." As previously reported by Media Matters, The National Policy Institute (NPI) invited VDARE.com editor Peter Brimelow to speak at a September 2011 conference discussing "Why the GOP Must Win White America For Victory in 2012." According to a press release, NPI wanted to focus on expanding the GOP's "traditional White voting base, as opposed to continuing its failed 'outreach' programs to racial minorities." [Media Matters, 9/2/11]

VDARE.com Believes In Maintaining A White Majority In The United States. In a 2010 appeal to VDARE.com readers, Brimelow wrote that "there's one brutal reason you must support" the site, pointing to demographic changes in the United States (emphasis original):

Let me give you just one brutal reason you must support VDARE.com. Sometime in the next few months, the Census Bureau will announce that a majority of births in the U.S. are now non-white. That means the U.S. will be majority non-white around 2040--when my new daughter, pictured above, will still be a young woman, It's an astonishing, indeed unprecedented, transformation of a country every one of whose Founding Fathers was white--in which nine out of every ten citizens was white as late as 1960. And it's all a result of government policy--specifically, the 1965 Immigration Act and the subsequent collapse, or sabotage, of law enforcement at our southern borders. No-one wants to talk about this. (I'm sure that even some VDARE.com readers flinched when they read it). No-one wants to think what it means. But at VDARE.com, we are prepared to say what it means: the end of the historic American-nation state--a nation-state being the political expression of a particular people, in this case the historic American nation as it had evolved by 1965. [Media Matters, 8/29/11]

Southern Poverty Law Center: VDARE's Website Is "An Anti-Immigration Hate Site"

SPLC: Brimelow Is A White Nationalist. The SPLC explained how Peter Brimelow espouses white nationalism in his anti-immigrant writings:

A former editor at Forbes magazine and past columnist at the conservative National Review, Peter Brimelow is one of the leading voices in the anti-immigrant movement. Interestingly, he is himself an immigrant (from England), a fact that he regularly brings up when he worriedly notes that his son, with his "blue eyes" and "blond hair," could grow up in an America in which whites have lost their population majority. For Brimelow, immigration itself is not the problem -- it's the influx of non-whites that is destroying America. Brimelow's racial views about America first gained attention in 1995, when he published Alien Nation, a book that argued that America is historically white-dominated and should stay that way. The book was written in a genial style and was careful to treat black Americans as part of the polity. Although the book was well reviewed in some places, it included strong veins of racism and xenophobia. Brimelow described the role of race as "elemental, absolute, fundamental." He said that white Americans should demand that U.S. immigration quotas be changed to allow in mostly whites. He argued that spending tax dollars on anything related to multiculturalism was "subversive." He called foreign immigrants "weird aliens with dubious habits." At one point, he wrote that if one enters an Immigration and Naturalization Service waiting room, just like walking into a New York City subway, "you find yourself in an underworld that is not just teeming but also almost entirely colored." By 1997, Brimelow was warning that by 2008 the GOP would no longer be able to compete in presidential elections because the racial makeup of the electorate would be changed by non-white immigration. [SPLC, Extremist Files, accessed 6/10/15]

VDARE.com "Regularly Publishes Articles By Prominent White Nationalists," "Prominent Academic Racists," And Other Anti-Immigrant Figures. According to the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), VDARE.com is "a place where relatively intellectually inclined leaders of the anti-immigrant movement share their opinions. VDARE.com also regularly publishes articles by prominent white nationalists, race scientists and anti-Semites." [SPLC, Extremist Files, accessed 6/10/15]