Conservatives Ask for Palin at Values Voters Summit
Updated Though they were both invited, neither Senator John McCain nor Gov. Sarah Palin plan to make an appearance at the three-day Values Voter Summit, organized by the political arm of the Family Research Council.

“People would have gone crazy to have seen her,” conservative activist Phyllis Schlafly said in a brief interview on Friday, the first full day of the summit. She called Gov. Palin a “breath of fresh air” for the Republican Party, but said her absence at the summit was a mistake on the part of the McCain campaign.

According to David Brody of the Christian Broadcasting Network, Tony Perkins, president of Family Research Council Action, rejected the McCain campaign’s offer to send a video-taped message from Ms. Palin to the conference.

Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich was among the dozens of conservatives to address the gathering, which began on Friday in Washington, D.C. He and others appeared to be relishing how the Democrats seemed flummoxed by Mr. McCain’s choice of Governor Palin as his running mate.

“They find Governor Palin quite horrifying because she actually believes in God, she actually believes in family, she actually has five children, and she actually is a conservative,” Mr. Gingrich said. “And that combination to them is literally inconceivable. It is as though John McCain had gone to Mars and brought back an alien in terms of their world.”



He also suggested that Senator Barack Obama, the Democratic presidential nominee, made a poor choice in picking Senator Joe Biden of Delaware as his running mate.

“He thought he knew it was going to be a traditional Republican ticket that looked like a traditional Republican ticket,” he said. “And he thought he was going to get away with the great mistake of his career, which was the failure to pick Hillary Clinton.”

Melissa Graeff and two of her colleagues from the Susan B. Anthony List, an Arlington, Va.-based organization which represents women who oppose abortion rights, were handing out Sarah Palin stickers — in pink and blue — at the summit.

Ms. Graeff said that her office has been seeing an increase in phone calls from supporters who are sending in contributions pegged to Ms. Palin’s presence on the Republican ticket.

“People – especially values voters – were very uncertain about McCain,” she said. “I think now with Palin they feel reassured that he is in tune to our issues.”

And Family Research Council Action waded ever deeper into the world of electoral politics on Friday with the announcement by Mr. Perkins of the formation of a new political action committee.

The Family Research Council Action P.A.C. will provide endorsements and, in some cases, financial support to “pro-family” candidates for office across the country, according to Mr. Perkins. He said that the group would have a budget of about $250,000 for the rest of the election cycle and the committee today issued its first endorsements in dozens of House and Senate races.

And while he offered praise for Senator McCain, Mr. Perkins said his group was not yet ready to officially throw its support behind one of the presidential candidates.

“There are some still lingering concerns on some over some of John McCain’s positions,” Mr. Perkins said at a press conference.

Mr. Perkins said the P.A.C would not be focused primarily on doling out money, but rather lending the Family Research Council’s seal of approval to candidates in about 80 races nationwide. He said the group would be watching those races closely to determine where to invest their resources. Though the vast majority of endorsements went to Republicans, two Democrats got the committee’s nod — Congressman Mike McIntyre and Congressman Heath Shuler, both of North Carolina.

The formation of the committee is another indication of the steadily growing enthusiasm among the conservative base for Mr. McCain’s candidacy, particularly after the addition of Gov. Palin to the Republican ticket, which Mr. Perkins said has “clearly changed the whole dynamic of this campaign cycle.”