NFL To Refund Taxpayers For Acts Of "Sponsored Patriotism"
In November it was reported that the Pentagon paid at least $6 million to 16 NFL teams from 2011 to 2014 for “patriotic displays” during games or events. Naturally, there was a huge backlash as a result of that finding. Now the NFL is trying to save a little face by agreeing to refund taxpayers $723,724 for those acts of “sponsored patriotism.”

BREAKING: The NFL has agreed to pay back taxpayers $723,734 for acts of sponsored patriotism (paid flag ceremonies, welcome back tributes) — Darren Rovell (@darrenrovell) May 19, 2016

While the NFL was not the only major sports league involved in this kind of activity, it does appear the bulk of the money went to the league’s teams.

The November report, spearheaded by Republican senators Jeff Flake and John McCain, uncovered a massive scheme that involved federal funding going to promote patriotism at sporting events. A quote from the report summed up the issue:

“[u]nsuspecting audience members became the subjects of paid-marketing campaigns rather than simply bearing witness to teams’ authentic, voluntary shows of support for the brave men and women who wear our nation’s uniform. This not only betrays the sentiment and trust of fans, but casts an unfortunate shadow over the genuine patriotic partnerships that do so much for our troops, such as the National Football League’s Salute to the Service campaign.”

The Pentagon called those types of events “a key recruitment tool,” but to many they seemed exploitative. And the fact that American professional sports leagues would have to take money in order to do something patriotic at a game is, frankly, disgusting. The NFL should honor veterans, or current service members out of genuine patriotism and shouldn’t have to collect a check to recognize a wounded soldier on the jumbotron.

The $723,724 the NFL is paying back is far from the full amount the league and its teams received from the government. It may be on the individual teams to relinquish the funds they were paid.

UPDATE: Both Senator Flake and Senator McCain have responded to the news the NFL will pay back taxpayers:

Flake’s statement follows:

“In all the years I’ve spent trying to root out egregious federal spending, the NFL is the first organization to perform due diligence, take responsibility, and return funds to the taxpayers. The NFL’s response to this investigation sets a new standard and only strengthens its reputation as a supporter of military service members and veterans.”

McCain had this to say:

“I applaud the NFL’s audit in response to our oversight investigation into ‘paid patriotism.’ Returning the $723,000 is the right thing to do. But the NFL is only one of several sports leagues we identified that accepted money from the Pentagon in return for honoring our troops. The other organizations – Major League Baseball, the National Hockey League, National Basketball Association and Major League Soccer – should also conduct an audit and return the money or donate it to service members, veterans and their families. We’ll be working to once again include language in the defense authorization bill that would fully ensure the Defense Department never again spends American tax dollars to honor our troops.”

That’s high praise for the NFL from the senators, but it’s clear they will not be satisfied until other leagues and teams join the NFL in paying back the money.

NFL commissioner Roger Goodell wrote a letter to both Flake and McCain detailing the internal audit the NFL did and announcing that the league would pay back the money. The text is pasted below: