Tammy Baldwin remains mum on handling of VA complaints
U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin speaks at the EMILY's List 30th Anniversary Gala on March 3 in Washington, DC. Credit: Getty Images

U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin has had little to say to the Wisconsin media about how her office bungled its handling of complaints about the troubled Tomah VA Medical Center.

One of the two Baldwin staffers most directly involved in the matter has now been moved off veterans issues, sources have confirmed. This follows the firing of a different aide.

Baldwin's office is mum about the latest move.

But the first-term Wisconsin Democrat has plenty of time for other activities, including a fundraiser with a pair of prominent lobbyists later this month.

Baldwin will be the guest of honor for an event at 6:30 p.m. March 24 at the home of big-time lobbyists Bill and Cindi Broydrick in Washington, D.C. Individuals are expected to donate $1,000 and political action committees $2,000.

The Broydricks were regular Capitol fixtures in Madison for decades, but they have focused their efforts in recent years on representing Wisconsin interests in D.C.

Asked about the event, Baldwin's office didn't so much as respond.

Got a politics question for @DanielBice or Craig @WisVoter Gilbert? Ask it now at http://t.co/Tk6DKCxVi4 and they'll answer noon Thursday. — Journal Sentinel (@journalsentinel) March 11, 2015

Joe Fadness, head of the state Republican Party, called on Baldwin to open up about what's going on. Fadness was unaware of the fundraiser.

"Baldwin's adamant refusal to address her actions for over two months is either the epitome of hubris or a complete disrespect for those she represents," Fadness said in an email.

Sources said Mike Helbick, a constituent services rep for Baldwin in her Milwaukee office, has been removed from handling veterans issues. Helbick worked under Marquette Baylor, the deputy state director fired by Baldwin in January.

Helbick's duties have been shifted to Sarah Anstaett, a Baldwin staffer in Madison.

Anthony Dumas, a 59-year-old veteran, told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel that he had been working with Baldwin's office on a number of matters related to his benefits.

Dumas said he was told recently that Helbick would no longer be handling his case and that it had been transferred to Anstaett.

"Every time I call I get the spin-around," Dumas said.

Another Baldwin source said she would detail all staff changes sometime soon.

Helbick, who did not return calls, was contacted regularly late last year by Ryan Honl, a former Tomah employee who acted as a whistleblower about the problems there.

A report prepared by the Veterans Affairs Office of Inspector General last year found officials at the Tomah medical center were prescribing high amounts of opiate pain pills to patients.

Veterans who relied on the facility for care had begun calling it "Candy Land." Federal officials are now investigating the deaths of three individuals who were treated at the Tomah medical center.

In November, Honl — a Gulf War veteran and West Point graduate — asked Helbick for a copy of the report but didn't receive a response, according to news reports. Shortly thereafter, the whistleblower began urging in emails to Helbick that the senator do something.

"When will Senator Baldwin say 'enough is enough' and push for better treatment of our veterans and a better culture free of intimidation and retaliation in Tomah and VA wide for those who whistleblow?" Honl asked Helbick in an email.

Baldwin's office obtained the inspection report in August but did not act until a January news story detailing the problems at Tomah.

Honl also alerted aides to U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson and U.S. Rep. Ron Kind, a Wisconsin Republican and Democrat, respectively. Johnson's staff deep-sixed the complaint, and Kind's office didn't even respond.

So far, Baldwin has said next to nothing about the matter.

Her attorney, heavy-hitting Democrat Marc Elias, confirmed Baylor's termination nearly a month after it happened.

In a one-minute interview with USA Today, Baldwin said she is conducting an internal review of how her staff handled the Tomah matter.

"I am in a very detailed and careful fashion — comprehensive fashion — seeking to understand everything that happened in my office in terms of the handling of a whistleblower case," Baldwin said. "And I will have lots more to say when we've come to the end of that process."

Throughout it all, Baldwin has kept a busy schedule.

In late January, her campaign account and leadership PAC made a total of four donations totaling more than $2,800 to the state Democratic Party.

Baldwin then spoke this month at the 30th anniversary event for EMILY's List, a PAC that helps elect female Democratic candidates who support abortion rights. The group spent roughly $5 million helping Baldwin win her Senate seat in 2012.

"Tammy Baldwin somehow found plenty of time over the past two months to give political speeches, hand out big campaign cash, and even hire a powerful attorney — everything but come clean with Wisconsinites," said Fadness, the GOP chief.

Or as one Democrat said of her campaign activity: "No time for you, but for the heavy breathers...."

All the time in the world.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.