ACLU calls for Trump officials to hand over info on immigrant children
The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) asked a federal court on Thursday to require the Trump administration to hand over information about the detained migrant children under the age of 5 who have not yet been reunited with their parents.

The ACLU said in a court filing that they “have no independent verification that these 58 parents have in fact been reunited with their children” and that they “have not yet received any specific information about most of the 23 individuals” who the government claim are ineligible for reunification.

The group requested that the court order the government to establish a fund to cover the cost of mental health treatment for children “who are suffering from severe trauma as a result of their forcible separation from their parents.”

ADVERTISEMENT

And the ACLU also called for the government to reimburse families for the cost of traveling to be reunited, and for the DNA testing used in the reunification process.

The Trump administration stated in the court filing that it will provide the ACLU with a list of the identified detained children, as well as the identified parents being held in custody.

Trump officials said Thursday that all eligible children under the age of 5 who were separated from their families at the U.S. border have been reunited.

The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) said that 46 other children are not eligible for reunification.

The families had been separated under the Trump administration's "zero tolerance" policy, requiring all people apprehended illegally crossing the southern border face prosecution. President Trump Donald John TrumpBrennan fires new shot at Trump: ‘He’s drunk on power’ Trump aides discussed using security clearance revocations to distract from negative stories: report Trump tried to dissuade Melania from 'Be Best' anti-bullying campaign: report MORE signed an order last month ending the family separation policy.