'Operation Streamline' at odds with our values By Vicki B. Gaubeca, ACLU of New Mexico Regional Center for Border Rights and James Stiven, retired U.S. magistrate judge - Tweet On Wednesday, four key senators from the so-called “Gang of 8” will visit the U.S.-Mexico border in Arizona to view conditions there as they work to finalize comprehensive immigration reform legislation. If they are looking at the situation objectively, what they will recognize is that there has been a massive intensification of border enforcement and personnel over the past decade – from FY2004 to FY2012, the budget for U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) increased by 94 percent to $11.7 billion. Too often, border security has simply grown wastefully and abusively without regard to genuine public safety need.



One program that is emblematic of this is Operation Streamline, a southwest border prosecution initiative that indiscriminately prosecutes tens of thousands of border-crossers in federal criminal court – instead of using administrative deportation hearings.



Senators Flake, Bennet, McCain, and Schumer should visit one of the federal courthouses along the U.S. Mexico border, where every day, up to 70 women and men are shuffled into courtrooms shackled hand to foot. Most have come to the United States to look for better opportunities for their families or to re-unite with their family members already here. Some have come to escape the violence in Mexico or Central American countries.



There is no jury in the courtroom. In fact, there are so many defendants that they sit in the jury box and in the benches typically set aside for the public. Most of them plead guilty at once, en masse, to illegal entry into the U.S. Individual equities like a defendant’s U.S. citizen children are not considered. They are just sent packing with federal prison time. We’re sure that if they witnessed these proceedings, the senators would agree that it’s impossible to reconcile the process in these courts with American ideals of justice, fairness, and due process for all. No wonder the Holy See has criticized the federal government for this large-scale criminalization of migrants.



In theory, the main goal of this program is to introduce more punitive consequences for entering the country without inspection, thus discouraging individuals from attempting to re-enter the United States. But there has been no comprehensive analysis concluding that Streamline actually deters people from coming. In fact, comparing the experience in San Diego, where Streamline is not used, with Tucson, where it has been in effect since 2008, border arrest statistics suggest the contrary.



Streamline overloads federal courthouses – the district of Arizona even had to declare a judicial emergency – and diverts resources away from prosecuting more serious crimes that present true threats to public safety, such as arms or drug smuggling or human trafficking. Five border districts now handle 41 percent of all federal cases, while nationwide entry and reentry prosecutions are up 130 percent from 2007 despite migrant apprehensions being at a 40-year low. All this comes at an incredible cost to U.S. taxpayers, mostly on costs for incarceration, and contributes greatly to federal prison overcrowding.



The program also intensifies racial inequality in our criminal justice system. Latino and Hispanic people now constitute almost 35 percent of the entire currently imprisoned federal prison population, despite constituting only 16 percent of the U.S. population. The percentage of resources allocated to prosecution and incarceration of persons for immigration crimes is highly disproportionate to any reasonable assessment of the needs of public safety.



If we continue Streamline, where else will the U.S. courts short-change justice and due process? Do we really want a justice system that treats people not as individuals with families, jobs and dreams, but as a just another input in a legal assembly line?



Instead of expanding this costly program, which would require building new courthouses and contracting for thousands more jail beds, Congress should evaluate Streamline’s true fiscal and human costs — and then face the truth that Operation Streamline is a failed experiment that must be halted.



Gaubeca is director of ACLU of New Mexico Regional Center for Border Rights. Stiven is a retired U.S. magistrate judge for the Southern District of California.

In practice, the program has created a mass assembly-line justice system in which individuals are apprehended, handed over to U.S. marshals, placed in county jails to await trial at a federal courthouse, sentenced in a matter of hours or days, sent to a federal prison—a majority of which are private for-profit facilities — and then handed over to ICE for removal proceedings which could instead have been used much more cheaply in the first place.Streamline overloads federal courthouses – the district of Arizona even had to declare a judicial emergency – and diverts resources away from prosecuting more serious crimes that present true threats to public safety, such as arms or drug smuggling or human trafficking. Five border districts now handle 41 percent of all federal cases, while nationwide entry and reentry prosecutions are up 130 percent from 2007 despite migrant apprehensions being at a 40-year low. All this comes at an incredible cost to U.S. taxpayers, mostly on costs for incarceration, and contributes greatly to federal prison overcrowding.The program also intensifies racial inequality in our criminal justice system. Latino and Hispanic people now constitute almost 35 percent of the entire currently imprisoned federal prison population, despite constituting only 16 percent of the U.S. population. The percentage of resources allocated to prosecution and incarceration of persons for immigration crimes is highly disproportionate to any reasonable assessment of the needs of public safety.If we continue Streamline, where else will the U.S. courts short-change justice and due process? Do we really want a justice system that treats people not as individuals with families, jobs and dreams, but as a just another input in a legal assembly line?Instead of expanding this costly program, which would require building new courthouses and contracting for thousands more jail beds, Congress should evaluate Streamline’s true fiscal and human costs — and then face the truth that Operation Streamline is a failed experiment that must be halted. Tweet View Comments Source:

http://thehill.com/blogs/congress-blog/homeland-security/290191-operation-streamline-at-odds-with-our-values The Hill Archives: Senate | House | Administration | Campaign | Business & Lobbying | Capital Living | Opinion View News by Subject:

Defense & Homeland Security | Energy & Environment | Healthcare | Finance & Economy | Technology | Foreign Policy | Labor | Transportation & Infrastructure