Billy Graham’s granddaughter: Trump needs to ask for forgiveness
Jerushah Armfield, the granddaughter of popular Christian evangelist Billy Graham, said Friday night that President Trump Donald John TrumpTrump officials to announce closure of Palestinian Liberation Organization office in DC: report Alibaba's Jack Ma to step down as chairman in 2019 Trump expected to soon declassify Carter Page, Bruce Ohr documents: report MORE needs to repent and ask for forgiveness following allegations of an affair with an adult-film star.

"Obviously our faith believes in forgiveness," Armfield told CNN's Jim Sciutto. "I think in order to forgive somebody, that individual needs to repent and apologize, and I don't think America has seen that from our president in any scenario, really."

Sciutto asked Armfield, who has previously cast doubt on Trump's faith, if evangelical Christians would respond the same way if it were former President Obama who had an affair.

"I think the reality, Jim, is we all know the answer to that question," Armfield said. "Had President Obama asked for forgiveness and then in humility changed his behavior, absolutely, I think that's a core of our faith."

ADVERTISEMENT

The host's line of questioning came after Armfield's uncle, the reverend Franklin Graham, said that Trump has changed as a person since the alleged affair in 2006.

Tony Perkins, the president of the conservative Family Research Council, recently said that Trump gets a "mulligan" after the alleged affair.

"I said last time I was on your program, Jim, that my president doesn't have to be a Christian, I just don't want him to be held up as the poster boy for Christian evangelicals because he doesn't represent most of us," Armfield said when asked if she agrees with her uncle's excuses for the president's behavior.

She said that while she understands why Christians may support Trump for his policies, she'd "love to see a Christian leader come out and say that they support Trump for his policies, but his behavior disgusts them and he needs to clean up his act."