Rosie O’Donnell lashes out at GOP senator over tax bill: ‘Do you think your family is proud of you?'
Rosie O’Donnell late Tuesday lashed out at Sen. Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsThe Hill's Morning Report — Uproar after Trump's defense of foreign dirt on candidates The Hill's Morning Report — Uproar after Trump's defense of foreign dirt on candidates Democratic challenger to Susan Collins announces Senate bid MORE (R-Maine) over the GOP tax overhaul.

The comedian and former co-host of “The View” tweeted a photo of Collins's family, asking if the Maine Republican thought they were proud of her.

“Woman, mother, grandmother, sister, daughter, you have betrayed us all.” O’Donnell wrote. “Dear god, ask for forgiveness, redeem your soul tomorrow.”

susan - 2 million dollars cash

call if u want to negotiate



do u think your family is proud of u @sennatorcollins



woman - mother - grandmother - sister - daughter

u have betrayed us all



dear god

ask for forgiveness

redeem ur soul tomorrow #NOTSEXIST pic.twitter.com/wa0QcMXNk2 — ROSIE (@Rosie) December 20, 2017

O’Donnell, a frequent critic of President Trump Donald John TrumpTrump defends Stephanopolous interview Trump defends Stephanopolous interview Buttigieg on offers of foreign intel: 'Just call the FBI' MORE and Republican lawmakers, in a tweet earlier Tuesday promised to give $2 million in cash to Collins and Sen. Jeff Flake Jeffrey (Jeff) Lane FlakeDemocrats needle GOP on standing up to Trump Democrats needle GOP on standing up to Trump Amash gets standing ovation at first town hall after calling for Trump's impeachment MORE (R-Ariz.) if they voted against the GOP plan.

“If they vote ‘no, no I will not kill Americans for the [super] rich,’” O’Donnell tweeted. “No shit. 2 million. Cash. Each.”

so how about this

i promise to give

2 million dollars to senator susan collins

and 2 million to senator jeff flake



if they vote NO

NO I WILL NOT KILL AMERICANS

FOR THE SUOER RICH



DM me susan

DM me jeff



no shit

2 million

cash

each — ROSIE (@Rosie) December 20, 2017

O’Donnell then attempted to tweet directly at Collins, although she used an incorrect Twitter handle, telling the senator to call her if she wanted to “negotiate” the $2 million offer.

ADVERTISEMENT

Collins and Flake both voted for the bill, which has been criticized as a boon for the wealthy and corporations, pushing it through the Senate early Wednesday morning.

The House also voted to pass the bill, but will have to vote again on Wednesday because of two provisions that the Senate said did not comply with budget rules.

It is illegal to offer money to public officials with the intent to influence official acts, like voting on a bill, but it is unclear if O’Donnell’s tweet was meant as a serious offer.