Second California road to be named after Obama
Part of a highway in Southern California will reportedly be named after former President Barack Obama Barack Hussein ObamaTrump deporting immigrants at slower pace than Obama: report Ingraham dismisses reparations: 'We won, you lost' Democrats grill Trump officials over fuel standard rollback MORE, the second road in the state that will honor the 44th president.

State lawmakers approved the second road on Tuesday. Supporters of the measure will begin private fundraising to pay for the signs, which could range from $3,000 to $5,000, according to The Los Angeles Times.

Part of the 134 freeway between Glendale & Pasadena is proposed to be named after @BarackObama. https://t.co/9mf7xAocZC pic.twitter.com/1LNtNikvO7 — Ron Baalke (@RonBaalke) May 3, 2017

The Obama section of the 134 Freeway will be between Interstate 210 and Highway 2, near Glendale, Pasadena and Eagle Rock. Obama had attended college at Occidental University in Eagle Rock before transferring to Columbia University in 1981.

The measure gained bipartisan support and passed 38-0. Two GOP state lawmakers did not vote, according to The Times.

ADVERTISEMENT

Activists and state legislators generally praised the move, adding that they are proud to honor Obama with the road.

State lawmakers had proposed naming another highway stretch on Rodeo Road after Obama earlier this year, and the name Obama Boulevard was approved in June. Some critics said the second road near Eagle Rock will be confusing.

California state Assemblyman Matthew Harper (R), who does not support naming the second road after Obama, said that it’s too soon to know what Obama’s legacy would be to name a road after him.

“With Obama being so young, it’s kind of undetermined what his overall legacy will be and how history will judge him,” Harper said. “He didn’t even graduate from a California university.”

Obama Boulevard on Rodeo Road is near “president’s row” on the highway, which also includes stretches named after George Washington, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson.

The Rodeo Road street is the site where Obama made one of his first 2008 campaign speeches in the state.