Sanders pulls crowd of 27,500 in LA
Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernard (Bernie) SandersPress: Democrats dare to think big Rep. Moulton says he may run for president The inconvenient truth behind 'Medicare for All' MORE (I-Vt.) attracted another huge crowd at a rally for his presidential campaign in Los Angeles on Monday night.



The Sanders campaign, citing Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena officials, said 27,500 people were inside the venue or in an overflow area outside to hear Sanders speak.

Stopped by Bernie Sanders rally tonight in L.A. & Sports Arena is jam packed. He said 27K including overflow. pic.twitter.com/1YGzQXVYw0 — Jacob Soboroff (@jacobsoboroff) August 11, 2015

When we stand together there is nothing we cannot accomplish, #BernieSanders says in closing. Standing ovations. pic.twitter.com/FDq5kracoI — Sarah Parvini (@sarahparvini) August 11, 2015

#BernieSanders speaks about an America he believes in and strives for, to a large crowd of diverse supporters. pic.twitter.com/nBix4M9x3x — Marcus Yam (@yamphoto) August 11, 2015



Actor and comedian Sarah Silverman introduced Sanders at the event.



“I give you, if we’re all very smart and a little bit lucky, the next president of the United States,” she said, according to remarks provided by the campaign.



Monday night’s event caps a three-day West Coast swing for Sanders that saw him pull record crowds.



On Sunday night, 28,000 people attended a Sanders rally in Portland, the largest crowd so far for any political event in the 2016 cycle.



On Saturday, an estimated 15,000 people turned out to see Sanders in Seattle.



Sanders also landed his first major union endorsement on the trip, with the National Nurses United announcing Monday they would back his Democratic bid for the White House.



Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonGOP promotes Trump line mirroring Hillary Clinton's 2016 campaign slogan GOP strategist says Virginia 'just got purple' Klobuchar says she will kick off campaign in Wisconsin, alludes to 2016 controversy MORE maintains a huge lead over Sanders in national polls and remains the heavy favorite to win the party's nomination.



Still, Sanders has energized grassroots liberals and emerged as the biggest threat to Clinton for the Democratic nomination. The crowds he’s attracting on the campaign trail are staggering in size for an underdog in an off-year.



In addition, Sanders has made gains in the polls in New Hampshire, the first-in-the-nation primary state, where he only trails Clinton by 7 points, according to the RealClearPolitics average of polls.