Lamont Cranston (Radio Show)
Contents show]

History

The Shadow, mysterious character who aids the forces of law and order is, in reality, Lamont Cranston.

Years ago in India, Cranston learned many strange secrets from a Yogi priest, keeper of the the Temple of the Cobras at Delhi. He taught him the power to "cloud men's minds" so they cannot see him.[1]

He is never seen only heard.

With his lovely companion Margo Lane, Cranston has dedicated his life to righting wrongs and fighting evil as The Shadow. It should be noted that Margo is the only person who knows The Shadow's true identity.





Powers and Abilities

Powers

Invisibility: the Yogi priest from Delhi also taught Cranston a "mesmeric trick" which causes people to be blind to his physical presence, and gives voice to The Shadow.



Abilities

In addition to "clouding men's minds," The Shadow can sometimes demonstrate telepathy and an ability to detect the presence of danger.



Strength level





Weaknesses

The Temple Bells of Neban: can dispel his powers if they're chimed by one who is familiar with their ancient mysteries.







Paraphernalia

Equipment:

He can contact Margo Lane by a private wireless device.



Transportation: None known.

Weapons: None known.







Notes

Harry Charlot, a writer for an advertising company, is credited for creating the mysterious narrator known as "The Shadow." The Shadow's voice was first heard on the radio on July 31, 1930, (The Detective Story Magazine Hour). Lamont Cranston as "The Shadow" is customarily known for the The Shadow Radio Show (1937-1954) series. He was introduced as The Shadow in "The Death House Rescue" (September 26, 1937).

The Lamont Cranston heard on the radio show should not be confused with the Lamont Cranston featured in the pulps.

Also, The Shadow in the pulps is a different character. He has agents, where as the radio version has only Margo Lane, his lovely companion. The pulp version can only hide in the shadows, but the radio version is invisible.







Trivia

No trivia.





See Also