Trump-state Dems introduce bill to withhold lawmaker pay during shutdown
Five Democratic senators from states won by President Trump Donald John TrumpPoll: Both parties need to do more on drug prices Senate approves .3 trillion spending bill, sending to Trump White House: Trump will delay steel tariffs for EU, six countries MORE in the 2016 presidential election introduced legislation Friday to withhold pay from members of Congress in the event of a government shutdown.

Sens. Heidi Heitkamp Mary (Heidi) Kathryn HeitkampKoch-backed group launches six-figure ad buy against Heitkamp Overnight Defense: Senate sides with Trump on military role in Yemen | Dem vets push for new war authorization on Iraq anniversary | General says time isn't 'right' for space corps Senate sides with Trump on providing Saudi military support MORE (N.D.), Claire McCaskill Claire Conner McCaskillKoch-backed group launches six-figure ad buy against Heitkamp GOP Senate candidate slams McCaskill over Clinton ties Dems meddle against Illinois governor ahead of GOP primary MORE (Mo.), Jon Tester Jonathan (Jon) Tester2020 Dems compete for top campaign operatives Senate GOP: We will grow our majority in midterms Senate passes bipartisan bill to roll back Dodd-Frank MORE (Mont.), Debbie Stabenow Deborah (Debbie) Ann StabenowSenators target 'gag clauses' that hide potential savings on prescriptions Nonprofit leaders look to continue work with lawmakers to strengthen charitable giving 10 Senate Democrats are up for reelection in Trump country MORE (Mich.) and Joe Manchin Joseph (Joe) ManchinCoal miners' union to endorse Manchin Washington VIPs gather to celebrate Mark Penn's new book Overnight Defense: Senate sides with Trump on military role in Yemen | Dem vets push for new war authorization on Iraq anniversary | General says time isn't 'right' for space corps MORE (W.Va.), all of whom are up for reelection this year, announced the bill Friday, hours ahead of a government funding deadline.

“If members of Congress can’t fulfill their basic duty to keep the government open and provide the essential services Americans depend on, then they don’t deserve their paychecks,” Heitkamp said in a statement. “Period.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Stabenow echoed Heitkamp’s remarks in the statement and vowed to donate her salary in the event of a shutdown even if the bill doesn’t pass.

“It’s wrong that members of Congress would still get paid in the event of a shutdown while paychecks for members of our military could be disrupted,” Stabenow said. “This bill ensures members of Congress will not get paid and another bill I have cosponsored makes sure our troops will."

Democratic Reps. Sean Patrick Maloney (N.Y.) and Stephanie Murphy Stephanie MurphyTom Steyer announces M effort to bring out young voters in Florida, California Fla. senator blasts 'excessive partisanship' after exclusion from White House guns meeting White House excludes Florida Democratic senator from meeting MORE (Fla.) also vowed Friday to forgo their pay if the government shuts down.

I'll give up my paycheck if the government shuts down.



I'm sending a letter to the House Chief Administrative Office asking that my pay be withheld in the event of a shutdown. The people I represent wouldn't get paid if they didn't do their job - and neither should Congress. pic.twitter.com/SRBKwuBVyq — Sean Patrick Maloney (@RepSeanMaloney) January 19, 2018

Members of Congress shouldn't collect a salary while thousands of government employees are furloughed without pay. I’ll return my salary for every day the government is shut down because it's the right thing to do. #FlaPol — Rep Stephanie Murphy (@RepStephMurphy) January 19, 2018

The announcement comes as Congress barrels towards the first government shutdown since 2013.

House Republicans passed a short-term government spending bill Thursday, but Senate Democrats have vowed to block the bill when it comes up for a vote.

Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Charles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerAmtrak to rename Rochester station after Louise Slaughter Conscience protections for health-care providers should be standard Pension committee must deliver on retirement promise MORE (D-N.Y.) met with President Trump at the White House Friday but left the meeting without a deal to avert a shutdown, saying there are still a “good number of disagreements” with Trump on immigration and spending.

The Senate is expected to take a vote on the House-passed spending bill Friday evening, but Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellSenate approves .3 trillion spending bill, sending to Trump GOP senator threatened to hold up bill over provision to honor late political rival: report Paul: Shutting down government not my goal MORE (R-KY.) is expected to fall short of the 60 votes necessary.