Arizona state lawmakers claim Trump supporters questioned them on their appearance
Arizona state lawmakers claimed that some supporters of President Trump Donald John TrumpBrennan fires new shot at Trump: ‘He’s drunk on power’ Trump aides discussed using security clearance revocations to distract from negative stories: report Trump tried to dissuade Melania from 'Be Best' anti-bullying campaign: report MORE targeted them over their appearance during a protest about immigration at the Arizona state capitol, the Arizona Capitol Times reported.

ADVERTISEMENT

Democratic Rep. Eric Descheenie, who is Navajo, said the protestors asked him if he was in the country illegally.

“I’m indigenous to these lands,” Descheenie told the Capitol Times. “My ancestors fought and died on these lands. I just told them, ‘Don’t ask me that question.’ ”

Democratic Rep. César Chávez, who came to the U.S. from Mexico when he was a child, said he was asked by a female protestor who he was.

Chávez told the Capitol Times that he told the woman he was “an undocumented legislator,” adding he made the comment for "the fun of it.”

He said the woman then called him “illegal.”

“She said something like, 'You’re illegal. Once illegal, always illegal,' ” Chávez told the paper. “I took no offense, no attention. It was just simply one of those things where you’re going to have a stance and I’m going to have a stance and we’re never going to agree on things.”

It’s unclear how many of the supporters posed the questions. The Trump supporters have denied that they asked the lawmakers and others at the capitol if they were in the country illegally.

State Democratic Senate Minority Leader Katie Hobbs wrote in a letter to the Arizona Senate president complaining about a lack of law enforcement on the scene, saying the supporters harassed staffers “perceived not to be white.”

“I can tell you that the Democratic staff who were yelled at by the protesters and called illegals definitely felt harassed and were not satisfied with the response,” Hobbs wrote, according to the Capitol Times. “They did not feel safe.”

The Trump supporters have denied the accusations.

“First, we were a group of several white, black and Latina Americans. To make assumptions that we were only calling out Hispanic representatives or ‘non-white’ legislatures [sic] is a disgusting, blatant lie,” one of the Trump supporters, Jennifer Caminiti-Harrison, told the Times in an email. “We also had legal immigrants visiting the Capitol who stood in solidarity with us along with Republican lawmakers who thanked us for being there and stopped for a photo.”

Caminiti-Harrison and another supporter, Lesa Antone, said they were at capitol to protest Living United for Change in Arizona activists, and that the two women are against illegal immigration.

The women told the Capitol Times they believed the activists from the social justice organization didn’t have the right to lobby lawmakers about immigration.