Chelsea Clinton tweets 'reminder' that she's 'not running for anything'
Chelsea Clinton insisted she has "no plans" to run for public office in a series of tweets on Monday.

The former first daughter was responding to a tweet from Vox senior correspondent Matt Yglesias, after he tweeted about a New York state primary.

"I'm not running for anything," Clinton tweeted, adding that she may need to make her "periodic reminder" more often.

I'm not running for anything*



*Apparently periodic reminder may mean twice a day reminding https://t.co/xJrYI30j39 — Chelsea Clinton (@ChelseaClinton) April 25, 2017

Clinton also shared a tweet from Yglesias asking: "So who from Left Twitter is going to step up, move from Brooklyn to White Plains, and challenge Chelsea in the NY-17 primary?"

ADVERTISEMENT

As reporters on Twitter chimed in, calling Clinton's denial of a future political run "vague," the former first daughter tweeted again.

"Goodness gracious!" she said. "I've no plans. How much clearer can I be (since you ask for clarity)?"

She also joked that "apparently twice a day reminder was optimistic."

Goodness gracious! I've no plans. How much clearer can I be (since you ask for clarity)?*



*Apparently twice a day reminder was optimistic https://t.co/PBm9eQUbs4 — Chelsea Clinton (@ChelseaClinton) April 25, 2017

For good measure throw in 2017 too-City Council elections are in November*



*My favorite color is blue (because, three times seemed enough) https://t.co/EVeF7MANzY — Chelsea Clinton (@ChelseaClinton) April 25, 2017

Clinton has repeatedly denied wanting to run for office. In an interview with Variety last month, she said the rumors have been part of her life for years.

“I am not running for public office,” she said in the March interview with the publication.

“I really am constantly surprised by the stories of me running for, fill in the blank—Congress, Senate, City Council, the presidency. I really find this all rather hysterical, because I’ve been asked this question a lot throughout my life, and the answer has never changed."