Salon tries their hand at Stolen Valor
The Leftists at Salon took a very weak shot at “busting” Sheriff David Clarke for stolen valor in their article entitled “Looks like Sheriff David Clarke’s “army” medals might be B.S.” in which they use as a source some guy named Charles Clymer who claims to be an Army veteran as well as a “Genderqueer” whatever that is.

1/ Okay, regarding Sheriff David Clarke, can I be petty for a second about something that's always irritated me? (thread) — Charles Clymer (@cmclymer) May 17, 2017

At almost all of his public appearances, Clarke either wears a pristine cowboy hat with a natty suit or, more famously, a uniform festooned with shiny military medals. On Thursday, Twitter user Charles Clymer, an army veteran, pointed out that those military medals might not be all that legit. Clymer went on to break down each individual medal, their placement and their apparently spurious provenance. Clymer acknowledged that legitimate medals are earned, and should be worn with pride, but accuses Clarke of “stolen valor” and calls Clarke’s collection, “a sloppy assortment of badge replicas arranged neatly, [that] looks imposing.”

Yeah, Clymer did no such thing. He complained that Clarke had too many shiny things on his uniform, none of which are related to military service. It was nothing but a feeble attempt to demean Sheriff Clarke personally, you know, because “Trump!!!”. I’m not familiar with any of the “bling” that Clarke is wearing in that picture, because, like I said, none of it is related to military service. It reminds me of when the Left didn’t like David Petraeus and made fun of the General’s uniform as they speculated about whether he had earned all of the awards on his uniform.

The whole thing is childish and it’s a political attack. We’ve busted phonies here on both sides of the political aisle, irrespective of their politics because that’s the nature of stolen valor. I can’t find any articles on Salon that take The Dick Blumenthal to task on his fake claims that Blumenthal was a Vietnam veteran.

This David Clarke/Charles Clymer thing is like me making a big deal and wondering if Clymer earned his tiara in this picture;

Category: Dumbass Bullshit