Press Release
SEATTLE--(BUSINESS WIRE)--June 18, 2008--To support growing customer demand, Amazon.com, Inc. (NASDAQ:AMZN), today announced plans to open a new fulfillment center in Goodyear, Arizona, during the third quarter of 2008. The new facility, operated by Amazon.com azdc, inc., will be more than 500,000 square feet and will create more than 600 full-time positions this year, with an additional 700 temporary positions during the 2008 holiday season.

The facility is located at 16920 W. Commerce Drive in Goodyear, and is Amazon's second fulfillment center in Arizona, following the opening of a facility in Phoenix last year.

"Corporate America is beginning to discover the City of Goodyear," said Mayor James Cavanaugh. "I know that Amazon appreciates the fact that our community is filled with people who are enthusiastic about joining such a well-known company. We're fortunate to be a city where so many new jobs are being created, and we are thrilled to welcome Amazon to Goodyear."

"As we continue to expand selection for customers across all product categories, we're excited to be opening a new facility in Goodyear to allow us to serve customers more quickly and efficiently," said Mike McKenna, vice president, Amazon fulfillment services.

Amazon is seeking highly motivated individuals with drive, ambition and a passion for giving customers a first-class shopping experience, and is currently recruiting for individuals seeking full-time employment. Management openings include roles as Area Managers, Operations Managers, Safety Managers and Facilities Area Managers.

Amazon will be conducting an open house for management roles on June 26, 2008, from 12:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. at the Radisson City Center, located at 3600 N. Second Avenue in Phoenix. Interested candidates can visit www.amazon.com/careers for more information or to apply for positions.

Please note: This open house is for interested candidates only, and is not open to the press. Media should contact 206-266-7180 for more details.

About Amazon.com

Amazon.com, Inc. (NASDAQ:AMZN), a Fortune 500 company based in Seattle, opened on the World Wide Web in July 1995 and today offers Earth's Biggest Selection. Amazon.com, Inc., seeks to be Earth's most customer-centric company, where customers can find and discover anything they might want to buy online, and endeavors to offer its customers the lowest possible prices. Amazon.com and other sellers offer millions of unique new, refurbished and used items in categories such as books, movies, music & games, digital downloads, electronics & computers, home & garden, toys, kids & baby, grocery, apparel, shoes & jewelry, health & beauty, sports & outdoors, and tools, auto & industrial.

Amazon Web Services provides Amazon's developer customers with access to in-the-cloud infrastructure services based on Amazon's own back-end technology platform, which developers can use to enable virtually any type of business. Examples of the services offered by Amazon Web Services are Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2), Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3), Amazon SimpleDB, Amazon Simple Queue Service (Amazon SQS), Amazon Flexible Payments Service (Amazon FPS), and Amazon Mechanical Turk.

Amazon and its affiliates operate websites, including www.amazon.com, www.amazon.co.uk, www.amazon.de, www.amazon.co.jp, www.amazon.fr, www.amazon.ca, and the Joyo Amazon websites at www.joyo.cn and www.amazon.cn.

As used herein, "Amazon.com," "we," "our" and similar terms include Amazon.com, Inc., and its subsidiaries, unless the context indicates otherwise.

Forward-Looking Statements

This announcement contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Actual results may differ significantly from management's expectations. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that include, among others, risks related to competition, management of growth, new products, services and technologies, potential fluctuations in operating results, international expansion, outcomes of legal proceedings and claims, fulfillment center optimization, seasonality, commercial agreements, acquisitions and strategic transactions, foreign exchange rates, system interruption, significant amount of indebtedness, inventory, government regulation and taxation, payments and fraud. More information about factors that potentially could affect Amazon.com's financial results is included in Amazon.com's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2007, and subsequent filings.

CONTACT: Amazon.com

Media Hotline, 206-266-7180



SOURCE: Amazon.com, Inc.