Press Release
SEATTLE--(BUSINESS WIRE)--June 24, 2008--Amazon.com, Inc. (NASDAQ:AMZN) today announced its Whitestown, Ind. fulfillment center, operated by Amazon.com.indc LLC, is looking to hire several hundred full-time hourly positions ahead of the facility's opening in late summer 2008.

The fulfillment center will be more than 600,000 square feet, located in Whitestown, Ind., 20 miles northwest of Indianapolis. The new facility will allow Amazon to serve its customers in the Midwest more efficiently. The company also plans to hire up to 1,700 temporary associates during peak seasons to meet demand for its products.

Amazon is currently recruiting for individuals seeking full-time employment opportunities. Candidates should be highly motivated with drive, ambition and a passion for giving customers a first-class shopping experience. Available positions include hourly roles in Picking, Packing and Receiving/Shipping.

We are hiring smart, friendly and dedicated people for our Whitestown facility to help us serve customers more quickly and efficiently, said Mike McKenna, vice president, Amazon fulfillment services. We focus on working hard, having fun and making history as Earth's Most Customer-Centric Company.

Open House events will be held on June 27, from 9:00 a.m to 6:00 p.m, and June 28, from 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m., at the Boone County 4-H Fairgrounds Pavilion, located at 1300 East 100th South in Lebanon. Individuals are encouraged to attend these events to learn more and apply for hourly positions. Management positions can be applied for online at www.amazon.com/careers.

Please note: This open house is for interested candidates only, and is not open to the press. Media should contact 206-266-7180 for more details.

About Amazon.com

Amazon.com, Inc., (NASDAQ: AMZN), a Fortune 500 company based in Seattle, opened on the World Wide Web in July 1995 and today offers Earth's Biggest Selection. Amazon.com, Inc. seeks to be Earth's most customer-centric company, where customers can find and discover anything they might want to buy online, and endeavors to offer its customers the lowest possible prices. Amazon.com and other sellers offer millions of unique new, refurbished and used items in categories such as books, movies, music & games, digital downloads, electronics & computers, home & garden, toys, kids & baby, grocery, apparel, shoes & jewelry, health & beauty, sports & outdoors, and tools, auto & industrial.

Amazon Web Services provides Amazon's developer customers with access to in-the-cloud infrastructure services based on Amazon's own back-end technology platform, which developers can use to enable virtually any type of business. Examples of the services offered by Amazon Web Services are Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2), Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3), Amazon SimpleDB, Amazon Simple Queue Service (Amazon SQS), Amazon Flexible Payments Service (Amazon FPS), and Amazon Mechanical Turk.

Amazon and its affiliates operate websites, including www.amazon.com, www.amazon.co.uk, www.amazon.de, www.amazon.co.jp, www.amazon.fr, www.amazon.ca, and the Joyo Amazon websites at www.joyo.cn and www.amazon.cn.

As used herein, Amazon.com, we, our and similar terms include Amazon.com, Inc., and its subsidiaries, unless the context indicates otherwise.

Forward-Looking Statements

This announcement contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Actual results may differ significantly from management's expectations. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that include, among others, risks related to competition, management of growth, new products, services and technologies, potential fluctuations in operating results, international expansion, outcomes of legal proceedings and claims, fulfillment center optimization, seasonality, commercial agreements, acquisitions and strategic transactions, foreign exchange rates, system interruption, significant amount of indebtedness, inventory, government regulation and taxation, payments and fraud. More information about factors that potentially could affect Amazon.com's financial results is included in Amazon.com's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2007, and subsequent filings.

CONTACT: Amazon.com

206-266-7180

SOURCE: Amazon.com, Inc.