Tammy Baldwin's attorney defends firing of staffer over Tomah VA
U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin is finally speaking out about her decision to fire a staffer over the problems at the troubled Tomah VA Medical Center. Credit: Mark Hoffman

U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin is finally speaking out about her decision to fire a staffer over the problems at the troubled Tomah VA Medical Center.

Or at least her nationally renowned Democratic attorney has issued a statement defending the move last month to oust Marquette Baylor, ex-deputy state director for Baldwin and chief of her Milwaukee office.

"Marquette Baylor was terminated because her long-term performance on a range of issues did not meet with the senator's expectations for effective constituent service," said Marc Elias, former general counsel for Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry and a partner at the Perkins Coie law firm in Washington, D.C.

"As deputy state director for constituent services," Elias continued in a written statement to No Quarter, "her handling of the problems at the Tomah VA was only one of those issues."

Elias — the go-to guy for Democrats in political trouble — said Wednesday night that he had been hired by Baldwin and was being paid out of her campaign fund.

In the statement, Elias acknowledged that Baylor was offered a severance package, a deal that he said was put together with the U.S. Senate's chief employment lawyer.

The separation agreement, Elias said, was "standard for a Senate employee of her tenure and seniority" and included "standard confidentiality language."

His statement, however, did not divulge the details of the proposed deal, including the amount of money involved. Baylor, who made $80,000 in 2014, worked for U.S. Sen. Herb Kohl for a decade before joining Baldwin's staff in June 2013.

No Quarter reported earlier this week that Baylor rejected the proposed severance package over the weekend.

"Marquette has notified Senate employment counsel through her attorney that she turned down that offer, and she is free to move forward in any way she so chooses," Elias said.

Baylor could not be reached for comment. Representatives for the former Baldwin aide declined to comment on Elias' statement. Baylor has hired a team of attorneys to explore litigation for wrongful termination or sexual discrimination.

The head of the state Republican Party said it is time for Baldwin, known for ducking the press on issues, to speak out on the matter.

"Tammy Baldwin needs to stop hiding behind her legal team and take responsibility for her role in this increasingly bizarre coverup that includes blaming staff for her failures and offering hush money in exchange for silence," said Joe Fadness, executive director of the state GOP.

The Journal Sentinel reported that Baldwin canned Baylor on Jan. 22 as the first-term Democratic senator was coming under heat for her handling of the Tomah controversy.

Baldwin's office sat for months on an inspection report that found officials at the Tomah medical center were prescribing high amounts of opiate pain pills to patients. She began calling for a federal investigation only after news reports ran in January showing that as many as three vets died after receiving treatment at Tomah.

Until Wednesday, Baldwin and her chief of staff, Bill Murat, would not even acknowledge terminating Baylor. Nor would they disclose the proposed five-figure severance deal offered to Baylor that included the confidentiality clause.

Baldwin was scheduled to spend the day in Milwaukee on Wednesday, meeting with union officials and U.S. Rep. Gwen Moore, a Milwaukee Democrat.

But Baldwin could not be reached for comment. Murat was in the senator's Milwaukee office on Tuesday but refused to answer questions from a reporter visiting that office.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.