Press Release
Facility to be located in Greater Nashville Area



NASHVILLE, Tenn., Jul 28, 2011 (BUSINESS WIRE) --

Amazon.com, Inc. (NASDAQ:AMZN) today announced plans to open an approximately 500,000-square-foot fulfillment center in Lebanon, Tennessee. Amazon will create hundreds of full-time and seasonal jobs at the facility this year.

The Lebanon facility will be Amazon's third fulfillment center in Tennessee, bringing its total footprint in the state to more than 2 million square feet. As part of this footprint, Amazon will open two additional facilities in Chattanooga and Cleveland, Tennessee this fall, creating 1,200 new full-time jobs in the state.

"We're delighted to be expanding our investment in Tennessee, bringing hundreds of additional jobs to the state," said Dave Clark, vice-president, Amazon North American Operations. "We look forward to opening the doors at three new Amazon facilities in Tennessee this fall."

"We're grateful to Governor Haslam, Senator Beavers, Representative Elam, Mayor Craighead, Mayor Hutto and other officials who have demonstrated their commitment to Amazon jobs and investment," said Paul Misener, vice-president, Amazon Global Public Policy.

Amazon is currently recruiting candidates for jobs at its Tennessee facilities. Full-time hourly openings include roles in Picking, Packing and Receiving/Shipping. Management roles include positions in Operations, Safety, Human Resources and Technical Support.

Amazon offers comprehensive benefits including:

Medical and dental coverage

Company-paid vision plan

Company-paid life insurance

Company-paid disability insurance

Paid vacation

Annual stock grants

401(k) plan with company match

Candidates for hourly positions can apply online at www.amazonapplyonlinenashville.com or call 615-238-0191 for more information. Candidates for management positions can email tn-jobs@amazon.com or apply online at www.amazon.com/careers.

The new facility is expected to be complete this fall. Amazon's fulfillment centers in Tennessee will be operated by Amazon.com dedc LLC.

This year, Amazon has announced plans for new fulfillment centers in Washington State, Indiana, South Carolina and Arizona.

About Amazon.com

Amazon.com, Inc. (NASDAQ: AMZN), a Fortune 500 company based in Seattle, opened on the World Wide Web in July 1995 and today offers Earth's Biggest Selection. Amazon.com, Inc. seeks to be Earth's most customer-centric company, where customers can find and discover anything they might want to buy online, and endeavors to offer its customers the lowest possible prices. Amazon.com and other sellers offer millions of unique new, refurbished and used items in categories such as Books; Movies, Music & Games; Digital Downloads; Electronics & Computers; Home & Garden; Toys, Kids & Baby; Grocery; Apparel, Shoes & Jewelry; Health & Beauty; Sports & Outdoors; and Tools, Auto & Industrial. Amazon Web Services provides Amazon's developer customers with access to in-the-cloud infrastructure services based on Amazon's own back-end technology platform, which developers can use to enable virtually any type of business. Kindle, Kindle 3G, Kindle with Special Offers, Kindle 3G with Special Offers and Kindle DX are the revolutionary portable readers that wirelessly download books, magazines, newspapers, blogs and personal documents to a crisp, high-resolution electronic ink display that looks and reads like real paper. Kindle 3G, Kindle 3G with Special Offers and Kindle DX utilize the same 3G wireless technology as advanced cell phones, so users never need to hunt for a Wi-Fi hotspot. Kindle is the #1 bestselling product across the millions of items sold on Amazon.

Amazon and its affiliates operate websites, including www.amazon.com, www.amazon.co.uk, www.amazon.de, www.amazon.co.jp, www.amazon.fr, www.amazon.ca, www.amazon.cn, and www.amazon.it. As used herein, "Amazon.com," "we," "our" and similar terms include Amazon.com, Inc., and its subsidiaries, unless the context indicates otherwise.

Forward-Looking Statements

This announcement contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Actual results may differ significantly from management's expectations. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that include, among others, risks related to competition, management of growth, new products, services and technologies, potential fluctuations in operating results, international expansion, outcomes of legal proceedings and claims, fulfillment center optimization, seasonality, commercial agreements, acquisitions and strategic transactions, foreign exchange rates, system interruption, inventory, government regulation and taxation, payments and fraud. More information about factors that potentially could affect Amazon.com's financial results is included in Amazon.com's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including its most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K and subsequent filings.

SOURCE: Amazon.com, Inc.

Amazon Media Line, 206-266-7180