About Last Night | An Art Soiree Starring Lady Gaga
High-wattage movie stars and art stars gathered in the Hamptons for the iconic theater director Robert Wilson’s annual Watermill Center summer benefit, including Hugh Jackman, Cindy Sherman and Winona Ryder, with Alan Cumming serving as master of ceremonies. A murmur went through the crowd when Marina Abramovic entered with none other than Lady Gaga attached at the arm. “Who is it?” asked Orlan, the French body modification artist, perhaps slightly embarrassed to be at the same party as the pop star she is suing for plagiarism

What

This was the 20th anniversary edition of the famous party, which benefits the Watermill Center, Wilson’s performance laboratory on the east end of Long Island. “Devil’s Heaven,” as it was titled, involved installations and performances across the grounds, as well as live and silent auctions that included more than 100 lots from major artists. Things really heated up during the live auction, when Gaga pursued much of the art on the block. Most sensationally, she entered into a bidding war with the Swiss patron Maja Hoffmann — a very early and unwavering supporter of Wilson and the Watermill — for a block of quartz Abramovic had carved and decreed as a spiritual artifact that should be pressed to its owner’s head each morning. Simon de Pury, who served as the auctioneer, seized on the spectacle: “Lady Gaga and Maja Hoffmann have more in common than you think! I once saw Lady Gaga perform at L.A. MOCA in a hat designed by Frank Gehry! And Maja Hoffmann is building a fabulous museum in Arles … designed by Frank Gehry!” Gaga won the rock.

Where

Wilson’s stronghold in the woods of Water Mill, N.Y., is an eight-and-half-acre compound on what was once the campus of a Western Union research facility. The retrofitted buildings are surrounded by lawns and sculpture gardens — a perfect playground for summer revelers.

When

A long line formed to get into the event, which began with a cocktail reception, then segued into a seated dinner. It was the marquee gathering in a jampacked weekend on the Hamptons event circuit, which also included Super Saturday, the giant designer garage sale, also in Water Mill; Russell Simmons’s Art for Life benefit in Bridgehampton; and Kenny Scharf’s riotous opening in East Hampton.

Why

The dinner, which raised $1.85 million, is the lifeblood of the residency program. The circus of ritualistic tableaus around the bucolic grounds reflected the spirit of the place. “It’s like a combination of street art and Gilbert and George’s living sculpture,” mused the globe-trotting curator Hans-Ulrich Obrist of the performances — many of which, in the mode of Abramovic, involved grueling acts of stillness or exertion, and were carried out in states of undress. “It’s a parallel reality,” he added.