Update: Rick Perry’s office says he ‘believes in the greatness of our Union and nothing should be done to change it’
Update at 4:31 p.m.: Moments ago, an email arrived from Catherine Frazier, press secretary for Governor Rick Perry, who has this to say about the petition on the White House website:

Gov. Perry believes in the greatness of our Union and nothing should be done to change it. But he also shares the frustrations many Americans have with our federal government. Now more than ever our country needs strong leadership from states like Texas, that are making tough decisions to live within their means, keep taxes low and provide opportunities to job creators so their citizens can provide for their families and prosper. We cannot allow Washington’s tax and spend, one-size-fits-all mindset to jeopardize our children’s future, undermine our personal liberties and drive our nation down a dangerous path to greater dependence of government.

Update at 2:39 p.m.: As of, well, now, 25,285 people have signed the petition, thus triggering a response from the White House. Meanwhile, Oklahoma’s secession petition has drawn … 755 signatures.

Original item at 8:45 a.m.: It doesn’t take a presidential election to trigger talk of Texas seceding from the Union — ain’t that right, Rick Perry? But this morning, Gawker directs our attention to a petition on the White House’s own website begging President Obama for permission to adios from the U.S.A. And Texas isn’t alone: Petitions in 18 other states want the okee-doke to scram.

The Lone Star offering (the handiwork of an Arlington resident named “Micah H”) reads as follows:

We petition the Obama Administration to peacefully grant the State of Texas to withdraw from the United States of America and create its own NEW government. The US continues to suffer economic difficulties stemming from the federal government’s neglect to reform domestic and foreign spending. The citizens of the US suffer from blatant abuses of their rights such as the NDAA, the TSA, etc. Given that the state of Texas maintains a balanced budget and is the 15th largest economy in the world, it is practically feasible for Texas to withdraw from the union, and to do so would protect it’s citizens’ standard of living and re-secure their rights and liberties in accordance with the original ideas and beliefs of our founding fathers which are no longer being reflected by the federal government.

The petition’s been up since Friday, and when I first clicked on it at 8:30 this morning there were 16,848 signatures; eight minutes later that number had jumped by 100. (Update at 9:17 a.m.: Now, more than 17,300 have signed the petition.) Never mind that Texas can’t secede from the Union: As Gawker points out, should the petition reach the 25,000-signature threshold, well, “White House staff will review it, ensure it’s sent to the appropriate policy experts, and issue an official response.” Looking forward to that update.