Homestretch: Restoration of governor's mansion concludes with final unveiling
The black-and-white floor pattern greets visitors in the foyer, which gives way to detailed crown molding on the ceiling and columns.

SHARE

By Susan Alexander of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Six years after it was announced, the restoration of Tennessee's Executive Residence in Nashville - home to eight former governors and their families - concludes this week with the unveiling of Conservation Hall, a new 2,800-square-foot underground meeting space built adjacent to the residence. The addition fulfills the project's master plan to create a space large enough for functions that previously have required tents to be placed on the mansion's lawn.

Construction is still under way, and photos of the new hall were unavailable at press time, but tours will be offered on Thursday during the annual First Lady's Luncheon. Proceeds from the luncheon benefit The Tennessee Residence and are earmarked for the revitalization of the grounds.

First lady Andrea Conte has spearheaded the revitalization of the home, though she and husband Gov. Phil Bredesen live in their own private residence about 15 minutes from the mansion.

In addition to the creation of Conservation Hall, the project included some long-overdue repairs and updates. The original slate roof needed replacement; electrical wiring needed updating; a faulty heating and cooling system had caused water damage; and the windows were not energy efficient. The foundation needed to be reinforced and the basement expanded to accommodate storage and support space as well as a new energy-efficient geothermal heating and cooling system. Also, the mansion was inaccessible to disabled Tennesseans and needed updates to meet Americans with Disabilities Act standards.

In all, the project cost $18 million, half of which has been raised through private donations, Conte said.

Asked which part of the project she's proudest of, Conte said, "Getting it done. When you're working on anything of this magnitude, there are critical decisions along the way, any one of which might have killed the project." She praised Mike Fitts and Alan Robertson of the Office of State Architect for their work throughout the project.

The three-story, 16-room, Georgian-style home, built in 1931 for Nashville businessman William Ridley Wills, was originally known as "Far Hills" for the views from its 10-acre site. It was purchased by the state and became the governor's home in 1949, after Wills' death.

As part of the project, Tennessee artists were invited to use discarded materials from the home - draperies and other fabrics, stonework and slate from the roof - to create new pieces of art to display there. Three East Tennessee artists - textile artists Gloria Felter and Sheila Rauen and sculptor Moema Furtado - have completed pieces that are on display. Felter and Rauen's pieces are quilted wall hangings; Furtado's stone sculpture resides in the property's herb garden.

Susan Alexander may be reached at alexanders@knoxnews.com or 865-342-6431. She is the News Sentinel features editor.