Eric Braverman Joins The Eric and Wendy Schmidt Group as President
Menlo Park, CA – January 18, 2017 – The Eric and Wendy Schmidt Group today announced that Eric Braverman has joined as President of the organization to oversee all philanthropic and non-investment efforts for the Schmidts. Chuck Chai remains President and Chief Investment Officer of the Hillspire investment group. Maria Seferian continues to serve as General Counsel across the Schmidt organization.

Eric Schmidt and Wendy Schmidt said: “Now more than ever, there is important work to be done as we bring the power of both technology and people together into networks that can help address this century’s greatest challenges. As we look to increase our impact, Eric Braverman’s insight into growing solutions that work and his experience with leaders in government, philanthropy, and business will be central to our efforts. We are very pleased to have Eric working closely with us to direct our family office and to lead and continue to innovate in our philanthropic efforts.” Braverman is now a member of the board of each active philanthropic entity, including The Schmidt Ocean Institute and The Schmidt Family Foundation.

From 1997 to 2013, Braverman was a partner and consultant at McKinsey & Company, where he co-founded the firm’s public sector practice and worked closely with leaders of government, philanthropy, and media/technology companies around the world. In 2013 he became Chief Executive Officer of the Clinton Foundation and led the Foundation’s worldwide operations from 2013 to 2015. Braverman holds a B.A. summa cum laude in biology from Yale and a J.D. from the Yale Law School, and currently holds a joint faculty appointment at the Yale School of Management and the Jackson Institute for Global Affairs.

The Eric and Wendy Schmidt Group, directs the family office and helps drive the full philanthropic efforts of the Schmidts to address this century’s most important challenges. These philanthropic efforts include The Schmidt Family Foundation, which advances the development of renewable energy and a wiser use of natural resources. Its grant-making operation, The 11th Hour Project, supports more than 150 non-profit organizations in program areas including climate and energy, ecological agriculture, human rights, and oceans. In 2009, the Schmidts created the Schmidt Ocean Institute, and in 2012 launched the research vessel, Falkor, as a mobile platform to advance ocean exploration, discovery, and knowledge, and catalyze sharing of information about the oceans. In addition, through The Eric and Wendy Schmidt Fund for Strategic Innovation, the Schmidts support a variety of organizations addressing global issues in the fields of science and technology, education, and the environment.