Turpentine Creek "Cat Of The Week"
Online Videos by Veoh.com

One of the most popular and distinct cats at Turpentine Creek is Kenny. He is the white tiger with the severe facial deformities that give him a pug nose and crooked teeth. Most people know who Kenny is and his strange looks make him one of the most loved cats at the refuge.

Kenny came to the refuge in good health in 1999 when he was rescued from a breeding facility. In the spring of 2007 we noticed an unusual growth on Kenny’s right scrotum which was removed Dr. Rob Wilkinson of St. Francis Vet Clinic and sent for testing. The pathology results suggested that it was an anaplastic neoplasia, in Kenny’s case a melanoma. The pathologist believed the tumor to be completely removed although they did suggest that there is a possibility of it returning or spreading. Since his tumor was removed Kenny has been released into a habitat area where he enjoys fun and freedom with his brother Willie and more recently he has had a new girl, Missy, move in next door.

Unfortunately, Kenny’s medical ordeal is not over. At the end of March 2008 we noticed that the skin between Kenny’s back legs seemed chaffed and raw. Dr. Aric Brandt, from St. Francis came to the refuge, Kenny was sedated and we quickly realized that the chaffed skin was only a symptom of a much bigger problem. Kenny had a mass under the skin in his pelvic region, small, hard nodules on the skin next to his penis and an abnormality in his right scrotum; the same place the tumor had been removed from a year ago. Kenny was immediately loaded into a trailer and brought to St. Francis for surgery.

Once at the clinic, Dr. A. Brandt performed the 3 hour surgery to remove tumor, the nodules and the mass in the scrotum which all seemed to be connected. Kenny was also neutered in order to reduce the risk of anything spreading to his testicles.

Samples were sent to the diagnostic lab and now we are nervously waiting on results while keeping busy making sure Kenny is recovering well. Luckily he has been very co-operative taking his high dose of antibiotics well and not biting, licking or disturbing the incision site.

For now, everyone at the refuge is thinking positively and making sure Kenny is happy, comfortable and has the best quality of life that we can provide for him. Please keep Kenny in your thoughts and if you want to help with Kenny’s vet bill please send any donations to the refuge or visit our website.