University of Ilorin, Ilorin Kwara State Nigeria - Academia.edu
less

Brief Profile of Professor Tanimola Makanjuola AKANDEProfessor Tanimola Makanjuola Akande was born in 1960. He is a Professor of Public Health with University of Ilorin and a Consultant Public Health Physician with University of Ilorin Teaching Hospital.He is a member West African College of Physicians (Public Health), Nigerian Institute of Management (Chartered) and a Fellow of the National Postgraduate Medical College (FMCPH). His area of specialization is Health Management. He was at various times Head, Department of Epidemiology & Community Health. University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria.H haes supervised over 60 resident doctors and more than 20 of them are Consultants today. He has taught hundreds of Medical Students and many of them are accomplished doctors including those that are already Professors in various specialities in Medicine.In the health sector he served in various Committees, Technical Working Groups and as Consultant to Federal Ministry of Health and several international agencies both within and outside Nigeria. He is a Senior Researcher, Amsterdam Institute for Global Health and Development (AIGHD) since January 2008.He is currently a member; National Implementation Steering Committee of Nigerian Health Act, member of the Expert Review Committee (ERC) on Poliomyelitis Eradication Initiative and Routine Immunization in Nigeria, member Board of Trustees PharmAccess Foundation Nigeria, also a member Board of Trustees, African Civil Society for the Care and Support of Tuberculosis Patients (ACT), and also He was a member World Health Organization African Region Technical Advisory Group (TAG) on Measles and Rubella from 2013 - 2016;He served on several missions as Consultant to World Health Organization on Polio Eradication Initiative, Integrated Disease Surveillance at various times in Ghana, Liberia, Zimbabwe, He also served as Consultant to UNICEF in Nigeria and Kenya. He has served as Consultant to Heath Finance and Governance HFG_USAID at various times since 2016.He is a member of several professional organizations including the Association of Public Health Physicians of Nigeria (APHPN) of which he was the National Chairman from 2013 - 2017. He has over 140 publications in reputable peer reviewed local and international journals.His hobbies include reading and working in God’s vineyard. He is widely travelled and happily married to Mrs Oluremi Akande with 3 highly valued daughters - one of them a medical doctor.