Shocking Allegations Show Harry Reid, Chinese Company Behind Nevada Ranch Standoff
As a family in Clark County, Nev. continues to face an onslaught of heavily armed federal agents determined to kick them off of their ranch, reports have surfaced that Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid might be behind the entire ordeal.

The ranch, which has been in Cliven Bundy’s family for more than a century, is ground zero for a growing showdown between federal authorities and individual rights activists.

Despite attempting to silence protesters by limiting them to so-called “First Amendment areas,” law enforcement personnel, legislators, and militia members are heading to the site in droves to express their outrage over the Bureau of Land Management’s show of force.

Send a message directly to the BLM by adding your name to our important petition!

Sign the Petition

In an apparent effort to cover its tracks, the BLM has reportedly removed documents from its website showing

that the move to kick the Bundys and their cattle off of the land was at least in part due to the fact that their presence

impeded development of solar energy on the land.

Photo Credit: Free Republic

Reid and his eldest son, reports indicate, were integral in the support and/or implementation

of a $5 billion solar plant being built-in the county by a Chinese company.

Officially, the federal agency has suggested they are only after Bundy because his cattle are a threat to an endangered species of tortoise.

That narrative, however, fell apart in the opinion of many critics when it was revealed the agency

itself has engaged in the widespread slaughter of the animal.

The recent allegations of Reid’s hand in the Bundy attack are bolstered by the fact that his former senior adviser

also served as the director of the BLM. According to reports, Reid successfully redrew the endangered tortoise’s

protected habitat to benefit a donor, indicating his concern is more about his political and financial future than the well-being of this reptile.

Photo Credit: Free Republic

As Bundy confirmed, he is far from the only rancher intimidated by the BLM. He is, however, the last one left fighting. According to a statement he made recently, there were 52 other ranchers in the vicinity of his property at one point – and they are all gone.

Sign the Petition