Candyman (1992)
Overview

Release Date: 16 October 1992 (USA) view trailer 16 October 1992 (USA) more

Tagline: We Dare You To Say His Name Five Times! We Dare You To Say His Name Five Times! more

Plot Summary: Helen Lyle is a student who decides to write a thesis about local legends and myths. She visits a part of the town... Helen Lyle is a student who decides to write a thesis about local legends and myths. She visits a part of the town... more

Awards: 4 wins & 5 nominations 4 wins & 5 nominations more

User Comments: * * * out of 4. * * * out of 4. more

Cast (in credits order) (verified as complete)

Create a character page for: Helen Lyle Daniel Robitaille Trevor Lyle Bernadette 'Bernie' Walsh Anne-Marie McCoy Jake Stacey Henrietta Mosely Kitty Culver Professor Philip Purcell Dr. Burke Clara Billy Monica Student Diane Danny Harold Baby Anthony Archie Walsh Crying Mother Castrated Boy Tough Guy Gang Leader Detective Frank Valento Policewoman Detective Attorney T.V. Reporter 1st Orderly 2nd Orderly Priest Cop Nurse ----------- more...

Crew verified as complete





Create a character page for: Helen Lyle Daniel Robitaille Trevor Lyle Bernadette 'Bernie' Walsh Anne-Marie McCoy Jake Stacey Henrietta Mosely Kitty Culver Professor Philip Purcell Dr. Burke Clara Billy Monica Student Diane Danny Harold Baby Anthony Archie Walsh Crying Mother Castrated Boy Tough Guy Gang Leader Detective Frank Valento Policewoman Detective Attorney T.V. Reporter 1st Orderly 2nd Orderly Priest Cop Nurse ----------- more...

Additional Details

Also Known As: Clive Barker's Candyman (USA)

more Clive Barker's Candyman (USA)

Parents Guide: Add content advisory for parents

Runtime: 99 min

Aspect Ratio: 1.85 : 1 1.85 : 1 more

Sound Mix: Dolby SR

Fun Stuff

Trivia: Real bees were actually put into Tony Todd's mouth while they where shooting the climax. His only protection was a mouth guard that kept him from having the bees go down his throat. Real bees were actually put into Tony Todd's mouth while they where shooting the climax. His only protection was a mouth guard that kept him from having the bees go down his throat. more

Goofs: Continuity: When the Candyman breaks the window to escape the psychiatrist's office at the hospital, there are shards of glass in the frame. In subsequent shots, when Helen goes to the window, all of the glass has been cleared. Continuity: When the Candyman breaks the window to escape the psychiatrist's office at the hospital, there are shards of glass in the frame. In subsequent shots, when Helen goes to the window, all of the glass has been cleared. more

Quotes: Candyman: They will say that I have shed innocent blood. What's blood for, if not for shedding? : They will say that I have shed innocent blood. What's blood for, if not for shedding? more

Soundtrack: STATE OF INDEPENDENCE STATE OF INDEPENDENCE more

FAQ

Message Boards

Recommendations

Related Links

You may report errors and omissions on this page to the IMDb database managers. They will be examined and if approved will be included in a future update. Clicking the 'Update' button will take you through a step-by-step process.



Discuss this title with other users on IMDb message board for Candyman (1992)