Across the Pacific (1942)
advertisement

Overview

User Rating:

MOVIEmeter: Up 13% in popularity this week. See in popularity this week. See why on IMDbPro

Contact: View View company contact information for Across the Pacific on IMDbPro

Release Date: 5 September 1942 (USA) 5 September 1942 (USA) more

Plot: Rick Leland makes no secret of the fact he has no loyalty to his home country after he is court-marshaled... add synopsis Rick Leland makes no secret of the fact he has no loyalty to his home country after he is court-marshaled... more

User Comments: Surprisingly nifty little espionage tale Surprisingly nifty little espionage tale more

Cast (Cast overview, first billed only)

Create a character page for: A.V. Smith Canadian Major Court-Martial President Unidentified Man Captain Harkness Dan Morton Captain Higoto ----------- more...

Additional Details

Also Known As: Aloha Means Goodbye (USA) (working title)

more Aloha Means Goodbye (USA) (working title)

Parents Guide: Add content advisory for parents

Runtime: 97 min

Aspect Ratio: 1.37 : 1 1.37 : 1 more

Sound Mix: Mono (RCA Sound System)

Fun Stuff

Trivia: The last-minute screenplay change from Pearl Harbor to the Panama Canal was not implausible. Until the mid 1930s US military exercises concentrated on defending the Panama Canal from air, amphibious & small craft attack and were extensively covered by the press. The last-minute screenplay change from Pearl Harbor to the Panama Canal was not implausible. Until the mid 1930s US military exercises concentrated on defending the Panama Canal from air, amphibious & small craft attack and were extensively covered by the press. more

Goofs: Factual errors: The background for the opening titles is a map of the Panama Canal. The orientation of the map and the compass is correct, but the labeling of the map is incorrect. In fact, the Atlantic end of the canal and the city of Colon are at the upper left (Northwest), and the Pacific end of the canal and Panama City are at the lower right (Southeast). The map is correctly labeled behind the closing credits. Factual errors: The background for the opening titles is a map of the Panama Canal. The orientation of the map and the compass is correct, but the labeling of the map is incorrect. In fact, the Atlantic end of the canal and the city of Colon are at the upper left (Northwest), and the Pacific end of the canal and Panama City are at the lower right (Southeast). The map is correctly labeled behind the closing credits. more

Quotes: Rick Leland: When you're slapped, you're gonna take it and like it. : When you're slapped, you're gonna take it and like it. more

FAQ

Message Boards

Recommendations

Related Links

You may report errors and omissions on this page to the IMDb database managers. They will be examined and if approved will be included in a future update. Clicking the 'Update' button will take you through a step-by-step process.

Discuss this movie with other users on IMDb message board for Across the Pacific (1942)