Conway Calls To Prohibit Golden State From Winning The Championship Unless They Come Celebrate In The White House “Like The Law Says”
Shaun Livingston said months ago, if the Warriors won the title, he wouldn’t visit Donald Trump’s White House. He’s unsurprisingly not alone in that thinking. Golden State coach Steve Kerr has called Donald Trump’s policies un-American. Stephen Curry essentially called the American president an a*s. David West said Trump’s approach is the opposite of what the forward teaches youth. But this level of unified decision-making was still somewhat surprising to see after the Warriors clinched the 2017 NBA title. This isn’t the first time players faced that conflict – participating in a photo op with someone whose policies and rhetoric you find reprehensible vs. respecting the office of the presidency – though, they have usually sided with respecting the office and getting the experience of a lifetime.

Meanwhile, counselor to U.S. President, Kellyanne Conway is at it again. In an interview with Minnesota’s KYSP Radio, she argued that the news of the Warriors’ refusal to visit the White House in a celebratory fashion is “a disrespectful act” and something you just don’t turn down. “First of all, I have to mention that I was going to congratulate the team for their win, but then I realized I’d be acting against my position by doing so. That’s the first thing. The second thing, I mean, I understand that everyone has the right to free will and all that, but everybody knows that an invite to visit the White House is a privilege not many are granted. It’s just one of those things you don’t turn down. So, to do something like this, and publicly, it’s a scandal,” she said.

She continued, “One could almost say it’s a rule. As a matter of fact, you know something? I’m just going to go out there and say it: it’s a law. And though I know it’s not really a law, I’m going to make sure to make it one. Because, it’s not about who the president is; the guy’s in there only temporarily. It’s about the structure, the space, the history within it and, ultimately, the honor of being inside a place where so many decisions took place; decisions that shaped the world as we know it. Ugh, I’m getting goosebumps just thinking about it. I can’t even begin to describe how I felt when I visited it for the first time. The Warriors don’t realize it yet, but they’re looking at this all wrong.”

“That’s exactly why I plan to do everything in my power to make sure Golden State is prohibited from winning the championship, formally speaking, unless they agree to come and celebrate in the White House. That’s the rule – or the law, whichever one you prefer – because I refuse to let this privilege be smeared by a group of so-called athletes who are such prima donnas that they can’t fathom being a part of something greater than their own puny achievements. Winning the NBA is done by a different team every year; but, there’s only one White House. That’s the gameplay, fellas. I hope I made it clear enough for you,” she concluded.

Source:Politicass.com

Comments

comments