Buffalo Bill (1944)
advertisement

Overview

User Rating:

MOVIEmeter: Down 10% in popularity this week. See in popularity this week. See why on IMDbPro

Contact: View View company contact information for Buffalo Bill on IMDbPro

Release Date: April 1944 (USA) April 1944 (USA) more

Plot: The story of William "Buffalo Bill" Cody, legendary westerner, from his days as an army scout to his later activities as owner of a Wild West show. add synopsis The story of William "Buffalo Bill" Cody, legendary westerner, from his days as an army scout to his later activities as owner of a Wild West show. full summary

User Comments: The red and blue clash at War Bonnet Gorge The red and blue clash at War Bonnet Gorge more

Cast (Complete credited cast)

Create a character page for: Louisa Frederici Cody Dawn Starlight Sergeant Chips McGraw Chief Yellow Hand Senator Frederici Murdo Carvell General Blazier Mr. Schyler Vandervere Sherman - Shooting Gallery Owner ----------- more...

Additional Details

Parents Guide: Add content advisory for parents

Runtime: 90 min

Aspect Ratio: 1.37 : 1 1.37 : 1 more

Sound Mix: Mono (Western Electric Recording)

Fun Stuff

Trivia: Early production charts had Early production charts had Vincent Price in the role of "Murdo Carvell," but he was replaced by 'Frank Fenton' when the role was severely cut. Many of the uncredited cast had more lines and screen time than Fenton, who was credited onscreen. more

Quotes: Yellow Hand: Men of the Nation. There's a black cloud coming from the east to cover us all. We, the Cheyenne, have called our brothers of the Sioux so we can hear the words about this thing. Yesterday, the buffalo was many as the blades of grass upon the prairie... : Men of the Nation. There's a black cloud coming from the east to cover us all. We, the Cheyenne, have called our brothers of the Sioux so we can hear the words about this thing. Yesterday, the buffalo was many as the blades of grass upon the prairie... more

Soundtrack: Buffalo Gals (Won't You Come Out Tonight) Buffalo Gals (Won't You Come Out Tonight) more

FAQ

Message Boards

Recommendations

Related Links

You may report errors and omissions on this page to the IMDb database managers. They will be examined and if approved will be included in a future update. Clicking the 'Update' button will take you through a step-by-step process.

Discuss this title with other users on IMDb message board for Buffalo Bill (1944)