Nine Congress Members Call for Stepped up Action Against Iraq
05 December 2001 Nine Congress Members Call for Stepped up Action Against Iraq Legislators urge support for opposition forces inside Iraq Nine members of Congress have written a letter to President Bush, urging the administration to step up support for the Iraqi opposition to remove Saddam Hussein from power. "This December will mark three years since United Nations inspectors last visited Iraq. There is no doubt that since that time, Saddam Hussein has reinvigorated his weapons program. Reports indicate that biological, chemical and nuclear programs continue apace and may be back to pre-Gulf war status," the letter, dated December 5, said. The letter was signed by Senators John McCain, Jesse Helms, Richard Shelby, Sam Brownback, Joe Lieberman, and Trent Lott, and by Representatives Henry Hyde, Ben Gilman, and Harold Ford, Jr. The legislators recommended that the administration begin immediately "to assist the Iraqi opposition on the ground inside Iraq by providing them money and assistance already authorized and appropriated." Earlier in the week Representative Lindsey Graham (Republican of South Carolina) introduced a resolution December 4 that would call refusal by Iraq to admit United Nations weapons inspectors covered by Security Council Resolution 687 "an act of aggression against the United States and its allies." White House Spokesman Ari Fleischer has indicated the Bush administration is "keeping a close eye" on Saddam Hussein and the dangers posed by the Iraqi weapons program. In a show of international solidarity against the continued threats coming from Iraq, the Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution November 29 continuing the oil-for-food program in Iraq for another six months. The council also stated that it would adopt a procedure by May 30, 2002, that would have at its core a "goods review list" of items of potential military use that would be subject to review by the sanctions committee before being imported by Iraq, a program sought by Secretary of State Colin Powell. Following is the text of the letter: December 5, 2001

The Honorable George W. Bush President of the United States The White House Washington, D.C. 20500

Dear Mr. President: The events of September 11 have highlighted the vulnerability of the United States to determined terrorists. As we work to clean up Afghanistan and destroy al Qaeda, it is imperative that we plan to eliminate the threat from Iraq. This December will mark three years since United Nations inspectors last visited Iraq. There is no doubt that since that time, Saddam Hussein has reinvigorated his weapons programs. Reports indicate that biological, chemical and nuclear programs continue apace and may be back to pre-Gulf war status. In addition, Saddam continues to refine delivery systems and is doubtless using the cover of a licit missile program to develop longer-range missiles that will threaten the United States and our allies. For much of the last year, the Administration has struggled to plug loopholes in the international sanctions against Iraq. Unfortunately, efforts to coopt Saddam's illegal trading partners -- particularly Syria -- have failed. In the meantime, the illegal oil trade from Iraq has flourished, and Saddam now earns an estimated $2 billion annually, much of which he has devoted to his military and his illegal weapons programs. If we have learned one thing from the ongoing battle in Afghanistan, it is that working effectively in coordination with locals on the ground can significantly leverage our own use of military farce. While we have no doubt that in the long run, the United States will always prevail in battle with the likes of the Taliban (not to speak of Saddam Hussein), we also know that we can minimize casualties and shorten conflict by cooperating with opposition forces. That has been a key element of U.S. strategy for several decades. Since the passage of the Iraq Liberation Act three years ago, we have fought to provide support for Iraqis inside Iraq. The Iraqi National Congress (INC), an umbrella group of all the significant anti-Saddam forces inside Iraq, has consistently requested Administration assistance for operations on the ground in Iraq ranging from the delivery of humanitarian assistance and information-gathering to military and technical training and lethal military drawdown. Despite the express wishes of the Congress, the INC has been denied U.S. assistance for any operations inside any part of Iraq, including liberated Kurdish areas. Instead, successive Administrations have funded conferences, offices and other intellectual exercises that have done little more than expose the INC to accusations of being "limousine insurgents" and "armchair guerillas". We note the troubling similarity of these accusations to charges made against the Afghan guerillas now helping us win the war against the Taliban. The threat from Iraq is real, and it cannot be permanently contained. For as long as Saddam Hussein is in power in Baghdad, he will seek to acquire weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. We have no doubt that these deadly weapons are intended for use against the United States and its allies. Consequently, we believe we must directly confront Saddam, sooner rather than later. Without allies on the ground inside Iraq, we will be handicapping our own efforts. Each day that passes costs us an opportunity to unite and professionalize the Iraqi opposition, thus ensuring it will be less capable when the conflict begins. Again, we can learn from our experience in Afghanistan. We cannot be drawn into the ethnic politics of any particular nation, but should find a way to work with all the opposition in a unified framework. The Iraqi National Congress is the only umbrella organization comprising all elements of the Iraqi opposition. No one group is excluded, no one group is favored. Mr. President, all indications are that in the interest of our own national security, Saddam Hussein must be removed from power. Let us maximize the likelihood of a rapid victory by beginning immediately to assist the Iraqi opposition on the ground inside Iraq by providing them money and assistance already authorized and appropriated. We look forward to working with you on this most important matter. Sincerely, (signed) John McCain (signed) Jesse Helms (signed) Henry Hyde (signed) Richard Shelby (signed) Harold Ford, Jr. (signed) Joe Lieberman (signed) Trend Lott (signed) Ben Gilman (signed) Sam Brownback