Wings for the Eagle (1942)
advertisement

Overview

User Rating:

MOVIEmeter: Up 16% in popularity this week. See in popularity this week. See why on IMDbPro

Contact: View View company contact information for Wings for the Eagle on IMDbPro

Release Date: 18 July 1942 (USA) 18 July 1942 (USA) more

Tagline: It's Time-and-a-Half for Uncle Sam...and the Rest of the Time is for Love!

Plot: Aircraft workers during during World War II become involved in a love triangle. add synopsis Aircraft workers during during World War II become involved in a love triangle. full summary

User Comments: an Ann Sheridan must-see an Ann Sheridan must-see more

Cast (Complete credited cast)

Create a character page for: Roma Maple Corky 'Cork' Jones Brad Maple Jake Hanso Pete Hanso Gil Borden Tom 'Cyclone' Shaw Alec Johnson Supervisor Stark Personnel Man Miss Baxter, Mr. Gross' Secretary Eddie, a Midget Policeman at Garage Motorcycle Officer ----------- more...

Additional Details

Also Known As: Shadow of Their Wings (USA) (working title)

more Shadow of Their Wings (USA) (working title)

Parents Guide: Add content advisory for parents

Runtime: 84 min

Aspect Ratio: 1.37 : 1 1.37 : 1 more

Sound Mix: Mono (RCA Sound System)

Fun Stuff

Trivia: The studio received permission to film inside the Lockheed Aircraft Co. in Burbank, California, but each member of the crew was required to carry a birth certificate to enter the plant. The studio received permission to film inside the Lockheed Aircraft Co. in Burbank, California, but each member of the crew was required to carry a birth certificate to enter the plant. more

Soundtrack: Someone's Rocking My Dreamboat Someone's Rocking My Dreamboat more

FAQ

Message Boards

Recommendations

Related Links

You may report errors and omissions on this page to the IMDb database managers. They will be examined and if approved will be included in a future update. Clicking the 'Update' button will take you through a step-by-step process.

Discuss this title with other users on IMDb message board for Wings for the Eagle (1942)