1998 Humor Archive Page
January 1, 1998



Quite an Option Package

THE LOCAL CAR DEALER, who was known to have taken advantage of several people in the community, informed a farmer he was coming over to purchace a cow, explains Nance Popp of Hill City, Kansas.

The farmer attached the following information to the cow so the car dealer knew what he was paying for:

Basic cow......................................................... $499.95 Extra stomachs................................................ 79.25 Two-tone exterior............................................ 142.10 Produce storage compartment........................ 126.50 Heavy-duty straw chopper............................... 189.60 Four-spigot/high-output drain system.............. 149.20 Automatic flyswatter........................................ 88.50 Genuine cowhide upholstery............................ 179.90 Deluxe dual horns............................................. 59.25 Automatic fertilizer attachment....................... 339.40 4x4 traction drive assembly............................. 884.16 Pre-delivery wash and comb........................... 69.80 Shipping and handling..................................... 35.75 Tax, license and title....................................... 306.63 Total list price................................................. $3,149.99

January 5, 1998



SOME WISDOM FOR THOSE WHO NEED A CHUCKLE

1. The two most common elements in the universe are hydrogen and stupidity.

2. If at first you don't succeed, skydiving is not for you.

3. Money can't buy happiness. But it sure makes misery easier to live with.

4. It has recently been discovered that research causes cancer in rats.

5. Always remember to pillage before you burn.

6. The trouble with doing something right the first time is that nobody appreciates how difficult it was.

7. It may be that your sole purpose in life is simply to serve as a warning to others.

8. If "clothes maketh the man" then it follows that naked people have little or no influence on society.

9. Vital papers will demonstrate their vitality by moving to where you can't find them.

10. The law of Probability Dispersal decrees that whatever it is that hits the fan will not be evenly distributed.

11. Indecision is the key to flexibility.

12. There is absolutely no substitute for a genuine lack of preparation.

13. Nostalgia isn't what it used to be.

14. The facts, although interesting, are usually irrelevant.

15. The careful application of terror is also a form of communication.

16. Things are more like they are today than they ever have been before.

17. Everything should be made as simple as possible, but no simpler.

18. Friends may come and go, but enemies accumulate.

19. All things being equal, fat people use more soap.

20. If you can smile when things go wrong then you have someone in mind to blame.

21. One-seventh of life is spent on Monday.

22. By the time you can make ends meet, they move the ends.

23. This is as bad as it can get -- but don't bet on it.

24. Never wrestle with a pig. You both get dirty but only the pig enjoys it.

25. The trouble with life is that you are halfway through it before you realize it's a "do it yourself" thing.

26. Drink varnish and you'll have a lovely finish.

27. We can sympathize with a child who is afraid of the dark, but the tragedy of life is that most people are afraid of the light.

28. If only the good die young then what does that say about senior citizens?

29. Employ teenagers - while they know everything.

30. The best antiques are old friends.

31. Down with gravity!

32. Nobody's perfect and since I'm nobody...

33. People who eat natural foods die from natural causes.

34. Why is there only one Monopolies Commission?

35. Some day my ship will come in, but with my luck, I'll be at the airport.

36. Age is a case of mind over matter. If you don't mind then it really doesn't matter.

37. A friend in need may turn out to be a nuisance.

38. When the cat's away there are fewer hairs on the armchair.

39. An expert is nothing more than an ordinary person away from home.

40. If you can't be kind, be vague.

January 8, 1998



What a Way to Go....

Brenda O'Malley is home as usual, making dinner, when Tim Finnegan arrives at her door. "Brenda, may I come in?" he asks. "I've somethin' to tell ya."

"Of course you can come in, you're always welcome, Tim. But where's my husband?"

"That's what I'm here to be tellin, ya, Brenda. There was an accident down at the Guinness brewery..."

"Oh, God no!" cries Brenda. "Please don't tell me ..."

"I must, Brenda. Your husband Shamus is dead and gone. I'm sorry."

Brenda reached a hand out to her side, found the arm of the rocking chair by the fireplace, pulled the chair to her and collapsed into it. She wept for many minutes. Finally she looked up at Tim. "How did it happen, Tim?"

"It was terrible, Brenda. He fell into a vat of Guinness Stout and drowned."

"Oh my dear Mother Mary! But you must tell me true, Tim. Did he at least go quickly?"

"Well, no Brenda...... no."

"No?"

"Fact is, he got out three times to pee."

January 12, 1998



Reasons it's great to be a guy:

1. Phone conversations are over in 30 seconds flat.

2. Movie nudity is virtually always female.

3. You know stuff about tanks.

4. A five day vacation requires only one suitcase.

5. Monday Night Football.

7. Your bathroom lines are 80% shorter.

8. You can open all your own jars.

9. Old friends don't give you crap if you've lost or gained weight.

10. Dry cleaners and haircutter's don't rob you blind.

12. Your ass is never a factor in a job interview.

13. All your orgasms are real.

14. A beer gut does not make you invisible to the opposite sex.

15. Guys in hockey masks don't attack you.

16. You don't have to lug a bag of useful stuff around everywhere you go.

17. You understand why Stripes is funny.

19. Your last name stays put.

23. The garage is all yours.

24. You get extra credit for the slightest act of thoughtfulness.

27. You never have to clean the toilet.

28. You can be showered and ready in 10 minutes.

29. Sex means never worrying about your reputation.

30. Wedding plans take care of themselves.

32. Your underwear is $10 for a three pack.

33. The National College Cheerleading Championship.

34. None of your co-workers have the power to make you cry.

35. You don't have to shave below your neck.

36. You don't have to curl up next to a hairy ass every nite.

37. If you're 34 and single nobody notices.

40. Everything on your face stays its original color.

41. Chocolate is just another snack.

42. You can be president.

43. Flowers fix everything.

44. You never have to worry about other people's feelings.

45. You get to think about sex 90% of your waking hours.

46. You can wear a white shirt to a water park.

47. Three pair of shoes are more than enough.

48. You can eat a banana in a hardware store.

49. Michael Bolton doesn't live in your universe.

50. Nobody stops telling a good dirty joke when you walk into the room.

51. You can whip your shirt off on a hot day.

52. Car mechanics tell you the truth.

53. The world is your urinal.

54. You get to jump up and slap stuff.

55. Hot wax never comes near your pubic area.

56. You never have to drive to another gas station because this one's just too skeevy.

57. You can sit with your knees apart no matter what you are wearing.

58. Same work .... more pay.

59. Gray hair and wrinkles add character.

60. You don't have to leave the room to make an emergency crotch adjustment.

61. Wedding Dress $2000; Tux rental $100.

62. With 400 million sperm per shot, you could double the earth's population in 15 tries, at least in theory.

63. If you retain water, it's in a canteen.

64. The remote is yours and yours alone.

65. People never glance at your chest when you're talking to them.

66. Bachelor parties whomp ass over bridal showers.

67. You have a normal and healthy relationship with your mother.

68. Someday you'll be a dirty old man.

69. You can rationalize any behavior with the handy phrase "F*#k it!"

70. If another guy shows up at the party in the same outfit, you might become lifelong buddies.

71. If something mechanical didn't work, you can bash it with a hammer and throw it across the room.

72. New shoes don't cut, blister, or mangle your feet.

73. You don't have to remember everyone's birthdays and anniversaries.

74. Not liking a person does not preclude having great sex with them.

75. Your pals can be trusted never to trap you with: "So ... notice anything different?"

76. Baywatch.

77. There is always a game on somewhere.

January 15, 1998



January 19, 1998



There were three men who were lost in the jungle. They were captured by cannibals. The cannibal king told the prisoners that they could live if they could pass the trial. First they would have to go into the jungle with a cannibal escort and gather ten pieces of the same kind of fruit. So all three men went separate ways to gather fruits.

The first one came back and said to the king, "I brought ten apples." The king then explained the rest of the trial to him. "You have to shove the fruits up your butt without any expression on your face or you'll be eaten." The first apple went in... but on the second one he winced in pain, so he was killed and eaten.

The second one arrived and showed the king his ten fruits were berries. When the king explained the rest of the trial to him he thought to himself that this should be easy. 1 ... 2 ... 3 ... 4 ... 5 ... 6 ... 7 ... 8 ... But on the ninth berry he burst out in laughter and therefore also was killed and eaten.

The first man and the second man met in Heaven. The first one asked, "Why did you laugh? You almost got away with it." The second one replied, "I couldn't help it, I saw that the third guy coming in from the jungle was carrying watermelons."

January 22, 1998



Mike Shanahan coach of the Denver Broncos, trying to do everything he can to prepare for the SuperBowl, decides to find out from Mike Holmgren coach of the Green Bay Packers what his secret is. So, Shanahan travels up to a Packer practice and asks Holmgren, "Coach, how is it that your team is so good? What's your secret?"

Holmgren responds by calling Brett Favre over. "Brett, who's your father's brother's nephew?" Favre answers, "Why coach, that's easy. It's me."

Holmgren turns to Shanahan and says, "That's the secret, Mike. A smart quarterback. You've got to have a smart quarterback."

Thinking he's finally got all the tools he needs, Shanahan returns to Colorado and the Bronco work-out. He promptly calls over old man Elway.

"Elway! Who's your father's brother's nephew?" old man Elway looks perplexed, thinks a minute and says, "Coach, can I get back to you after practice on that one?"

Shanahan (disgusted) says, "OK."

During practice, old man Elway calls over Terrell Davis. "Terrell, coach just asked me the weirdest question. Who's your father's brother's nephew?"

Davis: "Duh! That's easy. It's me!"

After practice, old man Elway catches up with Shanahan: "Coach, I think I've got it. My father's brother's nephew is Terrell Davis."

Shanahan (angry): "No, No, NO! You idiot!! It's Brett Favre!!!"

January 26, 1998



Two Statues in the Park

For decades, two heroic statues, one male and one female, faced each other in a city park, until one day an angel came down from heaven.

"You've been such exemplary statues," he announced to them, "That I'm going to give you a special gift. I'm going to bring you both to life for thirty minutes, in which you can do anything you want." And with a clap of his hands, the angel brought the statues to life.

The two approached each other a bit shyly, but soon dashed for the bushes, from which shortly emerged a good deal of giggling, laughter, and shaking of branches. Fifteen minutes later, the two statues emerged from the bushes, wide grins on their faces.

"You still have fifteen more minutes," said the angel, winking at them.

Grinning even more widely the female statue turned to the male statue and said, "Great! Only this time you hold the pigeon down and I'll crap on it's head."

January 29, 1998



THE FRUGALITY OF MILLIONAIRES

Before going to Europe on business, a man drove his Rolls-Royce to a downtown New York City bank and went in to ask for an immediate loan of $5,000. The loan officer, taken aback, requested collateral and so the man said, "Well then, here are the keys to my Rolls-Royce." The loan officer promptly had the car driven into the bank's underground parking for safekeeping and gave him $5,000.

Two weeks later, the man walked through the bank's doors, and asked to settle up his loan and get his car back. "That will be $5,000 in principal, and $15.40 in interest," the loan officer said.

The man wrote out a check and started to walk away. "Wait, sir", the loan officer said, "while you were gone, I found out you are a millionaire. Why would you need to borrow $5,000?" The man smiled. "Where else could I park my Rolls-Royce in Manhattan for two weeks and pay only $15.40?"

February 2, 1998



Another reason not to have cats. . .

Calling in sick to work makes me uncomfortable because no matter how legitimate my illness, I always sense my boss thinks I am lying. On one occasion, I had a valid reason but lied anyway because the truth was too humiliating to reveal. I simply mentioned that I had sustained a head injury and I hoped I would feel up to coming in the next day.

By then, I could think up a doozy to explain the bandage on my crown. In this case, the truth hurt. I mean it really hurt in the place men feel the most pain. The accident occurred mainly because I conceded to my wife's wishes to adopt a cute little kitty. As the daily routine prescribes, I was taking my shower after breakfast when I heard my wife, Deb, call out to me from the kitchen. "Ed! " she harkened, "The garbage disposal is dead. Come reset it." "You know where the button is." I protested through the shower (pitter-patter).

"Reset it yourself!"

"I'm scared!" She pleaded. "What if it starts going and sucks me in?"

. . . . . . . Pause . . . . . . . "C'mon, it'll only take a second."

No logical assurance about how a disposal can't start itself will calm the fears of a person who suffers from "Big-ol-scary-machinephobia," a condition brought on by watching too many Stephen King movies. It is futile to argue or explain, kind of like telling Lloyd Bentsen Americans are over-taxed. And if a poltergeist did, in fact, possess the disposal, and she was ground into round, I'd have to live with that the rest of my life.

So out I came, dripping wet and buck naked, hoping to make a statement about how her cowardly behavior was not without consequence but it was I who would suffer.

I crouched down and stuck my head under the sink to find the button. It is the last action I remember performing. It struck without warning, without respect to my circumstances.

No, it wasn't a hexed disposal, drawing me into its gnashing metal teeth. It was our new kitty, clawing playfully at the dangling objects she spied between my legs. She ("Buttons" aka "the Grater") had been poised around the corner and stalked me as I took the bait under the sink. At precisely the second I was most vulnerable, she leapt at the toys I unwittingly offered and snagged them with her needle-like claws.

Now, when men feel pain or even sense danger anywhere close to their masculine region, they lose all rational thought to control orderly bodily movements. Instinctively, their nerves compel the body to contort inwardly, while rising upwardly at a violent rate of speed. Not even a well trained monk could calmly stand with his groin supporting the full weight of a kitten and rectify the situation in a step-by-step procedure.

Fleeing straight up, I knew at that moment how a cat feels when it is alarmed. It was a dismal irony. But, whereas cats seek great heights to escape, I never made it that far. The sink and cabinet bluntly impeded my ascent; the impact knocked me out cold. When I awoke, my wife and the paramedics stood over me. Having been fully briefed by my wife, the paramedics snorted as they tried to conduct their work while suppressing their hysterical laughter. My wife told me I should be flattered. At the office, colleagues tried to coax an explanation out of me. I kept silent, claiming it was too painful to talk. "What's the matter, cat got your tongue?"

. . . If they had only known.

February 5, 1998



The New Version of The Presidential Seal

February 9, 1998



A man was walking along the beach and found a bottle. He looked around and didn't see anyone so he opened it. A genie appeared and thanked the man for letting him out.

The genie said: "For your kindness I will grant you one wish, but only one."

The man thought for a minute and said, "I have always wanted to go to Hawaii but have never been able to because I'm afraid of flying and ships make me claustrophobic and ill. So my wish is for a road to be built from here to Hawaii."

The genie thought for a few minutes and said, "No, I don't think I can do that. Just think of all the work involved with the pilings needed to hold up the highway and how deep they would have to be to reach the bottom of the ocean. Think of all the pavement that would be needed. No, that is just too much to ask."

The man thought for a minute and then told the genie, "There is one other thing that I have always wanted. I would like to be able to understand women. What makes them laugh and cry, why are they temperamental, why are they so difficult to get along with? Basically, what makes them tick?"

The genie considered for a few minutes and said: "So, do you want two lanes or four?"

February 12, 1998



Feeling Stressed Out?

Picture yourself near a stream.

Birds are softly chirping in the crisp cool mountain air.

Nothing can bother you here. No one knows this secret place.

You are in total seclusion from that place called "the world."

The soothing sound of a gentle waterfall fills the air with a cascade of serenity.

The water is clear.

You can easily make out the face of the person whose head you're holding under the water.

Look. It's the person who caused you all this stress in the first place.

What a pleasant surprise. You let them up... just for a quick breath... then ploop! ... back under they go...

You allow yourself as many deep breaths as you want.

There now... feeling better?

February 16, 1998



50 Facts About Men

1. Men like to barbecue. Men will cook if danger is involved.

2. Men who have pierced ears are better prepared for marriage. They've experienced pain and bought jewelry.

3. If you buy your husband or boyfriend a video camera, for the first few weeks he has it, lock the door when you go to the bathroom. Most of my husband's early films end with a scream and a flush.

6. Men are very confident people. My husband is so confident that when he watches sports on television, he thinks that if he concentrates he can help his team. If the team is in trouble, he coaches the players from our living room, and if they're really in trouble, I have to get off the phone in case they call him.

7. If it's attention you want, don't get involve with a man during play-off season.

8. Men like phones with lots of buttons. It makes them,feel important.

9. Men love to be the first to read the newspaper in the morning. Not being the first is upsetting to their psyches.

10. All men look nerdy in black socks and sandals.

11. The way a man looks at himself in a mirror will tell you if he can ever care about anyone else.

12. Don't try to teach men how to do anything in public. They can learn in private; in public they have to know.

13. Men who are going bald often wear baseball caps.

14. All men are afraid of eyelash curlers. I sleep with one under my pillow, instead of a gun.

15. A good place to meet a man is at the dry cleaner. These men usually have jobs and bathe.

16. Men love watches with multiple functions. My husband has one that is a combination address book, telescope and piano.

17. All men hate to hear "We need to talk about our relationship." These seven words strike fear in the heart of even General Schwarzkopf.

18. Men are sensitive in strange ways. If a man has built a fire and the last log does not burn, he will take it personally.

19. Men are brave enough to go to war, but they are not brave enough to get a bikini wax.

20. All men think that they're nice guys. Some of them are not. Contact me for a list of names.

21. Men don't get cellulite. God might just be a man.

22. Men have an easier time buying bathing suits. Women have two types: depressing and more depressing. Men have two types: nerdy and not nerdy.

23. Men have higher body temperatures than women. If your heating goes out in winter, I recommend sleeping next to a man. Men are like portable heaters that snore.

24. Women take clothing much more seriously than men. I've never seen a man walk into a party and say "Oh, my God, I'm so embarrassed; get me out of here. There's another man wearing a black tuxedo."

25. Most men hate to shop. That's why the men's department is usually on the first floor of a department store, two inches from the door.

26. If a man prepares dinner for you and the salad contains three or more types of lettuce, he is serious.

27. If you're dating a man who you think might be "Mr. Right," if he a) got older, b) got a new job, or c) visited a psychiatrist, you are in for a nasty surprise. The cocoon-to-butterfly theory only works on cocoons and butterflies.

28. Men own basketball teams. Every year cheerleaders' outfits get tighter and briefer, and players' shorts get baggier and longer.

29. No man is charming all of the time. Even Cary Grant is on record saying he wished he could be Cary Grant.

30. When four or more men get together, they talk about sports.

31. When four or more women get together, they talk about men.

32. Not one man in a beer commercial has a beer belly.

33. Men are less sentimental than women. No man has ever seen the movie THE WAY WE WERE twice, voluntarily.

34. Most women are introspective: "Am I in love? Am I emotionally and creatively fulfilled?" Most men are outrospective: "Did my team win? How's my car?"

35. If a man says, "I'll call you," and he doesn't, he didn't forget ... he didn't lose your number... he didn't die. He just didn't want to call you.

36. Men hate to lose. I once beat my husband at tennis. I asked him, "Are we going to have sex again?" He said, "Ye s, but not with each other."

37. Men who can eat anything they want and not gain weight should do it out of sight of women.

38. Getting rid of a man without hurting his masculinity is a problem. "Get out" and "I never want to see you again" might sound like a challenge. If you want to get rid of a man, I suggest saying, "I love you... I want to marry you... I want to have your children." Sometimes they leave skid marks.

39. Men accept compliments much better than women do. Example: "Mitch, you look great." Mitch:"Thanks.11 On the other side:"Ruth, you look great." Ruth: "I do? Must be the lighting."

40. Impulse buying is not macho. Men rarely call the Home Shopping Network.

41. Men who listen to classical music tend not to spit.

42. Only men who have worn a ski suit understand how complicated it is for a woman to go to the bathroom when she's wearing a jumpsuit.

43. Men don't feel the urge to get married as quickly as women do because their clothes all button and zip in the front. Women's dresses usually button and zip in the back. we need men emotionally and sexually, but we also need men to help us get dressed.

44. Men are self-confident because they grow up identifying with superheros. Women have bad self-images because they grow up identifying with Barbie.

45. When a woman tries on clothing from her closet that feels tight, she will assume she has gained weight. when a man tries something from his closet that feels tight, he will assume the clothing has shrunk.

46. Male menopause is a lot more fun than female menopause. With female menopause you gain weight and get hot flashes. Male menopause you get to date young girls and drive motorcycles.

47. Men forget everything; women remember everything.

48. That's why men need instant replays in sports. They've already forgotten what happened.

49. Men would like monogamy better if it sounded less like monotony.

50. All men would still really like to own a train set.

February 19, 1998



It's a beautiful warm spring day and a man and his wife are at the zoo. She's wearing a cute, loose-fitting, pink spring dress, sleeveless with straps. As they walk through the ape exhibit and pass in front of a very large gorilla, the gorilla goes ape. He jumps up on the bars, holding on with one hand (and 2 feet), grunting and-pounding his chest with the free hand. He is obviously excited at the pretty lady in the wavy dress. The husband, noticing the excitement, suggests that his wife tease the poor fellow. The husband suggests she pucker her lips, wiggle her bottom, and play along. She does and Mr. Gorilla gets even more excited, making noises that would wake the dead. Then the husband suggests that she let one of her straps fall, she does, and Mr. Gorilla is just about to tear the bars down. Now try lifting your dress up to your thighs ... this drives the gorilla absolutely crazy. Then, quickly the husband grabs his wife by the hair, rips open the door to the cage, slings her in with the gorilla and says, "Now, tell HIM you have a headache."

February 23, 1998



ANSWER SHEET

February 26, 1998



Short Jokes #1

When Silicon Valley wants to look good, it measures itself against Detroit. The comparison goes like this: If automotive technology had kept pace with computer technology over the past few decades, you would now be driving a V-32 instead of a V-8, and it would have a top speed of 10,000 miles per hour. Or you could have an economy car that weighs 30 pounds and gets a thousand miles to a gallon of gas. In either case the sticker price of a new car would be less than $50.

In response to all this goading, Detroit grumbles: Yes, but would you really want to drive a car that crashes twice a day?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yesterday scientists in the USA revealed that beer contains small traces of female hormones. To prove their theory they fed 100 men 12 pints of beer and observed that 100 of them started talking nonsense and couldn't drive.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A couple goes out to dinner to celebrate their 50th wedding anniversary. On the way home, she notices a tear in his eye and asks if he's getting sentimental because they're celebrating 50 wonderful years together.

He replies, "No, I was thinking about the time before we got married. Your father threatened me with a shotgun and said he'd have me thrown in jail for 50 years if I didn't marry you. Tomorrow I would've been a free man!"

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When a man talks dirty to a woman, it's sexual harassment.

When a woman talks dirty to a man, it's four dollars and ninety-five cents a minute.

March 2, 1998



True story about the passengers on-board a Northwest Airlines flight to Boston during some recent bad weather.

The captain did his best to skirt the edge of the storm, but it was a pretty rough ride just the same - rough enough that the flight attendants were ordered to strap themselves into their seats for about half an hour, and many of the passengers were putting the little plastic-lined bags in their seat pockets to good use. When the turbulence finally abated, the flight attendants unbuckled themselves, and the captain's voice came on over the intercom.

"Well, folks, that was quite some ride, wasn't it?' But we came through it fine, just the way we always do, and I'm happy to report that it looks like the remainder of our trip should be much calmer. On behalf of myself and today's flight crew, I'd like to thank you very much for your calmness and cooperation, and extend our best wishes for a pleasant stay in Boston."

After a short pause and several clicks ... "Jesus Christ - whadda bitchin, ride! Boy - I sure could use a cup of good strong coffee and a blow job right about now."

As a stricken stewardess dashed up the aisle to the cabin to inform the captain that his intercom was still on, one of the passengers called after her, "Don't forget the coffee"

March 5, 1998



Things You'd Never Expect A Southerner To Say....

It's time to stop fishing; we've caught our limit.

We don't keep firearms in this house.

I just can't wait for that Fellini festival.

Come to think of it, I'll have a Heineken.

That's enough ketchup on those eggs.

I thought Graceland was tacky.

No kids in the back of the pickup!

Alex, I'll take Shakespeare for $1,000.

That Civil War documentary was excellent.

I think communists are backing the NRA.

Good heavens, that's gaudy!

Honey, did you mail that contribution to Greenpeace?

Let's stop and fill up. We don't have but a quarter of a tank.

It just can't be fixed.

We're vegetarians.

Baby, those jeans are too tight.

I'll have grapefruit instead of biscuits and gravy.

Honey, these bonsai trees need watering.

Don't tie it on top of the car.

My mama can't make cornbread.

Deer heads detract from the decor.

I just couldn't find a thing at Wal-Mart today.

Cappuccino tastes better than espresso.

Why'd you cut the sleeves off your t-shirt?

The tires on that truck are too big.

I've got it all on a floppy disk.

Would you like your fish poached or broiled?

Unsweetened tea tastes better.

Lisa Marie was lucky to snag Michael Jackson.

Duct tape won't fix it.

I'm a Shiite Muslim.

I don't want a flannel shirt for Christmas.

Jimmy, get in here quick - the Boston Marathon's on Channel 2!

Little Debbie snack cakes have too many fat grams.

Checkmate.

She's too old to be wearing that bikini.

Does the salad bar have bean sprouts?

Hey, here's an episode of "Hee Haw" we haven't seen.

I don't have a favorite college team.

Who's that guy that wrote "Gone with the Wind"?

Mama, don't paint the poodle's toenails. It looks silly.

Aren't you going to recycle that?

Those shorts ought to be a little longer, Darla.

I wouldn't drive an American make if you paid me.

Those Monster Truck show tickets are too expensive.

I really admire Teddy Kennedy.

Where'd you get your doctorate?

That movie won "Best Picture" at Cannes.

It's January - take the Christmas lights down.

Bailing wire won't hold it.

Just a second, Irene, I'm going to pull over and check the map.

What's on "Masterpiece Theatre" this evening?

March 9, 1998



The British Government's policy of socialized medicine has recently been broadened to include a service called "Proxy Fathers". Under the government plan, any married woman who is unable to become pregnant through the first five years of her marriage may request the service of a proxy father--a government employee who attempts to solve the couple's problem by impregnating the wife.

The Smiths, a young couple, have no children and a proxy father is due to arrive. Leaving for work, Mr. Smith says, "I'm off. The government man should be here soon."

Moments later a door-to-door baby photographer rings the bell ...

Ms Smith: "Good morning."

Salesman: "Good morning, madam. You don't know me, but I've come to..."

Ms Smith: "No need to explain, I've been expecting you.

Salesman: "Really? Well, good. I've made a specialty of babies, especially twins."

Ms Smith: "That's what my husband and I had hoped. Please come in and have a seat."

Salesman: (Sitting) "Then you don't need to be sold on the idea?"

Ms Smith: "Don't concern yourself. My husband and I both agree this is the right thing to do."

Salesman: "Well, perhaps we should get down to it."

Ms Smith: (Blushing) "Just where do we start?"

Salesman: "Leave everything to me. I usually try two in the bathtub, one on the couch and perhaps a couple on the bed. Sometimes the living room floor allows the subject to really spread out."

Ms Smith: "Bathtub, living room floor? No wonder it hasn't worked for Harry and me."

Salesman: "Well, madam, none of us can guarantee a good one every time, but if we try several locations and I shoot from six or seven angles, I'm sure you'll be pleased with the results. In fact, my business card says, I aim to please."

Ms Smith: "Pardon me, but isn't this a little informal?"

Salesman: "Madam, in my line of work, a man must be at ease and take his time. I'd love to be in and out in five minutes, but you'd be disappointed with that."

Ms Smith: "Don't I know! Have you had much success at this?"

Salesman: (Opening his briefcase and finding baby pictures) "Just look at this picture. Believe it or not, it was done on top of a bus in downtown London."

Ms Smith: "Oh, my!!"

Salesman: "And here are pictures of the prettiest twins in town. They turned out exceptionally well when you consider their mother was so difficult to work with."

Ms Smith: "She was?"

Salesman: "Yes, I'm afraid so. I finally had to take her down to Hyde Park to get the job done right. I've never worked under such impossible conditions. People were crowding around four and five deep, pushing to get a good look."

Ms Smith: "Four and five deep?"

Salesman: "Yes and for more than three hours, too. The mother got so excited she started bouncing around, squealing and yelling at the crowd. I couldn't concentrate. I'm afraid I had to ask a couple of men to restrain her. By that time darkness was approaching and I began to rush my shots. When the squirrels began nibbling on my equipment I just packed it all in."

Ms Smith: "You mean they actually chewed on your, eh.., equipment?"

Salesman: "That's right, but it's all in a day's work. I consider my work a pleasure. I've spent years perfecting my patented technique. Now take this baby, I shot this one in the front window of a big department store."

Ms Smith: "I just can't believe it."

Salesman: "Well, madam, if you're ready, I'll set up my tripod so that we can get to work."

Ms Smith: "TRIPOD?!?"

Salesman: "Oh yes, I have to use a tripod to rest my equipment on. It's much too heavy and unwieldy for me to hold while I'm shooting. Ms Smith? ... Ms Smith? ... My word, she's fainted!

March 12, 1998



March 16, 1998



Charlie Brown Specials We'd Like to See

A few years ago, Charlie Brown and the "PEANUTS" gang made a new friend who developed leukemia in an animated special entitled, "WHY, CHARLIE BROWN, WHY?"

Recently, MetLife has put out a series of instructional pamphlets which feature the "PEANUTS" gang dealing with such issues as the loss of a loved one, writing a will, and dealing with a permanent disability.

Now that Charlie Brown is dealing with important issues, how about some "PEANUTS" specials for the kids of the 90's?

We could learn about V.D. in, "IT BURNS WHEN I PEE, CHARLIE BROWN."

Chuck and the Little Red-Headed Girl find out about unwanted pregnancy in, "IT'S BLUE, CHARLIE BROWN!"

Is Linus gay? Find out in, "IT'S A DIFFERENT KIND OF LOVE, CHARLIE BROWN."

Explore the real problems of child abuse in America in, "YOU MADE ME DO THAT, CHARLIE BROWN!"

See how the "PEANUTS" gang deals with date rape in, "NO MEANS NO, CHARLIE BROWN!"

Discover a father's forbidden love in, "IT'S OUR LITTLE SECRET, CHARLIE BROWN."

Franklin speaks! The "PEANUTS" gang gets a lesson in Ebonics in, "IMO BUSTA CAP INYO ASS, CHARLIE BROWN!"

What goes on in the mind of a serial killer? Discover the inner workings of Pig Pen's twisted psyche and meet his murderous alter ego, "Mr.Clean" in, "GOD TOLD ME TO DO IT, CHARLIE BROWN."

Charlie Brown peddles his body for crack money while stealing Social Security checks and boosting automobiles in "GO BLAME SOCIETY,CHARLIE BROWN!"

March 19, 1998



An Irishman, a Mexican and a redneck were doing construction work on some scaffolding on the 20th floor of a building. When lunch time arrived they opened their lunch buckets and began to eat.

The Irishman said, "Corned beef and cabbage! If I get corned beef and cabbage one more time for lunch I'm going to jump off this building." The Mexican opened his lunch box and exclaimed, "Burritos again! If I get burritos one more time I'm going to jump off, too." The redneck opened his lunch and said, "Bologna sandwich again. If I get a bologna sandwich one more time I'm jumping, too."

The next day at lunch time the Irishman opened his lunch box and found corned beef and cabbage. At that point he stood up and jumped to his death. The Mexican then opened his lunch bucket and seeing a burrito, jumped too. The redneck, having just watched his two friends drop to their death, shrugged and opened his lunch bag. Upon seeing yet another bologna sandwich, he too jumped to his death.

At the funeral the Irishman's wife, tearful and sad said, to the other two widows, "If I'd known how really tired he was of corned beef and cabbage, I never would have given it to him again!" The Mexican's wife, having just buried her husband the day before, nodded and sadly said, "I could have given him tacos or enchiladas! I didn't realize he hated burritos so much." The two then turned to the redneck's wife whose husband's funeral was the next day. "Hey, don't look at me," she said, "He made his own lunches!"

March 23, 1998



MAN CAUGHT BY HIS CATFLAP

"In retrospect, I admit it was unwise to try to gain access to my house via the catflap," Gunter Burpus admitted to reporters in Bremen, Germany.

"I suppose that is the reason they're called cat flaps, rather than human flaps, because they�re too small for people, and perhaps..... I should have realized that."

Burpus (41), a gardener from Bremen, was relating how he had become trapped in his own front door for two days, after losing his house keys.

"I got my head and shoulders through the flap but became trapped fast around the waist. At first, it all seemed rather amusing, I sang songs and told myself jokes. But then I wanted to go to the lavatory.

"I began shouting for help, but my head was in the hallway so my screams were muffled. After a few hours, a group of students approached me but, instead of helping, they removed my trousers and pants, painted my buttocks bright blue, and stuck a daffodil between my cheeks. Then they placed a sign next to me which said "Germany resurgent, an essay in street art. Please give generously"...... and left me there.

"People were passing by and, when I asked for help, they just said: 'Very good! Very clever!' and threw coins into my trousers.

No one tried to free me. In fact, I only got free after two days because a dog started licking my private parts and an old woman complained to the police. The rescue services came and cut me out, but the police arrested me as soon as I was free. Luckily, they've now dropped the charges, and I collected over DM3,000 ($2,000) in my underpants, so the time wasn't entirely wasted."

March 26, 1998



A teenager comes home from school with a writing assignment. He asks his father for help. "Dad can you tell me the difference between potential and reality?" His father looks up thoughtfully, and then says, "I'll display it for you. Go ask your mother if she would sleep with Robert Redford for a million dollars. Then go ask your sister if she would sleep with Brad Pitt for a million dollars. Then come back and tell me what you've learned."

The kid is puzzled, but he decides to see if he can figure out what his father means. He asks his mother, "Mom, If someone gave you a million dollars, would you sleep with Robert Redford?" His mother looks around shyly, and then with a little smile on her face says, "Don't tell your dad, but yes, I would." Then he goes to his sister's room and asks her, "Sis, if someone gave you a million dollars would you sleep with Brad Pitt?" His sister looks up and says, "Omigod! Definitely!" The kid goes back to his father and says, "Dad, I think I've figured it out. Potentially we're sitting on two million bucks, but in reality, we're living with a couple of whores."

March 30, 1998



April 2, 1998



Short Jokes #2

A science-minded soul, hoping to double his production, flew to Scotland, had himself cloned, and brought back his second self, only to learn that sorry sequel would utter nothing but vile profanity. Fearing ruin, the original lured his lascivious look-a-like up a mountain, pushed him off a cliff, and went back down the trail in deep relief. But witnesses saw it all. Police charged the fellow with making an obscene clone fall.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q. Do you know when its bed-time at the Michael Jackson house?

A. When the big hand covers the little hand....

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A blonde, red head and brunette were in an English Channel breast stroke competition. The redhead won, the brunette came in second. Hours and hours went by, finally the blonde arrived. Happy that she was still alive everyone embraced her. She hugged the judge and whispered, "I hate to be a bad loser but I think those other girls used their arms".

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Q. What do you get when you cross Lee Iacocca with Count Dracula?

A. autoexec.bat

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

ANOTHER BODY FOUND ! ! !

Apparently one of the less astute members of the cult was found under the sink, behind the Comet.

April 6, 1998



DEAD MEN READ NO MAIL:

By Scott Hanson

Excerpted from the Orlando Sentinel Star newspaper.

My father died on Jan 02, 1995. He left no forwarding address. Therefore, it fell to me to collect his mail. I didn't expect much really, since my sisters and I had been careful to notify his bank, insurance agent and a host of other businesses that one of their customers was no more.

You would think a death notice would cut down on the amount of correspondence from those firms. Quite the contrary. Instead -- for months, mind you -- my deceased father continued to receive mail from companies that had been told of his passing but pressed on, determined to contact him anyway.

The first to hope for a reply from beyond the grave was my father's bank.

Dear Mr. Hanson,

Our records indicate payment is due for overdraft protection on your checking account. Efforts to contact you have proven unsuccessful. Therefore, we are automatically withdrawing your monthly $28.00 service charge from you account. Please adjust your records accordingly.

Sincerely,

The Phoenix Branch

Dear Phoenix Branch,

This is to notify you once again-that Mr. Hanson died Jan 02, 1995. It is therefore unlikely he will be overdrawing his account. Please close his account, and adjust your books accordingly.

Sincerely,

Scott Hanson

Later that same week, I receive this note from Dad's insurance company. Again, this is a firm that had been told in no uncertain terms of his death.

Dear Mr. Hanson,

It's time to renew your auto insurance policy! To continue your coverage, you must send $54.17 to this office immediately. Failure to do so will result in the cancellation of your policy, and interruption of your coverage.

Sincerely,

Your Insurance Agent

Dear Insurance Agent,

This is to remind you that Mr. Hanson has been dead since January. As such, the odds he'll be involved in a collision are quite minimal. Please cancel the policy, and adjust your books accordingly.

Sincerely,

Scott Hanson

The next day, I went to my mailbox to find this:

Dear Mr. Hanson,

Let me introduce myself. I am a psychic reader, and it is very important that you contact me immediately. I sense that you are about to enter a time of unprecedented financial prosperity. Please call the enclosed 1-900 number immediately, so I can tell you how best to take full advantage of the opportunities that are coming your way.

Sincerely,

Your Psychic Reader

Dear Psychic Reader,

My father regrets he will be unable to call your 1-900 number. As a psychic reader, I'm sure you already know my father is dead, and had been for more that three weeks when you mailed your letter to him. I sense my father would be more than happy to take you up on your offer of a psychic reading, should you care to meet with him personally.

Sincerely,

Scott Hanson



P.S. Should you be in contact with my father in the future, please ask him if he'd like to renew his car insurance.

A few months of calm passed, and then these arrived:

Dear Mr. Hanson,

Our records indicate a balance of $112 has accrued for overdraft protection on your checking account. Efforts to contact you have proven unsuccessful. Please pay the minimum amount due, or contact this office to make other arrangements.



We appreciate your business and look forward to serving all of your future borrowing needs. Sincerely,

Your Bank's San Diego

District Office

Dear San Diego District Office,

I am writing to you for the third time now to tell you my father died in January. Since then, the number of checks he's written has dropped dramatically. Being dead, he has no plans to use his overdraft protection or pay even the minimum amount due for a service he no longer needs. As for future borrowing needs, well, don't hold your breath.

Sincerely,

Scott Hanson

Dear Mr. Hanson,

Records show you owe a balance of $54.17 to your insurance agent. Efforts to contact you have proven unsuccessful. Therefore, the matter has been turned over to us for collection. Please remit the amount of $54.17 to our office or we will be forced to take legal action to collect the debt.

Sincerely,

Your Insurance Agent's Collection Agency

Dear Collection Agency,

I told your client. Now I'm telling you. Dad's dead. He doesn't need insurance. He's dead. DEAD, DEAD, DEAD. I doubt even your lawyers can change that. Please adjust your books accordingly.

Sincerely,

Scott Hanson

A few more months, and:

Dear Mr. Hanson,

Our records show an unpaid balance of $224 has accrued for overdraft protection on your checking account. Our efforts to contact you have proven unsuccessful. Please remit the amount in full to this office, or the matter will be turned over to a collection agency. Such action will adversely affect your credit history.

Sincerely,

Your Bank's Los Angeles Regional Office

Dear Los Angeles Regional Office,

I am writing for the fourth time to the fourth person at the fourth address to tell your bank that my father passed away in January. Since that time, I've watched with a mixture of amazement and amusement as your bank continues to transact business with him. Now, you are even threatening his credit history. It should come as no surprise that you have received little response from my deceased father. It should also be small news that his credit history is of minor importance to him now. For the fourth and final time, please adjust your books accordingly.

Sincerely,

Scott Hanson

Dear Mr. Hanson,

This is your final notice of payment due to your insurance agent. If our firm does not receive payment of $54.17, we will commence legal action on the matter. Please contact us at once.

Sincerely,

Your Insurance Agent's Collection Agency

Dear Insurance Agent's Collection Agency,

You may contact my father via the enclosed 1-900 number.

Sincerely,

Scott Hanson

It has now been a couple of months since I've heard from these firms. Either the people writing these letters finally believe my father is dead, or they themselves have died and are now receiving similar correspondence. Actually, there has been a lesson in these letters. Any one of them would be cause for great worry, if sent to a living person. The dead are immune from corporate bullying. There's nothing like dying to put business correspondence in its proper perspective. Perhaps that's the best reason not to fear death: there's no post office there.

(Scott Hanson is a news reporter and anchor with WESH-Channel 2 in Orlando.)

April 9, 1998



These two guys had just gotten divorced and they swore they would never have anything to do with women again. They were best friends and they decided to move up to Alaska as far north as they could go and never look at a woman again.

They got up there and went into a trader's store and told him, "Give us enough supplies to last two men for one year". The trader got the gear together and on top of each one's supplies he laid a board with a hole in it with fur around the hole. The guys said "What's that board for?" The trader said, "Well, where you're going there are no women and you might need this."

They said "No way! We've sworn off women for life!" The trader said,"Well, take the boards with you, and if you don't use them I'll refund your money next year." "Okay," they said and left.

Next year this guy came into the trader's store and said "Give me enough supplies to last one man for one year." The trader said "Weren't you in here last year with a partner?"

"Yeah" said the guy.

"Where is he?" asked the trader.

"I shot him", said the guy.

"Why?"

"I caught him in bed with my board" was the reply.

April 13, 1998



Three blondes died and are at the pearly gates of heaven. St. Peter tells them that they can enter the gates if they can answer one simple question.

St. Peter asks the first blonde, "What is Easter?"

The blonde replies, "Oh, that's easy! It's the holiday in November when everyone gets together, eats turkey, and are thankful ..."

"Wrong!," replies St. Peter, and proceeds to ask the second blonde the same question, "What is Easter?"

The second blonde replies, "Easter is the holiday in December when we put up a nice tree, exchange presents, and celebrate the birth of Jesus."

St. Peter looks at the second blonde, shakes his head in disgust, tells her she's wrong, and then peers over his glasses at the third blonde and asks, "What is Easter?"

The third blonde smiles confidently and looks St. Peter in the eyes, "I know what Easter is."

"Oh?" says St. Peter, incredulously.

"Easter is the Christian holiday that coincides with the Jewish celebration of Passover. Jesus and his disciples were eating at the last supper and Jesus was later deceived and turned over to the Romans by one of his disciples. The Romans took him to be crucified and he was stabbed in the side, made to wear a crown of thorns, and was hung on a cross with nails through his hands. He was buried in a nearby cave which was sealed off by a large boulder."

St. Peter smiles broadly with delight. The third blonde continues, "Every year the boulder is moved aside so that Jesus can come out ... and, if he sees his shadow, there will be six more weeks of winter."

April 16, 1998



I DO NOT recommend this, but thought you might be interested.

Tax Filing Tips (*use at your own risk)

Have Fun with the IRS ...

This from experiences of a former IRS employee:

During my short employment tour with the IRS in the mail room, I've found several harmless ways to mess with them and receive no recourse.

Always put staples in the right hand corner. Go ahead and put staples down the whole right side. The extractors who remove the mail from the envelopes have to take out any staples in the right side.

Never arrange paperwork in the right order, or even facing the right way. Put a few upside down and backwards. That way they have to remove all your staples rearrange your paperwork and re-staple it (on the left side).

Line the bottom of your envelope with Elmer's glue and let it dry before you put in you forms, so that the automated opener doesn't open it and the extractor has to open it by hand.

If you are very unfortunate and have to pay taxes use a two or three party check.

On top of paying with a three party check pay one of the dollars you owe in cash. When an extractor receives cash, no matter how small an amount, he has to take it to a special desk and fill out a few nasty forms.

Write a little letter of appreciation. Any letter received has to be read and stamped regardless of what it is or what its on. Write your letter on something misshapen and unconventional, like on the back of a Kroger sack.

When you mail it, mail it in a big envelope (even if its just a single EZ form). Big envelopes have to be torn and sorted differently than regular business size ones. An added bonus to the big envelope is that they take priority over other mail, so the workers can hurry up and deal with your mess.

If you send 2 checks they'll have to staple your unsightly envelope to your half destroyed form.

Always put extra paper clips on your forms. Any foreign fasteners or the like have to be removed and put away.

Sign your name in ink on every page. Any signature has to be verified and then date stamped.

These are just a few of the fun and exciting things you can do with the Tax Man. These methods are only recommended when you owe money.

April 20, 1998



April 23, 1998



Major Technological Breakthrough! ! !

Announcing the new Built-in Orderly Organized Knowledge-device (BOOK) . .

The BOOK is a revolutionary breakthrough in technology: No wires, no electric circuits, no batteries, nothing to be connected or switched on. . It's so easy to use even a child can operate it. Just lift its cover! Compact and portable, it can be used anywhere -- even sitting in an armchair by the fire -- yet it is powerful enough to hold as much information as a CD-ROM disc.

Here's how it works . . . Each BOOK is constructed of sequentially numbered sheets of paper (recyclable), each capable of holding thousands of bits of information. These pages are locked together with a custom-fit device called a binder which keeps the sheets in their correct sequence. Opaque Paper Technology (OPT) allows manufacturers to use both sides of the sheet, doubling the information density and cutting costs in half. Experts are divided on the prospects for further increases in information density; for now BOOK's with more information simply use more pages. This makes them thicker and harder to carry, and has drawn some criticism from the mobile computing crowd. Each sheet is scanned optically, registering information directly into your brain. A flick of the finger takes you to the next sheet. The BOOK may be taken up at any time and used by merely opening it. . The BOOK never crashes and never needs rebooting, though like other display devices it can become unusable if dropped overboard. The "browse" feature allows you to move instantly to any sheet, and move forward or backward as you wish. Many come with an "index" feature, which pinpoints the exact location of any selected information for instant retrieval. .

An optional "BOOK mark" accessory allows you to open the BOOK to the exact place you left it in a previous session -- even if the BOOK has been closed. . BOOKmarks fit universal design standards; thus, a single BOOKmark can be used in BOOK's by various manufacturers. Conversely, numerous BOOKmarks can be used in a single BOOK if the user wants to store numerous views at once. . The number is limited only by the number of pages in the BOOK. You can also make personal notes next to BOOK text entries with an optional programming tool, the Portable Erasable Nib Cryptic Intercommunication Link Stylus (PENCILS).

Portable, durable, and affordable, the BOOK is being hailed as the entertainment wave of the future. The BOOK's appeal seems so certain that thousands of content creators have committed to the platform. Look for a flood of new titles soon. .

April 27, 1998



By the time Bill pulled into the little town, every hotel room was taken." You've got to have a room somewhere," he pleaded to the last hotel manager," or just a bed - I don't really care where. I'm completely exhausted."

"Well, I do have a double room with one occupant," admitted the manager," and I'm sure he would be glad to split the cost. But to tell you the truth, he snores so loudly that people in adjoining rooms have complained all week. I'm not sure it'd be worth it to you."

"No problem," the tired traveler assured him." I'll take it."

The next morning Bill came down to breakfast bright-eyed and bushy-tailed. The manager asked him how he survived.

"Never better," Bill said.

The manager was impressed." No problem with the other guy snoring, then?"

"Nope. I shut him up in no time."

"How'd you manage that?"

"He was already in bed, snoring away, when I came in the room," Bill said. "I went over, gave him a kiss on the cheek, said, 'Good night, beautiful,' and he sat up all night watching me."

April 30, 1998



Three guys found themselves in Hell: we will call them Carl, Bob, and Brett, they were a little confused at their present situation, and they were startled to see a door in the wall open, and behind the door was perhaps the ugliest woman they had ever seen. She was 3'4", dirty, and you could smell her even over the Brimstone.

The voice of the Devil was heard, "Brett, you have sinned! You are condemned to spend the rest of eternity in bed with this woman!" And Brett was whisked through the door by a group of lesser demons to his torment.

This understandably shook up the other two, and so they both jumped when a second door opened, and they saw an even more disgusting example of womanhood gone wrong. She was over 7' tall, monstrous, covered in thick black hair, and flies circled her.

The voice of the Devil was heard, "Carl, you have sinned! You are condemned to spend the rest of eternity in bed with this woman!" And Carl, like Brett, was whisked off.

Bob, now alone, felt understandably anxious, and feared the worst when the third door opened. And as the door inched open, he strained to see the figure of . . . Cindy Crawford! Delighted, Bob jumped up, taking in the sight of this beautiful woman, barely dressed in a skimpy bikini. Then he heard the voice of the Devil saying:



"Cindy, you have sinned. . . . . . . ."

May 4, 1998



PRISON VS. WORK

"Author Unknown"

IN PRISON ... you spend the majority of your time in an 8x10 cell.

AT WORK ... you spend most of your time in a 6x8 cubicle.

IN PRISON ... you get three meals a day.

AT WORK ... you only get a break for one meal and you have to pay for it.

IN PRISON ... you get time off for good behavior.

AT WORK ... you get rewarded for good behavior with more work.

IN PRISON ... a guard locks and unlocks all the doors for you.

AT WORK ... you must carry around a security card and unlock and open

all the doors yourself.

IN PRISON ... you can watch TV and play games.

AT WORK ... you get fired for watching TV and playing games.

IN PRISON ... you get your own toilet.

AT WORK ... you have to share.

IN PRISON ... they allow your family and friends to visit.

AT WORK ... you cannot even speak to your family and friends.

IN PRISON... all expenses are paid by taxpayers with no work required.

AT WORK... you get to pay all the expenses to go to work and then they deduct

taxes from your salary to pay for prisoners.

IN PRISON ... you spend most of your life looking through bars from the inside

wanting to get out.

AT WORK ... you spend most of your time wanting to get out and go inside bars.

IN PRISON ... there are wardens who are often sadistic.

AT WORK ... they are called managers.

May 7, 1998



May 11, 1998



Long ago, when sailing ships ruled the waves, a captain and his crew were in danger of being boarded by a pirate ship. As the crew became frantic, the captain bellowed to his First Mate, "Bring me my red shirt!" The First Mate quickly retrieved the captain's red shirt, which the captain put on and lead the crew to battle the pirate boarding party. Although some casualties occurred among the crew, the pirates were repelled.

Later that day, the lookout screamed that there were two pirate vessels sending boarding parties. The crew cowered in fear, but the captain, calm as ever bellowed, "Bring me my red shirt!" The battle was on, and once again the captain and his crew repelled both boarding parties, although this time more casualties occurred.

Weary from the battles, the men sat around on deck that night recounting the day's occurrences when an ensign looked to the captain and asked, "Sir, why did you call for your red shirt before the battle?" The captain, giving the ensign a look that only a captain can give, exhorted, "If I am wounded in battle, the red shirt does not show the wound and thus, you men will continue to fight unafraid." The men sat in silence marvelling at the courage of such a man.

As dawn came the next morning, the lookout screamed that there were pirate ships, 10 of them, all with boarding parties on their way. The men became silent and looked to their captain for his usual command.

The captain, calm as ever, bellowed, "Bring me my brown pants!"

May 14, 1998



A boy and his father visiting from a third world country were at a mall. They were amazed by almost everything they saw, but especially by two shiny, silver walls that could move apart and back together again.

The boy asked his father, "What is this, Father?" The father responded, "Son I have never seen anything like this in my life, I don't know what it is!" While the boy and his father were watching wide-eyed, an old lady in a wheelchair rolled up to the moving walls and pressed a button. The walls opened and the lady rolled between them into a small room. The walls closed and the boy and his father watched small circles of lights with numbers above the walls light up. They continued to watch the circles light up in the reverse direction. The walls opened up again and a voluptuous 24-year old woman stepped out.

The father said to his son, "Go get your mother".

May 18, 1998



Face it -- English is a crazy language. There is no egg in eggplant nor ham in hamburger; neither apple nor pine in pineapple. English muffins weren't invented in England or French fries in France. Sweetmeats are candies while sweetbreads, which aren't sweet, are meat.

We take English for granted. But if we explore it's paradoxes, we find that quicksand can work slowly, boxing rings are square and a guinea pig is neither from Guinea nor is it a pig.

And why is it that writers write but fingers don't fing, grocers don't groce and hammers don't ham? If the plural of tooth is teeth, why isn't the plural of booth beeth? One goose, 2 geese. So one moose, 2 meese? One index, 2 indices?

Doesn't it seem crazy that you can make amends but not one amend, that you comb through annals of history but not a single annal? If you have a bunch of odds and ends and get rid of all but one of them, what do you call it?

If teachers taught, why didn't preachers praught? If a vegetarian eats vegetables, what does a humanitarian eat? If you wrote a letter, perhaps you bote your tongue?

Sometimes I think all the English speakers should be committed to an asylum for the verbally insane. In what language do people recite at a play and play at a recital? Ship by truck and send cargo by ship? Have noses that run and feet that smell? Park on driveways and drive on parkways?

How can a slim chance and a fat chance be the same, while a wise man and a wise guy are opposites? How can overlook and oversee be opposites, while quite a lot and quite a few are alike? How can the weather be hot as hell one day and cold as hell another?

Have you noticed that we,talk about certain things only when they are absent? Have you ever seen a horseful-carriage or a strapful gown? Met a sung hero or experienced requited love? Have you ever run into someone who was combobulated, gruntled, ruly or peccable? And where are all those people who ARE spring chickens or who would ACTUALLY hurt a fly?

You have to marvel at the unique lunacy of a language in which your house can burn up as it burns down, in which you fill in a form by filling it out and in which an alarm goes off by going on. English was invented by people, not computers, and it reflects the creativity of the human race (which, of course, isn't a race at all). That is why, when the stars are out, they are visible, but when the lights are out, they,are invisible. And why, when I wind up my watch, I start it, but when I wind up this essay, I end it.

Written by Richard Lederer



This is a portion of the Introduction section to the book

CRAZY ENGLISH (Pocket Books, 1989)

There are 4 Parts. To view the others follow the link above and look in the "Looking at Language Archives" section.

May 21, 1998



This is wild..... It is sure to give you goosebumps.

Do not read the ending first! You'll ruin it!

Believe it or not . .

Of all the tales of the supernatural, this one is perhaps the best documented, the most disturbing and the most difficult to explain. The Princess of Amen-Ra lived some 1,500 years before Christ. When she died, she was laid in an ornate wooden coffin and buried deep in a vault at Luxor, on the banks of the Nile.

In the late 1890's, four rich young Englishmen visiting the excavations at Luxor were invited to buy an exquisitely fashioned mummy case containing the remains of the Princess of Amen-Ra. They drew lots. The man who won paid several thousand pounds and had the coffin taken to his hotel. A few hours later, he was seen walking out towards the desert. He never returned. The next day, one of the remaining three men was shot by an Egyptian servant accidentally. His arm was so severely wounded it had to be amputated. The 3rd man in the foursome found on his return home that the bank holding his entire savings had failed. The 4th guy suffered a severe illness, lost his job and was reduced to selling matches in the street.

Nevertheless, the coffin reached England (causing other misfortunes along the way), where it was bought by a London businessman. After 3 of his family members had been injured in a road accident and his house damaged by fire, the businessman donated it to the British museum. As the coffin was being unloaded from a truck in the museum courtyard, the truck suddenly went into reverse and trapped a passer-by. Then as the casket was being lifted up the stairs by two workmen, one fell and broke his leg. The other, apparently in perfect health, died unaccountably two days later.

Once the Princess was installed in the Egyptian Room, the trouble really started. Museum night watchmen frequently heard frantic hammering and sobbing from the coffin. Other exhibits in the room were also often hurled about at night. One watchman died on duty; causing the other watchmen to want to quit. Cleaners refused to go near the Princess too. When a visitor derisively flicked a dust cloth at the face painted on the coffin, his child died of measles soon afterwards. Finally, the authorities had the mummy carried down to the basement, figuring it couldn't do any harm down there. Within a week, one of the helpers was seriously ill, and the supervisor of the move was found dead on his desk.

By now, the papers had heard of it. A journalist photographer took a picture of the mummy case and when he developed it, the painting on the coffin was of a horrifying, human face. It was said that the photographer went home, locked his bedroom door and shot himself.

Soon afterwards, the museum sold the mummy to a private collector. After continued misfortune (and deaths), the owner banished it to the attic. A well known authority on the occult, madame Helena Blavatsky, visited the premises sometime later. Upon entry, she was seized with a shivering fit and searched the house for the source of "an evil influence of incredible intensity". She finally came to the attic and found the mummy case. "Can you exorcise this evil spirit ?" asked the owner. "There is no such thing as exorcism. Evil remains evil forever. Nothing can be done about it. I implore you to get rid of this evil as soon as possible." But no British museum would take the mummy; the fact that almost 20 people had met with misfortune, disaster or death from handling the casket in barely 10 years was now well known.

Eventually, a hardheaded American archaeologist (who dismissed the happenings as quirks of circumstance), paid a handsome price for the mummy and arranged for its removal to New York. In April 1912, the new owner escorted his treasure aboard a sparkling new White Star liner about to make its maiden voyage to New York. On the night of April 14, amid scenes of unprecedented horror, the Princess of Amen-Ra accompanied 1,500 passengers to their deaths at the bottom of the Atlantic.

The name of the ship was Titanic.

May 25, 1998



May 28, 1998



An old cowboy dressed to kill with a cowboy shirt, hat, jeans, spurs, and chaps went to a bar and ordered a drink. As he sat sipping his whiskey, a young lady sat down next to him.

After she ordered her drink, she turned to the cowboy and asked him, "Are you a real cowboy?" To which he replied, "Well, I have spent my whole life on the ranch, herding cows, breaking horses, mending fences. I guess I am."

After a short while, he asked her what she was.

She replied, "I am a lesbian. I spend my whole day thinking about women. As soon as I get up in the morning I think of women, when I eat, shower, watch TV, everything seems to make me think of women."

A short while later she left and the cowboy ordered another drink. A couple sat down next to him and asked, "Are you a real cowboy?" To which he replied, "I always thought I was, but I just found out that I'm a lesbian."

June 1, 1998



There was once an orchestra giving a huge concert, and they were playing Beethoven's Ninth Symphony. (Yes, he had a ninth check it out.) Since this is a rather long and difficult piece of music to play, there was a scheduled intermission immediately before the last movement.

During this time, the tuba, or bass players decided to run across the street from the concert hall, and grab a few quick drinks to help them make it through the last movement.

The first and second chair clarinet players were having a secret affair, and snuck into the practice rooms for a rendezvous.

Not to be left out, the concertmeister thought that it would be REAL cute to play a practical joke on the conducter, who he had had a running feud with for several years. He snuck up to the podium during intermission, and with some string that he had hidden in his suit coat, he proceeded to tie knots around the musical score that the conductor used to lead the orchestra.

Finally, the intermission was over, and the conductor walked up to the podium, ready to lift his baton to begin the final movement. He immediately discovered the problems facing him it was the bottom of the Ninth, the basses were loaded, two were out, and the score was tied . .

June 4, 1998



This was an actual letter from and reply to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, State of Michigan.

Reply To: Grand Rapids District Office

State Office Building 6th Floor

350 Ottawa NW

Grand Rapids MI 49503-2341

Department Of Environmental Quality

Hollister Building, PO Box 30473

Lansing MI 48909-7973

Russell J. Harding, Director

December 17, 1997

CERTIFIED

Mr. Ryan DeVries

2088 Dagget

Pierson, MI 49339

Dear Mr. DeVries:

SUBJECT: DEQ File No. 97-59-0023-1 T11N, R10W, Sec. 20, Montcalm County

It has come to the attention of the Department of Environmental Quality that there has been recent unauthorized activity on the above referenced parcel of property. You have been certified as the legal landowner and/or contractor who did the following unauthorized activity:

Construction and maintenance of two wood debris dams across the outlet stream of Spring Pond.

A permit must be issued prior to the start of this type of activity. A review of the Department's files shows that no permits have been issued. Therefore, the Department has determined that this activity is in violation of Part 301, Inland Lakes and Streams, of the Natural Resource and Environmental Protection Act, Act 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, being sections 324.30101 to 324.30113 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, annotated.

The Department has been informed that one or both of the dams partially failed during a recent rain event, causing debris and flooding at downstream locations. We find that dams of this nature are inherently hazardous and cannot be permitted.

The Department therefore orders you to cease and desist all unauthorized activities at this location, and to restore the stream to a free-flow condition by removing all wood and brush forming the dams from the strewn channel. All restoration work shall be completed no later than January 31, 1998.

Please notify this office when the restoration has been completed so that a follow-up site inspection may be scheduled by our staff.

Failure to comply with this request or any further unauthorized activity on the site may result in this case being referred for elevated enforcement action. We anticipate and would appreciate your full cooperation in this matter.

Please feel free to contact me at this office if you have any questions.

Sincerely,

David L. Price

District Representative

Land and Water Management Division

---- Reply Letter----

Dear Mr. Price:

Re: DEQ File No. 97-59-0023; T11N, R10W, Sec 20; Montcalm County

Your certified letter dated 12/17/97 has been handed to me to respond to. You sent out a great deal of carbon copies to a lot of people, but you neglected to include their addresses. You will, therefore, have to send them a copy of my response.

First of all, Mr. Ryan DeVries is not the legal landowner and/or contractor at 2088 Dagget, Pierson, Michigan - I am the legal owner and a couple of beavers are in the (State unauthorized) process of constructing and maintaining two wood "debris" dams across the outlet stream of my Spring Pond. While I did not pay for, nor authorize their dam project, I think they would be highly offended you call their skillful use of natural building materials "debris.'' I would like to challenge you to attempt to emulate their dam project any dam time and/or any dam place you choose. I believe I can safely state there is no dam way you could ever match their dam skills, their dam resourcefulness, their dam ingenuity, their dam persistence, their dam determination and/or their dam work ethic.

As to your dam request the beavers first must fill out a dam permit prior to the start of this type of dam activity, my first dam question to you is: Are you trying to discriminate against my Spring Pond Beavers or do you require all dam beavers throughout this State to conform to said dam request? If you are not discriminating against these particular beavers, please send me completed copies of all those other applicable beaver dam permits. Perhaps we will see if there really is a dam violation of Part 301, Inland Lakes and Streams, of the Natural Resource and Environmental Protection Act, Act 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, being sections 324.30101 to 324.30113 of the Michigan Compiled Laws annotated.

My first concern is - aren't the dam beavers entitled to dam legal representation? The Spring Pond Beavers are financially destitute and are unable to pay for said dam representation - so the State will have to provide them with a dam lawyer. The Department's dam concern that either one or both of the dams failed during a recent rain event causing dam flooding is proof we should leave the dam Spring Pond Beavers alone rather than harassing them and calling their dam names. If you want the dam stream "restored" to a dam free-flow condition contact the dam beavers - but if you are going to arrest them (they obviously did not pay any dam attention to your dam letter-being unable to read English) - be sure you read them their dam Miranda rights first.

As for me, I am not going to cause more dam flooding or dam debris jams by interfering with these dam builders. If you want to hurt these dam beavers - be aware I am sending a copy of your dam letter and this response to PETA. If your dam Department seriously finds all dams of this nature inherently hazardous and truly will not permit their existence in this dam State - I seriously hope you are not selectively enforcing this dam policy - or once again both I and the Spring Pond Beavers will scream prejudice!

In my humble opinion, the Spring Pond Beavers have a right to build their dam unauthorized dams as long as the sky is blue, the grass is green and water flows downstream. They have more dam right than I to live and enjoy Spring Pond. So, as far as the beavers and I are concerned, this dam case can be referred for more dam elevated enforcement action now. Why wait until 1/31/98? The Spring Pond Beavers may be under the dam ice then and there will be no dam way for you or your dam staff to contact/harass them then.

In conclusion, I would like to bring to your attention a real environmental quality (health) problem; bears are actually defecating in our woods. I definitely believe you should be persecuting the defecating bears and leave the dam beavers alone. If you are going to investigate the beaver dam, watch your step! (The bears are not careful where they dump!)

Being unable to comply with your dam request, and being unable to contact you on your dam answering machine, I am sending this response to your dam office.

Sincerely,

Stephen L. Svensen

June 8, 1998



A young punker gets on the cross-town bus. He's got spiked, multicolored hair that's green, purple, and orange. His clothes are a tattered mix of leather rags. His legs are bare and he's without shoes. His entire face and body are riddled with pierced jewelry and his earrings are big, bright feathers. He sits down in the only vacant seat, directly across from an old man who just glares at him for the next ten miles.

Finally, the punk gets self conscious and barks at the old man: "What are you looking at you old fart...... didn't you ever do anything wild when you were young?"

Without missing a beat, the old man replies: "Yeah. Back when I was young and in the Navy, I got really drunk one night in Singapore, and had sex with a parrot. I thought maybe you were my son."

June 11, 1998



June 15, 1998



HOW TO MAKE MONEY IN MEXICO

Two guys are bungee-jumping one day. The first guy says to the second, "You know, we could make a lot of money running our own bungee-jumping service in Mexico." The second guy thinks this is a great idea, so the two pool their money and buy everything they'll need: a tower, an elastic cord, insurance, etc.

They travel to Mexico and begin to set up on the square. As they are constructing the tower, a crowd begins to assemble. Slowly, more and more people gather to watch them at work.

The first guy jumps. He bounces at the end of the cord, but when he comes back up, the second guy notices that he has a few cuts and scratches. Unfortunately, the second guy isn't able to catch him. He falls again, bounces, and comes back up again. This time he is bruised and bleeding.

Again, the second guy misses him. The first guy falls again and bounces back up. This time, he comes back pretty messed up - he's got a couple of broken bones and is almost unconscious. Luckily, the second guy finally catches him this time and says, "What happened? Was the cord too long?"

The first guy says, "No, the cord was fine, but what is a pi�ata?"

June 18, 1998



A wife and her husband were having a dinner party for some important guests. The wife was very excited about this and wanted everything to be perfect. At the very last minute, she realized that she didn't have any snails for the dinner party, so she asked her husband to run down to the beach with the bucket to gather some snails.

Very grudgingly he agreed. He took the bucket, walked out the door, down the steps, and out to the beach. As he was collecting the snails, he noticed a beautiful woman strolling alongside the water just a little further down the beach. He kept thinking to himself, "Wouldn't it be great if she would even just come down and talk to me?" He went back to gathering the snails. All of a sudden he looked up, and the beautiful woman was standing right over him. They started talking and she invited him back to her place. They ended up spending the night together.

At seven o'clock the next morning he woke up and exclaimed, "Oh no!!! My wife's dinner party!!!" He gathered all his clothes, put them on real fast, grabbed his bucket, and ran out the door. He ran down the beach all the way to his apartment. He ran up the stairs of his apartment. He was in such a hurry that when he got to the top of the stairs, he dropped the bucket of snails. There were snails all down the stairs. The door opened just then, with a very angry wife standing in the doorway wondering where he's been all this time. He looked at the snails all down the steps, then he looked at her, then back at the snails and said, "Come on guys, we're almost there!!"

June 22, 1998



Men often find blowing off a chick the most difficult part of the dating process. The closest they ever come to telling a chick it's over is to look her straight in the eye and say, "I'll call you next week.". But there is now a great way to blow a chick off. It's safe. It's affordable, and the best thing is the chick has no opportunity to throw things at you. And it's at your fingertips right now. E-mail.

That's how all the happening, 90's kind of guys are telling chicks they're not worthy. You'll feel like a real man knowing you have told her how you really feel from the safety of your keyboard. And you can delete her response without ever reading it. What could be more painless?

Following is an Email rejection letter: Men can use it the next time they need to put their main squeeze on waivers. The text of the letter Follows.

Hope it comes in handy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I regret to inform you that you have been eliminated from further contention to become the future Mrs. (your last name). As you are probably aware, the competition was exceedingly tough this year and dozens of well-qualified candidates such as yourself also failed to make the final cut. I will, however, keep your name on file should an opening come available or I become extremely horny.

So that you may find better success in your future romantic endeavors, please allow me to offer the following reason(s) you were disqualified from the competition:

(Check those that apply)

____Your surprise at learning Paul McCartney was indeed in another band prior to Wings revealed you do not meet my age requirements.

____Your failure to reach for your purse even in a feigned attempt to pay for dinner by the fourth date displayed a stunning ignorance of basic economics.

____Your inadvertent admission that you "buy condoms and K-Y Jelly by the truckloads indicates that you may be slightly over-qualified for this position.

____You failed the 20 Question Rule, i.e., I asked you 20 questions about yourself before you asked me more than one about myself.

____The only question you asked was how much money I make.

____You neglected to reach over and unlock my car door from the inside after I opened the passenger side door for you.

____My breasts are bigger than yours.

____Your height is out of proportion to your weight. If you should, however, happen to gain the necessary 17 vertical inches, please resubmit your application.

____Your repeated comments such as, "Is it still called a penis when it's this small?" were both uncalled for and thoughtless.

____The way you enthusiastically jumped up on the stage at the alternative Bar and danced with the lesbians demonstrated that you are far too impressionable and have a disconcerting lack of commitment to heterosexuality.

____Your revelation that you would most certainly allow your ex-boyfriend to shack up with you again after he "beats that domestic abuse rap" shows compassion but makes it difficult to take you seriously.

____Although your inability to achieve orgasm was of paramount importance to me, your suggestion that we invite the basketball team into the bedroom during our sexual encounters so it would be "just like" your college days seemed somewhat extreme and inappropriate. I am out of your league; set your sights lower next time.

Sincerely,



Your Name (Optional)

June 25, 1998



Rules for cats who have a house to run:

1. DOORS: Do not allow closed doors in any room. To get a door opened, stand on hind legs and scratch the frame. You may also reach under the door and pull clothing towards you; silks get the quickest reaction. Once door is opened, it is not necessary to use it. After you have ordered an "outside" door opened, stand halfway in and out and think about several things. This is particularly important during very cold weather, when it's raining or snowing, or during the height of the mosquito season. Swinging doors must be avoided at all costs.

2. CHAIRS AND RUGS: If you have to urp, get to an overstuffed chair quickly. If you cannot manage this in time, get to an Oriental rug. If there are no oriental rugs, shag is a good substitute. When urping on shag, be sure you project; it is a must that it stretch for as long as a human's bare foot.

3. BATHROOMS: Always accompany guests to the bathroom. (See Rule I.) It is not necessary to do anything -- just sit and stare.

4. HELPING: If one of your humans is engaged in some semi-closed activity and the other is idle, stay with the busy one. This is called "helping"; humans are known to refer to it as "hampering."

The following are the rules for "helping":

a) When supervising cooking, sit just behind the left heel of the cook. You cannot be seen and thereby stand a better chance of being stepped on and then picked up and comforted.

b) For book readers, get in close under the chin, between eyes and book, unless you can lie across the book itself.

c) For knitting projects or paperwork, lie on the work in the most appropriate manner so as to obscure as much of the work or at least the most important part. Pretend to doze, but every so often reach out and slap the pencil or knitting needles. The worker may try to distract you; ignore it. Remember, the aim is to hamper work. Embroidery and needlepoint projects make great hammocks in spite of what the humans may tell you.

d) For people paying bills (monthly activity) or working on income taxes or Christmas cards (annual activity), keep in mind the aim - - to help! First, sit on the paper being worked on. When dislodged, watch sadly from the side of the table. When activity proceeds nicely, roll around on the papers, scattering them to the best of your ability. After being removed for the second time, push pens, pencils, and erasers off the table, one at a time.

e) When a human is holding the newspaper in front of him/her, be sure to jump on the back of the paper. They love to jump.

5. WALKING: As often as possible, dart quickly and as close as possible in front of the human. Especially effective places to strike are: 1) On stairs, when they have something in their arms; 2) In the dark; and 3) When they first get up in the morning. This exercise helps with improving their coordination skills.

6. BEDTIME: Always sleep on the human at night. If there are two (or more) of you, book end the human putting off the greatest heat. They will try and squirm but your sheer numbers and inert bodies will effectively keep them pinned.

June 29, 1998



AND YOU THINK YOUR JOB STINKS !



July 2, 1998



A LITTLE STORY

This is a story about four people named

Everybody, Somebody, Anybody and Nobody.

There was an important job to be done and

Everybody was sure that Somebody would do it.

Anybody could have done it, but Nobody did it.

Somebody got angry about that, because it was

Everybody's job. Everybody thought Anybody could

do it, but Nobody realized that Everybody wouldn't

do it. It ended up that Everybody blamed Somebody

when Nobody did what Anybody could have done.

July 6, 1998



Jesus and Mohammed have an argument as to who is the better programmer. This goes on for a few hours until they come to an agreement to hold a contest, with Bhudda as the judge.

They set themselves before their computers and begin. They type furiously, lines of code streaming up the screen, for several hours straight. Seconds before the end of the competition, a bolt of lightning strikes, taking out the electricity.

Moments later, the power is restored, and Bhudda announces that the contest is over. He asks Mohammed to show what he has come up with. Mohammed is visibly upset, and cries, "I have nothing. I lost it all when the power went out."

"Very well, then," says Bhudda, "Let us see if Jesus fared any better."

Jesus enters a command, and the screen comes to life, the voices of an angelic choir pour forth from the speakers.

Mohammed is astonished. He stutters, "B-b-but how?! I lost everything, yet Jesus' program is intact! How did he do it?"

Bhudda chuckles, "Everybody knows ... Jesus saves."

July 9, 1998



A man hears a knock at the door.

"Hi, my name's Joe, I'm here to get Flo. We're going to the show, is she ready to go?"

The man chuckles and calls his daughter.

Flo runs out the door, and her and Joe leave.

Knock at the door.

"Hi, my name's Eddy, I'm here to get Betty. We're gonna go eat some spaghetti. Is she ready?"

This time the man starts cracking up, but he still calls his daughter, and she and Eddy leave.

Knock Knock.

"Hi, my names Buck."

The man slams the door shut.

July 13, 1998



WHY WE'RE ALL SO TIRED

For a couple years I've been blaming it on iron poor blood, lack of vitamins, dieting and a dozen other maladies. But now I've discovered the real reason I'm tired is because I'm overworked.

The population of this country is 237 million.

104 million are retired. That leaves 133 million to do the work.

There are 85 million in school, which leaves 48 million to do the work.

Of this there are 29 million employed by the federal government. This leaves 19 million to do the work.

Four million are in the Armed Forces, which leaves 15 million to do the work.

Take from the total the 14,800,000 people who work for State and City Government and that leaves 200,000 to do the work.

There are 188,000 in hospitals, so that leaves 12,000 to do the work.

Now, there are 11,998 people in prisons. That leaves just two people to do the work.

You and me.

And you're sitting there screwing around with e-mail.

July 16, 1998



July 20, 1998



At a recent computer software engineering course in the US, the participants were given an awkward question to answer:

"If you had just boarded an airliner and discovered that your team of programmers had been responsible for the flight control software, how many of you would disembark immediately?"

Among the ensuing forest of raised hands only one man sat motionless. When asked what he would do, he replied that he would be quite content to stay onboard. With his team's software, he reasoned, the plane was unlikely to even taxi as far as the runway, let alone take off.

July 23, 1998



Some people say cats never have to be bathed. They say cats lick themselves clean. They say cats have a special enzyme of some sort in their saliva that works like new, improved Wisk - dislodging the dirt where it hides and whisking it away.

I've spent most of my life believing this folklore. Like most blind believers, I've been able to discount all the facts to the contrary, the kitty odors that lurk in the corners of the garage and dirt smudges that cling to the throw rug by the fireplace.

The time comes, however, when a man must face reality. When he must look squarely in the face of massive public sentiment to the contrary and announce: "This cat smells like a port-a-potty on a hot day in Juarez."

When that day arrives at your house, as it has in mine, I have some advice you might consider as you place your feline friend under your arm and head for the bathtub:

-- Know that although the cat has the advantage of quickness and lack of concern for human life, you have the advantage of strength. Capitalize on that advantage by selecting the battlefield. Don't try to bathe him in an open area where he can force you to chase him. Pick a very small bathroom. If your bathroom is more than four feet square, I recommend that you get in the tub with the cat and close the sliding-glass doors as if you were about to take a shower. (A simple shower curtain will not do. A berserk cat can shred a three-ply rubber shower curtain quicker than a politician can shift positions.)

-- Know that a cat has claws and will not hesitate to remove all the skin from your body. Your advantage here is that you are smart and know how to dress to protect yourself. I recommend canvas overalls tucked into high-top construction boots, a pair of steel-mesh gloves, an army helmet, a hockey face mask, and a long-sleeved flak jacket.

-- Prepare everything in advance. There is no time to go out for a towel when you have a cat digging a hole in your flak jacket. Draw the water. Make sure the bottle of kitty shampoo is inside the glass enclosure. Make sure the towel can be reached, even if you are lying on your back in the water.

-- Use the element of surprise. Pick up your cat nonchalantly, as if to simply carry him to his supper dish. (Cats will not usually notice your strange attire. They have little or no interest in fashion as a rule. If he does notice your garb, calmly explain that you are taking part in a product testing experiment for J.C. Penney.)

-- Once you are inside the bathroom, speed is essential to survival. In a single liquid motion, shut the bathroom door, step into the tub enclosure, slide the glass door shut, dip the cat in the water and squirt him with shampoo. You have begun one of the wildest 45 seconds of your life.

-- Cats have no handles. Add the fact that he now has soapy fur, and the problem is radically compounded. Do not expect to hold on to him for more than two or three seconds at a time. When you have him, however, you must remember to give him another squirt of shampoo and rub like crazy. He'll then spring free and fall back into the water, thereby rinsing himself off. (The national record for cats is three latherings, so don't expect too much.)

-- Next, the cat must be dried. Novice cat bathers always assume this part will be the most difficult, for humans generally are worn out at this point and the cat is just getting really determined. In fact, the drying is simple compared to what you have just been through. That's because by now the cat is semipermanently affixed to your right leg. You simply pop the drain plug with you foot, reach for your towel and wait. (Occasionally, however, the cat will end up clinging to the top of your army helmet. If this happens, the best thing you can do is to shake him loose and to encourage him toward your leg.) After all the water is drained from the tub, it is a simple matter to just reach down and dry the cat.

In a few days the cat will relax enough to be removed from your leg. He will usually have nothing to say for about three weeks and will spend a lot of time sitting with his back to you. He might even become psychoceramic and develop the fixed stare of a plaster figurine.

You will be tempted to assume he is angry. This isn't usually the case. As a rule he is simply plotting ways to get through your defenses and injure you for life the next time you decide to give him a bath.

But at least now he smells a lot better.

July 27, 1998



Real stories from Flight Attendants apologizing for rough transport on the airlines.....

Upon landing hard, the pilot gets on the PA system, "Sorry folks for the hard landing. It wasn't the pilot's fault, and it wasn't the plane's fault. It was the asphalt."

An airline pilot wrote that on this particular flight he had hammered his ship into the runway really hard. The airline had a policy which required the first officer to stand at the door while the passengers exited, give a smile, and a "Thanks for flying XYZ airline." He said that in light of his bad landing, he had a hard time looking the passengers in the eye, thinking that someone would have a smart comment. Finally everyone had gotten off except for this little old lady walking with a cane. She said, "Sonny, mind if I ask you a question?" "Why no Ma'am," said the pilot, "what is it?" The little old lady said, "Did we land or were we shot down?"

From a disgruntled Southwest Airlines employee .... "Welcome aboard Southwest Flight XXX, to YYY. To operate your seat belt, insert the metal tab into the buckle, and pull tight. It works just like every other seat belt, and if you don't know how to operate one, you probably shouldn't be out in public unsupervised. In the event of a sudden loss of cabin pressure, oxygen masks will descend from the ceiling. Stop screaming, grab the mask, and pull it over your face. If you have a small child traveling with you, secure your mask before assisting with theirs. If you are traveling with two small children, decide now which one you love more. Weather at our destination is 50 degrees with some broken clouds, but they'll try to have them fixed before we arrive. Thank you, and remember, nobody loves you, or your money, more than Southwest Airlines."

United Airlines Flight Attendant: "Ladies and Gentlemen, as you are all now painfully aware, our Captain has landed in Seattle. From all of us at United Airlines we'd like to thank you for flying with us today and please be very careful as you open the overhead bins as you may be killed by falling luggage that shifted during our so called 'touch down'."

About 5 or 6 years ago I was on an American Airlines flight into Amarillo, Texas, on a particularly windy and bumpy day. I could tell during the final that the Captain was really having to fight it, and after an extremely hard landing, the Flight Attendant came on the PA and announced, "Ladies and Gentlemen, welcome to Amarillo. Please remain in your seats with your seat belts fastened while the Captain taxis what's left of our airplane to the gate!"

Another flight Attendant's comment on a less than perfect landing: "We ask you to please remain seated as Captain Kangaroo bounces us to the terminal."

Landing: a controlled mid-air collision with a planet.

July 30, 1998



A magazine ran a Dilbert quotes contest. These are some results...

- As of tomorrow, employees will only be able to access the building using individual security cards. Pictures will be taken next Wednesday and employees will receive their cards in two weeks. [winning quote from Charles Hurst at Sun Microsystems]

- What I need is a list of specific unknown problems we will encounter.

- How long is this Beta guy going to keep testing our stuff?

- E-mail is not to be used to pass on information or data. It should be used only to be used for company business.

- Turnover is good for the company, as it proves that we are doing a good job in training people.

- This project is so important, we can't let things that are more important interfere with it.

- Doing it right is no excuse for not meeting the schedule.

- No one will believe you solved this problem in one day! We've been working on it for months. Now, go act busy for a few weeks and I'll let you know when it's