Capricorn One (1978)
advertisement

Overview

User Rating:

Contact: View View company contact information for Capricorn One on IMDbPro

Release Date: 2 June 1978 (USA) 2 June 1978 (USA) more

Tagline: The mission was a sham. The murders were real. The mission was a sham. The murders were real. more

Plot: A NASA Mars mission won't work, and its funding is endangered, so they decide to fake it just this once. But then they have to keep the secret... add synopsis A NASA Mars mission won't work, and its funding is endangered, so they decide to fake it just this once. But then they have to keep the secret... full summary

Plot Keywords: Mission | Astronaut | Mars | NASA | Journalist more

Awards: 4 nominations 4 nominations more

User Comments: The Mars Hoax The Mars Hoax more

Cast (Cast overview, first billed only)

Create a character page for: Congressman Hollis Peaker Sharon Willis Betty Walker Elliot Whitter Control Room man Capsule communicator ----------- more...

Additional Details

Parents Guide: View content advisory for parents

Runtime: 123 min

Aspect Ratio: 2.20 : 1 2.20 : 1 more

Fun Stuff

Trivia: The recovery ship for the return from Mars was specified at the USS Oriskany (CV-34) which was decommissioned in 1975. The short shot we see of the Oriskany was footage from The recovery ship for the return from Mars was specified at the USS Oriskany (CV-34) which was decommissioned in 1975. The short shot we see of the Oriskany was footage from The Bridges at Toko-Ri (1954), with the Korean War era straight-winged F9F Panthers in place on the deck catapults. Main characters in both films, William Holden 's character in "The Bridges at Toko-Ri" and James Brolin 's character in "Capricorn One," are both named Brubaker. more

Goofs: Factual errors: A title card at the beginning of the film indicates it is January 4. An onscreen announcer lists the time as three minutes after six, Eastern Daylight Time. Daylight Time normally doesn't begin until April. Factual errors: A title card at the beginning of the film indicates it is January 4. An onscreen announcer lists the time as three minutes after six, Eastern Daylight Time. Daylight Time normally doesn't begin until April. more

Quotes: Robert Caulfield: Somebody took a shot at me.

Walter Loughlin: When?

Robert Caulfield: Yesterday.

Walter Loughlin: Thank God I've got an alibi.

more : Somebody took a shot at me.: When?: Yesterday.: Thank God I've got an alibi.

FAQ

Message Boards

Recommendations

Related Links

You may report errors and omissions on this page to the IMDb database managers. They will be examined and if approved will be included in a future update. Clicking the 'Update' button will take you through a step-by-step process.

Discuss this movie with other users on IMDb message board for Capricorn One (1978)