Marine war hero from famous Iraq photo beaten and robbed by gang of ‘Black Lives Matter’ teens
A Marine vet who served in Iraq and Afghanistan became the target of an assault while eating at a McDonald’s Friday night in northwest DC. Metro PD is now investigating the incident and looking for five suspects between the ages of 16 and 21.

According to the Daily Caller News Foundation (DCNF), the group of teens started harassing Christopher Marquez while he was eating — surrounding his table and asking him: ‘Do you believe black lives matter.’ They also started calling him a racist.

“I believe this was a hate crime and I was targeted because of my skin color,” Marquez told The DCNF. “Too many of these types of attacks have been happening against white people by members of the black community and the majority of the main stream media refuses to report on it.”

Marquez says things got a little fuzzy following the verbal attack inside the restaurant because he suffered a trauma to his head –which apparently affected his memory of the events that night.

However, the manager at the fast food chain reviewed surveillance video and informed Marquez that after he walked out of the restaurant, one of the teens struck him on the side of the head knocking him unconscious. The others robbed him, taking off with his wallet, which contained $400 in cash, all his ID’s and three credit cards.

DCNF reports that Marquez managed to get a cab back to his apartment after regaining consciousness. He was later taken to the hospital, where he was treated for “head trauma and an eye contusion.”

Marquez is currently a student at American University. He served eight years active duty in the Marines as a Rifleman and Scout Sniper and received the Bronze Star for valor during his first deployment.

“When I was in the Marine Corps, I served with people from many different backgrounds, ethnicities, religions, and races,” Marquez told The DCNF. “Like all Marines, I fought for the freedom of all Americans and not just one particular group.” Marquez carried the body of his slain team leader from combat following an ambush during the Battle of Fallujah, for which he received the award.

He was also involved in the infamous “Hell House” fire fight in Fallujah. In November 2004, an embedded photographer captured one of the most memorable battlefield images of the U.S. war in Iraq. The LA Times wrote: “Marine 1st-Sgt. Brad Kasal, bloodied but unbowed, was being helped from house-to-house fighting in Fallouja by lance corporals Chris Marquez and Dane Shaffer. In one hand, Kasal gripped his 9-millimeter Beretta, in the other, his K-bar knife.”

© 2016 Bright Mountain Media, Inc.

All rights reserved. The content of this webpage may not be reproduced or used in any manner whatsoever without the express written consent of Bright Mountain Media, Inc. which may be contacted at info@brightmountainmedia.com