How Marijuana Can Kill You: Why a Cannabis Overdose is Impossible
1,500 pounds of Cannabis Sativa. (681.81 kilograms)Box of strike-anywhere matches or Butane/MAPP fuel torch, obtainable for around $20 at Wal-Mart.A small house-sized tent, large enough to fit 681 kilograms of cannabis and have room for a person.

Step One: First you must procure enough cannabis to die from lethal toxicity when consumed.

Doing so can be a rather arduous process, unless you are able to grow your own. You will have to obtain approximately 1,500 pounds of cannabis, or about 681.81 kilograms.

Step Two: Now that you've gathered up your 681 kilo's of marijuana, you have to find a method of consumption that can allow for your planned overdose. Smoking those 1,500 pounds joint by joint or bowl by bowl would be futile. You would just get REALLY stoned. You have to consume all 681 kilos in about fifteen minutes if you wish to overdose from lethal toxicity. The cheapest, and probably easiest method to attempt your overdose would be similar in the way the ancient Scythians consumed cannabis. In a time before the invention of pipes or bongs, they would burn cannabis or other herbs in tents, so that all the smoke could get captured. Ancient hot-boxing. So get yourself a tent, keeping in mind that 681 kilos of cannabis is going to take up A LOT of room, you will no doubt need a small house-sized tent.

Step Three: Assuming you were able to fit all 1,500 pounds into your small house-sized tent, you will then need to set fire to the entire pile, without using any lighter fluids, as those fumes would be dangerous. After all, the over all goal is to overdose naturally on cannabis, and cannabis only. Setting fire to this enormous pile of marijuana will prove to be difficult, and unless you are willing to multiply the dose per person who will be attempting this with you, chances are you are doing this alone. Take with you a large box of strike-anywhere matches, or if you prefer use a store bought $20 butane or mapp fuel torch. If you are using matches, continue striking and dropping lit matches into the 681 kilo pile for the duration of the 15 minutes. If you are using a torch, light the pile at the bottom and it should catch on from there.

Step Four: With your 681 kilogram pile of cannabis burning, you can now proceed to the overdosing. Simply sit in the tent as it hot-boxes for fifteen minutes, inhaling and exhaling naturally. Hopefully your small house-sized tent was large enough to provide enough space between you and flames from the burning pile of pot. If you are not suffering from third degree burns by now, you've done this all correctly, and you should be quite stoned. Remember, you have to inhale the entire THC content of those 1,500 pounds in no less than 15 minutes, otherwise all overdose attempts are useless and you will just get bombed out of your mind, and no fatalities by cannabis will occur.

Outcome: If you have done all of this correctly, and distance between you and the burning 1,500 pounds of pot was safe, and by nothing short of a miracle you were able to consume all the THC content in the 681 kilograms of cannabis in the 15 minutes allotted, you are now dead from lethal toxicity of cannabis. Congratulations, you have become the first human being in over 5,000 years of recorded history to die from lethal toxicity of cannabis.

For the Unsuccessful: Chances are you failed at overdosing on cannabis. Either you just got really really stoned, and after the fifteen minutes ended up annihilating every bag of chips in the kitchen, or you passed out from lack of oxygen to the brain, you definitely did not overdose from lethal toxicity of cannabis. But do not feel bad, you are not alone. Millions of people all over the world are using cannabis, medicinally and recreationally, and they will never be able to obtain that lethal toxicity.

Sources:

http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/library/mj_overdose.htm

http://www.medicalmarijuanainformation.com/precautions/toxicity.php

http://www.erowid.org/plants/cannabis/cannabis_myth.shtml