2011 Budget: 1.4% civilian and military pay raise

By Ed O'Keefe



President Obama speaks at the White House on Monday about his 2011 budget. From left are, Council of Economic Council Chair Christina Romer, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, OMB Director Peter Orszag and economic adviser Lawrence Summers. (AP/J. Scott Applewhite)

Updated 2:10 p.m. ET

Civilian federal employees and the military would get a 1.4 percent pay increase next year, according to President Obama's fiscal 2011 budget proposal.

That's much lower than the 2 percent civilian pay jump this year and the military's 3.4 percent increase. The proposed military pay bump is the smallest bump since 1973.

"It is lower than it has been in the past because inflation is lower than it has been in the past," Office of Management and Budget Director Peter Orszag said on Monday morning.

"Frankly, I think to a lot of Americans that sounds pretty good," he said.

The proposed increase means federal workers unions have successfully achieved pay parity, or the practice of giving military and civilian federal workers the same percentage pay increase.

Despite that achievement, Colleen M. Kelley, president of the National Treasury Employees Union, said the proposed raises are "very low."

William R. Dougan, national president of the National Federation of Federal Employees, called the increase "a modest adjustment," but acknowledged that "a modest increase is better than no increase at all."

"It’s a mixed bag," said John Gage, president of the American Federation of Government Employees, the nation's largest federal worker union. "I’ve certainly seen worse, and I certainly hope for better with the Obama administration, but I think we understand where the president is and I’m hoping that we will have an open door when we come in for adjustments in this budget on some of the key issues that affect federal employees."

Dougan, Gage and Kelley said their unions will work with the military and lawmakers to secure a higher pay raise.

“I believe that all federal employees, whether civilian or military, are deserving of a fair pay raise,” Kelley said.

Remember: Obama's proposal is just that -- a proposal -- so both civilians and military personnel could eventually see a higher pay raise.

Leave your thoughts in the comments section below

RELATED: Full Federal Eye 2011 Budget Coverage

Full Washington Post 2011 Budget Coverage

Follow The Federal Eye on Twitter | Submit your news tips here