Urban legend strikes ‘U’
Friday,

Oct. 16,

1998 Email: webmaster@statenews.com Urban legend strikes ‘U’ Students need not fear a Halloween massacre this year By JENNIFER MEESE

State News Staff Writer The rumor that a psychic predicted on “The Oprah Winfrey Show” that a mass murder might occur at MSU or Michigan is just that — a rumor. Audrey Pass, senior publicist for the show, said “there was no truth” to the story. That means that, as rumor has it, no one was on the show to predict a mass murder at a Michigan university in an H-shaped dorm near railroad tracks. This tale and its variations have been the buzz on campus in the last few days, sending chills down the backs of many MSU students — especially in the H-shaped dorms or halls that begin with an “H.” Many students have reported “knowing” someone who saw the show. Others said they would leave campus on Halloween to avoid any trouble. “I’m scared,” said Adam Panter, a no-preference freshman who lives in Holden Hall, an H-shaped dorm a few hundred yards from the Grand Trunk Western Railroad tracks. “I’m going to the fraternity house for the weekend. I don’t care if it is true or not. I’m not waiting around to find out.” There are several different versions of the story. One of the most widely heard at MSU goes like this: a serial killer dressed as Little Bo Peep will appear on a Big Ten campus in Michigan on Halloween. The killer will murder about 20 people in a dorm located near railroad tracks with a name beginning with an “H.” Variations of the story have the serial killer dressed in regular clothes or the crimes being committed in a dorm shaped like an “H” or near a cemetery. According to The San Fernando Valley Folklore Society, a version of this campus tale has appeared on campuses since 1968. Their Web page is: snopes.simplenet.com. English Professor Maurice Crane said these types of rumors are “a common kind of phenomenon — the kind of thing that could happen to you: that there’s a nut out there who’s interested in you.” “Halloween is a time when everyone is masked, and if someone who can’t normally show their face appeared, no one would be surprised,” said the popular culture expert. Mary Haas, director of University Housing, said both parents and students are upset over the rumor. “Students are very worried,” she said. “We’ve had parents call.” Haas said the rumor “seems to emerge every year around this time” in different versions. She said past variations have predicted such things as serial killers appearing in states beginning with certain letters on Halloween. “This is a known rumor — please assume there is no factual evidence to support this,” she said. Kate Murphy, assistant director of Residence Life for east and south campus, announced at a Residence Halls Association meeting Wednesday that University Housing was “99 percent sure” the rumor was a myth. “If RHA would help us extinguish what appears to be an urban myth, we would appreciate this,” she said. Fred Kayne, associate director of University Housing, said one of the reasons the rumor may have surfaced is because the movie “Urban Legend” recently came out Sept. 25. “We have communicated with resident advisers, graduate advisers and law enforcement people,” he said. “There’s no basis in fact in this.” Case Hall RA Laura Coatta said RAs received an e-mail this week from University Housing in reference to the serial killer rumor and “Urban Legend.” She said the e-mails instructed the RAs to encourage people to use the same precaution they normally would on Halloween. “They said to keep the residents calm, tell them not to expect any mass murderers,” Coatta said. “It said if anyone sees anything unusual, they should report it immediately, but that students should do everything they would normally do, take every precaution they normally would.” The rumor also circulated at the University of Michigan. Kelly Damm, a U-M biomedical engineering sophomore, lives in Markley Hall, an H-shaped dorm on the U-M campus near a cemetery. She said most of her dorm had heard the rumor that the killer would be at this type of dorm. “A girl on my floor said her mom heard it on Oprah,” she said. “A lot of people believed it.” Damm said students received e-mails from their RAs telling them the psychic prediction was a rumor. “They said it was not true, that someone was trying to find it on the Internet and couldn’t,” she said. Alan Levy, director of housing and public affairs at U-M, said the Markley Hall RAs were advised to send the e-mails to quash the rumor. “We said that rather than continue and get all this hype over nothing, Residence Life should communicate that this was not anything to take seriously,” he said. Levy said that if there was a serious threat, both the MSU and U-M police departments “would behave like they normally do.” “That is, they would work with the university community and alert them to the precautions they need to take.” MSU police Lt. John McCandless said the MSU police had not heard about the rumor. State News staff writer Alicia N. Ingram, contributed to this report. Other related sites:

These sites are not part of statenews.com and will open in a new browser window. Urban Legend - http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/urbanlegend/index.html Front Page | Campus | City | Sports | MS&U; | Opinion | Classified | Home All content © 1998 The State News