Mohammar Qaddafi; Libyan Strongman
The Personal History of Mohmmar Qadaffi

The role of Col. Mohmmar Qadaffi in numerous murderous attacks and in the training of several transnational terror organizations can not be easily contradicted. Reportedly, Qaddafi is to have been the financier of the "Black September Movement" which perpetrated the 1972 Munich Olympic massacre, was responsible for the direct control of the bombing of a German discotheque that wounded more than eighty U.S. Servicemen in 1988, and is said to have paid "Carlos-the Jackal" to kidnap and release several of the Saudi Arabian and Iranian oil ministers when it fit his purposes to do so.

Col. Qadaffi's statements to the press should give the reader a clear understanding of his attitude toward America and the Western Democracies. He has been loosely quoted, on several occasions, as saying that "the streets of America will run red with blood" and "we consider ourselves at a state of war due to the provocations of the U.S. Sixth Fleet and the continued actions of American politicians."

Although Qadaffi has been strangely silent since the U.S. F-111 raid on his compound and several key military targets, intelligence reports have verified his as having provided financial and logistical support for continued terror campaigns against America and her Allies. Several recent civilian airline bombings have all of the earmarks of Libyan involvement. Many mideast experts predict Qaddafi's major involvement in future attacks against the United States . Intelligence analysts point to the disclosure of an identified pharmaceutical plant located in a residential neighborhood, that in actuality may be a chemical munitions factory. Although denied by Qadaffi, this plant is believed to have the capability to produce nerve gases, which will add a new and most fearsome threat to the free world.

Qadaffi's history is very much like that of Saddam Hussein of Iraq. He was born of Bedouin farmers and tribesmen in the desert. He was reared with the tradition of fighting "Imperialism", as his grandfather was killed by an Italian colonist in 1911. He spent his youth learning of the exploitation of his people by the "foreigners". He was born in 1942, and like Hussein, the exact date is unknown. He was a Berber tribesman, during the middle of W.W.II, near the province capitol of Sebha.

The war also had a profound affect on Qadaffi. The "yoke" of Italian domination was thrown off with the help of the British Army and Libyan King Idris' men. However, in the view of the Bedouin tribesmen, all Europeans were alike and the Libyans soon resented the British as well. In 1949, the country was granted independence by the newly formed United Nations. However, Idris al-Mahdi as-Sanssi proclaimed himself King Idris I of Libya.

In 1956, the King decided that he would split from the kindness and graces of the British empire; he joined the newly formed Arab League. In 1959, a major discovery changed Libya as it had other countries in the region. Oil was discovered and it allowed total independence from the West. The "winds of change" were occurring throughout the Arab world, largely due to the discovery of the "black gold". Qadaffi began to develop as a man and as an Arab. He was profoundly affected by Gamel Abdel Nassar.

Nassar was one of the first to expose the idea of pan-Islamic world domination. It was something that Qadaffi believed in completely. That it was his destiny to lead the Arab world and that his belief in Moslem teachings would lead he and Libya to the forefront of the Arab world. Although sometimes less than devout, Qaddafi's opinion that anything is justifiable in the name of Islamic revolution has led him to his current beliefs.

At the age of sixteen (16), he began the revolutionary cell that would eventually lead he and his followers to the leadership of Libya. His childhood friend and he would often listen to Radio Cairo and plan the "coup" that would lead to the destruction of the monarchy of Kink Idris. He and his friends formed other cells and continued to protest against the "Zionists" of Israel. They plotted and planned and planned and plotted. For several years, Qadaffi and his small group of friends dreamed that they would overthrow the King.

In 1959, he attended the University of Libya and began to read the history and political science of Marxist thought. Although impressed, he reportedly rejected communism as being impure in the Islamic philosophical thought . Shortly thereafter, in 1964, he graduated from the University with a diploma from the Faculty of Law and joined the Military Academy in Benghazi.

Even though he was sure that he had been identified as a "trouble-maker" in the University, he grew and prospered in the Academy and in 1965 graduated. He was given a commission in the Libyan Army. The next year he was sent for advanced training in England and studied Armor Warfare. Even though he hated the British almost as much as the Italians of his youth, he could learn about the science of war from the British.

In 1969, he was promoted and given the job as Adjutant of the Signal Corps. It was another step closer to his desire to launch a "coup" against the King. He continued to foster his group of conspirators and cells of revolutionaries, even while serving in the King's Army. On September 1, 1969, he pre-empted a group of older Army officers that were said to be planning a "coup" of their own and he and his young friends seized power. The senior officers were flabbergasted, but Qadaffi had planned this movement for years. He and his followers occupied the Royal Palace, took over the government offices, and controlled the radio, T.V., and newspapers. In very short order, they controlled the country of Libya. Qadaffi was only twenty-seven years old.

Much of the rest of the story involves Qaddafi's continued desire to be another "Nassar" and to lead the Middle-East in a Pan-Islamic revolution. A complex and very proud man, he appears to be able to use what ever means are at his disposal to accomplish his goals. He has shown a propensity to commit terrorism if it fits his needs. Today, he is more focused on being a financial and logistical supporter of Islamic and pro-Palestinian groups, but can still be expected to be extremely dangerous.

Qaddafi, today, is an elusive and mercurial personage who "meddles" in Middle-east and African affairs, almost at will. He is reported to never sleep in the same place two days in a row, ever since the American air-raid on his camp, that allegedly killed at least one relative. Trusting almost no one, he reportedly has a person guard detail that is sworn to die on his behalf.

The most dangerous thing about Qaddafi is his unpredictability. Some allege that he may be mentally unbalanced, while others say he is "crazy like a fox." Few can predict his next action, but most are certain of his almost total control of Libya, and that he is firmly entrenched with control of the army and political apparatus there.

It is believed that Qaddafi still is a supporter of Islamic and pro-Palestinian causes, although he frequently engages in more rhetoric than action in recent times. His unpredictability, however, could lead him to take whatever action he deems necessary to remain in power and maintain his position in the Arab world.

Return to the Counter-Terrorism Page