FAQ
Frequently Asked Questions Question: I have looked everywhere for HERSHEY®'S Cocoa Mulch! Where can I buy it? Answer: Click here for a link to a list of current retailers. Question: Does HERSHEY®'S Cocoa Mulch really smell like chocolate? Answer: It really, really does! Question: I've heard that HERSHEY®'S Cocoa Mulch actually deters pests and insects. Is this true? If so, how? Answer: It sure does! The texture of HERSHEY®'S Cocoa Mulch serves as a natural deterrent to slugs and snails, potentially reducing damage to the garden from insects and pests. An added bonus, It's also weed-free! Cocoa shells are the clean husks removed from roasted cacao beans used in the making of HERSHEY®'S Chocolate and Cocoa. HERSHEY®'S Cocoa Mulch is screened and free of weed seeds. It aids in the prevention of weed germination. Weeds use up valuable fertilizer in the soil as well as act as a host plant to insects. Question: I have a rose garden and have heard that HERSHEY®'S Cocoa Mulch is better for my roses than other types of mulch. Fact or Fiction? Answer: Fact HERSHEY®'S Cocoa Mulch stimulates soil. Soil compaction is known to be one of the chief problems in producing a quality garden environment. The unique composition of HERSHEY®'S Cocoa Mulch includes protein; which adds in decomposition to produce humus. This stimulates soil, providing year-round protection, an added bonus for your delicate rose plants. HERSHEY®'S Cocoa Mulch's low acidity makes it delicate enough to use on new lawns. It also assists in the absorption and retention of moisture. This combination will provides an excellent growing medium for your roses.



It is 100% organic! HERSHEY®'S Cocoa Mulch is a 100% natural organic fertilizer. Compact soils are best aided by the regular addition of organic matter. Humus (decayed organic matter) is absolutely essential to plant life. It furnishes the plant food essential to the growth of micro-organisms without which plants cannot grow. Soils high in organic matter may have a rate of water penetration more than double that of soils with a low organic matter content. Question: Is it true that Cocoa Mulch is harmful to dogs? Answer: It is true that studies have shown that 50% of the dogs that eat Cocoa Mulch can suffer physical harm to a variety of degrees (depending on each individual dog). However, 98% of all dogs won't eat it. On the Animal Poison Control Center (ASPCA) web site, several common household products are listed that have proven harmful to dogs. Common lawn insecticides and insect killers are mentioned as being potentially life-threatening when ingested, specifically snail or slug bait. A 2-inch application of cocoa mulch in your plant beds will actually prevent germination of weeds, resulting in less weeds, acting as a deterrant for insects, snails and slugs. Following is a link to the ASPCA web site on outdoor household products that can be harmful to your pets. http://www.napcc.aspca.org/smalanml.htm#outdoor Question: Why would a dog eat Cocoa Mulch? Answer: It smells GREAT! . . . . so it must taste GREAT, right? Question: I've heard that Cocoa Mulch gets a white mold when damp. Is this harmful to my plants? Answer: Occasionally, the color of your Cocoa Mulch may be affected by a harmless mold which sometimes appears on cocoa shell mulch. This is a sign of the protein at work. Rain or watering will wash away this natural mold formation. You can easily take a light rake over the top of the mould and turn it under to eliminate it. It is not harmful to your plants. If desired, your gardening consultant can recommend a fungicide to prevent formation of mold spores.