the Daily Illini Online
Legend fuels massacre rumors Story considered a hoax, precautions still taken by Santosh Soparawala

Daily Illini reporter

Students who live in Pennsylvania Avenue Residence Hall can now live in less fear, as the prediction of a mass murder on Halloween night seems nothing more than an urban legend. According to John Renaldi, sophomore in LAS, the rumor is that a psychic on Oprah Winfrey’s show predicted a mass murder would take place on Halloween night at a Big Ten school. The specifics, Renaldi said, were that it would happen at an H-shaped dorm near a cemetery. PAR fits this description. The legend is suspected to have originated in 1968 with Richard Speck’s murder of nine nurses in a Chicago rooming house, according to the web site www.snoopes.simplenet.com. The site also mentions that the new movie Urban Legends might have spread the rumor. The legend’s variations have included psychics appearing on TV shows such as Donahue, Letterman, Johnny Carson and Oprah. The murderer, according to the legend, is either a crazed student, an escaped convict or a maintenance worker. The murderer is to be dressed up in a Little Bo Peep costume. The weapon of choice is said to be a sharp object, possibly a knife, axe or a hatchet. The murder is supposed to take place near a landmark area like a cemetery or a gym in a letter-shaped area or building. Harpo Studios, which produces Winfrey’s show, denied that any show fueling the rumor ever aired. The web site www.oprah.com revealed that no show involving psychics aired in the past year. Nevertheless, some officials are taking precautions. Eric Arneson, the South Area coordinator of University Resident Halls, affirmed that the show never aired but said PAR is "going to take it seriously because whenever students are upset, we have to do something." PAR and FAR will be locked during Halloween weekend, and any visitors will be required to call up to a room for an escort. The halls will also have twice as many RAs on staff for the weekend. Arneson also added that taking such precautions is normal; on any high risk weekend such as Homecoming or Halloween, residence halls tighten security. The University staff is trying to make sure that students know that this is nothing more than a legend. Bill Murphy, associate chancellor for public affairs, also confirmed that Oprah never aired the show, and informed police that the rumor was a hoax. RAs also made sure to dispel the rumor quickly to avoid any commotion. "We got an e-mail from our RA telling us about it," said Colin Anderson, freshman in FAA. Police also say the specifics of the legend are ambiguous. "The information is so general that it’s impossible to target a general area," said University Police Captain Krystal Fitzpatrick. Mark Goldman, Peabody Drive area coordinator for the University Residence Halls, said he believes the story should be treated as a hoax. "It was a big rumor at Syracuse University in the fall of 1991, too," he said. "I think my fear is that this kind of thing is something that can give someone an idea to do something horrible." Assistant Director of Housing James Rooney does not anticipate any problems. "My only concern," Rooney said, "is that it may cause some students stress." Chillin Tran, freshman in LAS and resident of Carr Hall in PAR, said, "My friend asked me to stay at his apartment over Halloween." Students at PAR seemed to have brushed off a threat of impending danger. "I think it’s kind of ridiculous," said Nathan Hancock, freshman in commerce.