LSD, History
Lysergide (LSD) was first produced in 1938 by Dr. Albert Hofmann, a Swiss chemist seeking to synthesize a new drug for treatment of headache. Dr. Hofmann obtained lysergic acid from the ergot fungus, a parasite which grows on the rye plant. From lysergic acid he synthesized the compound lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). He tested it in laboratory, animals for its analgesic (pain-killing) properties using standard procedures. Since it appeared to be totally inactive, the bottle of LSD was placed on a shelf in Dr. Hofmann's laboratory, where it remained untouched for five years. Little did Dr. Hofmann know that he had produced the most potent psychoactive drug ever known, or that the newly, synthesized drug would have an impact on society some 25 years later. On April 16, 1943, Dr. Hofmann decided to do some further testing with LSD. In handling the drug, he ingested an unknown quantity. His personal account of the drug's effects was remarkable accurate and virtually everything he described has been confirmed by subsequent studies. His diary contains this dramatic entry: Last Friday, April 16. 1943. I was forced to stop my work in the laboratory in the middle of the afternoon and to go home, as I was seized by a peculiar restlessness associated with a sensation of mild dizziness. Having reached home, I lay down and sank into a kind of drunkenness which was not unpleasant and which was characterized by extreme activity of imagination. As I lay in a dazed condition with my eyes closed (I experienced daylight as disagreeably bright) there surged upon me an uninterrupted stream of fantastic images of extraordinary plasticity and vividness and accompanied by an intense, kaleidoscope-like play of colours. This condition gradually passed off after- about two hours. Three days later, in an attempt to verify that the episode was indeed caused by the ingestion of LSD, Dr. Hofmann took what he thought would be a small quantity of the drug, 250 micrograms (1 microgram = 1/1,000,000 gram). This is approximately five times the dose necessary, to produce intense hallucinations in an average adult male. Therefore, the drug-induced effects were much more intense than the first time. Approximately 40 minutes after taking the drug, Dr. Hofmann noted that he felt unrest, dizziness, visual disturbances, a tendency, to laugh at inappropriate times and difficulty in concentration. Dr. Hofmann's condition was considerably improved six hours after taking the drug, although there were still prominent signs of LSD intoxication. LSD was first shipped to the United States in 1949. American scientists, eager to learn more about this exotic drug, fed LSD to spiders, fish, rats, cats, dogs, goats and even a three-tonne elephant! It produced dramatic behavioural changes in all species of animals investigated. During the 1950's, experimentation on the effects of LSD on humans began. There were few restrictions on the use of human "guinea pigs" at this time, and scientists were free to administer the drug widely, hoping to find some useful medical value for the drug. One of the first major areas of research with LSD was in treating alcoholism. After extensive experimentation, however, it was concluded that LSD was not effective in treating alcoholics. LSD was also tested on schizophrenics, narcotic addicts, sexually maladjusted people, and criminals, again with the hope that the individual could learn to view its behaviour objectively. The drug was found ineffective in treating any sort of behavioural problem. Even worse, it was becoming apparent that LSD may transform a normal individual into a person with a mild to severe personality, problem. LSD has never been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for any therapeutic use. Information provided by Incredible Promotions The drugs mentioned in these pages are illegal in South Africa

Do not experiment with any of them.