Tom Thumb
Designed and built by Peter Cooper in 1830, the Tom Thumb was the first American-built steam locomotive to be operated on a common-carrier railroad. Cooper planned to use it to convince the owners of the newly formed Baltimore and Ohio Railroad that they should use locomotives rather than horses. That summer, a famous race was held between this small locomotive and a horse belonging to a stagecoach line. The line's owner suggested the race to prove that horses were faster and more dependable than locomotives. The race was run along the Baltimore and Ohio tracks near Baltimore and the Tom Thumb led until an engine belt slipped. The horse then pulled ahead and won.

Peter Cooper, an American inventor, manufacturer and philanthropist, built the first American steam locomotive to operate on a commercial railroad. He also played an important part in developing the American iron industry. Cooper helped Cyrus Field lay the underseas Atlantic Cable, and founded the Cooper Union. The Cooper Union provided free instruction in art and science.

Cooper began earning a fortune in the 1820's, when he successfully manufactured glue, isinglass, and gelatin. He remained in this business all his life. By 1830, when he built the Tom Thumb, he also operated an iron works in Baltimore. He pioneered in the manufacture and sale of structural iron beams. During the 1850's and 1860's, Cooper helped promote the development of telegraph and cable companies.

Throughout his life, Cooper took an active intrest in civic affairs. He worked effectively for public education, improved water supplies, and advanced police and fire protection. After the Civil War, he supported the political and social reforms. He ran for President on the Greenback ticket when he was 85.

Cooper was born in New York City and spent his youth in Peekskill, N.Y. He soon showed a talent for mechanics and invention. Although he had only a limited education, he received a practical training by helping his father in hatmaking, brewing, and other trades. At 17, he was apprenticed to a coachbuilder, and he later worked as a mechanic.

Source: World Book Encyclopedia

Back to timeline