School Policies
Palisades Charter High School

15777 Bowdoin Street, Pacific Palisades, CA 90272 (310) 454-0611

ATTENDANCE

Good attendance and promptness are necessary for success in high school. When a student misses a class, a note from his/her parent or guardian must be presented to the Attendance Office. Students who are absent 10 days or more will receive a failing grade from their teacher unless an appeal has been upheld. If a student must leave school before his/her regular school day is over, a note from his/her parent or guardian must be presented to the Attendance Office before school or during nutrition. Failure to properly check out through the Attendance Office will result in truancy for classes missed.

Tardy Policy: Excessive tardiness will be referred to the Attendance Office for discipline, including detention, parent conference, and possible suspension. Three tardies constitute an absence limit. A tardy of 15 minutes or more is considered an absence.

Class Cut Policy: Class cuts will lead to disciplinary action, including detention and/or suspension. Parents are notified of all class cuts. Students are ineligible to make up work for truancy. Class cuts will definitely affect your grades.

BLOCK SCHEDULE:

Period

1 or 2 7:50- 9:30

Nutrition 9:30- 9:45

3 or 4 9:50- 11:30

Lunch 11:30- 12:05

5 or 6 12:10- 1:50

7 2:00- 3:00

OFF-CAMPUS AND OUT-OF-BOUNDS AREAS

Palisades High School is a closed campus. Students may not leave the school grounds without permission during school time. Only seniors may leave during lunch. Parking lots and all athletic fields are out-of-bounds during nutrition and lunch. During class periods, all classroom areas and teaching stations are out-of-bounds to students having no assigned classes.

THEFT, LOST AND FOUND, PERSONAL PROPERTY

Thefts should be reported immediately and in detail on a form available in the Assistant Principalsí Office. Students should avoid bringing unnecessary jewelry and cash to campus. Students who must bring valuable items or large amounts or cash to school should discuss security with the Assistant Principal in advance.

STUDENT PARKING

Students who drive automobiles to school and use student parking lots will be required to obtain and complete an Application for Parking Lot Access and vehicle registration card. A free parking permit window sticker will then be issued. These forms can be obtained in the Assistant Principalsí Office. Registered automobiles are to be parked and locked on designated student lots. Students may not park vehicles directly on the school campus or in the faculty parking lot. Doing so may result in the issuance of a parking citation or towing at studentís expense. Student drivers will be expected to comply with all traffic and safety regulations imposed by the Municipal Code, the District, and Palisades Charter High School.

Bicycles are to be securely locked in the bicycle racks.

RULES OF CONDUCT AND DRESS CODE

Possession or sale of any firearm, knife, explosive or other dangerous object is prohibited. Wearing clothing which may distract from or disrupt the educational process is prohibited. This includes sagging pants and suspenders worn down. Excessively long trousers with cuffs dragging on the ground will not be permitted. Trousers should remain at waist level without the use of a belt. Trousers with slits on the cuffs or frayed ends will not be permitted. Ends of belts will not be allowed to hang down form the waist. Belt buckles with one or more letters will not be permitted. Low cut blouses or tank tops will not be permitted. Underwear worn as an outer garment is not allowed. Exposed midriff will not be permitted. Wearing garments that display profanity, contain sexually-explicit messages and/or advertise any controlled substances is prohibited. Only sanctioned Palisades High School hats may be worn on campus. No hats, hoods, or bandanas may be worn on campus, in classrooms or offices. The wearing of hairnets, shower caps, and hair rollers is not allowed. Radios, or cassette players are not allowed on campus. This includes Walkman-type radios, tape players and electronic games.

STATE LAW AND EDUCATIONAL CODE RULES

Students may be suspended, expelled or transferred to other schools for the following actions:

Possession or sale of any firearm, knife, explosive or other dangerous object is prohibited. Students who bring guns of any kind to school are subject to arrest and expulsion from the district. This applies to all types of guns, including air guns, stun guns, and replica guns. Threatening, attempting or causing injury. Having, using, selling or being under the influence of any controlled substance, alcoholic beverage or intoxicant. Offering, furnishing or selling any substance represented as a controlled substance or intoxicant- even if it is not. Committing robbery or extortion. Causing or trying to cause damage to school or private property, including graffiti. Stealing or trying to steal school or private property. Possessing or using tobacco. Committing an obscene act, or using profanity or vulgarity. Disrupting school activities or willfully defying the authority of school personnel.

I.D. CARDS

Students should carry their student I.D. card at all times. I.D. pictures will be taken during orientation and during the first semester. Make-up I.D. pictures will be taken throughout the year. I.D. cards will cost $4.00. Replacement I.D. cards will cost $5.00. There is no charge for the first I.D. card if students purchase a picture packet during the fall semester.

STANDARDS OF APPEARANCE

Pupils shall be required to show proper attention to personal cleanliness, health, neatness, safety, and suitability of clothing and appearance for school activities. In every case the dress and grooming of the pupil shall be clean and:

Shall not be a hazard to his/her safety or to others Shall not be a health hazard. Shall not be distracting from the educational program. Shoes must be worn at all times.

GENERAL INFORMATION

Information- All students must take responsibility for knowing about the activities at Palisades High School. General Bulletins should be read during period 2 classes on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Copies of the Bulletins are posted on campus and individuals may pick up a copy in the Assistant Principalsí Office. Public address announcements are made during period 2 classes on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays.

Student Senate- The Student Senate is comprised of representatives from each period 2 class and meets regularly to receive information, discuss campus concerns and to provide input to the administration concerning student activities and campus improvement.

Library- The library is open from 7:30 a.m. to 3:15 p.m. Students may use the library during class with a pass from the teacher and during non-class with the approval of the librarian. Over 12,000 titles and 100 magazines make our library a fine resource center.

School Newspaper- "The Tideline" is published periodically and is distributed to all students.

Yearbook- The "Surf" should be pre-ordered during the fall semester and will be delivered in June.

School Colors and Mascot- The school colors are royal blue, Columbia blue, and White. The school mascot is Dewey Dolphin.

Accidents must be reported immediately to the teacher in charge. Injuries must be referred to the Health Office for treatment and evaluation or further aid requirements.

Lockers are issued to students during the first two weeks in September.

Visitors are not permitted on campus unless they are conducting school business or seeking information. Visitors must report to the Main Office. Student visitors must obtain 24-hour prior approval from the Attendance Office and individual teachers. If no visitorís pass is obtained, trespassing laws will be enforced.

PALISADES ACTIVITY CARD (P.A.C)

The Palisades Activity Card provides the opportunity to participate in many extracurricular activities for free or at a reduced cost. You will save money when you attend dances, sporting events, Senior Prom, home-coming dance, etc. In addition, you will save money when you purchase a yearbook, attend plays, or make other purchases. The P.A.C. costs $35.00 and can be purchased at the Palisades Student Store.

STUDENT GOVERNMENT

The Student Government organizes student body activities, regulates student body funds and advises in policies affecting all or part of the student body. The Student Government consists of approximately 20 elected members and has the capacity to appoint a few additional voting members.

Student Government meets second period in a class referred to as "Leadership". Any student may, with teacher permission, attend their sessions. Student Government also tries to have committee meetings at lunch at which all students are invited to help plan activities and perform other functions. The more students involved in Student Council the better. Some of the major programs under the jurisdiction of Council are concerts, speakers, dances, campus problems and improvements.

CLUBS/ORGANIZATIONS

Academic Decathlon Human Relations

ACCESS Key Club

Amnesty Club Latino Awareness Club

Animal Allies Madrigals

Asian Club MESA

Black Student Pali Outreach

Bridge Club Photo Club

California Scholarship Federation Pre-Med Club

CBOP Student Council

Cheerleaders Thespians

Chess Club Video Club

Gospel Singers Young Black Scholars

INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETICS

GIRLS BOYS

Basketball Baseball

Cross Country Basketball

Golf Cross Country

Soccer Football

Softball Golf

Swimming Soccer

Tennis Swimming

Track & Field Tennis

Volleyball Track & Field

Volleyball

STUDENT BODY FINANCE OFFICE

The basic objective of raising and expending student body funds is to promote the general welfare and morale of students as a whole: