The Death of a Satellite : Edwards Air Force Base
T o commemorate the Air Force Flight Test Center, which was established June 25, 1951, the AFFTC History Office recalled some of the milestones in flight that took place here during the last half century. By Dr. Raymond L. Puffer

Air Force Flight Center historian Four days before Christmas, 1982, F-15A No. 76-0086 took off from Runway 22 on its first captive-carry flight of a highly advanced, but controversial, missile. For the United States, the promise of the Anti-Satellite (ASAT) weapon system was its ability to rapidly negate enemy satellite systems in time of war. Low earth orbits were filled with reconnaissance satellites by the final decade of the Cold War, and the ability to blind an enemy would be a huge advantage if a major conflict should break out between the two superpowers. The development of a Soviet anti-satellite weapon in the 1970s spurred widespread concern. To keep the United States ahead, President Jimmy Carter issued a Presidential Directive early in 1978 that led to the establishment of an American ASAT system. The program was initially designated the Prototype Miniature Air-Launched Segment (PMALS) and Air Force System Command's Space Division established a system program office. The Western Space and Missile Center was designated the responsible test organization (RTO). AFFTC's role was initially limited to that of a participating organization, but this was soon to change. Due to their unfamiliarity with flight testing, the System Program Office and the RTO requested that the Flight Test Center take the lead in test planning for all aircraft-related activities. The F-15 Combined Test Force (CTF) directed this effort until January 1982, when a separate ASAT CTF was established, first under Lt. Col. Jerry Butler and later under Maj. Ralph B. Filburn III. The ASAT missile was nearly 18 feet in length and weighed 2700 lbs, small enough to be carried on the centerline pylon of an F-15. It consisted of a Boeing Short-Range Attack Missile first-stage motor, a Ling-Temco-Vought Corporation (LTV) Altair III second-stage motor, and an LTV miniature homing vehicle. The delivery aircraft would be launched into an area below the path of the oncoming target satellite. Pulling up into a steep climb, the F-15 would release its weapon into a small launch "window.'' If all went well, the homing vehicle would vector itself directly into the target's path and destroy it by smashing directly into it. At the extremely high closing speeds of the two objects, no explosives would be necessary. Following the first captive-carry flight in 1982, test sorties continued systematically. The first ASAT launch from an F-15 took place early in 1984 and was directed merely to a predetermined point in space, as a test of the missile's propulsion system. By September 1985, all was finally ready for a test against an orbiting satellite. On Sept. 13, Maj. Wilbert D. "Doug" Pearson, the director of the F-15 ASAT CTF, took off on a crucial mission that required him to fly an extraordinarily exacting profile in order to arrive at a precise firing location at exactly the right time. Flying at Mach 1.22 some 200 miles west of Vandenberg Air Force Base, he executed a 3.8g pull-up to a climb angle of 65 degrees. The missile automatically launched itself at 38,100 ft. Minutes later, orbiting peacefully 345 miles above the Pacific Ocean, an obsolete satellite named P78-1 was suddenly shattered into pieces. Pearson had become the world's first pilot ever to shoot down a satellite. To this day, now Maj. Gen. Doug Pearson remains, as Air Force Materiel Command Commander Gen. Lester Lyles recently observed, the first and only "space ace." Previous Next