Cambodian troops Quarantine Quan'sul
Cambodian troops moved into Quan'sul after Malaria victims attack populace. There has been a small outbreak of “zombism” in a small town near the border of Laos in North-Eastern Cambodia. The culprit was discovered to be mosquitoes native to that region carrying a new strain of Malaria which thus far has a 100 percent mortality rating killing victims in fewer than 2 days. After death, this virus is able to restart the heart of it’s victim for up to two hours after the initial demise of the person where the individual behaves in extremely violent ways from what is believe to be a combination of brain damage and a chemical released into blood during “resurrection.” Cambodian officials say that the outbreak has been contained and the public has no need to worry. General Ary Serey had this to say, "We have obtained samples of this new virus and plan to learn how it starts the heart and other major organs of the deceased. We intend to use this to increase the quality of life for all." US Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice opposed the plan saying that the Cambodian government holds a great biological weapon and should destroy it immediately. Cambodian officials have yet to comment. A United Nations team will be dispatched to Cambodia to confirm the safety of biological research in Cambodia.



E-mail this to a friend Printable version



LINKS TO MORE SOUTH ASIA STORIES



Select Syrian troops vacate Lebanese HQ Saudi Prince meets Bush at summit Rafsanjani hints at Iran poll bid Amnesty: West Bank farms poisoned Grenade attack in Yemeni capital Ebadi anger at women election ban Tourist in UAE jail over medicine Syria-Lebanon pullout 'nears end' US 'presses Iraq on government' Iraqis killed in market attacks Pakistani hostage freed in Iraq Call to punish parties over Iraq Demand for Rumsfeld abuse inquiry Convoys targeted in Iraq attacks Iraqis held in helicopter attack Bangladeshis storm Kuwait embassy Abbas announces security shake-up Iraq group 'threatens hostages' Conservatives 'win Saudi polls' Israel enforces Passover closure Top brass cleared over Iraq abuse Academics back Israeli boycotts Press examine US-Israel difference Israel media view US-Israel tensions Programmes and schedules In pictures: Iran's working rural women My life: Saudi Arabian women speak Hamas under pressure over vigilantes Gaza activist's life becomes play How determined are the settlers? Facing up to Morocco's hidden fear