RCMP Royal Canadian Mounted Police, 'F' Division
Links snopes.com

(English only)

The following e-mail hoax has been circulating in Canada with an RCMP signature. One of our Saskatchewan employees sent this e-mail on to others in good faith without realizing it was untrue. The information contained in the e-mail is FALSE and the RCMP regrets any unnecessary alarm this may have caused the public. We have not seen this circulating in French but if you have seen a French version, we appreciate being alerted to that fact using our Contact Us button. The following is the text of the message for comparison purposes only - please remember this has been determined to be a hoax. Please pass this on! Important police warning Very scary, now moving west.... started in... Manitoba, now in Saskatchewan and moving west. Police Warning - For Your Information: This is very scary and came directly from our Driver Training People who got the warning from Manitoba. Pass this to anyone you can. One of the officers who works with the dare program has passed along the following warning and asked that it be shared with all drivers. This is an extremely serious matter. If you are driving after dark and you see a car without its head-lights on do not flash your lights, do not blow your horn or make any signals to the driver of the other car. There is a new common gang initiation 'game' going on the streets. The new member being initiated drives along without his headlights on until someone notices and flashes their headlights or makes some sort of other action to signal him. The gang member is now required to chase the car and shoot at or into the car in order to complete his initiation requirements. Make sure you share this information with your family, friends, and anyone else you can reach. If you have any questions or information, please call your local police department.

Please take this seriously. This is not a joke. Please pass this on to everyone you know on e-mail and in person. It could save someone's life. XXXXXXX RCMP

Regina, Saskatchewan

S4P 3K7

Phone: (306) XXXXX

Fax: (306) XXXXX

E-Mail Internet: XXXXXXXX