BANGKOK HAUNTED 2: THE UNBORN
Covington (in the late 1900s) is a village completely cut off from the rest of civilization by a surrounding stand of deep forest. For as long as the people do not stray into it, its denizens, fierce and fearsome creatures, would keep their peace. This is according to village elder, Edward Walker (William Hurt) the understanding between them and "those we do not speak of." However things happen as reminders: animals found dead and skinned; a warning slash of red brushed on a door; horrifying screams and noises coming from the woods. Only Lucius Hunt (Joaquin Phoenix), who has tried venturing into the area, dares to question their isolation. At one point he wants permission from the elders to venture all the way out, to obtain medicines which the village does not have. Before any decision could be made, he is badly wounded by some creature, and his life is in grave jeopardy. Medicine from the outside "town" is urgently needed. Ivy Walker (Bryce Dallas Howard) his betrothed is not going to allow him to die. Her father Edward and the town elders believe she is the best person to be sent for the medicine. Shyamalan, producer, screenwriter and director of The Village, is known for his other works" The Sixth Sense (1999), Unbreakable (2000), and Signs (2002). What is common among these is his preference for unusual stories that provide mystery and suspense. What keeps the audience glued to the unfolding of The Village is the withholding of certain truths that would reveal how and why the things really are like they are. Revealing them any time from the beginning to about the middle of the film would, of course, remove the suspense and the mystery. The way the story reels out keeps the audience glued to the visuals and sounds, and the music helps. The dialogue, not the visuals, carry some revelations important to the story. The acting, the production design, the atmosphere try to approximate the 1990s, the time of the story. This is sufficiently evident. What makes the villagers willing to continue living in such isolation and what they had to do and went on doing to remain that way, should bring to light several actions involved, about which questions should be asked and evaluations should be made. Lucius was sufficiently brave to question their isolation and their need to be in touch with the outside. A woman was sent out to make contact and in spite of her disability (hard to suspend disbelief here), succeeds in her quest. A question of the end justifying the means is involved in the story. (Date Reviewed: August 13, 2004)