America Online
The awards, now in their fifth year, are open to children between 5 and 18 years of age who suffer from illnesses, disabilities, or injuries that prevent them from enjoying a normal education. With more than 100,000 children out of mainstream education in the UK for these reasons, those nominated for the AOL Child of Resolution Awards are representative of a large, otherwise unrecognised, group of children.

Nominations for the awards are made by the children's teachers, who represent a range of educational establishments including mainstream schools, hospital schools and home tuition units. The judging panel comprising of education, healthcare and charity professionals, as well as a parent representative of the NAESC advisory board, judged each nomination on individual merit. The eleven achievers who will attend today's awards ceremony have been chosen for the positive effort they have demonstrated in maintaining their studies, rather than degree of illness, injury or disability, age, or regional location. All other nominees for the awards are Highly Commended.

At today's ceremony, the eleven achievers will receive an AOL Child of Resolution 2001 certificate, a £100 cheque, a year's sponsored membership of the AOL service in the UK, and an AOL rucksack containing a watch, t-shirt and stationery. In addition, one achiever will receive a laptop computer to help with their studies. During the nomination process, all the children involved were asked to explain how portable technology would change their life and studies and a discretionary award of a laptop will be given to the achiever judged to be able to put it to best use. The children who are Highly Commended receive an AOL Child of Resolution 2001 certificate and an inscribed, commemorative pen.

Commenting on the awards, NAESC Director Dr Carolyn Skilling says, "Access to continuing education for sick children is a lottery, with more losers than winners. The AOL Child of Resolution Awards recognise the exceptional achievement of pupils who rise to the challenge and continue their education despite very serious illness."

"Over 10 million hours of education are lost every year when sick children are in hospital or at home. NAESC's work serves to rectify this and the awards recognise the exceptional efforts made by many children in continuing their education," says AOL UK Head of Social Inclusion Policy Katrina Giles. "We work very closely with NAESC to introduce the Internet as a learning tool to children who are out of mainstream schooling and we are very pleased to be supporting the awards again."



About the National Association for the Education of Sick Children (NAESC)

Founded in 1993 as the National Association for the Education of Sick Children, NAESC has been an independent registered charity since 1996 (No. 1059776). Under its new name, Present, the charity works exclusively to improve educational opportunity across the UK for all children whose education is disrupted by illness.



About AOL UK

AOL UK is the UK's leading interactive services company and a division of AOL Europe, the leading Internet, online and e-commerce services company serving consumers in ten countries and five languages across Europe.



Through its successful multiple-brand strategy, AOL Europe operates the leading AOL and CompuServe subscription services, the AOL and CompuServe portals and the AOL Instant Messenger, CompuServe Office and Netscape Online registered user services.



As part of its AOL Anywhere strategy, AOL Europe has announced a number of alliances with technology manufacturers and mobile network operators, to extend its world-class content, community and hallmark ease of use to the mobile platform.