Parking, Standing & Stopping Rules
H - On-street and off-street metered zones Activation of meter or in-vehicle parking system. No person shall park a vehicle, whether attended or not, in any parking space regulated by a parking meter that indicates by signal that the lawful parking time in such space has expired without (i) properly activating the meter by depositing the appropriate currency therein or otherwise making appropriate payment by an authorized method as described in this section and performing any other act necessary to activate the meter or (ii) properly activating an IVPS. The registration numbers of the electronic component, the electronic debit card and all related windshield stickers comprising an IVPS must match in order for such system to be considered properly activated. This provision shall not apply to the act of parking or the time necessary to activate the meter or an IVPS immediately. A person may park at a meter without depositing a coin, using another authorized method of payment, or activating an IVPS, if there is an unexpired interval of time shown on the meter but only if the vehicle is moved before the expiration of such interval. However, such person may reactivate the meter or activate an IVPS upon expiration of the time remaining on the meter but in no event may that person remain at the space in excess of the specified time limits applicable to the parking meter zone in which such meter is located.



Expired meters or in-vehicle parking systems. No person shall allow a vehicle within his/her control to be parked in any such parking meter space during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone in which such meter is located while the parking meter for such space indicates by signal or a properly activated IVPS shows that the lawful parking time in such space has expired. This provision shall not apply to the act of parking or the time necessary to deposit immediately thereafter a coin or coins or to use another authorized method of payment in such meter and to perform any other act prescribed on the meter which may be required to place the meter in operation or to activate an IVPS. If an IVPS is used, such system shall be the only valid indicator of whether lawful parking time in a space is available or has expired, because the meter in all such cases will indicate that the time has expired.



Parking at broken or missing meters. (i) No person shall park a vehicle at a broken meter for longer than sixty minutes (one hour). (ii) No person shall park a vehicle at a missing meter for the maximum amount of time lawfully permitted in that parking meter zone.(iii) Where parking spaces in a parking field or on a block area controlled by "Muni-Meter", and a "Muni-Meter" is broken or missing, the person seeking to purchase a parking receipt shall use a functional "Muni-Meter" in the same parking field or on the same block, to purchase a parking receipt pursuant to paragraph 10 of this subdivision: (a) If all "Muni-Meters" in a parking field or on a block are broken, no person shall park a vehicle for longer then sixty minutes (one hour) in or on such "Muni-Meter" controlled parking field or block. (b) If all "Muni-Meters" in a parking field or block are missing, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the maximum amount of time lawfully permitted in or on such "Muni-Meter" controlled parking field or block.



Oversize vehicles. When a vehicle is too large to be parked within a single parking meter space, it shall be parked with the front section alongside the forward meter. If the operator of the vehicle is using coins or another authorized method of payment other than an IVPS, such forward meter shall be operated and shall determine when the lawful parking time has expired. If the operator of the vehicle is using an IVPS, it shall be activated and shall determine when the lawful parking time has expired.



Time allowed at parking meters; feeding meters or reactivation of in-vehicle parking systems prohibited. (i) No person shall park a vehicle in a parking meter space for more than one time period lawfully permitted in that parking meter zone, nor shall any person deposit any additional coin or coins or use another authorized method of payment for the purpose of extending such time. (ii) No person shall activate an IVPS for a time period longer than one time period lawfully permitted in that parking meter zone, nor shall any person activate or reactivate an IVPS for the purpose of extending such time. Where a person uses less time than the time activated on an IVPS, the cost of the time not actually used shall be credited back to the electronic debit card when such card is next used to activate the electronic component of the IVPS.



Restrictions and limitations. The provisions of this subdivision (h) shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting, restricting, or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.



Authorized payment methods; counterfeits prohibited. (i) Authorized payment methods. Parking meters shall be activated by the insertion of a coin or coins of United States currency, by the insertion of a token issued by the Metropolitan Transit Authority ("MTA/NYCT") where authorized by sign or other official indicator, or by the insertion of an electronic debit card. Parking at an on-street meter may also be paid for by the activation of a valid IVPS. (Ii) No person shall attempt to deposit in any parking meter any slug, button or any other authorized device or substance as a substitute for coins of United States currency or a token issued by MTA/NYCT, nor shall any person use an IVPS or electronic debit card not issued pursuant to this section.



Displaying, selling or offering merchandise for sale prohibited. No peddler, vendor, hawker or huckster shall park a vehicle at a metered parking space for purposes of displaying, selling, storing or offering merchandise for sale from the vehicle.



Parking by disabled persons permitted. Rules pertaining to the use of parking meter zones shall not apply to vehicles operated by disabled persons duly displaying New York City special parking identification cards issued by the Department of Transportation, other than at those periods of time when no standing and no stopping restrictions are in effect in the metered zones.



Parking in excess of allotted time. No person shall, in any parking space controlled by a "Muni-Meter", which allows a person to purchase the amount of parking time desired from a machine that dispenses a receipt or tag to be displayed in the windshield, park a vehicle in excess of the amount of time indicated on such receipt or tag, or on posted signs. All motorists are required to display payment receipts at Municipal on-street and off-street parking spaces with "Muni-Meters" where indicated by posted signs. I - Municipal off-street parking facilities. Parking fees - No person shall park a vehicle without paying the appropriate fee in accordance with authorized fee schedules posted on the facility.



Hours of operation - No person shall park a vehicle before the opening hour or after the closing hour, as specified on authorized signs.



Parking in excess of allotted time - No person shall, in any facility using the "Muni-Card" system, which allows a person to purchase the amount of parking time desired from a machine that dispenses a receipt or tag, park a vehicle in excess of the amount of time indicated on such receipt or tag, or on posted signs.



Parking in a dangerous manner - No person shall park a vehicle in a manner that will endanger any person or property.



Operator responsible for loss - The operator enters the facility at his/her own risk and the City of New York shall not be responsible for any injury or loss due to fire, theft, accident, or other causes.

J - Standing or parking vehicles that violate registration and inspection rules, are covered or have the VIN obscured. Vehicles must be properly registered - No person shall stand or park a vehicle bearing a New York license plate or plates unless it is properly registered in accordance with the laws and rules of the state of New York.



Valid plates must be properly displayed - No person shall stand or park a vehicle unless it properly displays the current plate or plates issued to it. For the purposes of this paragraph (j)(2), New York plates shall not be deemed properly displayed unless they are conspicuously displayed, one on the front and one on the rear of the vehicle, each securely fastened so as to prevent the same from swinging and placed, whenever reasonably possible, not higher than 48 inches and not lower than 12 inches from the ground, and they are kept clean and in a condition so as to be readable and shall not be covered by glass or any plastic material, and the view thereof shall not be obstructed by any part of the vehicle or by anything carried thereon. New York dealer or transporter plates issued pursuant to Section 415 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be deemed properly displayed if the one plate issued is placed on the rear of the vehicle as described above. New York motorcycle plates and plates from other states shall be deemed properly displayed if at least one plate is fastened on the rear of the vehicle.



Vehicles must display valid registration sticker - No person shall stand or park a vehicle bearing a New York plate or plates unless it properly displays a current registration sticker.



Improper stickers prohibited - No person shall stand or park a vehicle bearing a New York plate or plates displaying an expired, mutilated, void, imitation, counterfeit or inappropriate New York registration sticker.



Registration plates, stickers, and tags must match - No person shall stand or park a vehicle bearing registration plates, stickers, and tags that do not match as to information contained thereon.



Vehicles must display valid inspection sticker - No person shall stand or park a vehicle bearing New York plates unless it is properly inspected and properly displays a current inspection sticker or certificate, in accordance with Section 306(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or unless it bears New York dealer or transporter plates pursuant to Section 415 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.



Improper inspection stickers prohibited - No person shall stand or park a vehicle bearing New York plates displaying any mutilated, imitation or counterfeit of an official certificate of inspection.



Vehicle covers prohibited - No person shall stand or park a vehicle having a cover on it that obscures the make, color, vehicle identification number (VIN), license plates and/or registration and inspection stickers, and/or restricts entry to the vehicle, if such vehicle is standing or parked in violation of posted rules.



Obscuring VIN prohibited - No person shall stand or park a vehicle that has the vehicle identification number obscured in any manner. K - Special rules for commercial vehicles. Parking of unaltered commercial vehicles prohibited - No person shall stand or park a vehicle with commercial plates in any location unless it has been permanently altered with all seats and rear fittings, except the front seats, removed and has the name and address of the owner as shown on the registration certificate plainly marked on both sides of the vehicle in letters and numerals not less than three inches in height, in compliance with Section 10-127 of the Administrative Code and is also in compliance with paragraph (I) of the definition of commercial vehicle as set forth in Section 4-01 of these rules.



No Standing Except Trucks Loading and Unloading - Where a posted sign reads "No Standing Except Trucks Loading and Unloading," no vehicle except a commercial vehicle as defined in Section 4-01(b)(3)(i) of these rules, or a service vehicle as defined in Section 4-01(b)(19) of these rules, may stand or park in that area, for the purpose of expeditiously making pickups, deliveries or service calls, and except that in the area from 35th St. to 41st St., Avenue of the Americas to 8th Avenue, inclusive, in the Borough of Manhattan, between the hours of 7 a.m. and 7 p.m., no vehicle except a truck as defined in Section 4-13(a)(1) of these rules may stand or park for the purpose of expeditiously making pickups, deliveries or service calls.



Angle standing or parking of commercial vehicles - Commercial vehicles standing or parking in authorized areas shall not be placed at an angle to the curb unless such positioning is essential for loading or unloading and then only for such period of time actually required for such purposes provided that a sufficient space shall be left clear for the passage of a vehicle between the angle-parked vehicle and the center of the street, the opposite curb or a vehicle parked or standing thereat, whichever is closest. In no event shall an angle-parked vehicle occupy more than a parking lane, plus one traffic lane.



Parking of trailers -



(i) No person shall park any trailer or semi-trailer on any street or arterial highway, except while loading or unloading at off-street platforms, unless such trailer or semitrailer is attached to a motor vehicle capable of towing it.



(i) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (i) above, where posted signs permit, a trailer or semitrailer may park while unattached to a motor vehicle capable of towing it on streets in industrial zoned property as defined in the Zoning Resolution. Such trailers or semi-trailers may park for the length of time indicated on the posted signs. An owner of a trailer or semitrailer parked pursuant to this provision shall protect the streets from damage that may be caused by parking the unattached trailer. All doors located on such trailers or semi-trailers must be locked while the trailers are parked.



Street storage of commercial vehicles prohibited - When parking is not otherwise restricted, no person shall park a commercial vehicle in any area, including a residential area, in excess of three hours.



Nighttime parking of commercial vehicles prohibited - No person shall park a commercial vehicle on a residential street, between the hours of 9 p.m. and 5 a.m.. Where a commercial vehicle is parked in violation of this subdivision (k)(6), it shall be an affirmative defense to said violation, with the burden of proof on the person who received the summons, that he or she was actively engaged in business at the time the summons was issued at a premises located within three city blocks of where the summons was issued. This subdivision (k)(6) shall not apply to vehicles owned or operated by gas or oil heat suppliers or gas or oil heat systems maintenance companies, the agents or employees thereof, or any public utility.



Vehicles equipped with platform lifts - Commercial vehicles may not be parked on any city street with a platform lift set in a lowered position while the vehicle is unattended. L - Blue zone, midtown, and other special zones. Blue zone - No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets within the area designated as the "Blue Zone", Monday through Friday from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., except as otherwise posted along the perimeter of and inside the designated area, or when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or upon the direction of any law enforcement officer authorized to enforce these rules. Said area is indicated by a blue line painted parallel to the curb and is bounded by the northern property line of Frankfort Street, the northern property line of Dover Street, the eastern property line of South Street, the western property line of State Street, the centerline of Broadway, and the centerline of Park Row.



Special midtown rule: method of parking - Except where otherwise restricted, between the hours of 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. daily, except Sundays, from 14th to 60th Streets, 1st to 8th Avenues, all inclusive, in the Borough of Manhattan, no operator of a vehicle or combination of vehicles used for transportation of merchandise shall stop, stand, or park in any of the streets herein designated, other than parallel and close to the curb, and occupy no more than ten feet of roadway space from the nearest curb, and in no case shall any such vehicle be backed in at an angle to the curb.



Special midtown rule: standing time limit - (i) Between the hours of 7 a.m. and 7 p.m., daily except Sundays, from 14th to 60th Streets, 1st to 8th Avenues, all inclusive, in the Borough of Manhattan no operator shall stand a vehicle or combination of vehicles for the purpose of making pickups, deliveries or service calls in any one block of streets herein designated for a period of more than three hours unless otherwise posted. A vehicle or combination of vehicles not being used for expeditious pickups, deliveries or service calls is deemed to constitute a parked vehicle subject to parking rules applicable to that particular location. (ii) Commercial parking meter area. Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, where signs are posted regulating the use of the curb by commercial vehicles it shall be unlawful to stand a vehicle in any space on a block unless such a vehicle is a "commercial vehicle" as defined in Section 4-01(b)(i) of this chapter or a vehicle with a valid "combination" registration from another state, and unless such space is controlled by a parking meter. The maximum time for such metered parking on a single block shall be a total of three hours, unless otherwise indicated by a posted sign. The provisions of subdivision (h) of this section shall apply to commercial vehicles parked at a parking meter, including a "Muni-Meter," pursuant to this paragraph.



Parking in garment district restricted to trucks and vans - Notwithstanding any provisions of these rules to the contrary, no vehicles except trucks and vans bearing commercial plates shall stand at the curb for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading between the hours of 7 a.m. and 7 p.m., daily, including Sundays, from 35th Street to 41st Street, between Avenue of the Americas and 8th Avenue, all inclusive, in the Borough of Manhattan. For the purpose of this paragraph (4), passenger vehicles, or station wagons bearing commercial plates shall not be deemed trucks or vans.



Parking restricted in limited truck zones - No operator of a truck shall stop, stand or park his/her vehicle upon any streets designated as "Limited Truck Zones," except for the purpose of making a delivery, loading or servicing within said zone, and except as otherwise provided in Section 4-13(c)(2)(i) of these rules. M - Additional parking rules. Wrong way parking prohibited - Except where angle parking is authorized, every vehicle stopped, standing, or parked partly upon a roadway shall be so stopped, standing or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway. On a one-way roadway such vehicle shall be facing in the direction of authorized traffic movement; on a two-way roadway such vehicle shall be facing in the direction of authorized traffic movement on that portion of the roadway on which the vehicle rests.



Angle standing or parking - No person shall place a vehicle at an angle to the curb, except when such angle placement is authorized by these rules or by signs.



Angle parking of motorcycles, motor scooters and mopeds - A person shall be permitted to park a motorcycle, motor scooter or moped at an angle to the curb at times and at places when and where parking is permitted but only in such manner that at least one wheel shall touch the curb. In no event shall any portion of the motorcycle, motor scooter or moped be more than 6 feet from the curb.



Parking of doctors' and dentists' vehicles - Where parking is prohibited by signs, but not where stopping or standing is prohibited, a duly licensed physician or dentist may park his/her motor vehicle, identified by "MD," "OP" or "DDS" New York registration plates, on a roadway adjacent to hospitals or clinics for a period not to exceed three hours. For the purpose of this paragraph, only those portions of the roadway corresponding to the shaded areas on the diagrams illustrated below, shall be considered adjacent to a hospital or clinic. At other locations where parking is prohibited by signs, but not where stopping or standing is prohibited, a duly licensed physician may park his/her motor vehicle, identified by "MD" or "OP" New York registration plates, for a period not to exceed one hour while actually attending to a patient in the immediate vicinity.



Bus parking on streets prohibited - No person shall park a bus at any time on any street within the City of New York, unless authorized by signs, except that a charter bus may park where parking is otherwise permitted at its point of origin or destination. No operator of a bus shall make a bus layover, except as otherwise provided in section 4-10(c) of these rules. Notwithstanding any local law or rule to the contrary, but subject to the provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, it shall be permissible for a school bus owned, used or hired by a public or nonpublic school to park at any time, including overnight, upon any street or roadway, provided said bus occupies a parking spot in front of and within the building lines of the premises of the public or nonpublic school.



Time limits - Where signs are erected specifying time limits on standing or parking, no person shall stand or park any vehicle in excess of the time so prescribed.



Emergency Ambulance Service Vehicles - The Operator of an ambulance, as defined in section 100-b of the Vehicle and Traffic law, while awaiting an emergency call, may park at meters, truck loading and unloading zones, and "NO PARKING" areas not specifically designated for other vehicles. (i.e. authorized zones).



Street storage of boat trailers, mobile homes and mobile medical diagnostic vehicles prohibited - No person shall park any boat trailer (with or without a boat attached), mobile home or mobile medical diagnostic vehicle in any area, on any street, in excess of 24 hours.



Street storage of vehicles prohibited - When parking is not otherwise prohibited by posted sign, no person shall park any vehicle in any area, including a residential area, in excess of seven consecutive days. N - Special restrictions on parking. Parking for sales purposes prohibited - No person regularly engaged in the sale of vehicles shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or off-street parking facility for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale.



Parking for certain purposes prohibited - No person regularly engaged in the repair of vehicles shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or off-street parking facility for the principal purpose of washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.



Parking for the purposes of commercial advertising prohibited - No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any street or roadway for the purpose of commercial advertising, as defined in section 4-12(j)(1) of these rules, except as otherwise provided in that section.



Peddlers, vendors and hawkers restricted - No peddler, vendor, hawker, or huckster shall permit his car, wagon, or vehicle to stand on any street when stopping, standing, or parking is prohibited or on any street within 25 feet of any corner of the curb or to stand at any time on any sidewalk or within 500 feet of any public market or within 200 feet of any public or private school.



Unattended motor vehicles - No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the vehicle, and effectively setting the brake provided, however, the provision for removing the key from the vehicle shall not require the removal of keys hidden from sight about the vehicle for convenience or emergency.



Moving parked vehicle - No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his/her control into any position where stopping, standing, or parking would be unlawful.



Unofficial reserving of parking space - It shall be unlawful for any person to reserve or attempt to reserve a parking space, or prevent any vehicle from parking on a public street through his/her presence in the roadway, the use of hand-signals, or by placing any box, can, crate, hand-cart, dolly or any other device, including unauthorized pavement, curb or street markings or signs in the roadway.



Vehicles must have proper equipment - No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle, motorcycle or limited use vehicle on any street at any time unless it is equipped with head lamps, rear lamps, reflectors and any other equipment required by any provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law. O - Permits For purposes of this section, a "permit" is the authorization granted by the Department to qualified individuals for special parking privileges as set forth in this subdivision. At the discretion of the Department, a permit may be represented by a permit card inscribed with information that describes the specific parking privileges it authorizes or by an IVPS programmed to contain the same information. Where this rule states that a permit must be displayed in the vehicle, a permittee using a permit card must place it in an appropriate place in the vehicle; a permittee using an IVPS must activate the system before so displaying it, in order to authorize parking pursuant to the permit. The registration numbers of the electronic component, the electronic debit card and all related windshield stickers comprising an IVPS must match in order for such system to be considered properly activated. Permits for people with disabilities -



(i) Authorized parking areas - An operator of a vehicle bearing a valid New York City Special Parking Identification permit may park:

(A) in any "No Parking" zone, including those marked "except authorized vehicles,"

(B) in any "No Standing Except Authorized Vehicles" zone,

(C) at parking meters without using an authorized payment method,

(D) and in "No Standing Except Trucks Loading and Unloading" zones.



Such special parking permit shall be displayed so that it is visible through the windshield. An IVPS must be activated to authorize parking.



(ii) Prohibited parking areas - Such Special Parking Identification Permits do not authorize parking: in a bus stop, in a taxi-stand, within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, in a fire zone, in a driveway, in a crosswalk, in a no stopping zone, in a no standing zone, or double parking.



(iii) Issuance of Permits - The Special Parking Identification permit shall be issued by the Commissioner or his/her designee to a New York City resident certified by the Department of Health or a provider designated by the Department or the Department of Health, who shall make such certification in accordance with standards and guidelines prescribed by the Department of Health, as having a permanent disability seriously impairing mobility, who requires the use of a private automobile for transportation and to a non-resident similarly certified who requires the use of a private automobile for transportation to a school in which such applicant is enrolled or to a place of employment. A permit shall also be issued to such person upon application made on such person's behalf by a parent, spouse, guardian, or other individual having legal responsibility for the administration of such person's day to day affairs. The permit may include no more than ten (10) License Plate numbers for the vehicle(s) which will be used to transport the permittee. Upon application for a permit, applicant shall submit to the department a copy of the vehicle registration for each license Plate which will be registered on the permit. Any vehicle displaying such a permit shall be used exclusively in connection with parking a vehicle in which the person to whom it has been issued is being transported or will be transported within a reasonable period of time.



(iv) Replacement Permits - In case of a lost or stolen permit, the permittee must, upon request for a replacement, submit to the Department a copy of a valid police report. In case of a stolen vehicle which is registered on the permit, permittee must submit to the department a copy of a valid police report. In the event a vehicle registered on the permit is unable to be used as a result of an accident or mechanical defect, a substitution of Plates will be permitted only if the permittee has three or fewer Plates registered on the permit. The permittee must provide proof to the Department of the inability to use the vehicle. If the permittee has four or more Plates registered on the permit, no temporary substitution will be allowed.



(v) Revocation - Any abuse by any person of any privilege, benefit or consideration granted by such permit, shall be sufficient cause for revocation of said permit.



Municipal parking permit - A municipal parking permit licenses the permittee to park one automobile at the permittee's risk in the area designated by signs. Fees charged are for the use of a parking space in the designated facility only. Only a license to park is granted by this permit and no bailment is created. The Department of Transportation assumes no responsibility for loss due to fire, theft, collision or otherwise to the car or its contents.



(i) A municipal parking permit must be displayed when parked in authorized spaces, and in such a manner that the front of the permit is visible through the left side of the windshield. An IVPS must be activated to authorize parking.



(ii) A municipal parking permit is to be displayed only on vehicles bearing license Plate numbers on file at the Bureau of Parking. For license Plate changes call the Permit Section of the Bureau of Parking weekdays (10 a.m. to 4 p.m.).



(iii) A municipal parking permit is to be displayed only when a vehicle is parked in areas reserved for use of this permit.



(iv) Failure to comply with the above regulations will result in a summons.



Yearly Permits for parking in contradiction to rules on city streets. Yearly Permits are issued on dates determined by the Department of Transportation or any other agency authorized by the Department to non-profit organizations needing to park in contradiction to parking rules when the vehicle is essential to the performance of their organizational functions. These organizations generally are medical, blood, government and human service programs. Such Permits shall be displayed so that they are visible through the windshield. An IVPS must be activated to authorize parking.



(i) Parking permitted. Parking with yearly permits is permitted in areas specified on or programmed into the permit and may include some or all of the following:

a. Meters

b. Truck loading and unloading zones

c. No Standing/Parking Except Authorized Vehicles, when the permit matches the signs, and

d. " No Parking" areas



(ii) Parking not permitted. Parking with yearly permits is not permitted at:

a. "No Standing" areas

b. "No Stopping" areas

c. Fire hydrants

d. Bus stops

e. Double parking

f. Driveways

g. Bridges and highways, and

h. Areas where a traffic hazard would be created



(iii) Duration. Yearly Permits are issued for the minimum hours and days essential for the activity. Such Permits are issued on an annual basis on dates determined by the Department of Transportation. The Commissioner or his/her designee may, at his/her discretion, issue, extend or revoke these Permits.



Single issue Permits for parking in contradiction to rules on city streets. Single issue Permits are issued by the Department of Transportation or any other agency authorized by the Department to for-profit and not-for-profit medical, blood and human service programs; press events; and concerts, film production companies, special events and emergencies. Such Permits shall be displayed so that they are visible through the windshield. An IVPS must be activated to authorize parking.



(i) Information required. The request for such a single issue permit shall be made in writing to the Department of Transportation and must include:

a. Date(s) of the event

b. Hours

c. Location

d. Number and size of vehicles, and

e. License Plates or identifying markings of the vehicles.



(i) Parking permitted. Parking with single issue permits is permitted in areas specified on or programmed into the permit and may include some or all of the following:

a. Meters

b. Truck loading and unloading zones

c. No Standing/Parking Except Authorized Vehicles, and

d. "No Parking" areas



(iii) Parking not permitted. Parking with single issue permits is not permitted at:

a. "No Standing" areas

b. "No Stopping" areas

c. Fire hydrants

d. Bus stops

e. Double parking

f. Driveways

g. On bridges and highways, and

h. Areas where a traffic hazard would be created



(iii) Duration .Single issue permits are issued for the minimum hours and days essential for the event. The Commissioner or his/her designee may, at his/her discretion, issue, extend or revoke these Permits.



Clergy parking permits.

(i) Definitions:

Hospital. A general hospital, nursing home or hospice inpatient facility certified pursuant to the public health law or a psychiatric center established pursuant to section 7.17 of the mental hygiene law.



House of worship . A building or space owned or leased by a religious corporation or association of any denomination or used by a religious corporation or association of any denomination pursuant to the written permission of the owner thereof, which is used by members principally as a meeting place for divine worship or other religious observances presided over by a member of the clergy and which is classified in occupancy group F-1(b) pursuant to article eight of subchapter three of chapter one of title twenty seven of the New York City Administrative Code. Such term shall not include a dwelling unit as defined in the housing maintenance code.



Member of the Clergy. A clergyperson or minister as defined in the religious corporations law including, but not limited to, a pastor,a rector, priest, rabbi or imam who officiates at or presides over services on behalf of a religious corporation or association of any denomination. Such term shall not include clergy who derive their principal income from any other occupation or profession or who do not officiate at or preside over services on behalf of a religious corporation or association of any denomination.



Passenger car. Notwithstanding any other provision of these rules, for the purpose of this paragraph (5), a passenger car shall mean a motor vehicle designed and used for carrying not more than fifteen people, including the driver. Such term shall not include a vehicle licensed to operate pursuant to chapter five of title 19 of the New York City Administrative Code or a commercial vehicle as defined in Section 19-170 of the Code.



(ii) Application requirements.

a. The religious corporation or association applying for a permit on behalf of a member of the clergy shall submit an application on a form to be provided by the department and signed by an officer of the corporation or association or by a person otherwise authorized to act on behalf of the corporation or association. Such application shall be accompanied by a copy of a deed or lease and a certificate of occupancy indicating classification in occupancy group F-1(b) (plus the type of house of worship) for the New York City house of worship used by the religious corporation. In the absence of a deed or lease, the religious corporation or association shall submit a sworn written statement of the owner of the house of worship attesting to the fact that said religious corporation or association has the permission of said owner to use the premises as a house of worship. In the event that a house of worship was constructed prior to the existence of a certificate of occupancy or occupancy group F-1(b) so that a certificate of occupancy is not available, the religious corporation or association shall submit such other documentation as the department may require.

b. The religious corporation or association shall, on behalf of a clergy member, submit a copy of title, registration or lease in the clergy member's name for a New York State registered vehicle to be covered by a permit. Such religious corporation or association shall, on behalf of a member of the clergy, also submit a copy of a current automobile insurance identification card for such vehicle.

c. The religious corporation or association shall certify on a form provided by the department that only the member of the clergy on whose behalf the application is made will use such a permit, that such use will occur only while the member of the clergy is performing official duties at the house of worship at whose services such member of the clergy officiates or presides or while performing such official duties at a hospital, that such member of the clergy derives his/ her principal income from officiating at or presiding over services on behalf of said religious corporation or association, that such member of the clergy possesses a valid New York State driver's license and that such member of the clergy otherwise qualifies for the benefits of this permit.

d. In addition, the religious corporation or association shall submit any other documents deemed necessary by the Department.



(iii) Parking Permitted. Parking is permitted only in "No Parking" areas designated by posted sign for up to four hours on a roadway adjacent to a house of worship's address as it appears on the permit or for up to three hours on a roadway adjacent to a hospital when the clergy member is performing official duties at such hospital. For the purposes of this paragraph, only those portions of a roadway corresponding to the shaded areas on the diagrams below shall be considered adjacent to a house of worship or hospital. Section 4-08 Title - 34 Department of Transportation

SHADED AREAS ARE CONSIDERED ADJACENT

Building Occupies

One Sq. Block Building in Middle

of Block Building Occupies

Part of a Block

Building in Part

of Mid Block Building in Corner

of Block



(iv) Issuance of Permit. Only one permit shall be issued to any religious corporation or association. The front of such permit shall include the license plate numbers of up to three passenger cars, as defined in subparagraph (i) herein, that are owned, registered or leased by the members of the clergy for whose benefit the religious corporation or association has applied for such a permit. No permit shall be issued with the license plate number of any vehicle that has one or more summonses in judgment according to the records of the New York City Parking Violations Bureau.



(v) Duration. Permits issued in accordance with this paragraph (5) shall be valid for one year, unless revoked pursuant to subparagraph (viii) below.



(vi) Renewal. Sixty days prior to the expiration of the permit, the religious corporation or association may apply for a renewal by completing a form provided by the department.



(vi) Replacement Permits.

a. In case of lost or stolen permit, the religious corporation or association shall, upon request for a replacement, submit to the Department a copy of a valid police report. In the case of a stolen vehicle containing a permit that was also stolen, the religious corporation or association shall submit a copy of a valid police report for the stolen vehicle, which report also lists the permit as stolen.

b. To receive a replacement permit with a change license plate number or an additional plate number up to a total of three, the religious corporation or association shall supply the documentation required by sub paragraphs (B), (C) and (D) of preceding paragraph (ii), in addition to the police report, if applicable. Changes to the permit may only be made by the department.



(vi) Revocation. A member of the clergy who engages in or allows the improper use or alteration of a permit issued pursuant to this paragraph may be excluded from the benefits of this paragraph. The department shall mail written notice to the the religious corporation or association with which such clergy member is associated of the improper use of a permit issued to such corporation or association. The religious corporation or association may submit a response within ten days of the date of mailing of such notice. After ten days from the date of mailing of such notice, the department may send notice to the religious corporation or association of the exclusion of a member from the permit and the corporation or association shall forthwith return the permit to the department. If the permit contains more than one license plate number, the license plate number of the vehicle of the excluded member shall be deleted and the department shall promptly reissue the permit with the remaining license plate numbers. If the permit contains only the license plate number of the excluded member, the religious corporation or association may submit an application for a new permit pursuant to this paragraph. The member of the clergy who engaged in or allowed such improper use shall not be eligible for inclusion in any future application submitted pursuant to this paragraph. P - Engine idling.

Idling of vehicle engines prohibited. Except as provided for buses in paragraph (p)(2) hereof, no person shall cause or permit the engine of any vehicle, other than a legally authorized emergency motor vehicle, to idle for longer than three minutes while parking, standing or stopping unless the engine is being used to operate a loading, unloading or processing device.



Idling of bus engines prohibited. No person shall cause or permit the engine of any bus to idle at a layover or terminal location, whether or not enclosed, when the ambient temperature is in excess of forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit. When the ambient temperature is forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit or less, no person shall cause or permit any bus to idle for longer than three minutes at any layover or terminal location. For the purpose of this rule, at a layover or terminal location a bus engine shall not be deemed to be idling if the operator is running the engine in order to raise the air pressure so as to release the air brakes, provided however, that this shall not exceed a period of three minutes.



Section 4-13: TRUCK ROUTES

(a) General provisions. Definitions. For the purpose of these rules, a truck is defined as any vehicle or combination of vehicles designed for the transportation of property, which has either of the following characteristics:



two axles, six tires; or three or more axles

Exceptions. These rules do not apply to authorized emergency vehicles and authorized public utility company vehicles engaged in an emergency operation as defined in Section 114-b of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.



Enforcement. An operator of any truck as defined above shall have in his/her possession throughout each trip a bill of lading, or similar document, showing the points of origin and destination of the trip. Upon the request of a law enforcement officer or other authorized person, the truck operator shall present for inspection the above stated document or documents.