Timberland
Investor Relations



Corporate Profile



The Timberland Company designs, engineers and markets premium quality footwear, apparel and accessories under the Timberland® brand name and the Timberland PRO™ series sub-brand. Timberland® products for men, women and children include premium boots, casual shoes, hiking boots and boat shoes, as well as outdoor-inspired apparel and accessories built to withstand the elements of nature. The Timberland PRO™ series is engineered to meet the demands of the professional worker.



Our company was founded by Nathan Swartz, whose legacy of craftsmanship, integrity and quality is carried on today through the active involvement of his son, Sidney Swartz, Chairman, and his grandson, Jeffrey Swartz, President and Chief Executive Officer. As of March 28, 2003, the Swartz family, together with trusts and a charitable foundation established by the family, held approximately 46% of Timberland stock and approximately 82% of voting power.



In 1987, the Swartz family brought the Timberland Company public on the American Stock Exchange. Since 1991, Timberland has been listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol TBL.



The Timberland Company continues to grow through innovation, global awareness and a strong sense of community. No amount of success has made us stray from our values or heritage. As always, everything we make is inspired by nature and designed to bring the consumer into the great outdoors. Through technological advances and a commitment to quality, Timberland is working toward realizing its goal of becoming a global lifestyle brand.



Timberland products are sold primarily through Timberland® stores, other specialty stores, better-grade department stores, concept shops and shoe stores throughout the world. Consolidated revenue in 2002 totaled $1.2 billion.



Shareholder Information Exchange New York Stock Exchange Listed Security Stock Quote TBL Transfer Agent Equiserve Trust Company N.A.

P.O. Box 43010

Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3010

Phone 877-282-1168

Email www.equiserve.com Independent Accountants Deloitte&Touche LLP

Boston, MA