Islamic Thinkers Society

Bringing Change Through Intellectual & Political Struggle. About Us

Links

Forum

Home Newsflash Our Site is up again. Please Bare with us while we put the contents back up



Main Menu Home Islamic Topics News From the Ummah Site Updates Search Links FAQ's About Us Forum



Bismillah ir Rahman ir Rahim

Innal-Hamdalillah was-Salaatu was-Salaam `alaa Rasoolillah

As-Salaamu alaikum wa-Rahmatullahi wa-Barakatuhu Welcome to the I slamic T hinkers S ociety web site. We are less than a handfull of Muslims from Ahlus Sunnah wal jama'ah who give public da'wah to society, where we invite the society to Islam(Aqeedah+Shahriah), command the good, forbid the evil and expose falsehood from every angle. Our struggle is always intellectual & political non-violent means.To find out more about our activities and about our views, we highly recommend you visit the "About Us" page first.

Home

Observing the Observer We the Muslims of Islamic Thinkers Society would like to clarify some statements made by the New York Observer in the June 27, 2005 weekly issue. As predicted in our past posts, the Observer has lied and misled its readers. The title for the article stated “Local Insurgents: ‘Islamic Thinkers” Menace Gay N.Y.” when we see the use of the word “insurgents” we can come to either of the two conclusions: one is the dictionary definition of insurgents that implies insurgents are “People who take part in an armed rebellion against the constituted authority” or two the use of the word insurgents is used by the New York Observer without the understanding of the definition. Since we’ve stated umpteen times that WE ARE A NON-VIOLENT/PEACEFUL INTELLECTUAL AND POLITICAL ORGANISATION we cannot come to the first conclusion so could it be the latter conclusion? The Observer being a media outlet would not have trouble understanding the definition of the word insurgents. So what conclusion can we come to? It seems the word “insurgents” is used deliberately as a means of slander. Now this should make us wonder what the NY Observer is trying to do. Do they observe that the majority of the readers who live in the most technologically advanced nation will believe such hate rhetoric? Read more... Islamic Thinkers Society Yet Again Plagued by Yellow Journalism! This time the Islamic Thinker Society is going to be publicized on the New York Times. Similar to the New York Observer, the New York Times is going with sources which are questionable. Again and again, the Muslims of Islamic Thinkers Society have denied any interviews to the media. From CNN to the Observer, we the Muslims of ITS have not consented to any interviews. Due to the unavailability of any direct source of information, even the reputable media outlets have turned into tabloids. The goal of the media is to suppress Muslims who stand up for injustice is vindicated even more now. Read more... Our Latest Confrontation With Christine Withers Added June 21, 2005 3:10am EST



The Observer has a source by the name of Christine Withers (a.k.a. “the she-male.”). Christine is someone who often incites violence when members of the Islamic Thinkers Society are peacefully presenting their views in public. She has a history of being physical and she was arrested due to her violent and indecent confrontations. The District Attorney has “an order to stay away from” Islamic Thinkers Society and also ordered Ms. Withers to “attend a 24 sessions of anger management class” and she is also subjected to a fine and an order to stay away from where Islamic Thinkers Society holds their da'wah stalls. Read more... American Flag Desecration This is the video clip of the desecration of the American Flag. In this video, we Muslims stepped on AND tore up the American flag in response to the desecration of the holy Qur'an. We also did it to prove that our loyalty does not belong to this flag. This flag represents a form of neo-idolatry where people live and die for this piece of cloth. This flag also represents oppression, not only in the Muslim world, but also other parts of the world which includes but not limited to South America, Vietnam, Japan & Africa. We would like to clarify that we DID NOT BURN THE FLAG as the rumors say. Rather, we stepped on it and ripped it. The video is evident of that. What we did was completely legal and protected by the American Constitutional Amendment. DOWNLOAD VIDEO HERE





Islamic Thinkers Society Gets Threatened We, the Muslims of Islamic Thinkers Society have been threatened by the “New York Observer”. One of their journalists, Jessica Bruder, is threatening to publish false information about Islamic Thinkers Society if we do not comply to her written questionnaires. Without credible evidences and inaccurate sources written haphazardly, an article would be published to deliberately misrepresent Islamic Thinkers Society and its views.



Read more... Hate Mails from American Patriots These are all the hate mails that we've recieved from people who are enraged at us desecrating the American flag. It seems the people are upset that we are using the first amendment to practice our rights. Some Americans fought hard to protect the first amendment and the freedom of expression so people can express themselves such as burning the American Flag or hanging it upside down. This was done so the freedom of expression can be practiced without having it violated. So thanks to those Americans, we have the right to rip the flag and step on it to make a political statement. Read more... Demonstration Against "Mixed-Gender" Prayer This video shows the demonstration that took place on March 18 against the deviant sect of Islam calling themselves "Progressive Muslims". The demonstration was in response to the deviant sect holding a "mixed-gender prayer" which is not allowed in the Islamic sharee'ah. Knowing this sect to reject the sharee'ah of Allah, which negates one of the pillar of Tawheed which is Tawheed ul-'Uloohiyah, we the Muslims of ahl us-Sunnah wal jama'ah were there to expose these "Progressive Pimps & Whores" of their batil(false) actions. We were also there to expose publicly their head figuers namely Ameena Wadud, Ahmad Nassef, & Asra Nomani.

Read more... Media Section Up Our media section is up and running. We are constantly updating it with new nasheeds. Please check them out. Extreme Sufis Extreme Sufis







When sufis go beyond whirling dervishes. This video shows some of the bizzare acts of sufism such as drilling holes with a nail & hammer to overcome "inner pain". This is as bizzare as it gets. Would anyone DARE to claim that this is from the Sunnah? Verily, we the Muslims from ahl us-Sunnah are free from them and they are free from us! Read more... Exposing Sufis Chechen Sufi Jam

The Sufi are really something. Check out this Chechen Sufi jam. Watch the old man jumping higher than anyone... Would anyone attribute this sort of behavior as something part of Islam? Is this gaining the pleasure of Allah?











Read more... Bare With Us Our Site is up again. Please Bare with us while we put the contents back up [ Back ] Polls Performing Takfeer on the present Rulers is... Haraam. That's kharijee behavior. Fardh. We must do so to purify our 'aqeedah and to have baraa' towards them. WHAT!? They are still Muslim. They say "la ilaha ill Allah" I don't want to be labelled as a Takferee. Who's Online We have 5 guests online