Trump's big give
7 years ago

(CNN) - Potential presidential candidate Donald Trump told CNN's Poppy Harlow that his treatment of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi in a real estate deal last year was "intelligent" and resulted in "more money that I would've gotten all year for this piece of land."

In his interview with CNN on Monday, Trump explained how he leased land to Gadhafi who intended to use it for a tent he would stay in while attending the United Nations General Assembly. In the end, Gadhafi was unable to pitch his tent at that location but had to pay out the lease anyway. And Trump says he forwarded the money to charity.



In another recent interview, Trump told Fox News he "screwed" Gadhafi on the deal.

In the CNN interview, Trump also explained how, based on his experience, he'd handle the conflict in Libya by demanding Arab nations pay for the military operation.

"We haven't done that."

Trump explained: "The first thing I'd do with Gadhafi is I'd go to the Arab league and I'd say, 'we'll do things…we'll do plenty of things but you're going to pay us for it.

We're not going to send our missiles out at a million and a half dollars per missile, we're not going to spend $500 million dollars on getting rid of Gadhafi and then you guys go home to your 747s,'" he continued.

And as far as dealing with Gadhafi personally, the real estate mogul delved into his past interaction with the Libyan leader when he spoke about a deal that the two entered.

"I deal with everyone," he said, "And I like that. What did I do with Gadhafi?"

"I leased him a piece of land for his tent. He paid me more than I'd get in a whole year. And then, eh, he wasn't able to use the piece of land. So people would say did I take advantage, did I-so I got, in one night, more money than I would've gotten all year for this piece of land up in Westchester and then, didn't let him use it. That's called being intelligent."

But Trump asserts he didn't keep the money he received from the deal, saying "And in fact, when I did it I said 'I'm gonna take Gadhafi's money, I'm not going to make it easy on him, and I'm going to give the money to charity.'

"And that's exactly what I did."