Springfield: Aluminum Tab Collection/Recycling Project
Aluminum Tab Collection

Recycling Project Aluminum Tabs, Can Tabs, Pop Tops Who benefits from the program? The money received from the recycling of the tabs is used to buy medical and non-medical items for Shriners Hospitals for Children. Who collects the tabs? Tabs are saved by individuals and groups, and are brought to the hospital in jars, bags, boxes, crates and barrels. Elementary, high school and college students collect them. Churches, businesses, neighborhood groups and senior centers collect them. They come from everywhere - all over New England, New York, and even from as far away as California!



What are some of the items purchased with the money? Baxter Infusion Pump - used to dispense pain medications

Arthrometer - used to measure the degree of instability in the knee

10-foot trailer for the hospital van - used to transport medical equipment and records to outreach clinics held throughout New England and New York State

Computerized pressure mapping - a force-sensing array used in evaluating pressure distribution for patients requiring customized wheelchair seating systems

Bullard laryngoscope - used by an anesthesiologist to place a breathing tube in patients who have a complex airway

Constant passive motion machine for the hip

Cast cutter with vacuum attachment

Special splints for arms and legs

X-ray viewing screens

Books and videos in English and foreign languages

Computer software

Traction equipment

Parties for children

Stretcher chair

Pool table

Arts and crafts supplies

Two-way radios for Security/Maintenance Department

Cost of producing a patient pre-operative teaching video

Portion of the cost of new hospital van for transporting patients Who oversees the aluminum tab program? The program originated and is maintained by Helma Court #64

The Ladies Oriental Shrine of North America (L.O.S.N.A.) Where do you bring can tabs after you have collected them? Who benefits from the program? The money received from the recycling of the tabs is used to buy medical and non-medical items for Shriners Hospitals for Children.Tabs are saved by individuals and groups, and are brought to the hospital in jars, bags, boxes, crates and barrels. Elementary, high school and college students collect them. Churches, businesses, neighborhood groups and senior centers collect them. They come from everywhere - all over New England, New York, and even from as far away as California!The program originated and is maintained by Helma Court #64The Ladies Oriental Shrine of North America (L.O.S.N.A.) Can tabs can be dropped off at the following locations: Shriners Hospitals for Children

516 Carew Street

Springfield, MA 01104

413.787.2000 Shrine Centers Did You Know...... There are about 1640 individual tabs in one pound. In the past 18 years, over 940 million individual tabs have been collected, which is approximately 573,500 lbs. As of April 2007, the recycling price for aluminum tabs was $0.50 - $0.70 per pound.