Hillary Clinton Email: Overthrow Assad, Destroy Syria For Israel
A newly-released Hillary Clinton email published by Wikileaks has confirmed that the Obama Administration helped ignite the civil war in Syria as “the best way to help Israel.”

The document was one of many declassified by the U.S. Department of State following the uproar caused by Clinton’s highly controversial private email server, which she used while serving as Secretary of State from 2009 to 2013. It was published by the famous website Wikileaks as Department of State case number F-2014-20439, document number C05794498.

It should be noted that the Wikileaks transcript of the email is incorrectly dated to December 31, 2000, which is an obvious error due to references in the text to the Syrian Civil War, which began in March 2011, as well as references to the May 2012 negotiations in Istanbul between Iran and the west over its nuclear program. Most likely the actual date of the email is December 31, 2012. At the time, Clinton was Secretary of State for President Barack Obama.

“The best way to help Israel deal with Iran’s growing nuclear capability is to help the people of Syria overthrow the regime of Bashar Assad.”

Clinton also says that the best course of action is to “use force” to overthrow the Syrian government, specifically because it is in Israel’s interest and that she believes this will undermine the “regional alliance” between Syria, Hezbollah, and Iran and will help halt Iran’s growing nuclear capability.

The email sheds light on United States policy towards the Middle East and makes it clear that the policy of the U.S. has been to encourage and provoke a civil conflict in Syria to further its geopolitical interests and those of Israel from the very beginning. These words are especially alarming coming from a senior federal official in charge of American foreign policy.

Clinton specifically mentions Iran’s nuclear program as threatening Israel’s atomic monopoly in the Middle East, and that other “adversaries” in the region could be encouraged to go nuclear as well and threaten the interests of the U.S. and Israel. In true realpolitik Machiavellian logic, this means that Syria must be destroyed.

“Iran’s nuclear program and Syria’s civil war may seem unconnected, but they are. For Israeli leaders, the real threat from a nuclear-armed Iran is not the prospect of an insane Iranian leader launching an unprovoked Iranian nuclear attack on Israel that would lead to the annihilation of both countries. What Israeli military leaders really worry about — but cannot talk about — is losing their nuclear monopoly.”

She goes on to detail the relations between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Syria through Iran’s alleged proxies and proposes toppling Assad will solve this problem.

“It is the strategic relationship between Iran and the regime of Bashar Assad in Syria that makes it possible for Iran to undermine Israel’s security — not through a direct attack, which in the thirty years of hostility between Iran and Israel has never occurred, but through its proxies in Lebanon, like Hezbollah, that are sustained, armed and trained by Iran via Syria. The end of the Assad regime would end this dangerous alliance. Israel’s leadership understands well why defeating Assad is now in its interests.”

Chillingly, she also mentions that bringing down the Syrian government by force may open the doors to military action against Iran.

“Bringing down Assad would not only be a massive boon to Israel’s security, it would also ease Israel’s understandable fear of losing its nuclear monopoly. Then, Israel and the United States might be able to develop a common view of when the Iranian program is so dangerous that military action could be warranted. Right now, it is the combination of Iran’s strategic alliance with Syria and the steady progress in Iran’s nuclear enrichment program that has led Israeli leaders to contemplate a surprise attack — if necessary over the objections of Washington.”

And prophetically, calls for the United States to use its allies in the regions to fund, arm, and train the Syrian opposition and inflame the civil war in the country, which would end up happening.

“Washington should start by expressing its willingness to work with regional allies like Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar to organize, train and arm Syrian rebel forces.”

This disturbing email by Clinton is more proof that the United States foreign policy has done little to combat terrorism in the Middle East. The Syrian rebels, far from being secular or “moderate” rebels, have been proven to be overwhelmingly made up of Islamic extremists and jihadis who oppose the secular Syrian state, as the Telegraph reports.

The Syrian Civil War and the chaos in Iraq, which are both the result of U.S. military intervention, were instrumental to the rise of ISIS. The leaked email also sheds new light on the origins of the refugee crisis that has been the source of much debate in Europe and the United States as millions of Syrians are displaced by the violence which Clinton thought would be a positive development in 2012.

The very real possibility that these words could be coming from a politician who may very well become the next President of the United States should give many people pause.

[Photo by Justin Sullivan/Getty Images]