BEAT THE LAW HOW TO GET DIPLOMATIC IMMUNITY
ALL CONTENTS OF THIS WEBSITE OR FROM COL WILSON IS FOR INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY. USE AT YOUR OWN RISK. ALL RIGHTS ARE EXPLICITLY RETAINED AT ALL TIMES AND PLACES. Government has no jurisdiction under the constitution.

CLICK HERE TO READ THE UCC CONNECTION FIRST Important : UCC 1-207 has been moved to UCC 1-308 to hide it from the public. Also you will need to make written motions along with the verbal procedure in court in this article "The UCC Connection" Additionally, lower level traffic courts and magistrates may not recognize your reservation of rights. You may have to appeal to a higher court. In Federal court they will offer you a magistrate. Always object to a magistrate. You want a real judge. But don't ask for a judge or anything else or they will try you . Below is pdf download of a notification of reservation of rights. Make sure you get it notarized and then file it with the county to make it public record. This is usually the same place that you file a marriage license. After they stamp it filed, then make several copies and send it to real judges on the state and Federal level. Registered mail and return receipt and restricted signiture. . To get it into the judge’s hands, you have to address it to his attention and put personal confidential as in this example. Care of: (NAME OF THE COURT HERE) Attention: (JUDGES NAME HERE, PERSONAL, CONFIDENTIAL ADDRESS CITY, STATE ZIP This keeps the letter on the private side so that it is not intercepted by the clerk. If it is returned signature refused, then have the sheriff serve it on them. (If the judge doesn’t see it, then you will not be put on the list). If you get a nasty letter back, not to worry, that is proof they got it. If the judge didn't sign for it, then you are not going to be put on the list. If signature is refused, then just send it first class mail and they are then responsible for its knowledge. Be sure to keep all of your mail receipts. DO NOT send it to magistrates or judges that only try traffic tickets and dog bites etc.. Send it to real judges that try real felonies. It’ll take about 15 to 30 days, but there will never be a warrant issued for your arrest or to search your property unless Ya actually harm someone. Also so you should not get a traffic ticket. Sometimes the judges fail to put you on the list for diplomatic immunity. If you do get a traffic ticket, then just appeal the decision of the traffic ticket court to the next court up and file a motion to dismiss because of reservation of rights. Then you may never hear from them again, or they will drag it out up to a year trying to wear you down or scare you into a plea bargain. But stick to your guns and do not give in. There is nothing they can do. The fact is that he will never rule on your motion but continue to drag out the case until they can no longer try you. This is usually 12 months. Then you file a motion to dismiss because you did not receive a speedy trial.To test for diplomatic immunity, perhaps trying to get a misdemeanor ticket or other non-moving violation . If ya don't get a ticket or just a warning ticket, then ya may be on the list for immunity. This way if you are not on the list, and do get a ticket, this non moving violation ticket should not hurt your insurance in case ya mess up the process. (Note: that in some states, no tags is a felony while others it is a very low cost misdemeanor.) Also note that there are state lists and a federal list. Some state judges will only put ya on the state list. In this case you would not get a ticket in your state, but you would get a ticket in another state. So try to get yourself on the federal list. If you run into trouble or do not understand something, call me or give me an email. There appears to be 3 lists. (1) the judges list appears to be a list of people that the judge will not issue a warrent for your arrest unless you cause injury. But they will still let police ticket you or arrest you. (2) The state list, is a list where not only there will be no arrest warrents, but the police cannot arrest you or ticket you or detain you unless you are causing injury. YOU ARE ONLY PROTECTED IN THE STATE THAT HAS PUT YOU ON THEIR LIST. If you go into another state, you can get tickets or be arrested. (3) The federal list is just like the state list execept that you are protected in all states and territories. However, you can no longer get on this list by sending a federal judge a letter of your reservation of rights. You have to sue your way onto this list, and possibly appeal. How the UCC 1-308 works . Compare that the constitution for the US establishes for the court’s jurisdiction at common law, equity and admiralty under article 3. As opposed to this, the Federal corporation establishes a similar jurisdiction except as principles under the Uniform commercial code. See... UCC § 1-103. Supplementary General Principles of Law Applicable. Unless displaced by the particular provisions of this Act, the principles of law and equity, including the law merchant and the law relative to capacity to contract, principal and agent, estoppel, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion, mistake, Bankruptcy, or other validating or invalidating cause shall supplement its provisions. Anytime ya see law by itself as in the foregoing, it means the common law . Except that they are taking the common law jurisdiction from the contract the UCC. The remedy of course is UCC 1-308. So the UCC is a deceptive criminal contractual constitution of sorts to those who uses it against us. UCC 1-308 is the remedy for any legal process under commercial law in the U.S. . UCC § 1-308. Performance or Acceptance Under Reservation of Rights. (a) A party that with explicit reservation of rights performs or promises performance or assents to performance in a manner demanded or offered by the other party does not thereby prejudice the rights reserved. Such words as "without prejudice," "under protest," or the like are sufficient. . Since the Federal Corporation is just that, a corporation. It has no jurisdiction except with those that contract with it. Also see Congressional act of 1871 and USC Title 28, Part VI, chapter 176, sub chapter 176, subsection A, 3002 (15) “United States” means—(A) a Federal corporation ; The states illegally contracted with the federal corporation by passing the Uniform Commercial Code making themselves as well as the unsuspecting people subject to the Federal corporation and also to the states in their new commercial capacities. · T he Uniform Commercial code creates a corporate State of the United States, the federal corporation. As opposed to one of the dejure several States of the union . See… UCC 1-201. General Definitions.(38) " State" means a State of the United States ,… As opposed to being one of the several states of the union… USC TITLE 28 > PART VI > CHAPTER 176 > SUBCHAPTER A > § 3002Definitions (14) “ State” means any of the several States ,… · Because the states have passed the Uniform Commercial code, it has made its Citizens persons (which are legal entities and articles of commerce) and the State to be vessels of the United States placing the State and its Citizens under maritime law. See the brilliant word smithing in the following. USC TITLE 18 > PART I > CHAPTER 1 > § 9. Vessel of the United States defined The term “vessel of the United States” , as used in this title, means a vessel belonging in whole or in part to the United States, or any citizen thereof , or any corporation created by or under the laws of the United States, or of any State , Territory, District, or possession thereof. Therefore all of the laws (color of law) are contractual commercial laws and the remedy is UCC 1-308. The Uniform Commercial Code makes all crimes commercial only by contract as per 27 CFR 72.11. The problem is that you have to get into higher courts before they will recognize the remedy. The remedy however should legally and always be give without delay on demand or claim. This of course is the problem. The misdemeanor courts do not have a clue as to where their jurisdiction comes from and neither do magistrates. You have to get in front of a court with a real judge that tries felonies. The courts try to string ya along under duress of threat hoping that you can be scared into a plea. But they in the end have to honor the remedy. . 27 CFR 72.11 PART 72_DISPOSITION OF SEIZED PERSONAL PROPERTY--Table of Contents Subpart B_Definitions Commercial crimes. Any of the following types of crimes (Federal or State): Offenses against the revenue laws; burglary; counterfeiting; forgery; kidnapping; larceny; robbery; illegal sale or possession of deadly weapons; prostitution (including soliciting, procuring, pandering, white slaving, keeping house of ill fame, and like offenses); extortion; swindling and confidence games; and attempting to commit, conspiring to commit, or compounding any of the foregoing crimes. Addiction to narcotic drugs and use of marihuana will be treated as if such were commercial crime. Last note: The 14th amendment actually creates a lower class of “citizen of the United States” rather than the higher Citizenship of one of the several states of the union. The remedy provided to the 14th amendment, is an act by congress known as 15 United States Statute at Large, July 27, 1868, one day before the 14th Amendment took effect and also known as the "Expatriation Statute." This is your remedy to claim to be a natural Citizen of your state. This makes you a higher Citizen and no longer subject to the Article 4 loophole that also deprives you of your rights.