Warner says 'enough is enough' on gun violence
6 years ago

(CNN) - Another high-profile Democrat with strong backing from the National Rifle Association said Monday it was time for tougher gun laws.

"I believe every American has Second Amendment rights. The ability to hunt is part of our culture. I have an NRA rating of an 'A,' but enough is enough," Sen. Mark Warner of Virginia told WBBT, a local CNN affiliate in Richmond.



- Follow the Ticker on Twitter: @PoliticalTicker

Warner's comments follow those of Sen. Joe Manchin, a conservative Democrat from West Virginia who's known for his ties to the NRA and support for gun rights. However, Manchin said earlier Monday that last week's elementary school shooting in Connecticut has "changed" him.

"I'm committed to bringing the dialogue that would bring a total change, and I mean a total change," Manchin said on CNN's "Amanpour."

Warner, who's up for re-election in 2014, echoed those sentiments, saying it was time for both parties to meet in the middle on the issue.

"I join with the president and reasonable folks in both parties and the overwhelming majority of Americans who are gun owners who believe that we've got to put stricter rules on the books," he said.

Warner did not go deep into specifics, only saying "there'll be time" to figure out the details.

Virginia is home to the headquarters of the NRA, which is located in Fairfax outside of Washington, D.C. It's also home to the worst school shooting in U.S. history.

Following the Virginia Tech massacre in 2007, Congress passed its first gun law in more than a decade. The legislation improved the National Instant Criminal Background Check program to better prevent those with a mental illness from purchasing a gun. In 2008, President George W. Bush signed the law, which had support from the NRA.

Like many lawmakers on both side of the aisle, Warner acknowledged that one single law won't stop an armed person with mental illness.

"But when we have close to 30,000 killings a year from all types of gun violence, even if we save a few lives, we make progress," he said.