Sign at Wegmans draws attention

It’s a first for Wegmans in this area. They’ve put up a sign asking customers buying pork or alcohol not to use a particular checkout line when a Muslim teenager is on duty as the cashier.

The sign went up a week ago at their Lyell Avenue store.

Wegmans says they haven’t gotten any in store complaints and Wegmans was very upfront about the cashier. They just wouldn’t allow us in the store to talk with her or customers.

Spokeswoman Jo Natale says the cashier is a teenaged girl who wears a head covering. She told her supervisor she was uncomfortable handling those items because of religious reasons. So the store manager who had experience with this type of situation outside of Rochester decided to put up a small sign whenever the girl was at the checkout counter.

It says, “If your order contains pork or alcohol product, we respectfully ask that you choose another lane.”

Wegmans also says the girl has been coached what to say if customers ask why. People News10NBC spoke with outside the Lyell Avenue Wegmans store said they were okay with it and one even knows Christians who don’t like the idea of serving alcohol.

Bernard Thomas said, “I feel like if they’re going to hire her and she’s got to have the job, why shouldn’t we respect her. Just go to another cashier.”

Darlene Hucko said, “I would respect her beliefs and go to the next line if I had alcohol.

Levato said, “You think that’s okay.”

Hucko said, “I think it is okay.”

Alex Gritsvuta said, “I'm from a Christian background and waiters...the Christian girls that I know have a problem serving alcohol to people in a bar. Not in the bar necessarily, maybe in the restaurant.”

The girl attends school and works part-time. Wegmans characterizes her as happy, someone who likes what she does and a good worker.

Because of her age, Wegmans says state law limits the types of jobs teenagers can do inside a supermarket.

For more Rochester, N.Y. news go to our website www.whec.com.

Like us on Facebook & follow us on Twitter