Offensive and Controversial Materials
Important: If you supply products for sale on Amazon, you must comply with all federal, state, and local laws and Amazon policies applicable to those products and product listings.

Amazon’s Offensive Products policies apply to all products except books, music, video and DVD.

Amazon does not allow products that promote, incite or glorify hatred, violence, racial, sexual or religious intolerance or promote organizations with such views. We'll also remove listings that graphically portray violence or victims of violence.

We maintain these policies to ensure a welcoming environment for our global customers and selling partners to do business while offering the widest selection of items on earth. We promote trust and respect, as well as adherence to the law.

We exercise judgment in allowing or prohibiting listings and we keep our global community of customers and cultural differences and sensitivities in mind when reviewing and making a decision on products.

Listings for items that Amazon deems offensive are prohibited on Amazon.com. Amazon reserves the right to determine the appropriateness of listings on its site, and remove any listing at any time. If you supply a product in violation of our Offensive products policies, we will take corrective actions, as appropriate, including but not limited to immediately suspending or terminating seller privileges, destroying inventory in our fulfillment centers without reimbursement, returning inventory, terminating the business relationship, and permanent withholding of payments (as applicable).

Examples of Products We Prohibit

Violence, Intolerance, and Hate

Products that contain violent or offensive material that has no historical significance. Amazon reserves the right to make a determination on the historical value of the item.

Products that promote, incite, or glorify hate or violence towards any person or group. This includes products that contain violent or offensive material that has no historical significance. Amazon reserves the right to make a determination on the historical value of the item.

Products that promote or glorify suicide

Products related to terrorist organizations

Products that promote or glorify people that have been found guilty of violent or sexual crimes.

Intolerance

Products that promote intolerance based on race, religion, and sexual orientation.

Products that contain racially derogatory language

Human Tragedies and Disasters

Products related to human tragedies and natural disasters

Child Abuse and Exploitation

Products that depict child abuse/exploitation

Products intended for use by children that contains adult content, profanity and/or sexual references

Products depicting children or characters resembling children in a sexually suggestive manner

Products marketed to or targeted at kids or teenagers that are age-inappropriate

Related guidelines and policies for services, community features, and other categories of products can be found here:

Last Update: 11/08/2018