California Wants to Teach Kindergartners There are 15 Genders
The California Department of Education is working on a plan to teach kindergartners that there are at least 15 different “genders.” The materials under the scheme also claim it is impossible to know whether babies are boys, girls, or something else, because they cannot talk yet. Parents will not be notified and are not allowed to opt their children out of the indoctrination sessions.According to a report in FaithWire , the proposed changes would be implemented under a revision to the state's “ Health Education Framework ” to be voted on in May. The scheme says it “supports the development of knowledge, skills, and attitudes” across a range of areas including “sexual health,” which serves as a catch-all to teach children all manner of perversion and evil.One of the recommended books, titled “ Who Are You? The Kid's Guide to Gender Identity ,” purports to provide “a straightforward introduction to gender for anyone aged 4+.” The book claims, among other absurdities, that grown-ups “make a guess” about what gender babies are “by looking at their bodies.” The cover features a boy in a dress and a girl climbing a tree.Meanwhile, a chapter in the health framework guidelines explains to teachers how to teach “sexuality” to kindergarten children. “Discuss gender with kindergartners by exploring gender stereotypes and asking open-ended questions, such as what are preferred colors, toys, and activities for boys/girls, and then challenging stereotypes if presented,” it reads.Then, the teacher should continue to confuse the children. “Throughout this discussion, show images of children around the same age who do not conform to typical gender stereotypes,” the instructions read. “Examples do not have to be exaggerated or overt. Simple differences, such as colors or toy preferences, can demonstrate acceptance of gender non-conformity.”Of course, preaching this sort of madness to vulnerable and impressionable children captive in a government classroom has devastating effects. As The Newman Report documented last year , a study from the University of California, Los Angeles, found that more than one fourth of children in the state between the ages of 12 and 17 are “gender non-conforming.”The new proposed guidelines, which are even more extreme than the previous ones, also call for encouraging middle-school students to fornicate with multiple people at the same time. “Some students may be non-monogamous and the term ‘partner(s)’ may be used to be more inclusive,” reads the material, which aims to normalize perversions that would have been unthinkable just a generation ago.Among the examples offered is “polyamory,” which is defined as “the practice of, desire to, or orientation toward having consensual non-monogamous relationships (i.e. relationships that may include multiple partners).” Another option is “polyfidelity (which involves more than two people being in romantic and/or sexual relationships which is not open to additional partners), amongst many other set-ups.”What exactly any of this perversion has to do with “health” was not made clear — especially since encouraging this sort of promiscuity and fornication leads to all sorts of venereal diseases, some of which can be deadly. Ironically, some of the sex propaganda is taught under the guise of preventing venereal disease.On the gender-bending madness, the American College of Pediatricians has said that encouraging children to believe they can change genders by taking hormones and mutilating their genitals is “child abuse.” In other words, these schools are institutionalizing the abuse of children.This sort of dangerous indoctrination will have the effect of destroying morality, destroying families, destroying lives, and ultimately, because families are the building blocks of civilization, destroying civilization itself. And that is exactly the point.The government's indoctrination centers have become a mortal threat not just to the children entrusted to their care, but to the very civilization that birthed them. The consequences are going to be devastating.