CASEY ANTHONY PREGNANT
Sources confirm to WWN that Casey Anthony is pregnant.

Sources confirm to WWN that Casey Anthony is pregnant.

Casey Anthony is pregnant with another child and is reportedly thrilled at the chance to prove she is a good mother even after she was acquitted of killing her first daughter Caylee.

The National Enquirer broke the story based on the claims of multiple unidentified sources saying that the infamous mother is pregnant.

“She just said that she fell in love with a very wealthy man while she’s been in hiding. Casey said he’s taking care of her financially and he’s so obsessed with her that he’ll do anything for her,” an unnamed insider told the tabloid.

That source also told WWN that “her sugar daddy is someone in the publie eye. He’s a high profile man, that everyone in America would know.”

Prior to Casey Anthony dating the wealthy man, she was dating this man:

The former murder suspect was in hiding since the July 2011 trial when she was found not guilty of killing her 2-year-old daughter, only appearing in public last week to declare bankruptcy.

Casey is reportedly two months pregnant and is expecting… twins!

The most shocking aspect of the story is that Casey wants to name one of her new babies – Caylee – in honor of her deceased daughter.

Her was the original Caylee:

There is a group of concerned citizens who have created a petition to force Casey to be sterilized, and should she have another baby, they will apparently argue that the child should be turned over to social services. Neither the name of the group- nor the names of any participants- were not listed in the article.

If Casey continues to keep the identity of her partner a secret, it will be the second time that the identity of her child’s father is kept a secret, though she apparently does know the man in this case.

One of the many shocking revelations related to her first daughter Caylee’s murder trial was that a psychaitrist reported that Casey was impregnated when she was passed out at a party at the age of 18-years-old and discovered a while later that she was with child.

Casey is not receiving any money in book and TV deals, and is living on the kindness of her former lawyer and strangers. And sources say that Charlie Sheen has stated that he is Casey’s mentor.