India: Baby Born With Two Minds in Same Body
Mumbai | Doctor Jagadhish Parsa, who assisted yesterday in the birth of a baby born with a rare malformation causing him to have two distinct brains crammed inside his head, claims that the newborn could be a unique case of two separate minds sharing a single head and body.

Tamish and Rajiv Mukherjee were born at 09:10 AM at the Saiffe Hospital, after a long and complicated surgical operation meant to extract them safely from their mother’s womb.

The boys are a unique case of diprosopus, a rare condition in which twins share the same body but have separate faces and brains. In the case of Tamish and Rajiv, the twins share both the same face and the same body, with each of them controlling only one side.

After realizing a complete medical examination of the twins over the last 24 hours, the team of medical specialist observed that the boys are in surprisingly good health considering their condition, with the heart seemingly irrigating both brains efficiently, an element of great concern for patients affected by diprosopus.

A large crowd of onlookers gathered very rapidly around the hospital, as rumors had spread around the city that an “incarnation of Shiva” had just been born.

The particularity of the twins seems to have struck a very sensitive chord with many Hindus, as duality is a core concept of the most practiced polytheist religion in the world.

Journalists from all over India have joined in with the hundreds of pilgrims to try and meet the miraculous newborns, leading the police to use batons and pepper spray to push back the crowd.

The size of his head, which already caused many complications at the time of his birth, will without a doubt constitute a major problem.

The sheer weight of it could easily be sufficient to break the boys’ cervical spine if not supported carefully.

Besides that problem, the twins’ internal organs all seem to function normally, leaving hope that they could possibly live many years in rather decent living conditions.

An important question remains however concerning the capacity of the boys to eventually walk or speak since these basic actions would demand an exceptional coordination from both of them to execute.

Tamish controls the left eye, arm, and leg, while Rajiv controls their right counterparts.

The twins have already demonstrated strange faculties, as one them can fall asleep while the other is awake, leaving one half of the body inert while the other is active.