Texas Supreme Court: Christian Kids Don’t Need An Education If They’re Going To Be Raptured (UPDATED)
Posted by Busta Troll on 25 Jun 2016

Don’t you just love all the little white kids who traveled to the Middle East to have their pictures painted with Jesus?

***Update*** Snopes has determined this story to be false. While that may be true on the strictly technical grounds of the case, extrapolating the fact that the word “rapture” was used by one of the children and writing an opinion piece about it with a left-leaning bias isn’t exactly “technical.” I apologize if the facts of the case, which was one of an accusation from a family member and not one of constitutionality or religion, were skewed in the piece to make the point that Texas will allow any child to be homeschooled for any reason with little to no supervision from the state. That was the point to this piece — and remains so.

The Texas Supreme Court has cleared the way for religious ignorance to be passed on to Lone Star State children by doing…absolutely nothing. A lower court ruling allowed for Texas homeschoolers to legally teach their children absolutely zilch if they believe their family is waiting to be raptured.

Yes, you heard that right. Your children don’t need to learn if the Lord is returning to take you to heaven. It makes sense if you’re a lunatic, but to those of us who have watched with giddy delight as people stood on their lawns on the day the rapture was supposed to happen only to have their dreams shattered, you realize that at some point that kind of idiocy should be forbidden to be passed down to their children.

Not the religious nonsense; you’re welcome to teach them all the zealotry you desire. There’s always a chance that can be undone when they begin having independent thought. Refusing to educate them, however, isn’t just a travesty, it’s neglect. A lower court ruled in favor of a couple whose family turned them in for just that when they argued that being horrible parents was protected under the 14th amendment. The high court remanded the case to that court because its constitutional questions weren’t educational policy matters, whatever that means. They didn’t rule on the constitutionality of the case at all.

We can only assume that it means that the state of Texas is stacked with dimwits to the highest level. They care about nothing but keeping Republicans in control. In order to do that, you have to ensure a base of ignorant, uneducated people who can be trained to punch a ballot based on pure hate for the poor — even if they ARE poor — minorities, LGBTs and anyone who isn’t a white-Jesus fearing Christian. Add a little fear of terrorists crossing the border with grenade launchers and you have a massive electoral stash willing to put corruption in power until the end of time.

So for now, Texans are more than welcome to raise more idiots. They’re welcome to have children who are only allowed to read the bible who can’t read at all. Yes, that makes perfect sense, doesn’t it? After #Brexit there’s been much talk about Texas seceding…again. While there isn’t a path to secession in the laws of our nation that make it legal, if we all just turn the other way maybe they’ll just go ahead and do it. Then we can build a wall around it and make them pay for it.

Time for a church fundraiser, Texas! Maybe the state can sponsor one.

Featured image via Ids.org