"Kentuckians for Coal" to Protest the Solar Eclipse August 21!
"You can count on coal 24/7. You can't always depend on the sun!" -Major Joseph Calvin, Media Coordinator, Kentuckians for Coal.

HOPKINSVILLE, KY, August 11, 2017 /24-7PressRelease/ -- If you're planning to visit Hopkinsville, Kentucky, to see the total eclipse of the sun on August 21, 2017, be prepared. Hopkinsville (a.k.a. Eclipseville) is globally recognized to be the epicenter of the eclipse. Hundreds of thousands of spectators will converge on the town to see it. Among them "Kentuckians for Coal" will be in the vanguard protesting the eclipse.



Kentuckians for Coal is an ad-hoc coalition of miners, union officials, family members and coal users created to defend the Kentucky coal industry against encroachment from renewable energy industries and from economic development initiatives aimed at lessening America's dependence on coal. Kentuckians for Coal stands against the eclipse and those who worship it.



The protest is scheduled for high noon on Monday, August 21, 2017, in front of the offices of the Kentucky New Era newspaper at 1618 E. 9th Street, Hopkinsville, just as the eclipse begins. The "totality"--the complete blocking of the Sun by the Moon--will start at 1:24:39 and will last 2 minutes and 40 seconds.



The protesters chose the New Era office location because the newspaper and other fake-news media have been over-hyping the eclipse because of its potential to boost local economic development, while ignoring the importance of the coal industry.



Hopkinsville, with a population of 33,000, has two other great claims to fame. One is as the birthplace of the world-renowned psychic Edgar Cayce. He made his home in Hopkinsville, and died there in 1945, after predicting the date of his own death. The other is the notoriously pagan annual celebration of extra-terrestrials, which commemorates a terrifying landing by space aliens in 1955, 62 years ago to the day, known as the Little Green Men Festival.



When more than 250,000 people descend on the town for four days in August, including busloads of Amish from Pennsylvania and rumored Arab royalty, hucksters will peddle overpriced souvenirs as area hotels jack up their room rates by 400%; gas stations run out of gas; and cell phone service crashes due to demand. Traffic jams, a run on available food, an invasion of prostitutes, and rowdy crowds will test the patience of both local residents and the extra law enforcement brought in to maintain order. In addition, there is the serious threat to spectators' eyesight if they look at the sun without special eclipse-viewing glasses.



Kentuckians for Coal understands civic pride and the importance of economic development, but the extent of this sun worship lacks in common sense and good horse judgment.



Says Major Joseph Calvin, media coordinator for Kentuckians for Coal, "A mine is a terrible thing to waste."



This demonstration is open to all like-minded patriots. Everyone is invited to come and join in the protest. Kentuckians for Coal will provide five hundred 24 x 36-inch printed signs, but people are welcome to bring their own.



Kentuckians for Coal is grateful for the support of our esteemed president Donald J. Trump and the great Kentucky Senator Mitch McConnell.



Here are some sign slogans:



A Mine Is A Terrible Thing To Waste

Climate Change Is a Hoax!

Kentuckians for Coal

You can count on coal 24/7. You can't always depend on the sun!

Still Think Solar Makes Sense?

Coal Never Quits

You Can Depend On Coal!

The Solar Industry Is Modernizing Us Out of Jobs!

Blame Obama!

Coal was good enough for my forefathers, it's good enough for me!

This Is a Bluegrass-Roots protest!

This much time and money spent for 2 minutes and 40 seconds

That's what she said!

Pray for Rain!

What's Next? Global Warming?

Coal Power!

Clean Coal!

You Can't Always Count on the Sun!

Boycott the Eclipse!



For more information, please contact: Major Joseph Calvin, Media Coordinator, Kentuckians for Coal, P.O. Box 66-66, Hopkinsville, KY 42240

Email: kentuckycoalpower@gmail.com / Phone: 270-839-3250



Kentuckians for Coal is an ad-hoc citizens coalition of miners, union officials, family members and coal users created to defend the Kentucky coal industry against encroachment from renewable energy industries and from economic development initiatives aimed at lessening America's dependence on coal.



# # #