Australian Catholics pass judgement on royal commission calls to break confessional seal

Updated

Divisions are emerging in the Australian Catholic community over a controversial call for the seal of the confessional to be broken if a paedophile admits to sexually abusing a child.

The Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse has made 85 recommendations into the justice system, including a new criminal offence for failing to report child abuse.

Under the proposed law, Australians could be charged if they know, suspect or should have suspected a child is being molested, and do not go to the police.

That would include members of the clergy who would be breaking the law if they failed to report any abuse divulged to them during confession.

It has triggered a mixed response from the nation's Catholics.

Redefining the seal of the confessional

The plan has the support of one of Australia's most well-known Catholics, Melbourne priest Father Bob Maguire.

"The price of freedom is eternal vigilance and that's what the royal commission is doing," he said. "In principle, I agree that we should have mandatory reporting, especially in this vexed, vexed, vexed issue of child abuse."

At the moment, religious confessions are privileged in some parts of Australia, so members of the clergy can refuse to reveal anything that is confessed to them.

Father Bob wants more clarity over how the proposed law would work.

"What can I do? That's what I want to know. I want the bishops and the royal commission to tell me what to do," he said.

"In the confessional, am I to take the mobile phone and as soon as somebody says 'I have been involved in sexual abuse of children', press a button on the mobile phone?"

But he says the recommendations should still be taken seriously, even if they are distasteful to some Catholics.

"Everything should be resubmitted for [redefinition] in the post-modern age. So I want a redefinition of the seal of confession because the one we have now goes back 1,000 years."

A 'symbolic and silly' change

Deep within Melbourne's CBD is the Caroline Chisholm Library, a Catholic institution with close to 30,000 tomes covering subjects like church history, philosophy and mysticism.

Anthony Krohn is a lawyer from Ballarat who volunteers at the library and thinks breaking the seal of the confessional will not improve reporting on child sex abuse.

"Recidivist and remorseless child abusers are not going to be turning up for confession," he said.

"If there are people who do turn up who have abused, they're likely to be in a frame of mind, if the seal of confession is still there, to be open and then get good and sensible and constructive advice.

"It would be a sort of symbolic and silly change in the law because after all, who is going to be a witness of a potential breach of that?

"The priest and the penitent, and in neither case are they likely to be going to the police and be witnesses for the prosecution."

Mr Krohn said changing the law would be heavy-handed.

"I don't think that it would achieve a good that can't be achieved in another way, and I think that it would drive a wedge between ordinary Catholics' respect for the law of the land and their faith."

Jail before breaking the seal

Some of Australia's most well-known and highest-ranking clerics have already signalled they would oppose any changes to the privilege around religious confessions.

When asked if he would go to jail to uphold the sanctity of the confessional, the Archbishop of Melbourne, Denis Hart, told ABC Radio Melbourne he would.

"I've said that I would [go to jail]. I believe that this is an absolutely sacrosanct communication of a higher order."

Archbishop Hart denied suggestions priests would be above the law.

"I would go to extreme lengths outside of the confessional to make sure that the law was observed," he said. "But there are some matters which are of a higher order, things to do with God.

"If we leave the seal there, which is the position of the Church ... it's perhaps the only opportunity where a person who's offended or a child who's been hurt, can have the opportunity for broader advice and then outside the confessional for appropriate action to the taken."

But that reaction has been met with dismay and anger from Juliette Hughes-Norwood, a Catholic author from Melbourne's north.

"At what point do you say you're doing the right thing by disobeying the laws of the country?" she said. "You already disobeyed the laws of the country when you protected child abusers."

She wants the law to change.

"Have decency — put children first, put human dignity first not your position."

Topics: royal-commissions, catholic, religion-and-beliefs, child-abuse, community-and-society, melbourne-3000

First posted