CFR - Code of Federal Regulations Title 21
New Search Help | More About 21CFR [Code of Federal Regulations] [Title 21, Volume 2] [Revised as of April 1, 2016] [CITE: 21CFR133]











CHAPTER I--FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

SUBCHAPTER B--FOOD FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION PART 133 CHEESES AND RELATED CHEESE PRODUCTS TITLE 21--FOOD AND DRUGSCHAPTER I--FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATIONDEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES Subpart A--General Provisions Sec. 133.3 Definitions. (a) Milk means the lacteal secretion, practically free from colostrum, obtained by the complete milking of one or more healthy cows, which may be clarified and may be adjusted by separating part of the fat therefrom; concentrated milk, reconstituted milk, and dry whole milk. Water, in a sufficient quantity to reconstitute concentrated and dry forms, may be added. (b) Nonfat milk means skim milk, concentrated skim milk, reconstituted skim milk, and nonfat dry milk. Water, in a sufficient quantity to reconstitute concentrated and dry forms, may be added. (c) Cream means cream, reconstituted cream, dry cream, and plastic cream. Water, in a sufficient quantity to reconstitute concentrated and dry forms, may be added. (d) Pasteurized when used to describe a dairy ingredient means that every particle of such ingredient shall have been heated in properly operated equipment to one of the temperatures specified in the table of this paragraph and held continuously at or above that temperature for the specified time (or other time/temperature relationship which has been demonstrated to be equivalent thereto in microbial destruction): Temperature Time 145 deg. F 1 30 min. 161 deg. F 1 15 s. 191 deg. F 1 s. 204 deg. F 0.05 s. 212 deg. F 0.01 s. (e) Ultrapasteurized when used to describe a dairy ingredient means that such ingredient shall have been thermally processed at or above 280 deg. F for at least 2 seconds. Sec. 133.5 Methods of analysis. Moisture, milkfat, and phosphatase levels in cheeses will be determined by the following methods of analysis from "Official Methods of Analysis of the Association of Official Analytical Chemists," 13th ed., 1980, which is incorporated by reference (copies are available from the AOAC INTERNATIONAL, 481 North Frederick Ave., suite 500, Gaithersburg, MD 20877, or available for inspection at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/code_of_federal_regulations/ibr_locations.html ): (a) Moisture content--section 16.233 "Method I (52)--Official Final Action", under the heading "Moisture". (b) Milkfat content--section 16.255 "Fat (60)--Official Final Action". (c) Phenol equivalent value--section 16.275 "Reagents", section 16.276 "Sampling", and section 16.277 "Determination", under the heading "Residual Phosphatase (27) Official Final Action". (d) Milkfat in solids (fat on a dry basis)--Subtract the percent of moisture found from 100; divide the remainder into the percent milkfat found. The quotient, multiplied by 100, shall be considered to be the percent of milkfat contained in the solids. Sec. 133.10 Notice to manufacturers, packers, and distributors of pasteurized blended cheese, pasteurized process cheese, cheese food, cheese spread, and related foods. (a) Definitions and standards of identity have recently been promulgated under the authority of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act for a number of foods made in part from cheese, including pasteurized process cheese; pasteurized process cheese with fruits, vegetables, or meats; pasteurized blended cheese; pasteurized process cheese food; pasteurized process cheese spread, and related foods. These standards prescribe the name for each such food. The act requires that this name appear on the label. Many of these names consist of several words. In the past it has been the practice of some manufacturers to subordinate the words "pasteurized," "blended," "process," "food," and "spread" to give undue prominence to the word "cheese" and to words naming the variety of cheese involved. (b) When placing the names of these foods on labels so as to comply with the requirements of section 403 (a), (f), and (g) of the act, all the words forming the name specified by a definition and standard of identity should be given equal prominence. This can readily be accomplished by printing the specified name of the food in letters of the same size, color, and style of type, and with the same background. (c) Where the names of optional ingredients are required to appear on the label, the designations of all such ingredients should be given equal prominence. The names of the optional ingredients should appear prominently and conspicuously but should not be displayed with greater prominence than the name of the food. The word "contains" may precede the names of the optional ingredients, and when so used will not be considered as intervening printed matter between name of food and name of optional ingredients required to be placed on the label. (d) Where a manufacturer elects to include a label statement of fat and moisture content, the declaration should be on the basis of the food as marketed. A fat declaration on a moisture-free basis is likely to be misleading, and should not be used in labeling. Subpart B--Requirements for Specific Standardized Cheese and Related Products Sec. 133.102 Asiago fresh and asiago soft cheese. (a) Asiago fresh cheese, asiago soft cheese, is the food prepared from milk and other ingredients specified in this section, by the procedure set forth in paragraph (b) of this section, or by another procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties as the cheese produced when the procedure set forth in paragraph (b) of this section is used. It contains not more than 45 percent of moisture, and its solids contain not less than 50 percent of milkfat, as determined by the methods prescribed in 133.5 (a), (b), and (d). It is cured for not less than 60 days. (b) Milk which may be pasteurized or clarified or both, and which may be warmed, is subjected to the action of harmless lactic-acid producing bacteria, present in such milk or added thereto. Harmless artificial blue or green coloring in a quantity which neutralizes any natural yellow coloring in the curd may be added. Sufficient rennet, or other safe and suitable milk-clotting enzyme that produces equivalent curd formation, or both, with or without purified calcium chloride in a quantity not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the weight of the milk, is added to set the milk to a semisolid mass. The mass is cut, stirred, and heated to promote and regulate separation of the whey from the curd. The whey is drained off. When the curd is sufficiently firm it is removed from the kettle or vat, further drained for a short time, packed into hoops, and pressed. The pressed curd is salted in brine and cured in a well-ventilated room. During curing the surface of the cheese is occasionally rubbed with a vegetable oil. A harmless preparation of enzymes of animal or plant origin capable of aiding in the curing or development of flavor of asiago fresh cheese may be added during the procedure in such quantity that the weight of the solids of such preparation is not more than 0.1 percent of the weight of the milk used. (c)(1) For the purposes of this section, the word "milk" means cow's milk, which may be adjusted by separating part of the fat therefrom or by adding thereto one or more of the following: Cream, skim milk, concentrated skim milk, nonfat dry milk, water in a quantity sufficient to reconstitute any concentrated skim milk or nonfat dry milk used. (2) Such milk may be bleached by the use of benzoyl peroxide or a mixture of benzoyl peroxide with potassium alum, calcium sulfate, and magnesium carbonate; but the weight of the benzoyl peroxide is not more than 0.002 percent of the weight of the milk bleached, and the weight of the potassium alum, calcium sulfate, and magnesium carbonate, singly or combined, is not more than six times the weight of the benzoyl peroxide used. If milk is bleached in this manner, sufficient vitamin A is added to the curd to compensate for the vitamin A or its precursors destroyed in the bleaching process, and artificial coloring is not used. (d) Safe and suitable antimycotic agent(s), the cumulative levels of which shall not exceed current good manufacturing practice, may be added to the surface of the cheese. (e) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes". Sec. 133.103 Asiago medium cheese. Asiago medium cheese conforms to the definition and standard of identity and is subject to the requirements for label statement of ingredients prescribed by 133.102 for asiago fresh cheese, except that it contains not more than 35 percent moisture, its solids contain not less than 45 percent of milkfat, and it is cured for not less than 6 months. Sec. 133.104 Asiago old cheese. Asiago old cheese conforms to the definition and standard of identity and is subject to the requirements for label statement of ingredients prescribed by 133.102 for asiago fresh cheese, except that it contains not more than 32 percent moisture, its solids contain not less than 42 percent of milk fat, and it is cured for not less than 1 year. Sec. 133.106 Blue cheese. (a) Description. (1) Blue cheese is the food prepared by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(2), of this section, or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. It is characterized by the presence of bluish-green mold, Penicillium roquefortii, throughout the cheese. The minimum milkfat content is 50 percent by weight of the solids and the maximum moisture content is 46 percent by weight, as determined by the methods described in 133.5. The dairy ingredients used may be pasteurized. Blue cheese is at least 60 days old. (2) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be homogenized, bleached, warmed, and is subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to set the dairy ingredients to a semisolid mass. The mass is cut into smaller portions and allowed to stand for a time. The mixed curd and whey is placed in forms permitting further drainage. While the curd is being placed in forms, spores of the mold Penicillium roquefortii are added. The forms are turned several times during drainage. When sufficiently drained, the shaped curd is removed from the forms and salted with dry salt or brine. Perforations are then made in the shaped curd, and it is held at a temperature of approximately 50 deg. F. at 90 to 95 percent relative humidity, until the characteristic mold growth has developed. During storage the surface of the cheese may be scraped to remove surface growth of undesirable microorganisms. Antimycotics may be applied to the surface of the whole cheese. One or more of the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedure. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat milk, or cream, as defined in 133.3, used alone or in combination. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Blue or green color in an amount to neutralize the natural yellow color of the curd. (ii) Calcium chloride in an amount not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the weight of the dairy ingredients, used as a coagulation aid. (iii) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin, used in curing or flavor development. (iv) Antimycotic agents, applied to the surface of slices or cuts in consumer-sized packages or to the surface of the bulk cheese during curing. (v) Benzoyl peroxide or a mixture of benzoyl peroxide with potassium alum, calcium sulfate, and magnesium carbonate used to bleach the dairy ingredients. The weight of the benzoyl peroxide is not more than 0.002 percent of the weight of the milk being bleached, and the weight of the potassium alum, calcium sulfate, and magnesium carbonate, singly or combined, is not more than six times the weight of the benzoyl peroxide used. If milk is bleached in this manner, vitamin A is added to the curd in such quantity as to compensate for the vitamin A or its precursors destroyed in the bleaching process, and artificial coloring is not used. (vi) Vegetable fats or oils, which may be hydrogenated, used as a coating for the rind. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "blue cheese." (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order of predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat", as appropriate. Sec. 133.108 Brick cheese. (a) Description. (1) Brick cheese is the food prepared from dairy ingredients and other ingredients specified in this section by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. The minimum milkfat content is 50 percent by weight of the solids and the maximum moisture content is 44 percent by weight, as determined by the methods described in 133.5. If the dairy ingredients used are not pasteurized, the cheese is cured at a temperature of not less than 35 deg. F for at least 60 days. (2) If pasteurized dairy ingredients are used, the phenol equivalent value of 0.25 gram of brick cheese is not more than 5 micrograms as determined by the method described in 133.5. (3) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section is brought to a temperature of about 88 deg. F and subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culutre. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to set the dairy ingredients to a semisolid mass. The mass is cut into cubes with sides approximately 3/8 inch long, and stirred and heated so that the temperature rises slowly to about 96 deg. F. The stirring is continued until the curd is sufficiently firm. Part of the whey is then removed, and the mixture diluted with water or salt brine to control the acidity. The curd is transferred to forms, and drained. During drainage it is pressed and turned. After drainage the curd is salted, and the biological curing agents characteristic of brick cheese are applied to the surface. The cheese is then cured to develop the characteristics of brick cheese. One or more of the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedure. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat milk, or cream, as defined in 133.3, used alone or in combination. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Coloring. (ii) Calcium chloride in an amount not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the weight of the dairy ingredients, used as a coagulation aid. (iii) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin, used in curing or flavor development. (iv) Antimycotic agents, the cumulative level of which shall not exceed current good manufacturing practice, may be added to the surface of the cheese. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "brick cheese". (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order of predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat", as appropriate. Sec. 133.109 Brick cheese for manufacturing. Brick cheese for manufacturing conforms to the definition and standard of identity for brick cheese prescribed by 133.108, except that the dairy ingredients are not pasteurized and curing is not required. Sec. 133.111 Caciocavallo siciliano cheese. (a) Caciocavallo siciliano cheese is the food prepared from cow's milk or sheep's milk or goat's milk or mixtures of two or all of these and other ingredients specified in this section, by the procedure set forth in paragraph (b) of this section, or by another procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties as the cheese produced when the procedure set forth in paragraph (b) of this section is used. It has a stringy texture, and is made in oblong shapes. It contains not more than 40 percent of moisture, and its solids contain not less than 42 percent milkfat as determined by the methods prescribed in 133.5 (a), (b), and (d). It is cured for not less than 90 days at a temperature of not less than 35 deg. F. (b) Milk, which may be pasteurized or clarified or both, and which may be warmed, is subjected to the action of harmless lactic-acid-producing bacteria, present in such milk or added thereto. Harmless artificial blue or green coloring in a quantity which neutralizes any natural yellow coloring in the curd may be added. Sufficient rennet, rennet paste, extract of rennet paste, or other safe and suitable milk-clotting enzyme that produces equivalent curd formation, singly or in any combination (with or without purified calcium chloride in a quantity not more than 0.02 percent, calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride, of the weight of the milk) is added to set the milk to a semisolid mass. The mass is cut, stirred, and heated so as to promote and regulate the separation of whey from curd. The whey is drained off, and the curd is removed to another vat containing hot whey, in which it is soaked for several hours. This whey is withdrawn, the curd is allowed to mat, and is cut into blocks. These are washed in hot whey until the desired elasticity is obtained. The curd is removed from the vat, drained, pressed into oblong forms, dried, and salted in brine, and cured. It may be paraffined. A harmless preparation of enzymes of animal or plant origin capable of aiding in the curing or development of flavor of caciocavallo siciliano cheese may be added during the procedure, in such quantity that the weight of the solids of such preparation is not more than 0.1 percent of the weight of the milk used. (c)(1) For the purposes of this section, the word "milk" means cow's milk or goat's milk or sheep's milk or mixtures of two or all of these. Such milk may be adjusted by separating part of the fat therefrom or (in the case of cow's milk) by adding one or more of the following: Cream, skim milk, concentrated skim milk, nonfat dry milk; (in the case of goat's milk) the corresponding products from goat's milk; (in the case of sheep's milk) the corresponding products from sheep's milk; water in a quantity sufficient to reconstitute any such concentrated or dried products used. (2) Such milk may be bleached by the use of benzoyl peroxide or a mixture of benzoyl peroxide with potassium alum, calcium sulfate, and magnesium carbonate; but the weight of the benzoyl peroxide is not more than 0.002 percent of the weight of the milk bleached, and the weight of the potassium alum, calcium sulfate, and magnesium carbonate, singly or combined, is not more than six times the weight of the benzoyl peroxide used. If milk is bleached in this manner, sufficient vitamin A is added to the curd to compensate for the vitamin A or its precursors destroyed in the bleaching process, and artificial coloring is not used. (d) Safe and suitable antimycotic agent(s), the cumulative levels of which shall not exceed current good manufacturing practice, may be added to the cheese during the kneading and stretching process and/or applied to the surface of the cheese. (e) When caciocavallo siciliano cheese is made solely from cow's milk, the name of such cheese is "Caciocavallo siciliano cheese". When made from sheep's milk or goat's milk or mixtures of these, or one or both of these with cow's milk, the name is followed by the words "made from ___", the blank being filled in with the name or names of the milks used, in order of predominance by weight. (f) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes". Sec. 133.113 Cheddar cheese. (a) Description. (1) Cheddar cheese is the food prepared by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. The minimum milkfat content is 50 percent by weight of the solids, and the maximum moisture content is 39 percent by weight, as determined by the methods described in 133.5. If the dairy ingredients used are not pasteurized, the cheese is cured at a temperature of not less than 35 deg. F for at least 60 days. (2) If pasteurized dairy ingredients are used, the phenol equivalent value of 0.25 gram of cheddar cheese is not more than 3 micrograms as determined by the method described in 133.5. (3) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be warmed, treated with hydrogen peroxide/catalase, and is subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to set the dairy ingredients to a semisolid mass. The mass is so cut, stirred, and heated with continued stirring, as to promote and regulate the separation of whey and curd. The whey is drained off, and the curd is matted into a cohesive mass. The mass is cut into slabs, which are so piled and handled as to promote the drainage of whey and the development of acidity. The slabs are then cut into pieces, which may be rinsed by sprinkling or pouring water over them, with free and continuous drainage; but the duration of such rinsing is so limited that only the whey on the surface of such pieces is removed. The curd is salted, stirred, further drained, and pressed into forms. One or more of the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedure. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat milk, or cream, as defined in 133.3, used alone or in combination. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Coloring. (ii) Calcium chloride in an amount not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the weight of the dairy ingredients, used as a coagulation aid. (iii) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial orgin, used in curing or flavor development. (iv) Antimycotic agents, applied to the surface of slices or cuts in consumer-sized packages. (v) Hydrogen peroxide, followed by a sufficient quantity of catalase preparation to eliminate the hydrogen peroxide. The weight of the hydrogen peroxide shall not exceed 0.05 percent of the weight of the milk and the weight of the catalase shall not exceed 20 parts per million of the weight of the milk treated. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "cheddar cheese". (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order or predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat", as appropriate. Sec. 133.114 Cheddar cheese for manufacturing. Cheddar cheese for manufacturing conforms to the definition and standard of identity prescribed for cheddar cheese by 133.113, except that the milk is not pasteurized, curing is not required, and the provisions of paragraph (b)(3)(iv) of that section do not apply. Sec. 133.116 Low sodium cheddar cheese. Low sodium cheddar cheese is the food prepared from the same ingredients and in the same manner prescribed in 133.113 for cheddar cheese and complies with all the provisions of 133.113, including the requirements for label statement of ingredients, except that: (a) It contains not more than 96 milligrams of sodium per pound of finished food. (b) The name of the food is "low sodium cheddar cheese". The letters in the words "low sodium" shall be of the same size and style of type as the letters in the words "cheddar cheese", wherever such words appear on the label. (c) If a salt substitute is used, the label shall bear the statement "___ added as a salt substitute", the blank being filled in with the common name or names of the ingredient or ingredients used as a salt substitute. (d) Low sodium cheddar cheese is subject to 105.69 of this chapter. Sec. 133.118 Colby cheese. (a) Colby cheese is the food prepared from milk and other ingredients specified in this section, by the procedure set forth in paragraph (b) of this section, or by another procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties as the cheese produced when the procedure set forth in paragraph (b) of this section is used. It contains not more than 40 percent of moisture, and its solids contain not less than 50 percent of milkfat, as determined by the methods prescribed in 133.5 (a), (b), and (d). If the milk used is not pasteurized, the cheese so made is cured at a temperature of not less than 35 deg. F for not less than 60 days. (b) Milk, which may be pasteurized or clarified or both, and which may be warmed, is subjected to the action of harmless lactic-acid-producing bacteria, present in such milk or added thereto. Harmless artificial coloring may be added. Sufficient rennet, or other safe and suitable milk-clotting enzyme that produces equivalent curd formation, or both, with or without purified calcium chloride in a quantity not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the weight of the milk, is added to set the milk to a semisolid mass. The mass is so cut, stirred, and heated with continued stirring, as to promote and regulate the separation of whey and curd. A part of the whey is drained off, and the curd is cooled by adding water, the stirring being continued so as to prevent the pieces of curd from matting. The curd is drained, salted, stirred, further drained, and pressed into forms. A harmless preparation of enzymes of animal or plant origin capable of aiding in the curing or development of flavor of colby cheese may be added during the procedure, in such quantity that the weight of the solids of such preparation is not more than 0.1 percent of the weight of the milk used. (c) For the purposes of this section: (1) The word "milk" means cow's milk, which may be adjusted by separating part of the fat therefrom or by adding thereto one or more of the following: Cream, skim milk, concentrated skim milk, nonfat dry milk, water, in a quantity sufficient to reconstitute any concentrated skim milk or nonfat dry milk used. (2) Milk shall be deemed to have been pasteurized if it has been held at a temperature of not less than 143 deg. F for a period of not less than 30 minutes, or for a time and at a temperature equivalent thereto in phosphatase destruction. Colby cheese shall be deemed not to have been made from pasteurized milk if 0.25 gram shows a phenol equivalent of more than 3 micrograms when tested by the method prescribed in 133.5(c). (3) During the cheesemaking process the milk may be treated with hydrogen peroxide/catalase as provided in 133.113(a)(3). (d)(1) Colby cheese in the form of slices or cuts may have added to it a clear aqueous solution prepared by condensing or precipitating wood smoke in water. (2) Colby cheese in the form of slices or cuts in consumer-sized packages may contain an optional mold-inhibiting ingredient consisting of sorbic acid, potassium sorbate, sodium sorbate, or any combination of two or more of these, in an amount not to exceed 0.3 percent by weight calculated as sorbic acid. (e)(1) If colby cheese has added to it a clear aqueous solution prepared by condensing or precipitating wood smoke in water as provided in paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the name of the food is immediately followed by the words "with added smoke flavoring" with all words in this phrase of the same type size, style, and color without intervening written, printed, or graphic matter. (2) If colby cheese in sliced or cut form contains an optional mold-inhibiting ingredient as specified in paragraph (d)(2) of this section, the label shall bear the statement "___ added to retard mold growth" or "___ added as a preservative", the blank being filled in with the common name or names of the mold-inhibiting ingredient or ingredients used. (3) Wherever the name of the food appears on the label so conspicuously as to be easily seen under customary conditions of purchase, the statement specified in paragraph (e)(2) of this section, showing the optional ingredient used, shall immediately and conspicuously precede or follow such name, without intervening written, printed, or graphic matter except for the statement "with added smoke flavoring," as set forth in paragraph (e)(1) of this section. (f) Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes". Sec. 133.119 Colby cheese for manufacturing. Colby cheese for manufacturing conforms to the definition and standard of identity prescribed for colby cheese by 133.118, except that the milk is not pasteurized, curing is not required, and the provisions of paragraph (d) of that section do not apply. Sec. 133.121 Low sodium colby cheese. Low sodium colby cheese is the food prepared from the same ingredients and in the same manner prescribed in 133.118 for colby cheese and complies with all the provisions of 133.118, including the requirements for label statement of ingredients, except that: (a) Salt is not used. Any safe and suitable ingredient or combination of ingredients that contains no sodium and that is recognized as a salt substitute may be used. (b) Sodium sorbate is not used. (c) It contains not more than 96 milligrams of sodium per pound of finished food. (d) The name of the food is "low sodium colby cheese". The letters in the words "low sodium" shall be of the same size and style of type as the letters in the words "colby cheese", wherever such words appear on the label. (e) If a salt substitute as provided for in paragraph (a) of this section is used, the label shall bear the statement "___ added as a salt substitute", the blank being filled in with the common name or names of the ingredient or ingredients used as a salt substitute. (f) Low sodium colby cheese is subject to 105.69 of this chapter. Sec. 133.123 Cold-pack and club cheese. (a)(1) Cold-pack cheese, club cheese, is the food prepared by comminuting, without the aid of heat, one or more cheeses of the same or two or more varieties, except cream cheese, neufchatel cheese, cottage cheese, lowfat cottage cheese, cottage cheese dry curd, hard grating cheese, semisoft part-skim cheese, part-skim spiced cheese and skim milk cheese for manufacturing, into a homogeneous plastic mass. One or more of the optional ingredients designated in paragraph (c) of this section may be used. (2) All cheeses used in a cold-pack cheese are made from pasteurized milk or are held for not less than 60 days at a temperature of not less than 35 deg. F before being comminuted. (3)(i) The moisture content of a cold-pack cheese made from a single variety of cheese is not more than the maximum moisture content prescribed by the definition and standard of identity, if any there be, for the variety of cheese used. If there is no applicable definition and standard of identity, or if such standard contains no provision as to maximum moisture content, no water is used in the preparation of the cold-pack cheese. (ii) The fat content of the solids of a cold-pack cheese made from a single variety of cheese is not less than the minimum prescribed by the definition and standard of identity, if any there be, for the variety of cheese used, but in no case is less than 47 percent, except that the fat content of the solids of cold-pack swiss cheese is not less than 43 percent, and the fat content of the solids of cold-pack gruyere cheese is not less than 45 percent. (4)(i) The moisture content of a cold-pack cheese made from two or more varieties of cheese is not more than the arithmetical average of the maximum moisture contents prescribed by the definitions and standards of identity, if any there be, for the varieties of cheese used, but in no case is the moisture content more than 42 percent, except that the moisture content of a cold-pack cheese made from two or more of the varieties cheddar cheese, washed curd cheese, colby cheese, and granular cheese is not more than 39 percent. (ii) The fat content of the solids of a cold-pack cheese made from two or more varieties of cheese is not less than the arithmetical average of the minimum percent of fat prescribed by the definitions and standards of identity, if any there be, for the varieties of cheese used, but in no case is less than 47 percent, except that the fat content of the solids of a cold-pack cheese made from swiss cheese and gruyere cheese is not less than 45 percent. (5) Moisture and fat are determined by the methods prescribed in 133.5(a), (b), and (d). (6) The weight of each variety of cheese in a cold-pack cheese made from two varieties of cheese is not less than 25 percent of the total weight of both, except that the weight of blue cheese, nuworld cheese, roquefort cheese, or gorgonzola cheese is not less than 10 percent of the total weight of both, and the weight of limburger cheese is not less than 5 percent of the total weight of both. The weight of each variety of cheese in a cold-pack cheese made from three or more varieties of cheese is not less than 15 percent of the total weight of all, except that the weight of blue cheese, nuworld cheese, roquefort cheese, or gorgonzola cheese is not less than 5 percent of the total weight of all, and the weight of limburger cheese is not less than 3 percent of the total weight of all. These limits do not apply to the quantity of cheddar cheese, washed curd cheese, colby cheese, and granular cheese in mixtures which are designated as "American cheese" as prescribed in paragraph (d)(2) of this section. Such mixtures are considered as one variety of cheese for the purpose of this paragraph (a)(6). (b) Cold-pack cheese may be smoked, or the cheese or cheeses from which it is made may be smoked, before comminuting and mixing, or it may contain substances prepared by condensing or precipitating wood smoke. (c) The optional ingredients referred to in paragraph (a) of this section are: (1) An acidifying agent consisting of one or any mixture of two or more of the following: A vinegar, lactic acid, citric acid, acetic acid, and phosphoric acid, in such quantity that the pH of the finished cold-pack cheese is not below 4.5. For the purposes of this section vinegar is considered to be acetic acid. (2) Water. (3) Salt. (4) Harmless artificial coloring. (5) Spices or flavorings, other than any which singly or in combination with other ingredients simulate the flavor of a cheese of any age or variety. (6) Cold-pack cheese in consumer-sized packages may contain an optional mold-inhibiting ingredient consisting of sorbic acid, potassium sorbate, sodium sorbate, or any combination of two or more of these, in an amount not to exceed 0.3 percent by weight, calculated as sorbic acid or consisting of not more than 0.3 percent by weight of sodium propionate, calcium propionate, or a combination of sodium propionate and calcium propionate. (d)(1) The name of a cold-pack cheese for which a definition and standard of identity is prescribed by this section is "Cold-pack ___ cheese", "___ cold-pack cheese" or "___ club cheese", the blanks being filled in with the name or names of the varieties of cheese used, in order of predominance by weight. (2) If the cold-pack cheese is made of cheddar cheese, washed curd cheese, colby cheese, or granular cheese or any mixture of two or more of these, it may be designated "Cold-pack American cheese"; or when cheddar cheese, washed curd cheese, colby cheese, granular cheese, or any mixture of two or more of these is combined with other varieties of cheese in the cheese ingredient any of such cheeses or such mixture may be designated as "American cheese". (3) The full name of the food shall appear on the principal display panel of the label in type of uniform size, style, and color. Wherever any word or statement emphasizing the name of any ingredient appears on the label (other than in an ingredient statement as specified in paragraph (f) of this section) so conspicuously as to be easily seen under customary conditions of purchase, the full name of the food shall immediately and conspicuously precede or follow such word or statement in type of at least the same size as the type used in such word or statement. (e) The name of the food shall include a declaration of any flavoring, including smoke and substances prepared by condensing or precipitating wood smoke, that characterizes the product as specified in 101.22 of this chapter and a declaration of any spice that characterizes the product. (f) Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that cheddar cheese, washed curd cheese, colby cheese, granular cheese, or any mixture of two or more of these, may be designated as "American cheese". (1) Artificial coloring need not be declared. (2) If the cheese ingredient contains cheddar cheese, washed curd cheese, colby cheese, granular cheese, or any mixture of two or more of these, such cheese or such mixture may be designated as "American cheese". Sec. 133.124 Cold-pack cheese food. (a)(1) Cold-pack cheese food is the food prepared by comminuting and mixing, without the aid of heat, one or more of the optional cheese ingredients prescribed in paragraph (c) of this section with one or more of the optional dairy ingredients prescribed in paragraph (d) of this section, into a homogeneous plastic mass. One or more of the optional ingredients specified in paragraph (e) of this section may be used. (2) All cheeses used in a cold-pack cheese food are made from pasteurized milk, or are held for not less than 60 days at a temperature of not less than 35 deg. F before being comminuted. (3) The moisture content of a cold-pack cheese food is not more than 44 percent, and the fat content is not less than 23 percent. (4) Moisture and fat are determined by the methods prescribed in 133.5 (a), (b), and (d), except that in determining moisture the loss in weight which occurs in drying for 5 hours, under the conditions prescribed in such method, is taken as the weight of moisture. (5) The weight of the cheese ingredient prescribed by paragraph (a)(1) of this section constitutes not less than 51 percent of the weight of the finished cold-pack cheese food. (6) The weight of each variety of cheese in the cold-pack cheese food made with two varieties of cheese is not less than 25 percent of the total weight of both, except that the weight of blue cheese, nuworld cheese, roquefort cheese, gorgonzola cheese, or limburger cheese is not less than 10 percent of the total weight of both. The weight of each variety of cheese in the cold-pack cheese food made with three or more varieties of cheese is not less than 15 percent of the total weight of all, except that the weight of blue cheese, nuworld cheese, roquefort cheese, gorgonzola cheese, or limburger cheese is not less than 5 percent of the total weight of all. These limits do not apply to the quantity of cheddar cheese, washed curd cheese, colby cheese, and granular cheese in mixtures which are designated as "American cheese" as prescribed in paragraph (h)(5) of this section. Such mixtures are considered as one variety of cheese for the purposes of this paragraph (a)(6). (b) Cold-pack cheese food may be smoked, or the cheese or cheeses from which it is made may be smoked, before comminuting and mixing, or it may contain substances prepared by condensing or precipitating wood smoke. (c) The optional cheese ingredients referred to in paragraph (a) of this section are: One or more cheeses of the same or two or more varieties, except that cream cheese, neufchatel cheese, cottage cheese, creamed cottage cheese, cook cheese, and skim-milk cheese for manufacturing are not used, and except that semisoft part-skim cheese, part-skim spiced cheese, and hard grating cheese may not be used, alone or in combination with each other, as the cheese ingredient. (d) The optional dairy ingredients referred to in paragraph (a) of this section are: Cream, milk, skim milk, buttermilk, cheese whey, any of the foregoing from which part of the water has been removed, anhydrous milkfat, dehydrated cream, skim milk cheese for manufacturing, and albumin from cheese whey. All optional dairy ingredients used in cold-pack cheese food are pasteurized or made from products that have been pasteurized. (e) The other optional ingredients referred to in paragraph (a) of this section are: (1) An acidifying agent consisting of one or any mixture of two or more of the following: A vinegar, lactic acid, citric acid, acetic acid, and phosphoric acid, in such quantity that the pH of the finished cold-pack cheese food is not below 4.5. (2) Water. (3) Salt. (4) Harmless artificial coloring. (5) Spices or flavorings, other than any which singly or in combination with other ingredients simulate the flavor of cheese of any age or variety. (6) A sweetening agent consisting of one or any mixture of two or more of the following: Sugar, dextrose, corn sugar, corn sirup, corn sirup solids, glucose sirup, glucose sirup solids, maltose, malt sirup, and hydrolyzed lactose, in a quantity necessary for seasoning. (7) Cold-pack cheese food in consumer-sized packages may contain an optional mold-inhibiting ingredient consisting of sorbic acid, potassium sorbate, sodium sorbate, or any combination of two or more of these, in an amount not to exceed 0.3 percent by weight, calculated as sorbic acid or consisting of not more than 0.3 percent by weight of sodium propionate, calcium propionate, or a combination of sodium propionate and calcium propionate. (8) In the preparation of cold-pack cheese food, guar gum or xanthan gum, or both, may be used, but the total quantity of such ingredient or combination is not to exceed 0.3 percent of the weight of the finished food. When one or both such optional ingredients is used, dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate complying with the requirements of 172.810 of this chapter may be used in a quantity not in excess of 0.5 percent by weight of such ingredient or ingredients. (f) The name of the food is "cold-pack cheese food". The full name of the food shall appear on the principal display panel of the label in type of uniform size, style, and color. Wherever any word or statement emphasizing the name of (other than in an ingredient statement any ingredient appears on the label as specified in paragraph (h) of this section) so conspicuously as to be easily seen under customary conditions of purchase, the full name of the food shall immediately and conspicuously precede or follow such word or statement in type of at least the same size as the type used in such word or statement. (g) The name of the food shall include a declaration of any flavoring, including smoke and substances prepared by condensing or precipitating wood smoke, that characterizes the product as specified in 101.22 of this chapter and a declaration of any spice that characterizes the product. (h) Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that cheddar cheese, washed curd cheese, colby cheese, granular cheese, or any mixture of two or more of these, may be designated as "American cheese". Sec. 133.125 Cold-pack cheese food with fruits, vegetables, or meats. (a) Cold-pack cheese food with fruits, vegetables, or meats or mixtures of these is the food which conforms to the definition and standard of identity, and is subject to the requirements for label declaration of ingredients, prescribed for cold pack cheese food by 133.124, except that: (1) Its milk fat content is not less than 22 percent. (2) It contains one or any mixture of two or more of the following: Any properly prepared fresh, cooked, canned, or dried vegetable; any properly prepared cooked or canned meat. (3) When the added fruits, vegetables, or meats contain fat, the method prescribed for the determination of fat by 133.5(b) and (d) is not applicable. (b) The name of a cold-pack cheese food with fruits, vegetables or meats is "Cold-pack cheese food with ___", the blank being filled in with the common or usual name or names of the fruits, vegetables, or meats used, in order of predominance by weight. Sec. 133.127 Cook cheese, koch kaese. (a) Description. (1) Cook cheese, koch kaese, is the food prepared by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(3) of this section or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. The maximum moisture content is 80 percent by weight, as determined by the method described in 133.5. The dairy ingredients used may be pasteurized. (2) The phenol equivalent value of 0.25 gram of cook cheese is not more than 3 micrograms as determined by the method described in 133.5. (3) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be warmed and is subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to set the dairy ingredients to a semisolid mass. The mass is cut, stirred, and heated with continued stirring, so as to separate the curd and whey. The whey is drained from the curd and the curd is cured for 2 or 3 days. It is then heated to a temperature of not less than 180 deg. F until the hot curd will drop from a ladle with a consistency like that of honey. The hot cheese is filled into packages and cooled. One or more of the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedure. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Nonfat milk as defined in 133.3. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Calcium chloride in an amount not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the weight of the dairy ingredients, used as a coagulation aid. (ii) Culture of white mold. (iii) Pasteurized cream. (iv) Caraway seed. (v) Salt. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "cook cheese" or, alternatively, "koch kaese". (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130, except that enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes". Sec. 133.128 Cottage cheese. (a) Cottage cheese is the soft uncured cheese prepared by mixing cottage cheese dry curd with a creaming mixture as provided in paragraph (b) of this section. The milkfat content is not less than 4 percent by weight of the finished food, within limits of good manufacturing practice. The finished food contains not more than 80 percent of moisture, as determined by the method prescribed in 133.129(a). (b) The creaming mixture is prepared from safe and suitable ingredients including, but not limited to, milk or substances derived from milk. Any ingredients used that are not derived from milk shall serve a useful function other than building the total solids content of the finished food, and shall be used in a quantity not greater than is reasonably required to accomplish their intended effect. The creaming mixture shall be pasteurized; however, heat labile ingredients, such as bacterial starters, may be added following pasteurization. (c) The name of the food consists of the following two phrases which shall appear together: (1) The words "cottage cheese" which shall appear in type of the same size and style. (2) The statement "not less than _ percent milkfat" or "_ percent milkfat minimum", the blank being filled in with the whole number that is closest to, but does not exceed, the actual fat content of the product. This statement of fat content shall appear in letters not less than one-half of the height of the letters in the phrase specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, but in no case less than one-eighth of an inch in height. (d) When the optional process described in 133.129(b)(1) (ii) or (iii) is used to make the cottage cheese dry curd used in cottage cheese, the label shall bear the statement "Directly set" or "Curd set by direct acidification". Wherever the name of the food appears on the label so conspicuously as to be seen under customary conditions of purchase, the statement specified in this paragraph, showing the optional process used, shall immediately and conspicuously precede or follow such name without intervening written, printed, or graphic matter. (e) Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that milk-clotting enzymes may be declared by the word "enzymes". Sec. 133.129 Dry curd cottage cheese. (a) Cottage cheese dry curd is the soft uncured cheese prepared by the procedure set forth in paragraph (b) of this section. The finished food contains less than 0.5 percent milkfat. It contains not more than 80 percent of moisture, as determined by the method prescribed in 133.5(a). (b)(1) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is pasteurized; calcium chloride may be added in a quantity of not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the weight of the mix; thereafter one of the following methods is employed: (i) Harmless lactic-acid-producing bacteria, with or without rennet and/or other safe and suitable milk-clotting enzyme that produces equivalent curd formation, are added and it is held until it becomes coagulated. The coagulated mass may be cut; it may be warmed; it may be stirred; it is then drained. The curd may be washed with water and further drained; it may be pressed, chilled, worked, seasoned with salt; or (ii) Food grade phosphoric acid, lactic acid, citric acid, or hydrochloric acid, with or without rennet and/or other safe and suitable milk-clotting enzyme that produces equivalent curd formation, is added in such amount as to reach a pH of between 4.5 and 4.7; coagulation to a firm curd is achieved while heating to a maximum of 120 deg. F without agitation during a continuous process. The coagulated mass may be cut; it may be warmed; it may be stirred; it is then drained. The curd is washed with water, stirred, and further drained. It may be pressed, chilled, worked, seasoned with salt. (iii) Food grade acids as provided in paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section, D-Glucono-delta-lactone with or without rennet, and/or other safe and suitable milk clotting enzyme that produces equivalent curd formation, are added in such amounts as to reach a final pH value in the range of 4.5-4.8, and it is held until it becomes coagulated. The coagulated mass may be cut; it may be warmed; it may be stirred; it is then drained. The curd is then washed with water, and further drained. It may be pressed, chilled, worked, and seasoned with salt. (2) The dairy ingredients referred to in paragraph (b)(1) of this section are sweet skim milk, concentrated skim milk, and nonfat dry milk. If concentrated skim milk or nonfat dry milk is used, water may be added in a quantity not in excess of that removed when the skim milk was concentrated or dried. (3) For the purposes of this section the term "skim milk" means the milk of cows from which the milk fat has been separated, and "concentrated skim milk" means skim milk from which a portion of the water has been removed by evaporation. (c) The name of the food consists of the following two phrases which shall appear together: (1) The words "cottage cheese dry curd" or alternatively "dry curd cottage cheese" which shall all appear in type of the same size and style. (2) The words "less than 1/2% milkfat" which shall all appear in letters not less than one-half of the height of the letters in the phrase specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, but in no case less than one-eighth of an inch in height. (d) When either of the optional processes described in paragraph (b)(1) (ii) or (iii) of this section is used to make cottage cheese dry curd, the label shall bear the statement "Directly set" or "Curd set by direct acidification". Wherever the name of the food appears on the label so conspicuously as to be seen under customary conditions of purchase, the statement specified in this paragraph, showing the optional process used, shall immediately and conspicuously precede or follow such name without intervening written, printed, or graphic matter. (e) Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that milk-clotting enzymes may be declared by the word "enzymes". Sec. 133.133 Cream cheese. (a) Description. (1) Cream cheese is the soft, uncured cheese prepared by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. The minimum milkfat content is 33 percent by weight of the finished food, and the maximum moisture content is 55 percent by weight, as determined by the methods described in 133.5. The dairy ingredients used are pasteurized. (2) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be homogenized and is subjected to the action of lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to coagulate the dairy ingredients. The coagulated mass may be warmed and stirred and it is drained. The moisture content may be adjusted with one or more of the optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section. The curd may be pressed, chilled, and worked and it may be heated until it becomes fluid. It may then be homogenized or otherwise mixed. One or more of the optional dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) and the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedure. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat milk, or cream, as defined in 133.3, used alone or in combination. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Salt. (ii) Cheese whey, concentrated cheese whey, dried cheese whey, or reconstituted cheese whey prepared by addition of water to concentrated cheese whey or dried cheese whey. (iii) Stabilizers, in a total amount not to exceed 0.5 percent of the weight of the finished food, with or without the addition of dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate in a maximum amount of 0.5 percent of the weight of the stabilizer(s) used. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "cream cheese". (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial original may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order of predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat", as appropriate. Sec. 133.134 Cream cheese with other foods. (a) Description. Cream cheese with other foods is the class of foods prepared by mixing, with or without the aid of heat, cream cheese with one or a mixture of two or more types of foods (except other cheeses) listed in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, in an amount sufficient to differentiate the mixture from cream cheese. One or more of the other optional ingredients in paragraph (b)(2) of this section may be used. The maximum moisture content of the mixture is 60 percent by weight. The minimum milkfat is 33 percent by weight of the cream cheese and in no case less than 27 percent of the finished food. The moisture and fat contents will be determined by the methods described in 133.5, except that the method for determination of fat content is not applicable when the added food contains fat. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable optional ingredients may be used: (1) Foods. Properly prepared fresh, cooked, canned, or dried fruits or vegetables; cooked or canned meats, relishes, pickles, or other suitable foods. (2) Other optional ingredients. (i) Stabilizers, in a total amount not to exceed 0.8 percent, with or without the addition of dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate in a maximum amount of 0.5 percent of the weight of the stabilizer(s) used. (ii) Coloring. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "cream cheese with ___" or, alternatively, "cream cheese and ___", the blank being filled in with the name of the foods used in order of predominance by weight. (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order of predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat", as appropriate. Sec. 133.136 Washed curd and soaked curd cheese. (a) Description. (1) Washed curd, soaked curd cheese is the food prepared by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(3) of this section or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. The minimum milkfat content is 50 percent by weight of the solids and the maximum moisture content is 42 percent by weight, as determined by the methods described in 133.5. If the dairy ingredients used are not pasteurized, the cheese is cured at a temperature of not less than 35 deg. F for at least 60 days. (2) If pasteurized dairy ingredients are used, the phenol equivalent value of 0.25 gram of washed curd cheese is not more than 3 micrograms as determined by the method described in 133.5. (3) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be warmed, treated with hydrogen peroxide/catalase, and is subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to set the dairy ingredients to a semisolid mass. The mass is so cut, stirred, and heated with continued stirring, as to promote and regulate the separation of whey and curd. The whey is drained off, and the curd is matted into a cohesive mass. The mass is cut into slabs, which are so piled and handled as to promote the drainage of whey and the development of acidity. The slabs are then cut into pieces, cooled in water, and soaked therein until the whey is partly extracted and water is absorbed. The curd is drained, salted, stirred, and pressed into forms. One or more of the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedure. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat milk, or cream, as defined in 133.3, used alone or in combination. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Coloring. (ii) Calcium chloride in an amount not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the weight of the dairy ingredients, used as a coagulation aid. (iii) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin, used in curing or flavor development. (iv) Antimycotic agents, the cumulative levels of which shall not exceed current good manufacturing practice, may be added to the surface of the cheese. (v) Hydrogen peroxide, followed by a sufficient quantity of catalase preparation to eliminate the hydrogen peroxide. The weight of the hydrogen peroxide shall not exceed 0.05 percent of the weight of the dairy ingredients and the weight of the catalase shall not exeed 20 parts per million of the weight of dairy ingredients treated. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "washed curd cheese" or, alternatively, "soaked curd cheese". (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order of predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat", as appropriate. Sec. 133.137 Washed curd cheese for manufacturing. Washed curd cheese for manufacturing conforms to the definition and standard of identity prescribed for washed curd cheese by 133.136, except that the dairy ingredients are not pasteurized and curing is not required. Sec. 133.138 Edam cheese. (a) Description. (1) Edam cheese is the food prepared by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(3) of this section or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. The minimum milkfat content is 40 percent by weight of the solids and the maximum moisture content is 45 percent by weight, as determined by the methods described in 133.5. If the dairy ingredients used are not pasturized, the cheese is cured at a temperature of not less than than 35 deg. F for at least 60 days. (2) If pasteurized dairy ingredients are used, the phenol equivalent value of 0.25 gram of edam cheese is not more than 3 micrograms, as determined by the method described in 133.5. (3) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be warmed and is subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to set the dairy ingredients to a semisolid mass. After coagulation the mass is cut into small cube-shaped pieces with sides approximately three-eighths-inch long. The mass is stirred and heated to about 90 deg. F. and so handled by further stirring, heating, dilution with water or salt brine, and salting as to promote and regulate the separation of curd and whey. When the desired curd is obtained, it is transferred to forms permitting drainage of whey. During drainage the curd is pressed and turned. After drainage the curd is removed from the forms and is salted and cured. One or more of the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedures. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat milk, or cream, as defined in 133.3, used alone or in combination. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Coloring. (ii) Calcium chloride in an amount not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the weight of the dairy ingredients, used as a coagulation aid. (iii) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin, used in curing or flavor development. (iv) Antimycotic agents, the cumulative levels of which shall not exceed current good manufacturing practice, may be added to the surface of the cheese. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "edam cheese." (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order of predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat," as appropriate. Sec. 133.140 Gammelost cheese. (a) Description. (1) Gammelost cheese is the food prepared from nonfat milk, as defined in 133.3, by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. The maximum moisture content is 52 percent by weight, as determined by the methods described in 133.5. (2) The dairy ingredients are subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. The development of acidity is continued until the dairy ingredients coagulate to a semisolid mass. The mass is stirred and heated until a temperature of about 145 deg. F is reached, and is held at that temperature for at least 30 minutes. The whey is drained off and the curd removed and placed in forms and pressed. The shaped curd is placed in whey and heated for 3 or 4 hours, and may again be pressed. It is then stored under conditions suitable for curing. (b) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "gammelost cheese". (c) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter. Sec. 133.141 Gorgonzola cheese. (a) Description. (1) Gorgonzola cheese is the food prepared by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(2) of this section or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. It is characterized by the presence of bluish-green mold, Penicillium roquefortii, throughout the cheese. The minimum milkfat content is 50 percent by weight of the solids and the maximum moisture content is 42 percent by weight, as determined by the methods described in 133.5. The dairy ingredients used may be pasteurized. Gorgonzola cheese is at least 90 days old. (2) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be warmed and is subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to set the dairy ingredients to a semisolid mass. The mass is cut into smaller portions and allowed to stand for a time. The mixed curd and whey is placed into forms permitting further drainage. While being placed in forms, spores of the mold Penicillium roquefortii are added. The forms are turned several times during drainage. When sufficiently drained, the shaped curd is removed from the forms and salted with dry salt or brine. Perforations are then made in the shaped curd and it is held at a temperature of approximately 50 deg. F at 90 to 95 percent relative humidity, until the characteristic mold growth has developed. During storage, the surface of the cheese may be scraped to remove surface growth of undesirable microorganisms. One or more of the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedure. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat milk, or cream, as defined in 133.3, or corresponding products of goat origin, used alone or in combination. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Blue or green color in an amount to neutralize the natural yellow color of the curd. (ii) Calcium chloride in an amount not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the weight of the dairy ingredients, used as a coagulation aid. (iii) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin, used in curing or flavor development. (iv) Antimycotic agents, the cumulative levels of which shall not exceed current good manufacturing practice, may be added to the surface of the cheese. (v) Benzoyl peroxide, or a mixture of benzoyl peroxide with potassium alum, calcium sulfate, and magnesium carbonate used to bleach the dairy ingredients. The weight of the benzoyl peroxide is not more than 0.002 percent of the weight of the dairy ingredients being bleached, and the weight of the potassium alum, calcium sulfate, and magnesium carbonate, singly or combined, is not more than six times the weight of the benzoyl peroxide used. If the dairy ingredients are bleached in this manner, vitamin A is added to the curd in such quantity as to compensate for the vitamin A or its precursors destroyed in the bleaching process, and artificial coloring is not used. (vi) Vegetable fats or oil which may be hydrogenated, used as a coating for the rind. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "gorgonzola cheese". (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order of predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat", as appropriate; "milkfat from goat's milk and nonfat goat's milk", etc. Sec. 133.142 Gouda cheese. Gouda cheese conforms to the definition and standard of identity and complies with the requirements for label declaration of ingredients prescribed for edam cheese by 133.138, except that the minimum milkfat content is 46 percent by weight of the solids, as determined by the methods described in 133.5 and the maximum moisture content is 45 percent by weight. Sec. 133.144 Granular and stirred curd cheese. (a) Description. (1) Granular cheese, stirred curd cheese is the food prepared by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(3) of this section or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. The minimum milkfat content is 50 percent by weight of the solids and the maximum moisture content is 39 percent by weight as determined by the methods described in 133.5. If the dairy ingredients used are not pasteurized, the cheese is cured at a temperature of not less than 35 deg. F for at least 60 days. (2) If pasteurized dairy ingredients are used, the phenol equivalent value of 0.25 gram of granular cheese is not more than 3 micrograms as determined by the method described in 133.5. (3) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be warmed, treated with hydrogen peroxide/catalase, and is subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to set the dairy ingredients to a semisolid mass. The mass is so cut, stirred, and heated with continued stirring, as to promote and regulate the separation of whey and curd. A part of the whey is drained off. The curd is then alternately stirred and drained to prevent matting and to remove whey from curd. The curd is then salted, stirred, drained, and pressed into forms. One or more of the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedure. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat milk, or cream, as defined in 133.3, used alone or in combination. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Coloring. (ii) Calcium chloride in an amount not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) by weight of the dairy ingredients, used as a coagulation aid. (iii) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin, used in curing or flavor development. (iv) Antimycotic agents, the cumulative levels of which shall not exceed current good manufacturing practice, may be added to the surface of the cheese. (v) Hydrogen peroxide, followed by a sufficient quantity of catalase preparation to eliminate the hydrogen peroxide. The weight of the hydrogen peroxide shall not exceed 0.05 percent of the weight of the dairy ingredients and the weight of the catalase shall not exceed 20 parts per million of the weight of the dairy ingredients treated. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "granular cheese" or, alternatively, "stirred curd cheese". (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order of predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat", as appropriate. Sec. 133.145 Granular cheese for manufacturing. Granular cheese for manufacturing conforms to the definition and standard of identity prescribed for granular cheese by 133.144, except that the dairy ingredients are not pasteurized and curing is not required. Sec. 133.146 Grated cheeses. (a) Description. Grated cheeses is the class of foods prepared by grinding, grating, shredding, or otherwise comminuting cheese of one variety or a mixture of two or more varieties. The cheese varieties that may be used are those for which there are definitions and standards of identity, except that cream cheese, neufchatel cheese, cottage cheese, creamed cottage cheese, cook cheese, and skim milk cheese for manufacturing may not be used. All cheese ingredients used are either made from pasteurized milk or held at a temperature of not less than 35 deg. F for at least 60 days. Moisture may be removed from the cheese ingredients in the manufacture of the finished food, but no moisture is added. One or more of the optional ingredients specified in paragraph (c) of this section may be used. (b) Composition. (1) Each cheese ingredient used is present at a minimum level of 2 percent of the weight of the finished food. (2) When one variety of cheese is used, the minimum milkfat content of the food is not more than 1 percent lower than the minimum prescribed by the standard of identity for that cheese. (3) When two or more varieties of cheese are used, the minimum milkfat content is not more than 1 percent below the arithmetical average of the minimum fat content percentages prescribed by the standards of identity for the varieties of cheese used, and in no case is the milkfat content less than 31 percent. (4) Milkfat and moisture contents are determined by the methods described in 133.5. (c) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Antimycotics. (2) Anticaking agents. (3) Spices. (4) Flavorings other than those which, singly or in combination with other ingredients, simulate the flavor of cheese of any age or variety. (d) Nomenclature. (1) The name of the food is "grated cheese" or "grated cheeses", as appropriate. The name of the food shall be accompanied by a declaration of the specific variety of cheese(s) used in the food and by a declaration indicating the presence of any added spice or flavoring. (2) Any cheese varietal names used in the name of the food are those specified by applicable standards of identity, except that the designation "American cheese" may be used for cheddar, washed curd, colby, or granular cheese or for any mixture of these cheeses. (3) The following terms may be used in place of the name of the food to describe specific types of grated cheese: (i) If only one variety of cheese is used, the name of the food is "grated ___ cheese", the name of the cheese filling the blank. (ii) If only parmesan and romano cheeses are used and each is present at a level of not less than 25 percent by weight of the finished food, the name of the food is "grated ___ and ___ cheese", the blanks being filled with the names "parmesan" and "romano" in order of predominance by weight. The name "reggiano" may be used for "parmesan". (iii) If a mixture of cheese varieties (not including parmesan or romano) is used and each variety is present at a level of not less than 25 percent of the weight of the finished food, the name of the food is "grated ___ cheese", the blank being filled in with the names of the varieties in order of predominance by weight. (iv) If a mixture of cheese varieties in which one or more varieties (not including parmesan or romano) are each present at a level of not less than 25 percent by weight of the finished food, and one or more other varieties (which may include parmesan and romano cheese) are each present at a level of not less than 2 percent but in the aggregate not more than 10 percent of the weight of the finished food, the name of the food is "grated ___ cheese with other grated cheese" or "grated ___ cheese with other grated cheeses", as appropriate, the blank being filled in with the name or names of those cheese varieties present at levels of not less than 25 percent by weight of the finished food in order of predominance, in letters not more than twice as high as the letters in the phrase "with other grated cheese(s)". (4) The following terms may be used in place of "grated" to describe alternative forms of cheese: (i) "Shredded", if the particles of cheese are in the form of cylinders, shreds, or strings. (ii) "Chipped" or "chopped", if the particles of cheese are in the form of chips. (e) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order of predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat", "milkfat from goat's milk and nonfat goat's milk", "milkfat from sheep's milk and nonfat sheep's milk", etc., as appropriate. Sec. 133.147 Grated American cheese food. (a)(1) Grated American cheese food is the food prepared by mixing, with or without the aid of heat, one or more of the optional cheese ingredients prescribed in paragraph (b) of this section with one or more of the optional ingredients prescribed in paragraph (c) of this section, into a uniformly blended, partially dehydrated, powdered, or granular mixture. (2) Grated American cheese food contains not less than 23 percent of milkfat, as determined by the method prescribed in 133.5(b). (b) The optional cheese ingredients referred to in paragraph (a) of this section are cheddar cheese, washed curd cheese, colby cheese, and granular cheese. (c) The other optional ingredients referred to in paragraph (a) of this section are: (1) Nonfat dry milk. (2) Dried whey. (3) An emulsifying agent consisting of one or any mixture of two or more of the emulsifying ingredients named in 133.173(e)(1), in such quantity that the weight of the solids thereof is not more than 3 percent of the weight of the grated American cheese food. (4) An acidifying agent consisting of one or more of the acid-reacting ingredients named in 133.173(e)(2). (5) Salt. (6) Artificial coloring. (d) The name of the food is "Grated American cheese food". The full name of the food shall appear on the principal display panel of the label in type of uniform size, style, and color. Wherever any word or statement emphasizing the name of any ingredient appears on the label (other than in an ingredient statement as specified in paragraph (e) of this section) so conspicuously as to be easily seen under customary conditions of purchase, the full name of the food shall immediately and conspicuously precede or follow such word or statement in type of at least the same size as the type used in such word or statement. (e) Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that cheddar cheese, washed curd cheese, colby cheese, granular cheese, or any mixture of two or more of these may be designated "American cheese". Sec. 133.148 Hard grating cheeses. (a) The cheeses for which definitions and standards of identity are prescribed by this section are hard grating cheeses for which specifically applicable definitions and standards of identity are not prescribed by other sections of this part. They are made from milk and the other ingredients specified in this section, by the procedure set forth in paragraph (b) of this section. They contain not more than 34 percent of moisture, and their solids contain not less than 32 percent of milkfat, as determined by the methods prescribed in 133.5 (a), (b), and (d). Hard grating cheeses are cured for not less than 6 months. (b) Milk, which may be pasteurized or clarified or both, and which may be warmed, is subjected to the action of harmless lactic-acid-producing bacteria or other harmless flavor-producing bacteria, present in such milk or added thereto. Sufficient rennet, rennet paste, extract of rennet paste, or other safe and suitable milk-clotting enzyme that produces equivalent curd formation, singly or in any combination (with or without purified calcium chloride in a quantity not more than 0.02 percent, calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride, of the weight of the milk) is added to set the milk to a semisolid mass. Harmless artificial coloring may be added. The mass is cut into small particles, stirred, and heated. The curd is separated from the whey, drained, shaped into forms, pressed, salted, and cured. The rind may be colored or rubbed with vegetable oil or both. A harmless preparation of enzymes of animal or plant origin capable of aiding in the curing or development of flavor of hard grating cheese may be added during the procedure, in such quantity that the weight of the solids of such preparation is not more than 0.1 percent of the weight of the milk used. (c) For the purposes of this section, the word "milk" means cow's milk or goat's milk or sheep's milk or mixtures of two or all of these. Such milk may be adjusted by separating part of the fat therefrom or (in the case of cow's milk) by adding one or more of the following: Cream, skim milk, concentrated skim milk, nonfat dry milk; (in the case of goat's milk) the corresponding products from goat's milk; (in the case of sheep's milk) the corresponding products from sheep's milk; water in a quantity sufficient to reconstitute any such concentrated or dried products used. (d) Safe and suitable antimycotic agent(s), the cumulative levels of which shall not exceed current good manufacturing practice, may be added to the surface of the cheese. (e) The name of each hard grating cheese for which a definition and standard of identity is prescribed by this section is "Hard grating cheese", preceded or followed by: (1) The specific common or usual name of such hard grating cheese, if any such name has become generally recognized therefor; or (2) If no such specific common or usual name has become generally recognized therefor, an arbitrary or fanciful name that is not false or misleading in any particular. (3) When milk other than cow's milk is used, in whole or in part, the statement "made from ___", the blank being filled in with the name or names of the milk used, in order of predominance by weight. (f) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) When milk other than cow's milk is used, in whole or in part, the common or usual name of each such milk ingredient shall be declared in order of predominance by weight; and (2) Enzymes of the animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes". Sec. 133.149 Gruyere cheese. (a) Description. (1) Gruyere cheese is the food prepared by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(3) of this section or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. It contains small holes or eyes. It has a mild flavor, due in part to the growth of surface-curing agents. The minimum milkfat content is 45 percent by weight of the solids and the maximum moisture content is 39 percent by weight, as determined by the methods described in 133.5. The dairy ingredients used may be pasteurized. The cheese is at least 90 days old. (2) If pasteurized dairy ingredients are used, the phenol equivalent value of 0.25 gram of gruyere cheese is not more than 3 micrograms as determined by the method described in 133.5. (3) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section may be warmed and is subjected to the action of lactic acid-producing and propionic acid-producing bacterial cultures. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to set the dairy ingredients to a semisolid mass. The mass is cut into particles similar in size to wheat kernels. For about 30 minutes the particles are alternately stirred and allowed to settle. The temperature is raised to about 126 deg. F. Stirring is continued until the curd becomes firm. The curd is transferred to hoops or forms, and pressed until the desired shape and firmness are obtained. The cheese is surface-salted while held at a temperature of 48deg. to 54 deg. F for a few days. It is soaked for 1 day in a saturated salt solution. It is then held for 3 weeks in a salting cellar and wiped every 2 days with brine cloth to insure growth of biological curing agents on the rind. It is then removed to a heating room and held at progressively higher temperatures, finally reaching 65 deg. F with a relative humidity of 85 to 90 percent, for several weeks, during which time small holes, or so-called eyes, form. The cheese is then stored at a lower temperature for further curing. One or more of the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedure. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat milk, or cream, as defined in 133.3, used alone or in combination. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Calcium chloride in an amount not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the weight of the dairy ingredients, used as a coagulation aid. (ii) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin, used in curing or flavor development. (iii) Antimycotic agents, applied to the surface of slices or cuts in consumer-sized packages. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "gruyere cheese". (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order of predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat", as appropriate. Sec. 133.150 Hard cheeses. (a) The cheeses for which definitions and standards of identity are prescribed by this section are hard cheeses for which specifically applicable definitions and standards of identity are not prescribed by other sections of this part. They are made from milk and the other ingredients specified in this section, by the procedure set forth in paragraph (b) of this section. They contain not more than 39 percent of moisture, and their solids contain not less than 50 percent of milkfat, as determined by the methods prescribed in 133.5 (a), (b), and (d). If the milk used is not pasteurized, the cheese so made is cured at a temperature of not less than 35 deg. F for not less than 60 days. (b) Milk, which may be pasteurized or clarified or both, and which may be warmed, is subjected to the action of harmless lactic-acid-producing bacteria, with or without other harmless flavor-producing bacteria, present in such milk or added thereto. Harmless artificial coloring may be added. Sufficient rennet, rennet paste, extract of rennet paste, or other safe and suitable milk-clotting enzyme that produces equivalent curd formation, singly or in any combination (with or without purified calcium chloride in a quantity not more than 0.02 percent, calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride, of the weight of the milk) is added to set the milk to a semisolid mass. The mass is cut into small particles, stirred, and heated. The curd is separated from the whey, drained, and shaped into forms, and may be pressed. The curd is salted at some stage of the manufacturing process. The shaped curd may be cured. The rind may be coated with paraffin or rubbed with vegetable oil. A harmless preparation of enzymes of animal or plant origin capable of aiding in the curing or development of flavor of hard cheese may be added during the procedure, in such quantity that the weight of the solids of such preparation is not more than 0.1 percent of the weight of the milk used. Harmless flavor-producing microorganisms may be added, and curing may be conducted under suitable conditions for the development of biological curing agents. (c) For the purposes of this section: (1) The word "milk" means cow's milk or goat's milk or sheep's milk or mixtures of two or all of these. Such milk may be adjusted by separating part of the fat therefrom, or (in the case of cow's milk) by adding one or more of the following: Cream, skim milk, concentrated skim milk, nonfat dry milk; (in the case of goat's milk) the corresponding products from goat's milk; (in the case of sheep's milk) the corresponding products from sheep's milk; water in a quantity sufficient to reconstitute any concentrated or dried products used. (2) Milk shall be deemed to have been pasteurized if it has been held at a temperature of not less than 143 deg. F for a period of not less than 30 minutes, or for a time and at a temperature equivalent thereto in phosphatase destruction. A hard cheese shall be deemed not to have been made from pasteurized milk if 0.25 gram shows a phenol equivalent of more than 3 micrograms when tested by the method prescribed in 133.5(c). (d) Safe and suitable antimycotic agent(s), the cumulative levels of which shall not exceed current good manufacturing practice, may be added to the surface of the cheese. (e) The name of each hard cheese for which a definition and standard of identity is prescribed by this section is "Hard cheese", preceded or followed by: (1) The specific common or unusual name of such hard cheese, if any such name has become generally recognized therefor; or (2) If no such specific common or usual name has become generally recognized, therefor, an arbitrary or fanciful name that is not false or misleading in any particular. (3) When milk other than cow's milk is used, in whole or in part, the statement "made from ___", the blank being filled in with the name or names of the milk used, in order of predominance by weight. (f) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) When milk other than cow's milk is used, in whole or in part, the common or usual name of each such milk ingredient shall be declared in order of predominance by weight; and (2) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes". Sec. 133.152 Limburger cheese. (a) Description. (1) Limburger cheese is the food prepared by one of the procedures set forth in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. The minimum milkfat content is 50 percent by weight of the solids and the maximum moisture content is 50 percent by weight, as determined by the methods described in 133.5. If the dairy ingredients used are not pasteurized, the cheese is cured at a temperature of not less than 35 deg. F for at least 60 days. (2) If pasteurized dairy ingredients are used, the phenol equivalent value of 0.25 gram of limburger cheese is not more than 4 micrograms as determined by the method described in 133.5. (3) One of the following procedures may be followed for producing limburger cheese: (i) One or more of the dairy ingredients, unpasteurized, specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section is warmed to about 92 deg. F and subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to set the dairy ingredients to a semisolid mass. The mass is cut into cubes with sides approximately one-half inch long. After a few minutes the mass is stirred and heated, gradually raising the temperature to 96deg. to 98 deg. F. The curd is then allowed to settle, most of the whey is drained off, and the remaining curd and whey dipped into molds. During drainage the curd may be pressed. It is turned at regular intervals. After drainage the curd is cut into pieces of desired size and dry-salted at intervals for 24 to 48 hours. The cheese is then cured with frequent applications of a weak brine solution to the surface, until the proper growth of surface-curing organisms is obtained. It is then wrapped and held in storage for development of as much additional flavor as is desired. One or more of the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedure. (ii) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section is pasteurized, brought to a temperature of 89deg. to 90 deg. F. after pasteurization, and is subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. The procedure is then the same as in paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this section, except that heating is to 94 deg. F. After most of the whey is drained off, salt brine at a temperature of 66deg. to 70 deg. F is added, so that the pH of the curd is about 4.8. The mixed curd, whey, and brine is dipped into molds, and the remaining procedure specified in paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this section is followed. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat milk, or cream, as defined in 133.3, used alone or in combination. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Coloring. (ii) Calcium chloride in an amount not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) by weight of the dairy ingredients, used as a coagulation aid. (iii) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin, used in curing or flavor development. (c) Nomenclature. The name of the food is "limburger cheese". (d) Label declaration. Each of the ingredients used in the food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter, except that: (1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin may be declared as "enzymes"; and (2) The dairy ingredients may be declared, in descending order of predominance, by the use of the terms "milkfat and nonfat milk" or "nonfat milk and milkfat", as appropriate. Sec. 133.153 Monterey cheese and monterey jack cheese. (a) Description. (1) Monterey cheese, monterey jack cheese is the food prepared by the procedure set forth in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, or by any other procedure which produces a finished cheese having the same physical and chemical properties. The minimum milkfat content is 50 percent by weight of the solids, and the maximum moisture content is 44 percent by weight, as determined by the methods described in 133.5. The dairy ingredients used are pasteurized. (2) The phenol equivalent of 0.25 gram of monterey cheese is not more than 3 micrograms, as determined by the method described in 133.5. (3) One or more of the dairy ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section is subjected to the action of a lactic acid-producing bacterial culture. One or more of the clotting enzymes specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is added to set the dairy ingredients to a semisolid mass. The mass is so cut, stirred, and heated with continued stirring, as to promote and regulate the separation of whey and curd. Part of the whey is drained off, and water or salt brine may be added. The curd is drained and placed in a muslin or sheeting cloth, formed into a ball, and pressed; or the curd is placed in a cheese hoop and pressed. Later, the cloth bandage is removed, and the cheese may be covered with a suitable coating. One or more of the other optional ingredients specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be added during the procedure. (b) Optional ingredients. The following safe and suitable ingredients may be used: (1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat milk, or cream, as defined in 133.3, used alone or in combination. (2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or other clotting enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin. (3) Other optional ingredients. (i) Calcium chloride in an amount not more than 0.02 percent (calculated as anhydrous calcium chloride) by weight of the dairy ingredients, used as a coagulation aid. (ii) Enzymes of animal, plant, or microbial origin, used in curing or flavor development. (iii) Salt. (iv) Antimycotic agents, the cumulative levels of which shall not exceed current good manufacturing practice, may be added to the surface of the chees