Alexandria's Genesis, page 1
I have Alexandria's Genesis and so is my daughter. You may want to read this:

is there a medical reason for people to have purple eyes? I found one listing, giving a reason, but I can't find anything else. here's the listing I found:



"Alexandria's Genesis," as it has been called since the 1960s, is a genetic mutation generally found in women of Euro-American (a.k.a., Caucasian) descent. This mutation can be traced as far as the Middle Ages in Northern Europe. The first known record of "Alexandria's Genesis" was written in the year CE 1330 (Common Era).

A woman named Alexandria Augustine came into the world on April 29, CE 1329 in London, England. At the time, she appeared to be normal, but her parents soon noticed that her eyes were changing from the blue eyes Alexandria had at birth to the purple eyes she would have by her first birthday. The parents were startled by this dramatic change. They took her to their priest, thinking that a witch did this to their child, and that the priest might be able to ask God to change the eye color back. The priest told the parents that it was not the work of the devil, but a myth come true. This particular priest had heard a story about a race of people who had purple eyes. These humans were thought to have come from Egypt after a mysterious light flashed in the sky during a moonless night thousands of years ago. The purple-eyed humans also had very fair skin, and were thought to be spirits because of their appearance. The so-called "spirit people" eventually went north and vanished without a trace. The priest told her parents not to worry, for they had a special child in their hands and they should take good care of her.

Eventually, Alexandria grew up to be a very beautiful woman, got married, had four children (all four were girls, and all four also had the mutation), never got sick, and died at the age of 150 of natural causes. It is this discovery that helped to name the genetic mutation when the gene was discovered in 1968.

The Characteristics of "Alexandria's Genesis"

The first characteristic of people with "Alexandria's Genesis" is their eye color. When someone is born with this genetic mutation, the eyes are either blue or gray at birth. At six months, the eyes begin their transformation from the original color to purple. This process is completed by the person's first birthday. A second process, where the eye color deepens, starts as soon as the first is completed. This slow process continues until the onset of puberty. By then, the eye will have become a dark purple, a deep purple, a royal purple, or a violet-blue color, and will be that color for the rest of their time. These changes do not affect the person's eyesight, though. If anything, the eyesight is, and remains until death, 20/20.

Speaking of puberty, those who have the mutation will never grow any facial, body, pubic, or anal hair during this stage of growth. In fact, the only hair they will ever have is what is on their heads, in their ears and nose, their eyebrows, and their eyelashes. Women also have an added bonus beyond never having to shave: never buying tampons or pads. It turns out that females born with "Alexandria's Genesis" never menstruate in their lives. They are fertile, however, and can go through the same things that women without the mutation can go through every month. Beyond these differences, those with the mutation go through puberty as normally as everyone else does.

Below are all of the characteristics of "Alexandria's Genesis."

Clear, silver-like purple eyes (after 1st birthday; deepen in color until onset of puberty)

No facial or body hair growth beyond what was already there at birth

Dark brown or blonde hair

Shimmering white skin that resist tanning and burning

Lack of menstruation cycle (in women)

Highly evolved immune system (has been known to resist every disease known to man so far)

Appear 5-20 years younger (after the age of 21, the aging process slows down greatly; it st