Cass Sunstein, President Barack Obama’s pick for regulatory czar, has liberals nervous
They were friends and colleagues for years at the University of Chicago, and if you ask Cass Sunstein, he will tell you that conservatives have nothing to fear from President Barack Obama.



Liberals? The jury’s out.



Sunstein is Obama’s choice to head the obscure but important Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs. It’s not automatically a powerful post, unless its occupant has the president’s ear.



Then it can become downright crucial, in the view of some progressives who believe Bush appointees used the office to block important regulations for protecting the workplace and environment.



Leaders of the orthodox left had been hoping for an appointee who would roll back that Bush legacy with a vengeance. Instead they got Sunstein, a high-wattage Harvard Law professor openly skeptical about various government rules.



To some, Obama’s BFF looks like a conservative in progressive garb. At the least, he’s a wild card.



Sunstein is a prolific author and blogger, yet his paper trail veers from liberal to libertarian, dedicated reformer to free-market devotee.



Efficiency seems to light his fire: His recent book “Nudge,” with University of Chicago economist Richard Thaler, focuses on improving society at optimal costs by encouraging individuals to make smart choices.



Still, he’s hard to predict. Another of his recent publications raised doubts about the constitutionality of the federal agency regulating workplace safety.



Be still thy heart, Chamber of Commerce.



Pigeon-holing this brainiac is probably impossible. But Sunstein conveniently left behind some broad clues about his views during a debate in March at the University of Chicago with Richard Epstein, an outspoken law professor.



Acting as an Obama campaign adviser, Sunstein explained why conservatives should vote for his longtime friend. And in the course of channeling Obama during the hour-long program, Sunstein may have revealed his personal priorities too.



“Obama will go to deregulation—it’s a prediction—in many domains,” Sunstein told the conference.



Deregulation? Didn’t that just sink the financial-services industry?



“His basic line of defense is disclosure,” Sunstein said.



If that means handing consumers a ream of fine print, mortgage fraudsters will love it.



“He’s a fan of cost-benefit analysis,” Sunstein assured the group.



Good luck calculating the value of a laborer’s life, or an IQ point lost to pollution exposure.



Sunstein went on to tell conservatives there that Obama “will be able to do some stuff, I think, that President Bush didn’t have the commitment or the sustained support to do.”



So Obama will be out-Bushing Bush? No wonder the left is worried.



Sunstein declined to comment for this column, but debate partner Epstein warned against jumping to conclusions. “Disclosure” could refer to requiring more extensive regulatory filings, and “cost-benefit analysis” could lead to heavier regulation depending on the assumptions, Epstein pointed out.



In Sunstein, Obama is getting an intellectual powerhouse, he said, “a bundle of extreme energy and contradictory impulses and genuine creativity.”



David Schkade, a professor at the University of California at San Diego, collaborated with Sunstein on a paper about punitive damages awarded in lawsuits. As their data came together, Sunstein changed his thinking about the issue, Schkade said. While the findings ultimately “cheered conservatives,” the key point is that Obama’s choice for regulatory czar embodied intellectual honesty and rigor, he said.



“He is a progressive. He is not a conservative. But he’s just not ideologically driven,” Schkade said. “There will be more regulation in some areas and less in others. Extremists on either side are going to unhappy with Cass.”



gburns@tribune.com