CFR - Code of Federal Regulations Title 21
New Search Help | More About 21CFR [Code of Federal Regulations] [Title 21, Volume 7] [Revised as of April 1, 2016] [CITE: 21CFR610]











CHAPTER I--FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

SUBCHAPTER F--BIOLOGICS PART 610 GENERAL BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS STANDARDS TITLE 21--FOOD AND DRUGSCHAPTER I--FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATIONDEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES Subpart G--Labeling Standards Sec. 610.60 Container label. (a) Full label. The following items shall appear on the label affixed to each container of a product capable of bearing a full label: (1) The proper name of the product; (2) The name, address, and license number of manufacturer; (3) The lot number or other lot identification; (4) The expiration date; (5) The recommended individual dose, for multiple dose containers. (6) The statement: "`Rx only'" for prescription biologicals. (7) If a Medication Guide is required under part 208 of this chapter, the statement required under 208.24(d) of this chapter instructing the authorized dispenser to provide a Medication Guide to each patient to whom the drug is dispensed and stating how the Medication Guide is provided, except where the container label is too small, the required statement may be placed on the package label. (b) Package label information. If the container is not enclosed in a package, all the items required for a package label shall appear on the container label. (c) Partial label. If the container is capable of bearing only a partial label, the container shall show as a minimum the name (expressed either as the proper or common name), the lot number or other lot identification and the name of the manufacturer; in addition, for multiple dose containers, the recommended individual dose. Containers bearing partial labels shall be placed in a package which bears all the items required for a package label. (d) No container label. If the container is incapable of bearing any label, the items required for a container label may be omitted, provided the container is placed in a package which bears all the items required for a package label. (e) Visual inspection. When the label has been affixed to the container a sufficient area of the container shall remain uncovered for its full length or circumference to permit inspection of the contents. Sec. 610.61 Package label. The following items shall appear on the label affixed to each package containing a product: (a) The proper name of the product; (b) The name, address, and license number of manufacturer; (c) The lot number or other lot identification; (d) The expiration date; (e) The preservative used and its concentration, or if no preservative is used and the absence of a preservative is a safety factor, the words "no preservative"; (f) The number of containers, if more than one; (g) The amount of product in the container expressed as (1) the number of doses, (2) volume, (3) units of potency, (4) weight, (5) equivalent volume (for dried product to be reconstituted), or (6) such combination of the foregoing as needed for an accurate description of the contents, whichever is applicable; (h) The recommended storage temperature; (i) The words "Shake Well", "Do not Freeze" or the equivalent, as well as other instructions, when indicated by the character of the product; (j) The recommended individual dose if the enclosed container(s) is a multiple-dose container; (k) The route of administration recommended, or reference to such directions in an enclosed circular; (l) Known sensitizing substances, or reference to an enclosed circular containing appropriate information; (m) The type and calculated amount of antibiotics added during manufacture; (n) The inactive ingredients when a safety factor, or reference to an enclosed circular containing appropriate information; (o) The adjuvant, if present; (p) The source of the product when a factor in safe administration; (q) The identity of each microorganism used in manufacture, and, where applicable, the production medium and the method of inactivation, or reference to an enclosed circular containing appropriate information; (r) Minimum potency of product expressed in terms of official standard of potency or, if potency is a factor and no U.S. standard of potency has been prescribed, the words "No U.S. standard of potency." (s) The statement: "`Rx only'" for prescription biologicals. Sec. 610.62 Proper name; package label; legible type. (a) Position. The proper name of the product on the package label shall be placed above any trademark or trade name identifying the product and symmetrically arranged with respect to other printing on the label. (b) Prominence. The point size and typeface of the proper name shall be at least as prominent as the point size and typeface used in designating the trademark and trade name. The contrast in color value between the proper name and the background shall be at least as great as the color value between the trademark and trade name and the background. Typography, layout, contrast, and other printing features shall not be used in a manner that will affect adversely the prominence of the proper name. (c) Legible type. All items required to be on the container label and package label shall be in legible type. "Legible type" is type of a size and character which can be read with ease when held in a good light and with normal vision. Sec. 610.63 Divided manufacturing responsibility to be shown. If two or more licensed manufacturers participate in the manufacture of a biological product, the name, address, and license number of each must appear on the package label, and on the label of the container if capable of bearing a full label. Sec. 610.64 Name and address of distributor. The name and address of the distributor of a product may appear on the label provided that the name, address, and license number of the manufacturer also appears on the label and the name of the distributor is qualified by one of the following phrases: "Manufactured for _____", "Distributed by ______", "Manufactured by _____ for _____", "Manufactured for _____ by ____", "Distributor: _____", or "Marketed by _____". The qualifying phrases may be abbreviated. Sec. 610.65 Products for export. Labels on packages or containers of products for export may be adapted to meet specific requirements of the regulations of the country to which the product is to be exported provided that in all such cases the minimum label requirements prescribed in 610.60 are observed. Sec. 610.67 Bar code label requirements. Biological products must comply with the bar code requirements at 201.25 of this chapter. However, the bar code requirements do not apply to devices regulated by the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research or to blood and blood components intended for transfusion. For blood and blood components intended for transfusion, the requirements at 606.121(c)(13) of this chapter apply instead. Sec. 610.68 Exceptions or alternatives to labeling requirements for biological products held by the Strategic National Stockpile. (a) The appropriate FDA Center Director may grant an exception or alternative to any provision listed in paragraph (f) of this section and not explicitly required by statute, for specified lots, batches, or other units of a biological product, if the Center Director determines that compliance with such labeling requirement could adversely affect the safety, effectiveness, or availability of such product that is or will be included in the Strategic National Stockpile. (b)(1)(i) A Strategic National Stockpile official or any entity that manufactures (including labeling, packing, relabeling, or repackaging), distributes, or stores a biological product that is or will be included in the Strategic National Stockpile may submit, with written concurrence from a Strategic National Stockpile official, a written request for an exception or alternative described in paragraph (a) of this section to the Center Director. (ii) The Center Director may grant an exception or alternative described in paragraph (a) of this section on his or her own initiative. (2) A written request for an exception or alternative described in paragraph (a) of this section must: (i) Identify the specified lots, batches, or other units of the biological product that would be subject to the exception or alternative; (ii) Identify the labeling provision(s) listed in paragraph (f) of this section that are the subject of the exception or alternative request; (iii) Explain why compliance with such labeling provision(s) could adversely affect the safety, effectiveness, or availability of the specified lots, batches, or other units of the biological product that are or will be included in the Strategic National Stockpile; (iv) Describe any proposed safeguards or conditions that will be implemented so that the labeling of the product includes appropriate information necessary for the safe and effective use of the product, given the anticipated circumstances of use of the product; (v) Provide a draft of the proposed labeling of the specified lots, batches, or other units of the biological product subject to the exception or alternative; and (vi) Provide any other information requested by the Center Director in support of the request. (c) The Center Director must respond in writing to all requests under this section. (d) A grant of an exception or alternative under this section will include any safeguards or conditions deemed appropriate by the Center Director so that the labeling of product subject to the exception or alternative includes the information necessary for the safe and effective use of the product, given the anticipated circumstances of use. (e) If you are a sponsor receiving a grant of a request for an exception or alternative to the labeling requirements under this section: (1) You need not submit a supplement under 601.12(f)(1) through (f)(2) of this chapter; however, (2) You must report any grant of a request for an exception or alternative under this section as part of your annual report under 601.12(f)(3) of this chapter. (f) The Center Director may grant an exception or alternative under this section to the following provisions of this chapter, to the extent that the requirements in these provisions are not explicitly required by statute: (1) 610.60; (2) 610.61(c) and (e) through (r); (3) 610.62; (4) 610.63; (5) 610.64; (6) 610.65; and (7) 312.6. Authority: 21 U.S.C. 321, 331, 351, 352, 353, 355, 360, 360c, 360d, 360h, 360i, 371, 372, 374, 381; 42 U.S.C. 216, 262, 263, 263a, 264.

Source: 38 FR 32056, Nov. 20, 1973, unless otherwise noted.