Michelle Nunn’s new line of attack: Education
Democrat Michelle Nunn opened a new line of attack in her Senate bid, saying her Republican rival’s support for dismantling the Department of Education could threaten middle-class families.

The nonprofit executive used a tour of a YMCA preschool center on the outskirts of downtown Atlanta yesterday to attack David Perdue’s platform, which she said would “eradicate” $1.1 bill in Pell Grants for Georgia students as well as millions in other programs.

“There’s a big contrast in this race for those who care and are invested,” she said.

Perdue has said the federal Department of Education should be abolished because it has failed to keep American students competitive. His spokeswoman Megan Whittemore said his plan involves “moving more money out of Washington and into our classrooms” and empowering parents and local school boards to make more decisions.

“There is plenty of waste and abuse across all federal agencies in Washington and we must become better stewards of taxpayer dollars,” said Whittemore.

Nunn said she supported efforts to slash wasteful spending in the education department, but she said it should be done with a scalpel rather than an axe.

“There’s always an opportunity to make sure the investments we are making are creating the results we want,” she said. “But if you think about where we should be investing, it’s in our kids – making sure our public school systems are effective.”

Nunn’s remarks came after an amusing question-and-answer session with students in one of the YMCA’s school programs. One told her he wanted to put trackers on everyone to prevent crime (she told him he may want to run for office one day). Another noted she was on TV an awful lot.

“You’ll be seeing more of me in the next few weeks,” she said.

Our favorite, though, was the little girl in the front row who told Nunn she recognized her name from the ads claiming Perdue discriminated against women while at Dollar General (though the girl mistakenly said “Dollar Tree”). Campaign aides in the back of the room quickly vowed that she wasn’t a plant.

***

Michelle Nunn will have some extra help in the final stretch. The Democrat didn’t mention this at the event, but she picked up the endorsement of the Georgia Association of Educators yesterday.

Sid Chapman, the president of the teacher’s lobby, said the group’s members voted to endorse her because it was looking for “strong, effective representation in the halls of Congress when it comes to federal legislation impacting public education.”

The statewide teacher group is the state’s most politically active teacher’s group – and the biggest to endorse candidates. It typically supports Democrats in races, and endorsed Jason Carter’s bid for governor and Valarie Wilson’s superintendent run earlier this season.

***

David Perdue will get a new endorsement of his own today from the National Federation of Independent Business.

The backing will be formally announced at an event in Woodstock. The organization has 7,000 dues-paying members in Georgia. Said NFIB state director Kyle Jackson, via the Perdue campaign:

“David Perdue understands from personal experience the roadblocks big government can throw in the path of small businesses. He believes in lower taxes and sensible regulations that encourage small businesses to grow and create jobs. David Perdue clearly understands the challenges facing Georgia’s small business owners, their employees, and their families. Our members are counting on him, and he can count on our members’ support on Election Day.”

***

The National Rifle Association is kicking in more money on David Perdue’s behalf. It announced $157,000 worth of radio ads and $10,700 worth of Internet ads attacking Michelle Nunn, in a new FEC filing.

***

The National Republican Congressional Committee has put down another $20,000 hitting Rep. John Barrow, D-Augusta, in the House race with the most TV ads in the country of late.

That brings the NRCC’s total independent investment to $1.29 million, edged slightly by the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee’s $1.35 million.

***

How about some off-the-wall speculation with your morning coffee?

Former U.S. Rep. Jane Harman, D-Calif., writes in Politico Magazine that President Barack Obama should consider a Republican for Attorney General to replace Eric Holder. Her top choice is former Solicitor General Ted Olson, but Harman lists outgoing U.S. Sen. Saxby Chambliss of Georgia as an option.

We’ll put the chances of AG Saxby somewhere between monkeys flying out of a human orifice and a Chicago Cubs World Series title.