The Old Farmer's Almanac
When is the Full Moon for April 2016—also called the Pink Moon? Here is our April Moon Calendar with April Full Moon names, dates, folklore, and more.

April Full Moon Names

April’s Full Moon, Full Pink Moon, heralds the appearance of the moss pink, or wild ground phlox—one of the first spring flowers. It is also known as the Sprouting Grass Moon, the Egg Moon, and the Fish Moon.

See all Full Moon names and their meanings.

A full Moon in April brings frost. If the full Moon rises pale, expect rain.

April Full Moon Date 2016

All dates and times are ET. See the Moon Phase Calendar for your city/state.

New Moon: April 7, 7:24 A.M. First Quarter: April 13, 11:59 P.M. Full Moon: April 22, 1:24 A.M. Last Quarter: April 29, 11:29 P.M.

All dates and times in above chart are ET. See our Moon Phase Calender for your city/state.

For your next full Moon, see our Full Moon Dates chart.

April Best Days 2016

Below are the Best Days for activities, based on the Moon’s sign and phase in April.

For Planting:

Aboveground crops: 12, 13

Belowground crops: 4, 5, 23

For Setting Eggs:

1, 19, 20, 28 –30

For Fishing:

7–22

See Best Days for more activities.

Full Moon Video

Each month, we will explain the traditional names of the full Moon along with some interesting and insightful Moon facts. Click below to watch the video and find out about April’s Full Pink Moon.

April Moon Facts and Folklore

On April 20, 1972, the lunar module of Apollo XVI landed on the moon with astronauts John Young and Charles Duke aboard. Thomas Mattingly remained in orbit around the moon aboard the command module. This was the third exportation of the moon.

landed on the moon with astronauts John Young and Charles Duke aboard. Thomas Mattingly remained in orbit around the moon aboard the command module. This was the third exportation of the moon. One day later on April 21, 1972, Apollo XVI astronauts John Young and Charles Duke drove an electric car ( LEM ) on the surface of the moon. It’s still up there along with some expensive tools and some film that they forgot.

astronauts John Young and Charles Duke drove an electric car ( ) on the surface of the moon. It’s still up there along with some expensive tools and some film that they forgot. The period from the full Moon through the last quarter of the Moon is the best time for killing weeds, thinning, pruning, mowing, cutting timber, and planting below-ground crops.

Share your thoughts about this month’s Moon below!