Gardendale will get to form its own school system if it abides by federal judge's three-year plan
Gardendale will get to form its own school system in stages with a full separation from Jefferson County schools possible in three years if the city can prove it can operate a desegregated system, a federal judge ruled Monday.

The new school system will have to work out a desegregation plan and appoint at least one African American resident to the city's board of education within 60 days, under the ruling by U.S. District Court Judge Madeline Haikala. And if the city wants to fold Gardendale High School into the new system, it will also have to pay Jefferson County for it or let it stay in the county system under a different name, she stated.

"The Court is giving the Gardendale Board of Education an opportunity to demonstrate good faith," Haikala stated in her order issued at 5:13 p.m. Monday.

"To date, the Gardendale Board has fallen short, but it is a new board with limited training," Haikala stated. "The Court is giving the Gardendale Board the opportunity to operate elementary schools (first) because skills learned in elementary school prove to be the best predictors of future academic success."

U.W. Clemon, a former federal judge who now represents private plaintiffs in the 52-year-old school desegregation case that provides guidelines for the formation of new school systems, responded to the judge's order.

"Though I have not fully analyzed the Opinion I am encouraged by the Court's extensive findings of fact, but disappointed in the contingent remedy. Hope never dies, and the struggle continues," Clemon stated in an email to AL.com.

An attorney for Gardendale schools had not responded to a request for comment prior to publication of this story.

The Gardendale Board of Education on its Facebook page says a special meeting is being called for 7 p.m. Tuesday. The board will go into executive session at that meeting, but the announcement does not specifically say the topic. Prior to that Facebook post the board had announced that school officials were reviewing the judge's order and would issue a statement as soon as possible.

Haikala's plan:

For the 2017-2018 school year and until Haikala orders otherwise, the Gardendale Board may operate Gardendale Elementary and Snow Rogers Elementary schools. The Jefferson County Board of Education shall take the steps necessary to convey those school facilities to the Gardendale Board so it may operate them for that academic year.

Gardendale Elementary and Snow Rogers Elementary shall be zoned for students residing within the municipal boundaries of the City of Gardendale.

Lawyers for the private plaintiffs and Department of Justice are to confer with lawyers for the Gardendale BOE and develop and submit to the Court within 60 days a proposed desegregation order tailored to the specific circumstances of the Gardendale City Schools System.

The proposed order shall contain provisions relating to interdistrict transfers, and the proposed order shall redraw the lines for Snow Rogers and Gardendale Elementary to address capacity issues at Gardendale Elementary. Should the Gardendale BOE operate those two schools in good faith compliance with the anticipated desegregation order, then in three years, the Court shall consider a renewed motion for operation of a Gardendale municipal system for kindergarten through grade 12.

Elementary school children living in Mount Olive, Brookside, and Graysville shall remain in their current elementary school zones and shall attend Bragg Middle School and Gardendale High School until the Court orders otherwise.

See U.S. District Court Judge Madeline Haikala's 190-page order here.

Gardendale High School?

During the first 12 months of the three-year period of supervision, the private plaintiffs, the DOJ, and the Jefferson County and Gardendale boards are to develop a proposed facilities plan for all of the students who currently are zoned for Bragg and Gardendale High, Haikala stated.

"That plan must either place the Gardendale High School facility in the Jefferson County system under a new name, or it shall place the high school facility in an anticipated K-12 Gardendale district with an appropriate payment to the Jefferson County Board of Education or the Jefferson County Commission to help fund an alternative high school facility for Jefferson County."

The judge didn't suggest an amount to be paid.

"The facilities plan provision in the Court's order accounts for the significant role that the new Gardendale high school facility plays in Jefferson County's desegregation efforts," Haikala stated. "It accounts for the fact that Jefferson County designed and built the facility to serve all high school students in Jefferson County, and Jefferson County has successfully attracted a racially and geographically diverse student body to the school through the county's good faith efforts to comply with the desegregation order."

"The treatment of the high school facility also comports with basic notions of fairness," Haikala wrote.

Follow the tax money

For the 2017-2018 school year and until the court orders otherwise, Jefferson County Schools shall operate Bragg and Gardendale. Students who reside within Gardendale city limits shall continue to attend Bragg and Gardendale until the Court orders otherwise.

Tax proceeds shall follow students from the City of Gardendale who attend the two schools per the terms of the 1971 Stout desegregation order, the judge ruled.

History

Haikala presides over the 1965 schools desegregation case Stout vs. Jefferson County Board of Education. Since a 1971 order in that case, federal judges have continued oversight - including approval of attendance zones - over county schools to make sure racial balances are maintained and no discrimination occurs.

Cities splitting off from the Jefferson County system since the 1971 order have been required to remain under the desegregation order until their system has reached "unitary status" - achieving the goals of becoming a non-discriminatory, desegregated system.

Gardendale, like six cities have done before it, wants to form its own school system. Residents voted in November 2013 to form a school system, named a school board, and hired a superintendent.

The Jefferson County system, DOJ, and private plaintiffs in the lawsuit argued against Gardendale forming its own system. Those groups said that Gardendale's system could prevent the Jefferson County system from achieving unitary status and getting out from under federal oversight.

No transition

Gardendale had proposed a 13-year transition plan. But Haikala said that won't happen.

"If, after three years, the Court approves a K-12 Gardendale municipal district, the Court will not approve a 13-year grandfather period," Haikala stated. "Though the lengthy grandfather period may be well meaning, it places too much stress on both the parent and the splinter districts."

Racist motives?

Haikala pointed out comments that referred to possible racist motives for Gardendale forming its own system.

"And if pictures speak louder than words, then a flyer bearing a photograph of a white student that asks Gardendale voters if they would rather live in an affluent white city or a formerly white city that now is well-integrated or predominantly black communicates an unambiguous message of inferiority," Haikala wrote. "There is no way to downplay or sidestep the harm that such a message conveys."

"Any arguable ambiguity in the flyer is resolved by blatant public statements from separation organizers that 'we don't want to become' what Center Point has become, and we need separation to provide 'better control of the geographic composition of the student body,'" the judge wrote.

Lawyers for the Gardendale Board emphasized that the statements were not made by board members, Haikala wrote. "But no member of the Gardendale Board has said anything, at least not publicly. No member of the board has disavowed the belittling language of exclusion used by separation organizers and supporters," she states.

"No member of the Board has reached out to students from North Smithfield to say 'you have been a part of these schools for 50 years, and we welcome you and want you to be part of them for 50 more' The silence is deafening," Haikala wrote.

Haikala stated she recognizes "there are no easy answers for the current situation."

"In a district like Jefferson County that was so resistant to desegregation that the Court had to order non-contiguous zoning, the process of finalizing federal oversight is complex," the judge writes. "Difficult discussions must be had about the best zoning options for students as federal supervision comes to a close."

Haikala ended her opinion with a history lesson.

"History teaches that communities, left to their own devices, re-segregate fairly quickly, in some cases sending the very messages of inferiority that the Supreme Court attempted to address in Brown (the landmark 1954 U.S. Supreme Court school desegregation case)," Haikala wrote. "The families of students who for years have boarded buses to attend schools outside of their neighborhoods must be consulted and must be part of the conversation about the best way to move forward.

"In doing the complicated work of dissolving a desegregation order, a court must ensure that the dying embers of de jure segregation aren't once again fanned into flames.

Updated at 7:30 a.m. April 25, 2017 with comment from U.W. Clemon.