Karen Handel wins; latest Georgia 6th District runoff results
Latest results: Click here if you do not see election results above this line.

Karen Handel defeats Jon Ossoff to win Georgia 6th District

On MyAJC: Precinct map with vote totals as they are posted

Most polls closed at 7 p.m. in Georgia’s 6th Congressional District , but the voting may continue at some precincts. As long as you were in line at 7 p.m., you are allowed to stay until you finish voting.

How long will it take to count the vote? As long as it takes.

We are reminded that it took Fulton County until after 2 a.m. to fully report during the first round of votes in April, but Fulton’s top elections official said he expects things to move smoothly today since there’s only one race on the ballot.

>> Read more on the AJC Runoff Election Day live blog

As the votes are counted , the AJC news team will publish live updates for the latest vote counts, along with news from the county elections office, Georgia’s Secretary of State and the candidates, Republican Karen Handel and Democrat Jon Ossoff.



Candidates for congress in Georgia's sixth congressional district Jon Ossoff (left) and Karen Handel (right) meet supporters on Election Day June 20, 2017. Photo: Chad Rhym

Bookmark this page for live updates.

RELATED: Georgia 6th District news headlines from the AJC

RELATED: Who can vote in Georgia 6th District special election

RELATED: Georgia special election polls

On Election night (Tuesday, June 20), readers will find live updates at ajc.com , MyAJC.com and the AJC Breaking News app . Readers can also follow our updates on Facebook and Twitter .

For in-depth coverage of the Georgia 6th District election , turn to the Politics page on MyAJC.com.

It's Election Day for Georgia's 6th District. Swipe up for everything you need to know.

Support real journalism. Support local journalism. Subscribe to The Atlanta Journal-Constitution today. See offers.

Your subscription to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution funds in-depth reporting and investigations that keep you informed. Thank you for supporting real journalism.