Transcripts
Return to Transcripts main page

CNN NEWSROOM

Getting Rid of Unwanted Gifts; President Obama Birth Controversy; Mystery Death in Missouri; Arizona Lawmaker Tied and Beaten; Nine Killed in Iraq Bombings; Spiderman Actor has Surgery; "St. Elmo's Fire"; Hef Still Believes in Marriage; Alanis Morissette's Best Gift

Aired December 27, 2010 - 13:00 ET

THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED.



TONY HARRIS, CNN ANCHOR: CNN NEWSROOM continues right now Deb Feyerick in for Ali Velshi.



DEBORAH FEYERICK, CNN GUEST ANCHOR: Tony Harris, always good to see you. Have a great afternoon. Well, you are looking, right now, at live pictures of New York City. The nation's largest city has nearly run into a standstill. All major airports are closed. The roads are a mess, but New York is not alone. If you're in the northeast and want to get out, or outside the northeast and want to get in, forget Christmas.



This is starting to feel a lot like groundhog day. In the wake of the yuletide blizzard that brought as much as two and a half feet of snow and winds as high as 80 miles an hour, travel is, at best, strongly discouraged, at worst, it's impossible. The three major airports serving New York City were supposed to reopen at 4:00 p.m. Eastern, three hours from now, but, well, take a look at those pictures, that has been pushed back along with the hopes of thousands of would-be passengers.



JFK is now scheduled to reopen at 6:00 p.m., no word on Laguardia or Newark, more than 2,500 flights have been canceled since yesterday and even if the snow were to melt tomorrow, it would take days to get all those schedules back to normal.



The snow won't be melting tomorrow, that's because blizzard warnings are still in effect in northern New England, states of emergency as far south as Virginia, but here, too, as you know, timing is everything.



Schools and many offices were closed anyway, most stranded flyers found out their flights were canceled before they went to the airport so they were allowed to stay home. One of them, CNN's Rob Marciano is staying put in Stamford, Connecticut, today.



But, Rob, you're out there, looks like the wind has died down a little bit, but it is going to be a problem. What's it like out there?



ROB MARCIANO, AMS METEOROLOGIST: Well, conditions are improving. I'll say that, Deb, and, obviously, where the travelers are stranded and have to get around via air that's a backlog of unimaginable proportions but as far as what we're starting to see now just in the last couple of hours is a bit of a digging, a digging out of what has been a blockbuster storm for some.



See here in Stamford, they've done a pretty good job getting mass transit out. The buses are out along with the plows and even the buses got stuck behind our live shot, two of them get stuck, one had to get towed out.



So, we are making progress. The snow has finally stopped and the winds have died down just a little bit. They've been able to catch up and plow some of these roads to the point where you're even seeing a little bit of black tarmac and with the sun coming out, now that's will help things out.



Temperatures below freezing tonight, so that's going to make travel an issue. The other improving condition has been the New Haven Line of metro north where they had some issues with the equipment.



Now, they're running that line which runs the I-95 corridor, including in Stamford from New Haven to New York City, they're running that, kind of, in a Sunday schedule with cancellations, now limited schedule there, same deal with Long Island Railroad.



But, obviously, folks are getting out and about. Just to give you an idea of how difficult it is to get around, people have been walking on the streets rather than on the sidewalk, because just to get on the sidewalk it is quite the chore, and then once you're there, there's no guarantee that it's actually going to be paved.



So, that's what we're looking at here, blizzard warnings, as you mentioned, have been dropped. There are still some power outages because of the tremendous winds across New England, so some folks in the dark and, in some cases, without heat, and there have been shelters set up across parts of eastern New England because of that. Slowly improving things here, Deb, and that's, certainly, some light at the end of the tunnel. Back to you.



FEYERICK: Absolutely. At least maybe for some kids they're able to take advantage of it and do some sledding because it certainly looks like some fun sledding snow out there. Thanks, Rob.



Well, our Allan Chernoff, also. He's out there at Laguardia airport in New York. Allan, any word on when they're going to be - on when they'll reopen? Or are people just understanding it's going to take a couple of days?



ALLAN CHERNOFF, CNN SENIOR CORRESPONDENT: Right. Well, you know, when they actually reopen the airport, that is almost like a starting gate, it doesn't mean that, all of the sudden, the flights are going to begin taking off.



You can see behind me, some people trying to reschedule their flights, there's a little bit of a line there, some people, actually, arriving here at the airport, some not even aware that their flights are not on for the day, but the headline here remained the fact that people have been delayed just hours and hours and, in some cases, days and days, yes.



We have an example here. Sarah Sohn (ph) is trying to fly to Chicago. Sarah (ph) you've been here for how long? Here at Laguardia airport?



SARAH SOHN (ph): I arrived here December 26th.



CHERNOFF: That's yesterday.



SOHN (ph): Yes.



CHERNOFF: Now it's 24 hours. Sarah is trying to get to Chicago and then to Shanghai. You've got a long trip ahead of you. When do you expect to get out of here?



SOHN (ph): I'm going to leave on December 28th, 7:00 a.m.



CHERNOFF: Tomorrow morning, 7:00 a.m. Now, Sarah, where did you sleep last night?



SOHN (ph): I just sit there. I didn't sleep.



CHERNOFF: In a seat right here by the food court.



SOHN (ph): Yes.



CHERNOFF: All night long?



SOHN (ph): Yes.



CHERNOFF: Last night you told me, my goodness, I'm so tired. You look pretty good right now.



SOHN (ph): Maybe my friend that she's here, so I'm good.



CHERNOFF: Perked you up. People are in good humor. You have one more night and plan to stay right here.



SOHN (ph): Yes.



CHERNOFF: My goodness, imagine that, two nights, literally, sleeping or trying to Sleep in a chair, only to get on to a flight to Chicago and then 14 hours to Shanghai?



SOHN (ph): 14 hours.



CHERNOFF: Assuming those flights are on time. Deb, wow. What a story.



FEYERICK: Absolutely, a lot to process. Certainly, I was on the 10:00 flight yesterday, and we were so lucky to get out. There was sort of a giddy expectation we were among the lucky ones. Allan Chernoff, thank you so much there in New York City.



Well, our "sound effect" today is a black voice trapped in a white body. That's a quote from the bounder Bradio One, describing R&B; singer-songwriter Teena Marie. Marie called herself The Ivory Queen of Soul. Here's part of the reason why.



TEENA MARIE: I need your love, and I won't bring no pain gain, a little birdie told me that you feel the same game and all you want to do let's make a deal, sugar all I want to do is be your one and only lover I just want to be your lover girl.



FEYERICK: Teena Marie died in her sleep yesterday at her home in Pasadena, California. She was 54. The last night of her life she tweeted a quote from jazz great Sarah Vaughn, "may you never grow old and may I never die."



We also remember they claimed documentarian Bud Greenspan. If you know, or care about the Olympics, you know and care about Greenspan's work. He chronicled the games for six decades on film and in books. But Greenspan died Christmas afternoon of complications from Parkinson's Disease. He was 84.



Well, new security concerns today about the thousands of air cargo flights that pass over the US, but don't actually land here. A "Washington Post" report says the packages on those planes are not screened to US Standards. And the paper also says passengers are not matched to names on the TSA's terror watch list. The TSA spokesman says it's working with other countries to improve screening of cargo, and an airline industry representative says the risk from these flights is low. The issue got international a next October when explosives were found in these printer cartridges on flights bound for the US from Yemen.



Former President Bill Clinton's heading back out on the campaign trail, a spokesman says he's going to be in Chicago next month to campaign for Rahm Emanuel, as he runs for mayor. Emanuel worked in the Clinton White House for five years. He was President Obama's chief of staff for two years before heading back to Chicago to seek the mayor's office.



A 911 reporting is out today after the death of a woman at the home of former Anheuser-Busch CEO August Bush. The 28-year-old was found dead last Sunday.



(BEGIN 911 TAPE)



OPERATOR: Emergency 911.



JUNG: Yeah, we need an ambulance.



OPERATOR: OK. Is that a residence or business?



JUNG: Residence.



OPERATOR: OK, What's your problem?



JUNG: Uh, uh, she's - this girl's just not waking up. We can't get her to ...



OPERATOR: Is she - is she breathing?



JUNG: We don't know. It's dark back there. I'm going to get a light and try and see.



OPERATOR: OK. All right. I'll get 'em going' right away.



JUNG: OK.



OPERATOR: All right, thanks. Bye-bye.



(END 911 TAPE)



FEYERICK: Busch did not make this 911 call. It was made by an employee at the home. No cause of death has been released. The medical examiner says Martin had no obvious signs of trauma, and toxicology results could take six weeks. Busch's attorney says his client is upset and disturbed over the death.



Nine of the men arrested in Britain on terror charges last week appearing in court today. We're going to have a live report from London.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



Well, nine men appeared in court in London today to face terror charges. They were among 12 suspects arrested in a series of raids one week ago. Three of the 12 have been released, but the other nine are accused of conspiring to cause an explosion, or explosions, likely to endanger lives. CNN Correspondent Dan Rivers is standing by in London. And, Dan, you were in court today. What are you learning?



DAN RIVERS, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Well, we are learning the identities of these men aged between 19 and 28 years old. From three different locations around the UK, Kardiff, Stoke-On-Trent, and London. All of them charged with two main offenses, conspiracy to cause an explosion between the 6th of November and the 21st of December and preparing for an act of terrorism between the same dates.



And now, that involved things like downloading, researching material online, conducting reconnaissance of different alleged targets, traveling and attending to meetings among the men, and even igniting and testing incendiary material. And eight of the nine men were also charged with some counts of possessing extremist material that could be useful in this plot.



Now, they'll all appear, again, on the 14th of January in the UK at the Old Bailey. Two of the targets that were mentioned in court were the US Embassy in Grosvenor Square and the London Stock Exchange. That gives you an idea of the nature of this plot.



We'll report more once the trial gets under way but, Debra, this could be several months away before a full reporting if this is allowed in the UK once a jury is sworn in, and, of course, the men haven't even had a chance, yet, to put in any pleas, guilty or not guilty. They were, simply, allowed to speak and confirm their names and their ages and their address.



FEYERICK: And, Dan, obviously, the restrictions in London are very different from in the United States. But looking at some of what's out there it suggests that by releasing three of the people they may not have been intrinsic to this alleged plot as perhaps the other nine are. Is that a fair suggestion?



RIVERS: Yes, and I think it's important in a lot of the terrorist arrests in the UK, quite a large percentage of the people who were initially picked up on terrorism charges or suspicions - or arrested on suspicion of terrorism, are later released.



And then, you know, it gets an ever smaller proportion that are actually successfully prosecuted under terrorism charges, so it wouldn't be a surprise in this kind of case that, you know, a quarter of the men initially picked up a week ago were released without charge. It's very difficult, in these cases, to get enough evidence to make something stick in court.



In this case, three of the 12 have been released without charge, nine now go forward to the next stage. It is conceivable that, perhaps, some of those may then be subsequently released if it's so that the evidence isn't strong enough. But, already, the kind of prosecution service, here, they kind of public prosecution, if you like, has come forward and said they think this is in the public interest and they, clearly, think they've got a case to put before the courts.



FEYERICK: Dan Rivers in London. Thank you so much.



Clearly it will be interesting to see also what kind of evidence they put forward, including perhaps what the incendiary devices may or may not have been.



Well, now we turn to another story, what you need to know before you head to the store to return those unwanted gifts, next, coming up in "Your Money."



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



FEYERICK: Now, maybe you didn't get exactly what you wanted for Christmas. So that means you're headed back to the store to return some of those, well, less than perfect gifts. But there are some important things you need to know before you go. CNN's Christine Romans is in New York with that checklist.



Christine, I have to tell you, my nieces and my cousins were at the mall yesterday, 45 minutes to park and then it was just -- it was a nightmare they said there were so many people there.



CHRISTINE ROMANS, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Yes. Yes. And I even stopped some place yesterday -- two places. One place to buy salt for my driveway. Another place just to check out some of the deals before the snow came down. And I'll tell you, there was an hour long wait to return gifts at a Kohl's department store in New Jersey. So, you're right, a lot of people braved the elements.



And I'll tell you, my first piece of advice is, you don't need to do it right away. If you've got the receipt, you can wait a few days and make sure it's safe to do so. But, Deb, the National Retail Federation says one in three Americans will return at least one gift and "Consumer Reports" says people expect to spend at least an hour in a line to do that.



Return policies are changing all the time, so be careful. And they've actually been getting a little more consumer friendly over the past couple of years after just a barrage of consumer complaints over everything from restocking fees to really difficult return policies. It will be a little bit easier to return something to Macy's, for example. You'll have a little bit longer to do so. They had had a shorter window for returning gifts before. Also, Toys "r" Us is going to have a -- if you have a receipt, you'll be able to return that within, I think, 60 or 90 days now. So be sure that if you get there within the next month or two you'll be able to return it.



Gift cards, though, I want to give you a little bit of a warning on the gift cards. You know, if you get a gift card, you can't return a gift card. Don't let it get lost. $5 billion, Deb, of gift cards go unused every year. So use it or lose it. Don't forget about that.



Deb.



FEYERICK: Well, you know, how is it, when people are returning these items, how does it affect store's bottom line or do they just count that 30 percent of all gifts are going to be returned? How does it affect it?



ROMANS: Oh, that's interesting because actually most people don't -- look, if you buy something online, about 30 percent of online purchases are returned. So think about that. Some of them are gifts that are unwanted, that never get returned. So that's good for the store, right? But the kind of the pain and suffering of having to restock something and put it back out for sale later on is difficult.



That's one of the reasons, Deb, why so many of the retailers have kept things very lean this year. They don't want a lot of excess inventory. They figured the usual rate of people returning things, and they don't want to have a lot of stuff on their shelves, which means you might not have all the deals in the next couple of weeks that you thought you would.



This snowstorm means that maybe you're going to have some deals maybe into next week. Some of the store sales that you would have seen yesterday and today, they didn't get a lot of people, maybe they'll extend those for the next week or so. But if you've got something to return, my advice is, have a receipt and return it sooner rather than later



FEYERICK: Without that receipt, if something goes on sale, are they simply going to give you the sale price as opposed to the price that perhaps somebody paid for the gift?



ROMANS: Yes.



FEYERICK: So you're out of luck. The stores make money that way.



ROMANS: Yes, if you don't have -- yes, you're out of luck. It's best -- and it's also always best to give a gift receipt, even though you know in your heart, Deb, that the gift you're giving someone is exactly what they want.



FEYERICK: Correct. Always



ROMANS: Just a little piece of insurance and put the gift receipt in there.



FEYERICK: OK, Christine Romans, thank you so much.



ROMANS: Bye, Deb.



FEYERICK: Be sure to tune in to "Your Bottom Line" with Christine Romans every Saturday morning at 9:30 Eastern and "Your Money" with Ali Velshi Saturdays at 1:00 p.m. Eastern and Sundays at 3:00.



Well, checking the latest developments in our top stories. A major blizzard in the Northeast has paralyzed air travel. New York's three main airports are shut down. They're closed. The FAA now says JFK and LaGuardia could reopen at 6:00 p.m. No word yet on LaGuardia. More than 2,500 flights have been canceled since yesterday, leaving thousands and thousands of passengers stranded, many sleeping on cots and airport floors and making friends with strangers.



Well, Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, has reportedly landed a book deal worth at least $1.3 million. Assange says he'll use the funds to keep his website running and to pay for legal fees piling up because of sex charges he's facing in Sweden. Assange told "The Sunday Times" of London he didn't want to write the book, but he had to for financial reasons.



In Morocco, officials say a terror network made up of six men who were planning to attack hot spots around the world has been dismantled. A state-run news agency says the members of the network had considerable experience making explosives and they were planning to use car bombs. The interior ministry says the men will appear in court once the investigation is complete.



The controversy over President Obama's birth place just doesn't seem to go away. But you may be surprised to learn who's bringing it up now. Ed Henry will have that in his stakeout.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



FEYERICK: Well, that seemingly never-ending controversy over where President Obama was born is back in the news. Ironically, the debate is being revived not by the president's opponents, but by a supporter. The newly elected Democratic governor of Hawaii. Our senior White House correspondent, Ed Henry, is giving up some surfing today. He's on the stakeout in Hawaii, where the president is spending his Christmas vacation.



And, Ed, boy, it seems like this controversy just does not go away. Why the governor? Why is he stirring it up?



ED HENRY, CNN SENIOR WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT: Well, Deb, you're absolutely right, I mean this has gone back to the 2008 campaign where you've had these so-called birthers saying they don't believe the president was born here in Hawaii in 1961, even though, you know, the Obama campaign back then had this certification of live birth, which is considered an official document here. It's not the actual birth certificate, but it's a certificate of live birth. They just kept reviving it.



And the bottom line is that I sat down with the governor, spoke to him this weekend and he basically, in his first on camera comment says, look, I realize the White House may not like me bringing this up, but I don't care. He said it's a matter of principle for him and he wants to basically, in his words, "end this controversy" once and for all. Here's what he had to say about why he's doing this now.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



GOV. NEIL ABERCROMBIE (D), HAWAII: Obviously I'm going to do what is legally possible. I have the attorney general and the director of the Department of Health looking at what we can do to try and see what we can do in turn for an open process that will put those who want to disrespect the president and his parents in the proper light, which is to say they have a political agenda not worthy of any good American.



HENRY: So even if the president or White House officials ask you to stop, we just don't want you to do it, you're still -- it's a matter of principle. You're going to go ahead and do it.



ABERCROMBIE: We haven't had any of those discussions. This is a matter of principle with me. I knew his mom and dad.



HENRY: Right.



ABERCROMBIE: I was here when he was born. Anybody who wants to ask the question honestly could have had their answer already. My friends in Congress know that. Everyone who knows me knows that. This has nothing to do with the president in terms of politics in the White House. This has everything to do with the respect the president's office is entitled to, and it has everything to do with the respect that every person's mother and father is entitled to.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



FEYERICK: You know, Ed --



HENRY: So he repeatedly in the interview, the governor, told me, he kept citing the president's parents, who he knew here in Hawaii in the early '60s. And he basically said, you know, look, this is a disrespect to them and so he now has the attorney general of this state, as well as the director of the state department of health looking at what legal options they can do here. And I asked the governor point blank, might you just release the president's actual birth certificate. And he basically said if legally we determine I can do that, and I can show the world the birth certificate and try to end this once and for all, we're going to do whatever we can. So he is vowing to end this once and for all, Deb.



FEYERICK: You know it's interesting because he says it's a matter of principle, but it's also very personal, too, especially if he knew the mother and the father. Did he say -- did you talk about the circumstances of the birth as well?



HENRY: Yes. Absolutely. I mean he basically said, look, I was here when Barack Obama was born. He was here in Hawaii. He knew about it then, you know, back in 1961, because he knew Barack Obama Sr., who had a scholarship to come here to the University of Hawaii, which is where Neil Abercrombie then was, the governor.



And he also knew Ann Dunham, the president's mother. And that's what he kept saying in this interview with me, this is not just a disrespect to the president, the president's office, it's a disrespect to his parents. Because the allegation essentially is that Barack Obama's parents had him born in Kenya and then sort of brought him here to Hawaii to sort of fool everyone into thinking he was born here in America. And both of the president's parents are deceased now, of course, and Neil Abercrombie saying, look, I now have the power as governor to right this wrong, not just for the president's sake, but to clear his parents' name. it was very, very personal to him, Deb.



FEYERICK: Ed Henry out there in Hawaii just taking a hit for the team. Thanks so much. We're going to check back with you later.



HENRY: Thanks, Deb.



FEYERICK: Well, another package bomb turns up at a foreign embassy in Rome. Details on whether it's connected to the one found at two embassies last week. That's next in Globe Trekking.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



FEYERICK: Happening now. Well if you haven't heard more than 2,500 flights have been canceled because of the blizzard that is gripping the northeast. All three of New York's airports still closed, but there's word now that JFK and Newark will be reopening at 6:00 p.m. Thousands are without power, some places might get as much as 30 inches of snow.



And you're looking live at the Dow, a light day of trading is expected on the street today. In addition to the holidays, the bad weather is keeping some Wall Street employees from getting to work.



And nine men arrested across the United Kingdom a week ago were ordered held without bail on charges of conspiracy and other terrorism offenses. The men appeared in court in London today. All of the suspects between the ages of 19 and 28.



Time for Globe Trekking. In Rome, another package bomb was discovered today, this one at the Greek embassy. The bomb was diffused and there were no injuries. The Greek ambassador says the package was addressed by hand and arrived at the embassy on Christmas Eve. Police say the device resembled those which exploded in Rome last week at the Chilean and Swiss embassies injuring two people.



An anarchist group, called the informal anarchist federation claimed responsibility for those two attacks, and police say they may be behind today's incident. The group has vowed to launch more strikes to quote, "destroy the systems of domination." Police also responded to other reports of suspicious packages at the Venezuelan, Danish, Monaco, Kuwaiti, and Albanian embassies, also in Rome today. Those packages did not contain explosives.



Next stop, Egypt, and a bus crash that killed eight American tourists. Nineteen other Americans and two Egyptians were injured. One side of the bus was completely sheared off. It happened yesterday when a tourist bus slammed into a parked dump truck in Aswan, about 600 miles south of Cairo. The bus was one of three carrying 116 Americans to the popular tourist spot. The bus in the middle of the three-bus convoy is the one that crashed. No word yet on the possible cause.



And now to Pakistan. Two suspected U.S. drone strikes killed 18 alleged militants today. It happened in the tribal region of North Waziristan, which borders Afghanistan. The attack is just the latest aimed at insurgents suspected of using Pakistan as a base to attack U.S. and NATO forces in neighboring Pakistan.



CNN's Chris Lawrence joins us from the Pakistani capital Islamabad, with more. And General Petraeus has said he wants the U.S. to use a hammer and anvil kind of strategy.



What's going on?



CHRIS LAWRENCE, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Well, Deb, that basically means to hit from both sides. Basically to have as NATO forces and Afghan forces hit insurgents on their side of the border, that the Pakistani authorities would follow up with a similar campaign on this side of the border so the militants don't just flee to safety on the other side.



This drone attack today really underscores the increase drone activity here in Pakistan, although U.S. authorities will always deny, deny, deny that these drone strikes take place. Two Pakistani military -- two Pakistani intelligence officials confirmed to us that there was a drone strike in which it looks like the drone fired four missiles at an insurgent vehicle. And then that was followed up later with two missile strikes on an insurgent hideout.



The death toll has been rising since we first reported this. It's now up to 18, could go even higher as authorities look into this even more. But it's interesting in that the drone strikes today in North Waziristan, it's because of the increased activity in this area that military officials tell us have really pushed a lot of the militants further north into some of the other tribal areas right along the border with Afghanistan. And when you look at it, this drone strike by our count brings the count to 108 so far this year. Compare that to only 52 all of last year -- Deb.



FEYERICK: And Chris, one of the reasons that they're looking at this area, the U.S. considers this one of the most dangerous areas for U.S. interests. Even though Pakistan doesn't agree, there are sanctuaries there harboring groups like the Taliban, like the Haqqani network, and so they want to get there to sort of effectively at least cut it off temporarily while the winter months are there.



LAWRENCE: Right. Why does the U.S. care? Because they feel this is where a tremendous amount of attacks are planned, supplied, and then the fighters are coming from this area to execute them over the border in Afghanistan.



But I was speaking with a senior Pakistani military official who says even though, yes, they know eventually they've got to go into North Waziristan, now is not yet the time. He said he compared it to the fact that, you know, a U.S. fighter who fights a year in Afghanistan and then he goes home to Texas or Florida, he's safe, he's secure, he can relax. He said because of rotation schedules, our fighters have been in these tribal areas for almost two and a half years and then when they do go home they're still fighting militancy in their towns and villages.



So he said right now right now they're just not prepared to undertake a massive amount of ground offensive in North Waziristan. They know they eventually will have to, perhaps in the next six months is the figure I was told. But right now is just not the time.



FEYERICK: OK. Wow. Two and a half years there in country. That's got to be difficult. Chris Lawrence reporting for us out there.



Thank you so much for joining us today.



Well, snow is shutting down the northeast, airports closed, travel plans in jeopardy. We're going to get the details from Chad Myers out of the break.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



(WEATHER REPORT)



FEYERICK: The mystery death at the home of a beer tycoon, August Busch IV. Police release 911 tapes. You're going to want to hear that after this.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



FEYERICK: Now the story of a model who apparently died suddenly at the mansion of August Busch IV. Busch is the former chief executive of Anheuser-Busch beer brewing company before it was taken over by a Belgian firm. Police today released the 911 call from the incident back on December 19th.



CNN's Casey Wian joins from Los Angeles. Casey, what is going on?



CASEY WIAN, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Well, Deborah more than a week after Adrianne Martin, the girlfriend of August Busch IV was found dead in his St. Louis area mansion. Police have released the 911 call connected to the case. The call was made by an employee at the Busch home. Let's listen.



OPERATOR: "Emergency 911."



JUNG: Yes, we need an ambulance.



OPERATOR: OK, is that a residence or business? JUNG: Residence.



OPERATOR: OK, what's the problem?



JUNG: She's, this girl's just not waking up. We can't get her to -



OPERATOR: Is she - is she breathing?



JUNG: We don't know - it's dark back there. I'm going to get a light and try and see.



OPERATOR: OK. All right. I'll get them going right away.



JUNG: OK.



OPERATOR: All right, thanks. Bye-bye.



WIAN: Now that call was placed at 1:12 last Sunday afternoon, according to the Frontenac, Missouri Police Department. Paramedics arrived eight minutes later and pronounced the 27-year-old Martin dead at 1:26.



According to the police report, there were no apparent signs of trauma or other indications of cause of death. The St. Louis County Medical Examiner's Office is investigating, but it won't have toxicology results for four to six weeks. Now the death is being investigated as a possible overdose, according to a law enforcement source who spoke to the "St. Louis Post Dispatch."



But the paper also quotes friends and colleagues who say the former model was against drugs. Martin's ex-husband also talked to the paper, he's a doctor who said she had a heart condition called long QT syndrome that in some cases can prove fatal. She leaves behind an 8- year-old son and according to her obituary, August Busch IV, the love of her life. Deborah --



FEYERICK: Casey, my understanding also is that -- they had been going out for about a year, correct, this was a couple?



WIAN: This is absolutely a couple, and relatives of the victim or the dead woman say that they were very fond of Mr. Busch. They had been in a relationship for a year. They were both divorced. She had an 8- year-old son as we mentioned, and that 8-year-old son's father said he was also, he also thought that August Busch IV is a good guy. Deborah --



FEYERICK: OK. Thank you, and there was a little bit of a delay though on releasing, on that call, wasn't there, by the time they found her and the time they actually called 911?



WIAN: Yes, there are some questions about that, local media reported that the medical examiner's office said that she was found dead at 12:30 p.m., that the 911 call wasn't made until 42 minutes later.



Now I spoke to the medical examiner's office myself earlier today, and they said that they didn't provide that 12:30 time frame. So we're not exactly clear where that came from, it could have come from a paramedic, could have come from somebody else, could have been an estimate.



But there are questions about the timing of the 911 call that have not been answered and also questions about the actual time of her death. She was apparently last seen alive at 3:30 in the morning.



The original police report said that the death occurred on the 18th and they amended it and saying it occurred on the 19th so a lot of questions still revolving around this case.



FEYERICK: OK, Casey Wian in Los Angeles, thanks so much. We'll check in with you in a little while.



An Arizona state legislator is recovering today after he was severely beaten in his business about an hour south of Phoenix. Police say they're looking for the person who tied up Frank Pratt, beat him stole his truck from his swimming pool business. At last check, he was in stable condition.



At least nine people including four police officers are dead after suicide bombings in western Iraq. At least two explosions hit a government complex in Ramadi. Forty people were wounded in those attacks.



The actor injured on the set of the "Spiderman" Broadway musical is recovering after surgery. He's expected to begin rehabilitation today in New York. The 32-year-old Christopher Tierney was hurt after he fell during a performance last week. You see him on that stage going over. He fell 30 feet into the orchestra pit. Tierney suffered broken ribs and a back injury.



Forget the rat pack. In the '80s it was all about the brat pack. Coming up we're going to revisit the movie "ST. Elmo's Fire" and find out what that cast is up to now.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



FEYERICK: It was one of the most memorable brat pack movies of the 1980s, "St. Elmo's Fire," that coming of age movie. Where are the actors of this iconic film now? Well, Brooke Anderson reports from Hollywood.



(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)



BROOKE ANDERSON, CNN ENTERTAINMENT CORRESPONDENT (voice-over): It was 1985 and seven college graduates left the halls of Georgetown and entered the hearts of a generation. Twenty five years later, Kirby, Billy, Kevin, Jules, Alex, Wesley and Wendy have gone their own way.



EMILIO ESTEVEZ, ACTOR: I encourage young people to get in life, man and get involved and reengaged.



ANDERSON: For his part Emilio Estevez, son of Martin Sheen and brother of Charlie Sheen wrote, directed and starred in the biopick "Bobby" about the life and death of Robert Kennedy. UNIDENTIFIED MALE: It's "St. Elmo's Fire."



ANDERSON: Rob Lowe, D.C.'s ultimate frat boy went on to a thriving career in television including a seven-year stint on "The West Wing" and four-year run on the hit drama "Brothers & Sisters."



UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Like a yearbook I guess.



ANDERSON: Allie Sheeny, Andrew McCarthy and John Nelson all starred in a series of '80s brat pack movies before evolving into smaller roles in Hollywood. Mary Winningham went on to have five children and in 2002 converted to Judaism. She also continues to work on the small screen with recent roles with in the TV drama "24" and "Grey's Anatomy."



Finally and perhaps the most famous of the "St. Elmo's" alumni is actress Demi Moore.



DEMI MOORE: I really love you.



UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Ditto.



ANDERSON: Her subsequent roles in box office hits like "Ghost," "Indecent Proposal" and "Charlie's Angels" as well as her highly publicized marriages to actors Bruce Willis and now Ashton Kutcher have made her a fixture in the public eye. Brooke Anderson, CNN, Hollywood.



(END VIDEOTAPE)



FEYERICK: I remember it well.



OK. You're spending time with friends and family over the holidays and you're looking for that perfect indoor activity you can share with the whole gang. We've got it. It's called the most intriguing person of the year. Here's how you can play.



Go to CNN.com. That's where you'll find CNN's list of who we consider the 20 most intriguing people of 2010. Your role is to help us narrow the list down to 10, and it's not going to be easy.



Is it quarterback Michael Vick who went from dog abuser to top dog? Or trapped Chilean miner Edison Pena whose training in the mine shaft allowed him to do the New York City marathon? Is Apple's Steve Jobs more intriguing than Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg? Decide your top 10 and we will announce the winner this Thursday.



Hugh Hefner is at it again at 84. I'll tell you what it is after a break.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



FEYERICK: Time now for "Odds & Ends" and new beginnings. You know Crystal Harris, Miss December 2009? On Christmas Eve, she became the next Mrs. Heff to be. In a tweet to his fans, the iconic founder of "Playboy" magazine says he gifted his newest favorite bombshell with an engagement ring and it was the happiest Christmas weekend in memory.



When you're 85 years old, that's saying something. Ms. Harris is 24. Put another way, she was 3 when Hef wed the former playmate he formally divorced just a few months ago.



In 2-1/2 months since their breathtaking rescue from the Chilean mine, these guys have been the toast of the world and it's not over yet. The 33 miners along with families and rescuers are going to Disney World for a six-day, all-expenses paid vacation. They'll also serve as grand marshals at the Main Street parade.



Alanis Morissette can thank the stork, not Santa, for her best Christmas ever. On December 25th, the singer and her husband, Mario Soli Tradeway welcomed a baby boy who they named Ever Imra Morissette Tradeway. The publicist says all are healthy and happy.