Amazon.com: Once a Bum, Always a Dodger: My Life in Baseball from Brooklyn to Los Angeles (9780312039028): Don Drysdale, Bob Verdi: Books
Back in my teenage years, and mainly from 1962-67, I was a huge Los Angeles Dodgers fan, listening to every game that I could on my transistor radio. My chief heroes were hurlers Sandy Koufax and Don "The Big D" Drysdale, in that order. The most highly anticipated game day was one featuring a double-header in which both pitchers started. The ultimate delight was hearing both record a victory. Drysdale died in 1993 at age 56. His book, ONCE A BUM, ALWAYS A DODGER had been published 3 years before. For me, reading it only now, it represents The Big D's last walk to the mound.



This volume is Don's memoir of his time as a (Brooklyn) Dodger beginning in 1956 to his retirement from the (Los Angeles) Dodgers in 1969 and his subsequent career as a sportscaster.



Though California born and raised, Drysdale's biggest thrill in life was putting on the Brooklyn uniform, and that New York borough remained his sentimental professional home for the rest of his career. He remembers with fondness the Brooklyn greats with whom he first played, some of whom made the move to Los Angeles: Pee Wee Reese, Gil Hodges, Jackie Robinson, Roy Campanella, Sal Maglie, Carl Furillo, Don Newcombe, and Duke Snider. Oddly, he has relatively little or nothing to say about the next generation of players whom I followed over the airwaves in Chavez Ravine: Maury Wills, Tommy and Willie Davis, Ron Fairly, Jim Brewer, Ron Perranoski, Claude Osteen, Johnny Roseboro, Jeff Torborg, Jim Lefebvre, Wes Parker, Dick Tracewski, and Lou Johnson. Sandy Koufax, of course, gets big mention inasmuch as it was Sandy and Don that joined forces for the infamous Great Holdout before the 1966 season. But, even then, I didn't sense that The Big D and Dandy Sandy were that close, not because either was overtly unfriendly, but because Koufax was (and is) a supremely private person. At one point Drysdale writes:



"I don't know if Sandy enjoyed watching me pitch, but I sure as hell enjoyed watching him do his thing. He was something."



The most useful personal insights, such as they are, are pretty much limited to Manager Walter Alston, General Manager Buzzie Bavasi, and Dodger owner Walter O'Malley during Drysdale's playing era, and to Vin Scully and Howard Cosell during his broadcasting years. But, even here, there's not much meat.



The book includes a 16-page section of photographs, but it lacks even a rudimentary section on Don's throwing statistics covering his 13-year major league career, though there is an entire chapter - "The Scoreless Streak" - dedicated to his most memorable achievement, the 58 2/3 innings of scoreless ball pitched in 1968.



The reader might be left with the impression that The Big D's life was without bumps. Therefore, I found refreshing his last chapter admission to and brief discussion about the failure of his 24-year marriage to his first wife Ginger. Indeed, it was only at this late point that I discovered the man to be human and his story retrospectively engaging. Nevertheless, Drysdale remains a larger-than-life figure in the endless summer of my adolescence.