Amazon.com: The Yogi Book (9780761154433): Yogi Berra: Books
Hardly anyone would quarrel...that Winston Churchill has been replaced by Yogi Berra as the...favorite source of quotations. (The New Yorker)

"Yogi Berra was one of the first guys to allow himself to be kidded by his teammates. A shrewd move--they made him one of the most famous personalities in America." (Tim Mccarver)

"Yogi's son Larry and I played on the Montclair High School Basketball team together. At the time, Yogi represented Yoo-Hoo soft drinks. When we'd win, Yogi would bring the Yoo-Hoo to

the locker room. When we'd lose, we got nothing. Prior to the games, Yogi would tell us, "If you win, you get the Yoo-Hoo, if you lose you get the Boo-Hoo!" (Leonard S. Coleman Jr.)

"Yogi came back to my dressing room after our show at the Garden State Arts Center in New Jersey. He has always been one of my heroes. I felt like I was in the locker room after hitting a home run and winning the World Series. Yogi looked at me and said, "Wow, kid, I wouldn't want to do what you do...the work's too hard!" ( "Talking to Yogi Berra about baseball is like talking to Homer about the gods." (Bart

Giamatti)

"When I was on Saturday Night Live, Yogi played himself in a mock documentary called 'Ballplayers.' Christopher Guest and I played 75-year-old black ballplayers talking about the old days. We acted our hearts out. Yogi had one line and stole the movie. I'll never work with him again!" (Billy Crystal)

"A conversation with Yogi Berra is as memorable as seeing a game in Yankee Stadium in its heyday." (Frank Sinatra)

"I was standing at home plate and the announcer said, 'Now catching for the Yankees, Yogi Berra.' I'd never heard of him and there he was--his shin guards and chest protector were too long--and I thought, 'Who are they trying to kid with this guy?' Well, I played against him for ten years and I appreciated his abilities more and more and more. He made the pitchers pitch. And he was a damn good hitter!" (Ted Williams)

"I make a lot of speeches. Often, to illustrate a point, I reach back for a Yogi expression because Yogi can sum up a situation like nobody else. Thanks, Yogi." (Brendan T. Byrne)

"Yogi Berra is a national treasure. I've been using his remarks to close all my speeches and they always bring huge laughs. I love Yogi--always have, always will." (Larry King)