Carrying the Fire: An Astronaut's Journeys: Michael Collins, Charles A. Lindbergh: 8601404382673: Amazon.com: Books
I recently came across Carrying the Fire by Michael Collins about a week and a half ago. I thought to myself “Who is Michael Collins?” I knew who he was of course, but was wondering what business he had writing a book. After all, he was the “third guy” on Apollo 11, the oft-forgotten Command Module Pilot while Neil and Buzz had their moment in history. If you had to read a book from anybody, why him?



It had great reviews and I picked it up because of this. I figured he might have a unique perspective on the whole ordeal by not being in the limelight and the reviews did not disappoint. I found it a wonderful book by a fantastic astronaut who is realistic and down to Earth with his words while still being able to let his rhetoric soar towards the Moon when it is needed.



The book covers his entire time in the space program (and slightly before) in a roughly autobiographical fashion. His descriptions of Gemini 10 and Apollo 11 are fantastic and you are left feeling that you are along with him in his tiny spacecraft for days on end; the writing at this point almost seems like a thriller. You get to hear about the struggles that are little-known with being an astronaut and the challenges involved in getting to the moon. You get an idea of his peers and their differing attitudes, personalities, and skills. With this book I felt I had a surprisingly personal and up-close view of NASA, the astronauts, and the race to the moon in the 1960s that nothing else seemed to capture.



The book is not without its flaws as tiny as they are. Collins seems very pragmatic and down to Earth, and you sometimes fault him for not having his head-in-the-clouds a bit more, but he is himself in this book and that is commendable. He didn't use a ghost writer and that shows. You can’t much fault him much for this and it’s a rather minor point! The book was also written in the early 1970s which makes it dated. This works both ways, for good and for bad. On the negative side, some parts seem outdated and there is much optimistic speculation but little fact on how the space program played out after the Apollo program. On a positive note the optimism displayed is shocking because much of it is wrong. Collins expected us to be on Mars by now and the fact that we aren't is surprising. Another positive is that the writing is fresh and not being recalled decades after the fact. The book has a new forward by the author, but a new version with a “final chapter” by Collins would close it out wonderfully. Collins, being in his 80s, would be nice to hear from with a retrospect to the book.



I’d recommend this to anyone with any interest in the Gemini, Apollo, or the 1960s space race in general. Other space fans might also be pleased but this is the period the book focuses on. It gives a close-up and personal view of NASA in the 1960s from the perspective of one of the luckiest astronauts to have lived. While he wasn’t one of the “big guys” who walked on the moon he was there on the landmark Apollo 11 flight and he gives a unique perspective on the affair that none other can. Coupled with wonderful and insightful writing, this is a fantastic book indeed.