Is Barack Obama's Birth Certificate a Fraud?: A Computer Guy Examines The Evidence For Forgery: John Woodman: 9780983759256: Amazon.com: Books
I have had an interest in Barak Obama's BC for a long time and have been reading everything on the subject (pro or con) that I could find. I have found very little convincing information refuting these forgery claims with most refutations falling into the category of insults toward the birthers. As a case in point, the day before Obama published an alleged copy of his long form birth certificate on the government web site, Shepard Smith (Fox News Channel) announced with great irritation that Obama had already produced his BC completely ignoring the fact that the demand was for the long form version.



Once the purported long form BC was out, many individuals analyzed the document and concluded that it had to be forged. The fact that this was unaccompanied by any attempt to disprove these claims caused me (and I suspect many others) to give a certain amount of credibility to the claims.



When I stumbled across a reference to this book on the web, I looked it up on Amazon.COM and ended up purchasing a kindle version. I was amazed at the thoroughness, and reasonableness of the arguments that were presented. I believe the author addressed pretty much every claim that had ever been made regarding Obama's birth and his BC. In every instance, he provided credible arguments against the forgery claim being addressed.



I thought that Corsi, World Net Daily (WND), or sombody else would address these arguments and provide a counter to the refutation. That did not happen. Consequently, this book turned me from a position of believing the BC was likely forged to one of believing that the forgery claims were hogwash. And that is where I am today and where I will remain until somebody is able to provide a convincing argument of why this book is wrong.



One thing is very certain. The main stream news outlets have really done nothing to refute any claims other than demonstrating how much in the tank they are for Obama. Their reaction to the subject has ranged from pretending there is no controversy to labeling everyone who questions Obama's BC as some kind of right wing nut job.



I really do not understand why this book has not received more publicity. I suppose the main stream press have never really bothered to understand what the debate was about for fear the forgery claims might be true.



In summary, this is a well written, well researched, interesting book that is a must read for anyone who questions or would like to refute questioners of Obamas BC and claims of forgery.