Amazon.com: 2016 Ebooks Antitrust Settlement Terms & Conditions
Terms and Conditions for 2017 Apple eBooks Antitrust Settlement Credit

Your settlement credit is subject to the following terms and conditions:

1. To be eligible for the settlement credit through Amazon, you must have (a) received Apple settlement credits as part of the 2016 distribution and (b) redeemed some or all of the credits you received in June 2016. (Eligibility for the 2016 distribution required (a) a U.S. billing address, and (2) a purchase of a Kindle book published by Hachette, HarperCollins, Simon & Schuster, Penguin or Macmillan (including their divisions) between April 1, 2010 and May 21, 2012.)

2. Amazon will disburse the settlement credit automatically to your account, and then automatically apply your settlement credit toward your purchase of qualifying items through Amazon.com, an Amazon device or an Amazon app. The credit applied to your purchase will appear as a gift card in your order summary during checkout and in your account history.

3. Amazon will apply settlement credits first before applying existing credits or gift cards in your account.

4. Your settlement credit will apply to the total purchase amount of your order, including costs like taxes, shipping, or gift wrapping. You cannot use your settlement credit for any purchases of Amazon gift cards or certain subscriptions.

5. Customers will be responsible for the balance of any orders that the settlement credit does not cover. Amazon will use the payment instruments on file in your account to satisfy these balances.

6. Settlement credits will be valid through April 20, 2018. Unused settlement credits are subject to expiration after this date, by order of the Court overseeing this settlement. This term supersedes any inconsistent terms of your Amazon account.

7. Settlement credit amounts are determined by the number of qualifying Kindle books purchased multiplied by an amount set by the Court. Amazon cannot vary the settlement credit amount.

8. Settlement credits cannot be transferred or redeemed for cash.

9. Returned items purchased with settlement credits will result in restoration of the settlement credit in the amount of the return, subject to these terms and conditions.

10. Your purchases will otherwise be governed by Amazon's Conditions of Use.

Check your credit balance.