From Worst to First: Behind the Scenes of Continental's Remarkable Comeback: Gordon Bethune: 9780471248354: Amazon.com: Books
I purchased this book because United and Continental Airlines merged into one company and I wanted some back ground knowledge concerning Continental's trials and tribulations.

My initial reaction was I found the repetition of issues and how they were addressed to be a bit unnecessary. I suppose the author wanted to emphasis the gravity of what they were up against, and that comes across loud and clear.

I do not want to repeat a lot of other well thought out reviews so I will skip to the main impression I came away with. If Gordon Bethune, the team of managers he was a part of, non-management groups, engineers, ground personnel, front line customer service and mechanics, as well as out side company suppliers, come together with one vision, then anything is possible. It takes knowledge, brutal honesty, integrity, an understanding that this is not about ME but for everyone who works in a company, and TRUST, that will create a great corporation. I particularly want to emphasis trust, because it seems that this is what is at the center of what Bethune is fighting to create and preserve. This seems so basic it borders on the ridiculous to even mention or question as to its roll in a successful organization, but this theme repeats itself in many forms in this book. Bethune understands though, that trust is earned, and when the pot has been scraped dry, the only tools available to you are to; have a deep understanding of what happened, address the issues directly with candor and forthrightness, apologize with sincerity, do not make accuses, honesty, truthfulness, humble, and ask for forgiveness. Once Continental started down this road it seemed that the final step for creating a healthy relationship was not to side step any issues, no matter how uncomfortable, but to address them openly and with candor.

I enjoyed this book and recommend it to any one.

As an after thought I want to say Continental/United Airlines are on a new path. It is going to be what it is. Hopefully, it won't be the typically dysfunctional relationship that represents a lot of the corporations in our America.