The Peanuts Collection: Treasures from the World's Most Beloved Comic Strip: Nat Gertler: 9780316086103: Amazon.com: Books
Format: Hardcover

Full disclosure: first off, I'm not a huge fan of these `treasure trove' types of books where the book comes with removable reprints of memorabilia, and second, I love Peanuts. So these two things should even themselves out.



There's something about the antics of Charlie Brown, Snoopy, Linus, Lucy, et al. that just gets me. Whether it's Charlie Brown's constant underdog status, Snoopy's understated cool, Linus' unshakable belief in things he's told are wrong, or Lucy's cynicism, there are so many elements of the strip that resonate with me and, given it's longevity and popularity, millions of others.



Even accepting my general dislike of this kind of book, this - released to coincide with Peanuts' 60th anniversary - is a nice example of how they should be done. Not every page has something detachable, thankfully, but virtually every page does have several pictures of rare items. Items included include a film cel, some frameable prints, stickers, comics, a Great Pumpkin carol leaflet, early advertising featuring the characters (for the Ford Falcon) and much more.



On the text side, the book is relatively light - but that seems to be par for the course for these things. Yes, there are over 25 `chapters' but each one takes only a page of the book and focuses on one topic. Subjects range from character pieces (why Linus and Lucy get combined on one page I'll never know) to merchandising, animation, and a look at how the character of Franklin broke new ground. Writer Nat Gertler has an amazingly comprehensive knowledge of the strip and it's history so they never fail to be entertaining, if short.



Realistically, this book isn't going to win any new fans to the world of Peanuts but conversely it's probably not aimed at them. For fans of the strip already, there's plenty new here to enjoy - and for those people, I'd highly recommend the book.