Will Scott veto Florida tuition increases?
Gov. Rick Scott has his dislike of tuition hikes clear, likening them to tax increases.

But lawmakers defied his opposition and sent him a $74.5 billion budget for next year that contains a 3 percent tuition increase for state universities and colleges.

The question is what will he do with it? And perhaps more importantly can he do anything about it?

On Friday, Scott did not definitively say he would veto the tuition increase. But he came very close.

"As you know I've been against tuition increases," Scott told reporters, noting that Florida's university tuition has risen rapidly — some 67 percent according to The College Board — in the last five years.

"It's really impacted our families and I worry about families like mine growing up that didn't have a lot of money for tuition," he said.

Under the new budget, which takes effect July 1, the per-credit tuition for university students would rise by $3.10, which would equate to about a $93 annual increase for a student taking 30 credit hours. That does not include additional fee increases that are tied to the tuition rate.

In 2007, former Gov. Charlie Crist vetoed a 5 percent tuition increase. Critics asserted the veto was not legitimate since Crist used his veto power to eliminate "proviso language" that authorized the tuition increase rather than eliminating a "line item" in the budget. But the veto was never legally challenged and it stood.

Now Scott could face the same situation as he prepares to act on the new budget before a May 24 deadline.

Scott sidestepped the proviso language question, saying he would review the entire budget "very carefully," while adding "as you know I have not supported a tuition increase."

Peter Antonacci, a veteran Tallahassee lawyer and Scott's general counsel, said he believes the governor has the power to eliminate the tuition increase.

"The pure question there is, does the general counsel's office take the position that the governor has the authority to veto that item? The answer is yes," Antonacci said.

Antonacci, who previously worked in the Attorney General's Office and as a state prosecutor, said legal clashes over the governor's veto power are not uncommon.

"It has been part of the pull and tug between the legislative and executive branches," Antonacci said. "It's been that way for as long I've watched it."

House and Senate budget chairmen leaders say Scott should let the tuition increase stand. The House originally proposed a 6 percent increase, but compromised with the Senate, which had no tuition increase its original budget.

Lawmakers say they have mitigated the 3 percent tuition increase by expanding Bright Futures scholarships and need-based financial aid for students.

For instance, university students who qualify for the highest Bright Futures award — as a Florida Academic Scholar — would see the award rise from $100 per credit hour to $103 under the new budget.

Aside from the Bright Future scholarships, which are awarded on a merit basis, lawmakers also increased the major fund for need-based financial aid from $135 million to $138 million.

"I think the compromise with the 3 percent that we put in is reasonable. Hopefully it won't come to that," Senate Appropriations Chairman Joe Negron, R-Stuart, said when asked about Scott's authority to veto the tuition increase.

But Negron, a lawyer, said the "the answer is unclear" if a tuition veto could survive a legal challenge.

"I've seen legal positions on both sides of the issue and it hasn't been litigated," he said.

House Appropriations Chairman Seth McKeel, R-Lakeland, said he would rather defend the tuition increase on its merits rather than whether or not it could avoid a veto.

"I think the policy is correct. I think we would certainly rather win on the policy argument," McKeel said.

McKeel noted that a portion of the tuition increase goes to student aid. He also made the case that Florida's university tuition remains among the lowest in the country. The 2012 fall survey by The College Board placed Florida's tuition at 41st in the nation, with students paying an average of $6,232 a year compared to $8,655 nationally.

"It's just important to keep pace," McKeel said. "If you continue to fall further and further behind our universities won't be able to compete nationally."

In the overall scheme of the state university system budget, the tuition hike represents only $18.5 million of the $314 million increase in operating funds for the schools, not including the $300 million restoration of a previous budget cut.

Even if Scott rejects the 3 percent increase, the state universities have the power to seek a "differential" tuition increase up to 15 percent. However, that increase is subject to approval by the Board of Governors; a solid majority of the members were appointed by Scott and would presumably reflect the governor's line on tuition increases.

— Information from the News Service of Florida was used in this report.