The Byrds: Timeless Flight Revisited: The Sequel: Johnny Rogan: 9780952954019: Amazon.com: Books
Johnny Rogan's "The Byrds: Timeless Flight Revisited: The Sequel" 4th edition, is a revised and updated edition of his 1997 tome "Timeless Flight." If you are a fan of the Byrds, this is the definitive book! It is revised, updated and expanded to examine in detail all aspects of the group's members (album releases, projects, and deaths in the years following the group's existence (1965-1972.) The book is huge (700+ pages) and minute in its details and Rogan interviewed all of the principals; wrote extensive notes, annotations, a discography, and many, many details and recollections. Good thing he completed his work before the recent (April 2011) death of group manager and producer Jim Dickson who was a major source of this book it seems.



Rogan is a fine writer, but at times as others have noted, you can see he is a fan when he lapses into gushing praise or praise. Don't get me wrong, it just is unexpected when you read a book like this expecting "Behind the Music" style "just-the-facts" expose writing. It actually makes the book a better read and it covers all aspects of the Byrds, the background, the music, the members and "all the things" one would expect from such a story, including the inevitable "sex, drugs and rock n' roll." The Byrds made innovative and unique music despite clashing egos, members with very different musical backgrounds and vision.



Rogan lets the members, the producers and other folks speak for themselves and weaves the narrative together. David Crosby gets his say and vents his spleen, as does Roger McGuinn, Chris Hillman. Rogan does a fine job with obits/retrospectives of Gene Clark (died 1991) and drummer Michael Clarke (died 1993.) I have to say that in spite of being an admirer and fan of David Crosby, I gained more insight and understanding of him from Rogan's book.



"Timeless Flight Revisted" is the best book on a rock group that I have read and is essential reading for anyone who is a fan of the Byrds. I did not agree with all of Rogan's reviews of some of the albums or group members solo projects, but he presents them in a logical and well researched way and I could see his points. This is especially true of McGuinn and Hillman's solo efforts. A worthy addition to any bookshelf!