Eisenhower: Soldier and president: Stephen E Ambrose: 9780671701079: Amazon.com: Books
Sometimes, it takes time to identify our heroes. When I was a child in the fifties, Ike seemed like Mr. Bland, the King of mindless conformism. (Please note again that I was a CHILD. :-) )



Once JFK was in the White House, I don't think I devoted any thought to Eisenhower until, oddly enough, I was working in Teheran, which had a long, large boulevard named after Eisenhower. This simple fact made me stop and think. There were certainly no streets named after LBJ and Nixon. What was so special about this old duffer who spent his time playing golf?



Well, of course I had to grow up, and sooner or later try to rank the 20th-century Presidents, and one thing I found extraordinary about Eisenhower was what he had done BEFORE becoming President.



As a factual example: the outbreak of World War II caused a meteoric rise in Ike's career, and before long he was in charge of the renamed War Planning Department --- the Operations Planning Department. Working directly under George C. Marshall, Ike had 107 officers reporting to him and an unparalleled view of what global warfare meant in his time.



This is where I start getting a little scared, since I cannot even imagine running a huge, detailed department like that. Could you?



It got even "worse," and more "terrifying," when Ike was put in charge of the European Theater of Operations (in London) and his life suddenly changed forever --- he had stepped onto the world stage and was a public figure ever after.



Then he planned, organized and commanded Operation Overlord, the invasion of Normandy which eventually put Hitler out of business for good. Through it all, his vast spidery intelligence was crucial, but so were his terrific public relations efforts in Britain --- and, above all, the indomitable will of George C. Marshall and Dwight David Eisenhower working as a team.



Not too bad, for a guy who was 51 on Pearl Harbor Day. If he had died on that day, he would mean nothing to history but would be completely forgotten. As things turned out, though, his childhood virtues ( honesty, self-reliance, integrity, fear of God, and ambition ) served him very well. More than that, they served our country very well. Ike went on to guide us through the critical postwar years, settled the Korean War, and was overall a trusted and capable President.



Highly recommended reading.