Red light camera study set
TALLAHASSEE

Red-light cameras remain controversial, even as changes to the laws governing them take effect.

Proponents say they save lives by increasing safety standards at major intersections throughout the state. Opponents contend the cameras are becoming lucrative cash cows for local governments and have varying enforcement standards around the state.

Lawmakers took a modest step toward addressing some those issues in the 2013 session, passing a law that precluded fining drivers for right-hand turns if they came to a complete stop. It gave motorists more time to deal with notices of a violation and allowed cities and counties to create an administrative appeals process for motorists who want to challenge their citations.

The law didn’t go far enough for the critics who would like to ban cameras or at least impose more restrictions, such as eliminating the enforcement of the right-hand turn violations and setting strict standards for the timing of yellow lights.

But to push that agenda, the opponents are going to have to deal with issues such as whether the cameras are actually reducing injuries and saving lives and exactly how much money is being generated by the cameras and how it is being used.

More than 70 Florida cities and counties — including Sarasota, Bradenton and Manatee County — are using the devices, bringing in about $46 million in the last full budget year.

Senate Transportation Chairman Jeff Brandes, R-St. Petersburg, is among the lawmakers who would like to ban the cameras. He was a key architect of the changes in the law this year. However, he also understands the difficulty of eliminating or changing a program that has become increasingly popular among Florida’s cities and counties.

Earlier this month, Brandes asked Senate President Don Gaetz, R-Niceville, to authorize a state study to delve into many of the critical issues involving the red-light cameras. And recently Gaetz approved a plan to allow the Office of Program Policy Analysis and Government Accountability — a group of state analysts known for their thorough and even-handed reports — to review the red-light camera program in Florida before the 2014 session.

Brandes said the OPPAGA report should provide some key findings to allow lawmakers to act on the issue next year.

“Now that red light cameras have been in place in Florida for several years, we need to take a hard look at whether or not local governments are misusing this technology,” Brandes said in a statement. “These programs were sold to the public as a way of improving traffic safety, not a revenue source for cities who want to expand their budgets on the backs of hard-working Floridians.”

Here are some of the key issues that the OPPAGA will look at:

— The number of local governments using the cameras, the money generated by the cameras and the enforcement strategies of the local law enforcement officers.

— The timing of yellow lights, which some critics say have been shortened in some locations to generate more violations and revenue.

— Crash data, including information on side-impact and rear-end crashes

— Fines and whether or not administrative fines can be set at a level to keep the program “revenue neutral,” rather than generating extra dollars for local governments.

— The use of cameras in other states and their experience in terms of cost and program effectiveness.

— Local government contracts with red-light camera company vendors.

— The options of modifying or eliminating the cameras and what the advantages and disadvantages would be.

“This study will give us the facts and armed with this data we will be addressing red light cameras next legislative session,” Brandes said.

Florida’s red-light camera law is named after Mark Wandall, a Manatee County man whose wife fought for years to pass the law in 2010 after her husband was killed when a motorist ran a traffic light.

WINNER OF THE WEEK: Bill Galvano. The Bradenton state senator appears to have secured enough pledges from his fellow Republicans to put himself in position to become the Florida Senate president after the 2018 elections. Galvano would be the second Senate president in recent years from Manatee County, following former Senate President John McKay, R-Bradenton, who led the chamber in 2001 and 2002.

LOSER OF THE WEEK: Living arrangements. Senate President Don Gaetz, R-Niceville, and House Speaker Will Weatherford, R-Wesley Chapel, want to review the issue of where state lawmakers live, after media reports have questioned whether some half-dozen legislators — all Southeast Florida Democrats — actually live in their districts. The legislative leaders said the guidelines for determining residency are unclear.

QUOTE OF THE WEEK: “The constantly changing measures the Florida (Department of Education) uses in grading schools renders them meaningless as a comparison of school progress,” said Andy Ford, head of the Florida Education Association, as the DOE released a new set of school grades showing fewer schools earning A’s and B’s and more earning F’s under a new measurement scheme.