101 People Who Are Really Screwing America: Jack Huberman: 9781560258759: Amazon.com: Books
Huberman proclaims that Goldberg's book would be better titled "81 Liberals, 7 Conservatives and 12 Others, of Whom Maybe 5 Are Really Screwing Up America."



Following are a sample of those listed in Huberman's book:



#101)Obnoxiously Loud and Constant Cell Phone Users. Destroying the peace and quiet in restaurants, parks, libraries, etc., and endangering others as they talk and drive.



#76)Pope Benedict XVI - strongly opposes birth control, stem cell research, homosexuality. (Huberman also lists Pat Robertson and James Dobson - "paragons" of Christian virtues such as love and forgiveness, while abusing their tax-exempt status participating in politics and even selling merchandise.



#75)Kansas State Board of Education - voted to erase any mention of evolution from state science curricula in '99 (reversed in '01), mandated statement that "evolution is controversial among scientists ('04).



#67)SUV Buyers - screwing up our air, economy (requiring extra foreign oil purchases), and menacing our highways.



#57)The Unteachably Ignorant, Bush-Voting Average American - he'll support any war he's told to, against countries he couldn't find on a map. She knows the world hates us because we're the greatest.



#33)James Inhofe (Senator from Oklahoma) - "Global warming is the second-largest hoax ever played on the American people after the separation of church and state."



#30, #29, and #27)Sean Hannity, Bill O'Reilly, and Rush Limbaugh - long winded, and short on facts.



#25)Rick Santorum - major K-Street Project player (ensuring that lobbyists are sufficiently Republican), goes wild over homosexuals, loves the Iraq war, and thinks 25+ year-old abandoned and decayed Iran-Iraq War chemical bombs are viable WMD in 2006.



#22)NRA and Wayne LaPierre - 30,000 Americans are killed by guns, almost 18,000 more use them to commit suicide. Other nations' (that ban guns) homicide rates are far lower.



#13)So-Called Liberal Media - Huberman sees them as giving Bush et al an easy pass. Perhaps; where they are clearly off-beam is there habit of giving equal time to both sides - even when the scientific community largely has taken one side (eg. global warming).



#4)Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld - sending insufficient troops and armor to Iraq, allowing a Taliban "comeback" in Afghanistan, lacking a post-war plan in Iraq.



#2)President Bush - lying about Iraq, prisoner abuse, abusing the environment, disastrous deficits and tax cuts for the rich, illegal spying on Americans, etc.



#1)V.P. Dick Cheney - pushing torture, and generally pushing Bush II in the wrong direction.



Most of the others I'd never heard of, or just couldn't see their "importance" (eg. J.K. Rowling, Harry Potter series author). Maybe just listing 50 would be enough. On the other hand, I was disappointed that he didn't list the National Education Association - the teachers' union that has created a mythology that more money cures everything in education, resulting in wasted billions while pupil outcomes remain unchanged.