The Railway Killer (A Mexican Illegal Alien)
OXFORD, Fla. -- Convicted serial killer Angel Maturino Resendiz led authorities Saturday to the skeletal remains of a teen-age girl, a day after admitting to authorities he killed her and her traveling companion three years ago. (External link)

The admitted railroad killer who made the FBI's 10 Most Wanted List was sentenced to death Monday for killing a Houston- area doctor, one of nine murders he was accused of committing.

HOUSTON (Reuters) -- A rail-hopping Mexican drifter who confessed to being a serial killer but pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity was convicted of capital murder Thursday for the December 1998 death of a Houston physician.

HOUSTON (AP) -- Prosecutors say they will seek the death penalty against accused rail - riding serial killer Angel Maturino Resendiz, after he refused to undergo an exam with a court-appointed psychiatrist.

HOUSTON (AP) - Angel Maturino Resendiz, suspected in the deaths of nine people while he was riding freight trains across the country, dropped a request Thursday to have his murder trial moved from Houston, saying he did not want to risk facing a jury composed of "rednecks and Germans."

Maturino Resendiz made the request to state District Judge Bill Harmon during an unscheduled appearance, which was hastily brought together after the judge received a pair of letters from the suspect asking permission to represent himself.

``As a result of their determined efforts and the cooperation of Mexican authorities , the suspect is now in custody in the United States,'' the president said.

"Mission accomplished," said Don Clark, the Houston-based FBI agent in charge of the investigation. He thanked "the American public for being so responsive to our pleas and requests for assistance in this investigation."

Resendez-Ramirez, 38, turned himself in after relatives -- who had knowledge of his whereabouts -- contacted authorities who then began secret negotiations to win the suspect's surrender.

July 13, 1999 -- Updated 11:42 a.m. EDT, 1542 GMT (8:42 AM PDT) -- Rafael Resendez-Ramirez, the rail-riding fugitive suspected of killing at least eight people, has surrendered to U.S. authorities along the Mexican border and was to be brought to Houston later in the day, sources told CNN on Tuesday. He apparently surrendered at the INS checkpoint in El Paso, Texas, and is being processed there before being flown to Houston. Details to follow later. -WVCT 8:48 AM PDT

Two days after he was released, Ramirez allegedly slipped back across the border, and over the next two weeks allegedly killed four more people in Texas and Illinois; eventually, police would tie him to eight murders.

Assistant Police Chief Fructuoso San Miguel said Friday that in the last 48 hours, the police department had received four calls of possible Resendez sightings.

Suspected serial killer Rafael Resendez-Ramirez , who is wanted in connection with eight slayings in the United States, may be responsible for as many as 15 homicides here, authorities said today.

The Immigration and Naturalization Service is offering leniency to illegal aliens who help authorities nab suspected serial killer Rafael Resendez-Ramirez, officials said today.

Thirteen of 93 pieces surrendered last month by Resendez-Ramirez's common-law wife have been positively identified by relatives of slain Houston schoolteacher Noemi Dominguez, Houston police Lt. Ron Walker said.

"Here's a character (Resendez-Ramirez) that's gone back and forth across the American border, illegally, for 23 years. He's believed to have murdered eight Americans. He's been held by the (U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service) and border patrol and let go because there's no coordination," Buchanan said.

...It raises the possibility that police could be tracking the biggest serial killer in North American history.

RAFAEL RESENDEZ-RAMIREZ Psycho or terrorist? "He's reached a level here where he's nothing. He's been a big loser; nobody wants anything to do with him."

''You get nine get-out-of-jail free passes before you are deported,'' said Lamar, who said he wants the INS to increase its deportations.

"The brutality of the crimes linked to this suspect is unimaginable," Rep. Hal Rogers, R-Ky., wrote in a letter to Attorney General Janet Reno, who oversees the INS. "That the INS would allow a man suspected of such brutality to circulate back onto the streets of the United States, Mexico -- or anywhere else in the world for that matter -- is deplorable."

Law officers and railroad police are stopping trains and searching boxcars in a Wild West-style manhunt for Rafael Resendez-Ramirez, the tattooed ex-convict wanted in eight slayings along the tracks.

Agents used dogs and helicopters to root out undocumented immigrants sneaking aboard freight trains headed north from this city, the busiest commercial crossing point on the U.S.-Mexico border.

"The Clinton administration wants the FBI to check the background of every law-abiding sportsman buying a hunting rifle in the United States," [Lamar] Smith said. "Why can't it also make the INS and the FBI check the criminal records of anyone who is arrested after entering the United States illegally?

"There's no good explanation on the part of INS or the Department of Justice unless we have an agency that doesn't work or doesn't care," said Rep. Lamar Smith, R-Texas, chairman of the House immigration subcommittee. "How many more Ramirez' are out there?"

6-29-99 - Rodeo, Durango, Mexico Killer Makes Mexican Town a Target ``It feels very ugly because he's a hometown boy,'' said Margarita Rodriguez Campo, director of the Catholic school where Reyes briefly taught English to grade-school and high-school students. 6-29-99 - Mexican Illegal Alien Serial Killer The Faces of a Fugitive ...The worst-case scenario, of course, is that there will be another railroad murder and that the combined forces of the FBI and all the state and local cops will still be unable to nab the suspect. 6-28-99 - Houston While Mexican Killer Runs Loose, INS 'Scrutinizes Procedures' But officials are unsure of what changes are needed or can be made to prevent another missed opportunity. The Houston Chronicle today quotes INS spokesman Tomas Zuniga as saying: "At the time he was apprehended, we had no idea that he was wanted by the FBI. He was operating under another alias." 6-28-99 - Breaking News - 12:35 PM PST ILLEGAL ALIEN MEXICAN SERIAL KILLER LINKED TO TEN MORE MURDERS IN U.S. CNN reports that the FBI new suspects Resendez-Ramirez in 18 murder cases. More to follow later.

CLICK HERE and tell us what you

think of bad border controls.

READ FEEDBACK

6-24-99 Illegal Mexican Alien Serial Killer Update NEW PHOTOS RELEASED Crime Spree Map (CNN) Resendez-Ramirez Profile HOTLINE (800) 889-8161 6-23-99 Resendez-Ramirez Update SERIAL KILLER SUSPECT PROFILED ... Resendez-Ramirez has been arrested as many as 10 times from coast to coast. He has spent time in federal prison and at state prisons in Florida and New Mexico. But most of his history involves burglary and getting caught trying to illegally obtain or use American identification. 6-23-99 East Texas Illegal Alien Fugitive Serial Killer Voted in Presidential Election Can you help find accused serial killer Resendez-

Ramirez? 6-18-99 Manhunt Continues THE SEARCH FOR RESENDEZ-RAMIREZ The search for accused serial-killer Rafael Resendez-Ramirez results in the arrest of dozens of other illegal aliens at train yards across southwest Texas.