Mr. Tambourine Man: The Life and Legacy of The Byrds' Gene Clark: John Einarson: 9780879307936: Amazon.com: Books
As a kid I was a huge fan of the Byrds, as well as many of its later iterations (CSN…andY, Flying Burritos, etc.) But early on I was too young (and dependent on AM radio) to really distinguish between the personnel and politics of the group. As an unfortunate result, Gene Clark the artist was never on my radar screen. Now as I listen to my Gene Clark station on Pandora, and scour youtube for un-released demos and interviews, I realize what a tremendous missed opportunity that was for an impressionable young musician who was into exactly the sound and material that he was generating.



This book is a sad tale of unfulfilled promise. As a result of unbridled egos and jealousy among several of his band mates, a young, sensitive artist of incomparable talent was isolated and obstructed to the point of emotional and mental distress. Did George and Ringo break up the Beatles because John and Paul reaped the extra reward of their unique talent and writing abilities? No, they cooperated and ultimately shared in the unprecedented success. Not so, Crosby and McGuinn. If they had displayed a modicum of patience, they would have learned from a master (…already, at 21!), honed their own writing skills and they and the entire world would have been richer for it. One has only to listen to Clark’s 1967 release, “Echoes” to understand just how big the Byrds could have become if they had only acted with a bit more maturity.



And while Einarson attempted to moderate and downplay it, David Crosby comes across as a complete jerk, and probably the chief instigator in Clark’s departure from the Byrds and ultimate disappearance from the public’s awareness. Manipulative and self-serving, it’s little wonder that he himself was fired by the band a year later. From watching old videos, one can see that Clark was professional and considerate of the others. When it was time for McGuinn to carry the lead vocal, Gene would fade into the background and give him the stage…a very astute understanding of stage etiquette for a young artist armed only with a tambourine. Conversely, while McGuinn was singing lead, Crosby can be seen mouthing the lyrics off the mic…a real no-no, especially. on national t.v.



There is no excuse for Clark’s abuse of alcohol and drugs in the ensuing years, esp. given the fact that the effect on his personality was to turn a quiet, soft-spoken country boy into a snarling Mr. Hyde. But the permissive, coddling star culture of Southern California did him no favors. He was afforded way too much leeway by everyone because he was “Somebody”. How many times did law enforcement merely send him home after some outrageous offense that would have landed a normal human being at least in long-term rehab. And certainly, some timely psychological counseling could have helped with his irrational fear of flying.



He does seem to be somewhat of a victim of poor management and representation in his career, however. Listening now to his stunning body of work, he should have been one of the most successful artists and influences of the 60’s, 70’s AND 80’s.