ACA problems undermine Medicaid expansion chances
TALLAHASSEE

The continuing problems with the rollout of the federal Affordable Care Act — also known as Obamacare — may further undermine efforts to expand the Medicaid program in Florida.

Officially, the Senate hasn’t backed away from its plan to expand Medicaid — the state-federal health care plan for the poor and disabled — under the ACA. And Gov. Rick Scott has not retreated from his support for expansion.

But the well-publicized problems with Obamacare, which is scheduled to take full effect on Jan. 1, is bolstering House Speaker Will Weatherford’s position that expanding Medicaid — even if the federal government pays for it fully for the first three years — is too risky and uncertain. In the 2013 session, Weatherford’s position prevailed.

In an appearance at a health care forum at Jacksonville University this week, Weatherford, R-Wesley Chapel, amplified his position against expansion, while Senate President Don Gaetz, R-Niceville, praised the House speaker’s foresight.

“It turns out the speaker was right not to order the health-care mystery meat from the federal cafeteria,” Gaetz said.

Facing an audience with health insurance and hospital executives — who support expansion — Weatherford acknowledged the criticism that he has received from derailing a proposal that could bring an additional $51 billion in federal funding to the state over the next decade and offer health care coverage to nearly 1 million Floridians.

Weatherford said he understood why the hospitals were seeking the expansion, noting that treating patients covered by Medicaid was better than having to treat patients with no insurance at all.

He also said national Republicans, who have become expert critics of Obamacare, need to do a better job of coming up with alternative plans to address the needs of people without any health-care coverage.

Both he and Gaetz made their continuing case that the Medicaid program needs to be overhauled before it is expanded. And they again made a plea that the federal government give states like Florida more “flexibility” in designing coverage plans.

They outlined their concerns that Medicaid, even without the ACA expansion, continues to grow in Florida. Gaetz said since 2004, the Medicaid program has increased by roughly two-thirds in cost, from $14 billion to $23 billion. It now claims about 31 percent of the overall $74 billion state budget.

The funding demand for Medicaid is “crowding out” state funding for other critical programs, such as schools, roads and prisons, the legislative leaders said.

“Expand Medicaid? Medicaid is expanding every day,” Gaetz said. “Medicaid is metastatic.”

Gaetz and Weatherford also complained that the federal government has taken an “all or nothing” approach with the Medicaid expansion. The legislative leaders want a more targeted approach in providing coverage.

For instance, Weatherford said by his estimate, expanding Medicaid to cover everyone who makes less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level would help some 800,000 Floridians. But he said with more flexibility, roughly 40 percent of those Floridians — 350,000 — could apply for federal government insurance premium subsidies and then get coverage for about $30 a month.

He said those Floridians would be better off with private insurance coverage which could result in better care and would pay more to providers, like hospitals, than the Medicaid program would.

“Why would we put them into Medicaid? That doesn’t make sense,” Weatherford said.

Although their calls for more flexibility have been rebuffed by the federal government, the legislative leaders said they remain ready to back an alternative plan that could provide more health-care coverage to Floridians.

“The ball is in the federal government’s court,” Gaetz said. “We’re happy to sit down at the negotiating table with the feds any time they’re willing.”

WINNER OF THE WEEK: Marshall Criser III. A search committee to find the next head of Florida’s state university system has tapped the son of a former University of Florida president as the top candidate. The selection all but assures that Criser, who is a UF trustee and has been the president of AT&T Florida since 2005, will be the next university system chancellor replacing the departed Frank Brogan.

LOSER OF THE WEEK: Democratic attorney general candidates. George Sheldon and state Rep. Perry Thurston, D-Fort Lauderdale, found out they will face tough odds in trying to oust Republican incumbent Attorney General Pam Bondi. In new campaign finance reports, Bondi announced she has raised $481,479 for her re-election and will also be aided by a political committee, called “And Justice For All,” that has raised nearly $900,000. Sheldon, who announced in late October, raised just under $6,000, while Thurston will not file his first report until next month.

QUOTE OF THE WEEK: “It turns out the speaker was right not to order the health-care mystery meat from the federal cafeteria,” Senate President Don Gaetz said about House Speaker Will Weatherford’s decision to reject the expansion of Medicaid in Florida under the much-criticized Obamacare program.