Scott signs abortion bill
TALLAHASSEE — Florida’s abortion regulations will become among the most restrictive in the United States under a bill that Gov. Rick Scott signed into law on Friday.

The new law, which takes effect on July 1, is similar to a 2013 Texas law that has been challenged in the U.S. Supreme Court as an unconstitutional restriction on the right of a woman to have an abortion. Supporters say the laws improve safety at the clinics, while not restricting a woman’s right to choose.

The Florida legislation (HB 1411), which passed the House in a 76-40 vote and the Senate in a 25-15 vote, will also prohibit any public funding for non-abortion services, including cancer screenings, birth control or STD tests, at clinics that also provide abortion services.

The law will block state funding for Planned Parenthood clinics, which serve more than 67,000 patients each year in Florida.

“As a result of this bill, thousands of people across Florida may no longer be able to access essential reproductive health care, such as cancer screenings, birth control, and well-woman exams,” said Cecile Richards, president of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America. “This cruel bill is designed to rip health care away from those most at risk.”

Abortion opponents hailed the legislation, particularly the provision aimed at Planned Parenthood, an organization targeted by anti-abortion groups that used secretly recorded videos to allege the clinics were illegally selling fetal tissue. The allegation has not been substantiated.

John Stemberger, president of Florida Family Policy Council, which has been calling for Scott to cut off Planned Parenthood funding since last October, called the new law “a historic victory.”

“We are so grateful to the Republican leadership in the Florida House and Florida Senate for making this happen,” Stemberger said, citing the sponsorship of the legislation by Sen. Kelli Stargel and Rep. Colleen Burton, both Republicans from Lakeland. “They collectively did what the governor failed to do, namely, provided leadership on this critical issue and made it happen.”

Stemberger said Florida is now one of a dozen states that have banned public funding for Planned Parenthood clinics.

Under the new law, abortion clinics would have to meet regulatory standards similar to those used for “ambulatory surgical centers” and doctors who perform abortions would have to have admitting privileges at a nearby hospital or the clinic would have to have a patient transfer agreement in place.

Similar restrictions, which have led to the closing of roughly half of the abortion clinics in Texas as a result of the 2013 law, are the crux of a U.S. Supreme Court case in which opponents of the law say it violates a 1992 court ruling that established regulations could not provide an “undue burden” on a woman’s ability to obtain an abortion. The nation’s highest court is expected to rule on the case in June.

Abortion clinics in Florida will also face other requirements in the new law, including annual inspections by the state that mandate a review of at least half of the patient records generated since the last inspection. The law also specifically prohibits clinics from selling, donating or transferring any fetal remains.

The law will have a major financial impact on the clinics that use public money for non-abortion services.

Planned Parenthood clinics are projected to receive some $162,000 from the Department of Health this year for non-abortion services, like maternal care and family planning. In the 2014-15 fiscal year, the clinics received $106,000 in Medicaid funding from the state, according to legislative analysts.

Additionally, 10 of the Medicaid managed care programs in the state contract with local Planned Parenthood clinics for services, representing more funding that will also end when the law takes effect in July.

Scott’s office has trumpeted several bills signed by the governor this month. But the governor signed the abortion bill without ceremony or comment.