Scott repeats Medicaid expansion opposition during Sarasota stop
Florida Gov. Rick Scott reiterated on Thursday his new pledge not to accept an expansion of Medicaid because of how the federal government is phasing out another program aimed at paying for health care for low-income families.

Scott repeated his frustration with the federal government for not continuing the Low Income Pool, or LIP, that pays hospitals and health providers for unreimbursed care in Florida. The state expected to receive at least $1.3 billion for that program.

The Florida Senate has proposed accepting federal funding to expand Medicaid to cover 800,000 Floridians and provide money to cover the loss of the LIP funds.

But Scott said the pull back of the LIP funds only makes him less trusting of taking the Medicaid expansion dollars.

“The same federal government that offers some money for a program is walking away from another health care program,” Scott said during a stop in Sarasota. “How can you feel comfortable picking up another federal program when they are walking away from an existing program?”

Asked if he has had any new discussion with the House or the Senate on the issue over the last 48 hours, Scott would not say. Instead he repeated his top priorities for the Legislature session, which is scheduled to end on May 1.

“What I’m focused on this session is the highest funding for K-12 per pupil in history of the state, making college more affordable, and get the $673 million in tax cuts to put money back in your hands,” Scott said.

But when reminded that the lost LIP funding could jeopardize those priorities, Scott said it was “disappointing” and repeated his opposition to expanding Medicaid.

"Why should we be taking over federal programs," he asked. "Which one are we going to take over next? Social Security? Medicare? We can’t afford it."

Scott was in Sarasota to tout job expansion in Florida since he became governor. He was highlighting a retail merchandising company called Creative Agency Services Team, or CAST, which has added 32 jobs in Sarasota since 2012 and now have 148 employees statewide.