Page 12 - API_Default
This is a SEO version of API_Default. Click here to view full version

Everyone knows who Matthew McConaughey is,

right? Did you know Matthew McConaughey raises

Angus cattle? Matthew McConaughey is co-owner of

LP Ranch in Mertzon,Texas, along with his brother,

Mike “Rooster” McConaughey.They own the 30,000-

acre, 400-cow ranch inWest Texas.

I had the wonderful opportunity of interviewing

Madison McConaughey, cattle manager for LP Ranch

and the nephew of Matthew McConaughey. Madison

was gracious enough to conduct a phone interview

with me about the ranch and why he and his family

feel it is important to raise Angus cattle.

LP Ranch began as a cow/calf commercial

operation and in 2002, primarily became a registered

Angus operation. Currently, the ranch is home to

250 registered Angus cows and 350-400 total cows.

LP Ranch is committed to raising quality Angus that

are eye-appealing and built on performance, fertility,

functionality and effciency. Madison informed me

that producing high-quality Angus cattle gives him

and his family an edge in the markets and provides

the versatility they are looking for

with their bulls.

The goal of LP Ranch as a

registered cow/calf operation is to

provide clients with top-notch herd

sires and replacement females.The

ranch breeds for thickness, calving

ease, milking ability, weaning weight

and overall good looks.

When selecting their cattle,

Madison and his crew make sure

the cattle meet three criteria:

heavy-boned, climate-adapted and

terrain-ready. LP Ranch aims to

produce moderate-to-low birth

weight, strong-maternal, cost-

effcient performance cattle. Some

of the AI sires used at LP Ranch

include:TCTotal 410, LCC New Standard, WAR

Alliance 9126 6006, Sitz Upward 307R, Connealy

Refection 3323, HARB Pendleton 765JH, Quaker

Hill Objective 3J15 and Stevenson CE Deluxe 1914.

I asked Madison what Matthew McConaughey’s

role is on the ranch and what Matthew’s thoughts

are about producing Angus cattle. Matthew gets

very little time to spend at the ranch; he is usually

traveling and busy with his career and new family.

When he does get time to visit the ranch, he likes to

drive around and look at the cattle and assist with

the day-to-day operations.Additionally, he likes to

view the beautiful scenery of the ranch by jogging

the hills.

When I asked Madison why Matthew felt is was

important to raise Angus cattle and support the beef

industry, he said Matthew feels it is a part of his

family’s heritage that he wants to embrace, and it

is important to produce high-quality beef. Madison

advocated for the use of Angus bulls on the family

ranch.After deciding to use Angus genetics, the

family was

extremely

impressed with

the result and decided to start the registered herd.

He feels the family’s Angus cattle produce the results

that satisfy both producer and consumer needs.

Matthew McConaughey is the spokesperson

for “Beef, it’s what’s for dinner,” the slogan for the

Beef Checkoff. Madison called him a “big beef man”

since he is an advocate for the beef industry and

both a producer and consumer of high-quality beef.

Matthew thinks it doesn’t get any better than Angus

beef.

Author’s note: I would like to thank Madison

McConaughey for taking time to visit with me on the

phone and answering my questions.

IndustryNews:ThePowerofAngus

Big Screens andAngus Dreams

From creating blockbuster movies to producing quality Angus beef, one celebrity and his family believe in the value of hard

work and meeting the needs of consumers everywhere.

By Michaela Clowser, Neb.

11

Pictured at left is Madison McConaughey, cattle and sales manager for LP Ranch, along with his wife Kristina and daughters Isabella, Rivers and Anna. Pictured

at right is LP Ranch Co-owner Matthew McConaughey with family Camila and Levi. Photos provided with permission by