Strange Clouds Over CERN: Portals to another dimension opens above the LHC?

What are the mysterious clouds photographed over CERN? Is this another mind-bending experiment that tries to open portals to another dimension? In the past, scientists at CERN used the LHC to ‘connect’ with a Parallel universe outside our own.

It seems that unusual phenomena are continuing to occur in the vicinity of Geneve near the Large Hadron Collider. According to a set of images and videos, strange clouds appear over the LHC, which has sent the internet into a frenzy suggesting the enigmatic phenomenon could, in fact, be a portal to another dimension.

The Jaw-dropping images taken above CERN’s Large Hadron Collider are truly fascinating. But are they connected to the mystery experiments that are taking place below the surface? And is it really possible for CERN to open up portals to another dimension?

The images alone with a fancy title have proposed all kinds speculation. Apparently, the images were taken on June 24th, the exact same day CERN was conducting a new experiment called AWAKE. The AWAKE experiment, which is also known as the “Proton Driven Plasma Wakefield Acceleration Experiment,” aims to use a whole new method that will get particles going much faster in a shorter amount of time. However, results of this experiment are not expected until 2018.

CERN is the world’s most powerful particle accelerator placed inside a ring-shaped 27 kilometer-long underground tunnel located at the Swiss and the French border. The facility was built between 1998 and 2008 and allows physicists to test various theories.

In the past, it is well-known that CERN has carried out experiments creating artificial clouds to better understand global warming.

The video that caused a massive uproar on social networks was uploaded to YouTube on June 27th by YouTube Channel Freedom Fighter Times. Called What portal did CERN open now? Strange Clouds Hover Above the LCH,” the video has ignited a massive debate whether or not CERN scientists are actually opening up portals to another dimension.

But… do another dimension actually exist? Or have users on the internet gone too far now?

Well, according to a document released by the FBI, other dimensions DO exist, and we have even been visited by ‘beings’ from those dimensions. According to declassified report released by the FBI, not only are we being visited by Alien beings from other worlds, but we have been visited by “beings from other dimensions.” The official link from the FBI vault can be found here: http://vault.fbi.gov/UFO/UFO%20Part%201%20of%2016/view

These “entities” that could “materialize” on our planet appeared as giant translucent figures.

But let’s get back to CERN and the so-called portals being opened above the facility.

In the video uploaded by YouTube Channel Freedom Fighter Times, the narrator states:

“It [the image] is not a background you can get on Google,” the narrator says in the video. “It is an actual picture taken on June 24, 2016. It is directly over CERN, and the cloud formation is fascinating.”

“The energy that is being produced, you can actually see that minus the lightning strikes,” he continues.

“How much energy did CERN pull into itself?” he asks. “Is this why the weather is so crazy all over the planet? There are many other colliders all over the world.”

But can CERN actually open up portals to other dimensions if they do exist?

Well, it turns out that they can. Scientists at CERN want to use the Large Hadron Collider to better understand the fundamental forces of our universe, how it was created and where the universe is going. They aim to recreate the Big Bang and discovered what kind of matter existed at the exact moment our universe came into existence. However, they also look forward to FIND other dimensions and open up ‘gateways’ or portals to these dimensions.

Last year, scientists conducting a mindboggling experiment at the Large Hadron Collider stated that they hope to ‘connect’ with a Parallel universe outside our own.

Scientists at CERn said: „It is even possible that gravity from our own universe may ‘leak’ into this parallel universe.“

Mir Faizal, one of the three-strong team of physicists behind the experiment, said: “Just as many parallel sheets of paper, which are two-dimensional objects [breadth and length] can exist in a third dimension [height], parallel universes can also exist in higher dimensions.

“We predict that gravity can leak into extra dimensions, and if it does, then miniature black holes can be produced at the LHC.

“Normally, when people think of the multiverse, they think of the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, where every possibility is actualized.

“This cannot be tested, and so it is philosophy and not science.

“This is not what we mean by parallel universes. What we mean is real universes in extra dimensions.

“As gravity can flow out of our universe into the extra dimensions, such a model can be tested by the detection of mini-black holes at the LHC.

“We have calculated the energy at which we expect to detect these mini black holes in ‘gravity’s rainbow’ [a new scientific theory].

“If we do detect mini black holes at this energy, then we will know that both gravity’s rainbow and extra dimensions are correct.”

A mindboggling fact: Did you know that when the LHC is fired up the energy is measured in Tera electron volts – a TeV is 1,000,000,000,000, or one trillion, electron Volts.