Melania Knauss Trump Biography

The busty Knauss has posed for GQ, Front and FHM, appeared at New York's elite fashion parties and most notably became Donald Trump's long-term flame, living with him in the famous penthouse in Trump Tower. She was also a celebrity judge for the Miss USA 2003 beauty pageant. Even if her relationship were to falter, Knauss has her smokin' looks and modeling opportunities to fall back on.

Melania is so hot, we get a jaw ache every time we come across photos of her (from staring agape so much, of course). Her face ranks up there with essica Alba as one of the purest in the world, while her body, which Knauss tirelessly shows off, is definitely something to behold. When you package that together with a rack even Jenna Jameson would be proud of, you know "The Donald" is a lucky man.

Though her career in North America has been but average, Melania Knauss is widely recognized in Europe as a supermodel, having done magazine spreads and fashion shows across the continent.

In the U.S., she caught men's attention after posing for the cover of GQwhile aboard then boyfriend Donald Trump's jet. She followed up that spread with appearances in FHM and Front, before doing print ads for jeweler Charles & Covard in fashion mags like Vogue and Vanity Fair.

In 1999, when beau Donald Trump announced he was considering running for the Reform Party nomination, it was Knauss and not the billionaire potential presidential candidate that got all the attention. In fact, Alluremagazine got her to do some bold pictures for its September issue, and the tabloid Celebrity Sleuth ranked her No. 9 in its 25 Sexiest Women of 2001 list. The couple's on-again off-again relationship stabilized somewhat following the debut of The Apprentice, Trump's reality TV show.

Knauss has appeared on the program and also added more television experience to her resume after serving as celebrity judge for the 2003 Miss USA Pageant, which Trump owns. Lately, she has become a media godsend, appearing with Trump at the 2004 Academy Awards, several fashion shows in New York and every A-list celebrity party. She loves the cameras, and the cameras certainly love her back. In April 2004, her engagement to Donald Trump was announced, making Melania wife (to be) number three.

Melania and Donald Trump finally exchanged vows in Palm Beach, Florida, on Saturday January 22, 2005, in what was touted as the most expensive society wedding of the year. Too bad Melania voted against airing the wedding on TV...

Biography

Born in Yugoslavia, in an area now a part of the Republic of Slovenia, in 1974, Melania Knauss grew up in a comfortable but overprotective household. Her Austrian father and Slovenian mother wished to make sure their daughter was well-educated so that wherever she ended up in life, she'd be well placed to succeed. This translated into many hours of study for the young Knauss; as a child, her head was frequently buried in a book.

As Melania blossomed into a stunning young lady, she realized that another asset, besides the mind, could be utilized to succeed. Knauss had developed a curvaceous body to match her beautiful face. Out of high school and in the process of becoming a quadrilingual — she learned English on top of Eastern Europe dialects — she tried her hand at modeling in her homeland.

After Melania put in a lot of hard work and received little in terms of pay or job opportunities in return, she decided to travel to the United States to see how things would work out. She was bent on establishing herself as a successful and unique model, confident she could woo designers and magazines with both her body and wit.

In the late 1990s, work began to finally roll in. Melania did ads for a small watch-company, found work with Panasonic in a television commercial and strolled the catwalks of New York City a few times for local lingerie designers. Sill, it wasn't the big break she had been hoping for. Life was still giving her the cold shoulder.

Her luck would change in 1999, however. At a red-carpet fashion event, Knauss met billionaire developer Donald Trump. He was just coming off his well-documented divorce from Marla Maples and was on the rebound. Despite their age difference, the two hit it off. The relationship bloomed slowly, partly because Trump wished to give the media some time to stop gabbing about his most recent failed marriage.

Just when news was breaking that "The Donald" was dating a stunning Slovenian, Knauss shot a pictorial for Allure magazine. She then became a frequent newsmaker after her developer boyfriend announced his interests in running for the Reform Party presidential nomination. As Trump toured the country spreading his political mandate, Knauss, naturally, received most of the attention while at his side.

Together, they were interviewed on The Howard Stern Radio Show during Trump's campaign and announced to the world they were happy and, to the delight of gossip columnists, quite naughty. After the interview, news spread quickly of Knauss's penchant for sexual wickedness. British GQpicked up on this and had her pose nude in Trump's private jet for their January 2000 cover.

Though the attention over Trump's presidential bid died down, Knauss continued to get attention. Between features in Celebrity Sleuth (as the 9th Sexiest Woman of 2001), Ocean Drive and Country Living, she was recognized as a true New York socialite, appearing at the city's most popular fashion shows, celebrity parties and five-star restaurants. Though it was reported that in 2000, Trump and Knauss had broken up, both now contend the rocky period in their relationship was short-lived.

Soon, with her rich boyfriend still firmly in the picture, magazines FHM andFront came calling for small, but very memorable, spreads. Knauss also worked for jeweler Charles & Covard, appearing in print ads in Vogue andVanity Fair. In 2003, having now moved into the multi-million dollar penthouse atop Trump Tower, Melania became a celebrity judge for the Miss USA Pageant, which Donald Trump owns. Speaking of Trump, he proposed to Melania in April of 2004.

Melania has done less and less modeling work, concentrating instead on simply living the high life. She continues to be a constant in the New York social scene, appearing at the 2004 Academy Awards and on The Apprentice, Trump's reality TV series.

On January 22, 2005, Melania and The Donald tied the knot in Palm Beach, Florida, in what was likely one of the most expensive ceremonies of the decade.

Melania is Ivanka Trump's step-mother.