So Long, Hollywood? Website Floats Eastwood Move to Arkansas
HOT SPRINGS, Ark - Clint Eastwood is Hollywood royalty, and one website is saying he may soon be calling Arkansas home.

This information comes from recently created online media website, McKenzie Post, which said Eastwood could be moving to Hot Springs.

There's only one problem: the website ThatsFake.Com says McKenzie Post is full of fake news article.

"The site also contains small articles about genuine news as well as articles that have simply been copied and pasted from other legitimate media outlets. However the fake articles on the site mean it cannot be considered a trusted news source," ThatsFake.Com states.

McKenzie Post recently reported Justin Bieber would be moving to Oregon, Scarlett Johanssen was moving to Oklahoma City and Katy Perry was packing her bags for South Carolina.

Though there's likely no legitimacy to the story, some Hot Springs residents like Jimmi Trevathan and Anthony Tidwell couldn't be happier. It's creating quite a bit of buzz.

"I love it because I think it would be great for the city," said Trevathan.

"Man I love it," said Tidwell.

The McKenzie Post article said the five-time Oscar winner is tired of living in California.

"If he wants some real people, it don't get any realer than Hot Springs," said Tidwell.

He grew up watching Eastwood's cowboy flicks.



"One of my favorite quotes is 'Dying ain't much of a way to make a living,'" said Tidwell.

Trevathan offered her suggestion on where he should live.

"Ouachita, the forest or either out on a lot of land," said Trevathan.

Steve Arrison, CEO of Visit Hot Springs, said someone emailed him the online post Wednesday.

"I thought it was great when I saw it, that, obviously, Clint Eastwood realizes what a great retirement and relocation place Hot Springs, Arkansas is," said Arrison.

But Arrison did his own investigation into McKenzie Post.

"That site has sort of been known for putting some things out there that are not necessarily true," said Arrison.

True or false, Tidwell can only imagine what Clint Eastwood would do for the Spa City.

"If he moves here, it's going to help out economically," said Tidwell. "It's going to help."

Clint Eastwood's production company would not confirm nor deny the rumor.