On the Issues: Social Issues
Senator McCain now hews close to the conservative line on most social issues. But in some cases, like on abortion and gun control, he migrated there to shore up conservative support in advance of his current campaign.

Senator Obama has tried to straddle the fence on many of these issues as he has sought to appeal to voters across the spectrum. He often says he wants to find “common ground” between both sides and is seeking “common-sense solutions.”

Abortion

Favors abortion rights Naral Pro-Choice America rates him at 100 percent and the National Right to Life Committee rates him at zero. Supports Roe v. Wade "I think that most Americans recognize that this is a profoundly difficult issue for the women and families who make these decisions. They don't make them casually. And I trust women to make these decisions, in conjunction with their doctors and their families and their clergy, and I think that's where most Americans are." — Democratic debate, April 26, 2007 Supports a ban on the medical procedure critics call partial-birth abortion only if it allows exceptions to protect the mother’s health Criticized a Supreme Court decision upholding a ban on such procedures: "I strongly disagree with today's Supreme Court ruling, which dramatically departs from previous precedents safeguarding the health of pregnant women. As Justice Ginsburg emphasized in her dissenting opinion, this ruling signals an alarming willingness on the part of the conservative majority to disregard its prior rulings respecting a woman's medical concerns and the very personal decisions between a doctor and patient." — Statement, April 18, 2007

Opposes abortion rights except in cases of rape, incest and to save the mother’s life; supports federal funding for embryonic stem cell research The National Right to Life Committee rates him at 66 percent, largely because of his support for stem-cell research and for campaign-finance measures that limit political lobbying by independent groups. Naral Pro-Choice America rates him at zero. Wants to overturn Roe v. Wade ... "I do not support Roe versus Wade. It should be overturned." — South Carolina, February 18, 2007 ... but has been supportive in the past "I'd love to see a point where it is irrelevant, and could be repealed because abortion is no longer necessary. But certainly in the short term, or even the long term, I would not support repeal of Roe v. Wade, which would then force X number of women in America to [undergo] illegal and dangerous operations." — San Francisco Chronicle and CNN, August 1999 Supported a Supreme Court decision upholding a ban on so-called partial-birth abortions "Today's Supreme Court ruling is a victory for those who cherish the sanctity of life and integrity of the judiciary. The ruling ensures that an unacceptable and unjustifiable practice will not be carried out on our innocent children...as we move forward, it is critically important that our party continues to stand on the side of life." — Statement, April 18, 2007

Gay Marriage and Gay Adoptions

Opposes gay marriage but also opposes a federal constitutional amendment to ban it, as well as a California effort to ban it; supports civil unions Supports gay adoptions

Opposes gay marriage but also opposes a constitutional amendment to ban it; supports the California effort to ban gay marriage; has been ambiguous about civil unions His campaign says he personally opposes civil unions but does not oppose people’s entering into contracts, regardless of sexual orientation. His aides say he believes that states should decide the matter but that no state should be legally bound to recognize unions that might be legal elsewhere (other than New Hampshire, which has agreed to do so). Opposes gay adoptions

Gun Control

Supports some restrictions on gun ownership He has said he believes that the Constitution “confers an individual right to bear arms” but that localities can take steps to protect their citizens. The National Rifle Association opposes him, saying he would be “the most antigun president in history”; he says he wants to maintain hunting traditions and would not take guns away. He is backed by both the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence and the American Hunters and Shooters Association.

Opposes gun control In 1999, he supported a ban on certain assault weapons, but now opposes restrictions. The National Rifle Association has endorsed him, even though he supports measures to mandate background checks at gun shows.

Death Penalty

Supports the death penalty for certain crimes He worked in Illinois to change a system that had produced wrongful convictions.