Avoiding Clickbait Scams
Recent events like Robin Williams’ suicide, the vicious beheading of American journalists in the Middle East and domestic violence incidents have spawned a new round of “clickbait” scams on social media like Facebook and Twitter.

The scams entice consumers with promises of sensational video or information on incidents in the news, then ask for personal information they can use to commit identity theft or other fraud.

Con artists exploit tragedies in these ways:

Impersonating victims or family members on social media.

Selling memorabilia, often promising that some or all of the proceeds will go to charity.

Posting teasers for sensational video footage or photos.

BBB offers the following tips to protect yourself from social media scams:

Don't take the bait. Stay away from promotions of "exclusive," "shocking" or "sensational" footage. If it sounds too outlandish to be true, it is probably a scam.

Stay away from promotions of "exclusive," "shocking" or "sensational" footage. If it sounds too outlandish to be true, it is probably a scam. Hover over a link to see its true destination. Before you click, mouse over the link to see where it will take you. Don't click on links leading to unfamiliar websites.

Before you click, mouse over the link to see where it will take you. Don't click on links leading to unfamiliar websites. Confirm before you trust your “friends” online. It might not actually be your friends who are "liking" or sharing scam links to photos. Their account may have been hacked and scammers could be using another tactic called “clickjacking”. Clickjacking is a technique that scammers use to trick you into clicking on social media links that you would not usually click on.

It might not actually be your friends who are "liking" or sharing scam links to photos. Their account may have been hacked and scammers could be using another tactic called “clickjacking”. Clickjacking is a technique that scammers use to trick you into clicking on social media links that you would not usually click on. Report scam posts on Facebook by following these instructions.

by following these instructions. Report malware or spam on Twitter by following these instructions.

Consumers are urged to contact BBB at 314-645-3300 or www.bbb.org, for a BBB Business Review before doing business with any company or charity.