ALABAMA: Parents demand social studies/history books with excessive emphasis on Islam be dropped
Anger over Islamo-centric bias, to the exclusion of other religions, with much of it sanitized for American consumption, has delayed Alabama’s state board’s adoption of new social studies books Parents, if your children are using any of the textbooks listed below, get a group of concerned parents to protest to the school board and demand that more appropriate books be used.

AL.com Concerns that Alabama could recommend social studies textbooks with pro-Islamic bias caused the state board of education to cancel a planned vote on the books today, pending further review.

State Superintendent Tommy Bice said he would review the 12 books criticized by conservative groups and issue a recommendation to the board in January.

He had not decided whether he would recommend any of the books be excluded from the state’s recommended textbook list for social studies.

“It’s not necessarily inaccurate information but possible perceived omissions and terminology that was not strong enough, things like that,” Bice said of the allegations that the books “favored Islam.”

Board Vice President Charles Elliott of Decatur said he thought four of the 12 books would be removed.

Here are the books criticized by conservative groups:

Discovering Our Past: A History of the World-Early Ages. Grade level: 8. Publisher McGraw-Hill. My World Geography, Chu-Hardwick-Holtgrieve-Wiggins. Grade level: 7. Publisher: Pearson. World History & Geography: Modern Times, Spielvogel. Grade level 9. Publisher: Glencoe/McGraw-Hill. World History: Early Ages. Grade: 8. Publisher: Pearson Prentice Hall. The Americans: Reconstruction to the 21st Century. Grade level: 11. Publisher: Houghton, Mifflin, Harcourt. Ancient Civilizations Through the Renaissance. Grade level: 8. Publisher: Houghton, Mifflin, Harcourt. Discovering World Geography, Spielvogel. Grade level: 7. Publisher: McGraw-Hill. Ancient World History: Patterns of Interaction. Grade level: N.A. Publisher: McDougal Littell. The Cultural Landscape. Grade level: AP 9-12. Publisher: Pearson Education Inc. My World History: Pro Guide. Grade level: 8. Publisher: Pearson. Modern World History: Patterns of Interaction. Grade level: N.A. Publisher: McDougal Littell. Geography: Teacher’s Edition. Grade level: N.A. Publisher: Holt McDougal.

The board was slated to adopt the recommended textbook list for social studies, which includes more than 500 books, at its meeting today in Montgomery.

But concerns over 12 of the books were raised by the Eagle Forum of Alabama, a longtime conservative interest group, and the Birmingham chapter of ACT! for America, a conservative group dedicated to protecting freedom and security in America.

Specific concerns raised by the groups in a letter sent Dec. 4 to school board members included that the books under reported the positive impacts of Christianity and failed to accurately represent the spread of Islam through violence.



“Islam was spread by the sword in most every case. The Muslims have killed millions in their 1,400-year history and enslaved millions more,” wrote Larry Houck, the founder of ACT! for America’s Birmingham chapter.

Houck said after the meeting he has been researching Islam since the Sept. 11 terror attacks and his goal is to tell Americans “what’s really going on,” describing a non-violent Jihad in America that relies Islamic influence over textbook publishers.

He also complained that the books dedicated more space to Islam and that sections on Islam usually have more and better photographs when compared to sections on Christianity and Judaism.