Jewish Arbitration and Mediation
The Beth Din of America is a full service mediation and arbitration organization. We have earned a reputation, among Jews across the ideological spectrum, for handling dispute resolution with confidentiality, competence, fairness and integrity.

Types of Cases

The Beth Din regularly arbitrates a wide range of disputes among parties, ranging in value from small claims to litigation involving several million dollars. These cases include: commercial (such as employer-employee, landlord-tenant, real property, business interference, breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duty, investor mismanagement, defective merchandise and unfair competition disputes), communal (such as rabbinic contract disputes and other congregational issues) and familial (such as family business, inheritance and matrimonial) disputes. Cases are heard by a panel of three dayanim (arbitration judges) or, on occasion, one dayan.

Expert Arbitration Judges

The dayanim who sit on cases include leading authorities on Jewish law, as well as lawyers and businessmen who are familiar with secular law and contemporary commercial practices. When appropriate, the Beth Din will either include expert professionals on an arbitration panel, or consult them as expert witnesses. Cases are decided under Jewish law, through the prism of contemporary commercial practice and secular law.

Procedural Fairness

The Beth Din maintains an impartial and confidential relationship with each of its clients. Hearings proceed in conformity with the Rules and Procedures of the Beth Din.

Legally Binding Rulings

Prior to having a case heard by the Beth Din, litigants are required to enter into a binding arbitration agreement. The Beth Din conducts its proceedings in a manner that is consistent with the requirements of secular arbitration law, so that the rulings of the Beth Din are legally binding and enforceable in the secular court system.

To bring a case to the Beth Din of America, complete and submit an Application to Open a Din Torah Case. For further information about the din torah process click on How Cases are Brought to Beth Din, or read the Layman’s Guide to Dinei Torah (Beth Din arbitration proceedings). If you have any questions about the din torah process, please contact the Beth Din.