Revealed: Mysterious Knights Templar Caynton Caves overrun with black magic cults
The video will start in 8 Cancel

Get daily updates directly to your inbox Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Black magic ceremonies once forced the owners of a mysterious Midland landmark to seal up its entrance, it has been revealed.

Keeping devotees of dark forces out of Caynton Caves, which were carved out of sandstone in the 17th century by followers of the Knights Templar, has been proving a devil of a job.

The Shropshire caves date back around 700 years when they were used by followers of the Knights Templar – a medieval religious order that fought in the Crusades.



One year after Christmas, the labyrinth of intricately carved chambers was found to be filled with candles, sinister symbols scrawled on the walls and more besides.

The owners of the site, hidden in dense woodland ten miles from Wolverhampton, decided enough was enough when two warlocks knocked on the door – and asked for their robes back.

The red-faced pair had left the garments behind after a ritual.

Dominic Wass, an acclaimed urban artist who works under the name ‘Sketch’, once set up a workshop on the site.

“There’s definitely some strange stuff gone on down there,” he told the Sunday Mercury.

“It’s surreal to have two warlocks knock on your door, but at least they asked. It’s the mess left behind by the ones that don’t…

“Some of the requests have been very weird.”

Accompanied by a Mercury photographer, our reporter entered the cramped tunnels to explore the secret world below.

Our torches picked out pillars, hidden alcoves and ritualistic symbols.

Mystic sigils competed for crowded wall space with more modern scrawled messages, written by youths who have turned the temple into a drinking den.

And, yes, evil had been at work – but not with a dustpan and brush.

(Image: BPM/ Tim Harley-Easthope)

There were more snuffed-out candles than you could wave a wand at.

Spirits were present, too. Empty bottles of booze littered the floor.

‘Sketch’, who is 25, scanned the cobweb-encrusted inner sanctum and shook his head sadly.

“They’ve moved the sacrificial stone again,” he groaned.

Some people! Why can’t they just put things back where they found them?

“Obviously it’s not something we want to be associated with,” he added. “But in the past, if people have asked permission, explained what they wanted to do and we were happy with it, and if they tidied up afterwards

“But this is going too far.”

Time and again, wrought iron gates have been placed over the’ tiny entrance to the caves, only big enough to crawl through.

But they have been ripped down within days. Nothing, it seems, will stop unwelcome intruders intent on hell-raising.

Sketch, who has lived on the site for two years, admitted: “It’s almost impossible to control.

“You can put up razor-wire, but if someone gets injured, we’re the ones who land in trouble.

“People don’t seem to realise that this is private property and they are trespassing.

“It’s a difficult one. Publicity just leads to more people trying to get into the caves.”

News of the closure will be a hammer blow to the many polite Pagans who ask permission to use the place.

They’re not the ones who cause trouble, apparently.

But Druids, white witches, wizards and Satanists risk meeting their maker (whichever one he or she may be) when attempting to enter the Caynton complex.

Dogs, including a very large mastiff, roam the grounds.

There’s also barbed wire and brambles to overcome.

The caves themselves are hazardous. Some chambers are so tiny that you have to enter them on hands and knees.

In 2009, a 16-year-old lost his life when a similar sandstone cave, in nearby Bridgnorth, collapsed.

In another effort to keep unwelcome worshippers away, CCTV has been increased at Caynton and more robust fencing erected. A walkway has been blocked off.Plans to fill in the caves, which are big enough to accommodate ten people, have been considered, but rejected.

Yet still they come, ignoring the perils to discover a site dubbed one of the most mystical in the Midlands.

It ranks with Castle Ring, a public Stone Age monument near Cannock Wood, Staffordshire, which has become a hotspot for Druids.

Solstice and Halloween pose particular problems at Caynton.

One Halloween bonfire party for local children was interrupted when trespassing worshippers, alerted by smoke, spilled out from the cave. “We really went to town that night,” remembers Sketch, “put up a cross, built a bonfire.

“All of a sudden all these people came running out, coughing and spluttering.”

They, like so many others, were inspired by the many legends that surround Caynton Caves.

Sketch explained: “Very little is known about why they are there. There are all kinds of stories.

“We were told they were dug by followers of the Knights Templar (a sect dating back to the days of the Crusades).

“They wanted a place where they could worship without being persecuted. It must have taken them a long time to create.

“We’ve also been told that a landowner hid slaves down there. Slavery was illegal by then and he’d hide as many as 60 down there.”

Some believe the grotto is more recent, dug out in the 1850s by a wealthy family as a folly.

One website, devoted to Britain’s hidden treasures, states: “It consists of a series of passages and chambers, with niches for candles, and the carving of the rooms is quite professional.

“It’s a creepy place and is rumoured to have been used in the 1980s for Black Magic rituals – probably not involving boxes of chocolates.”

Superstitions linked to the sinister site are rife in the community.

The mood of one local darkened when we asked for directions.

“You don’t want to go down there,” he warned. “There’s nothing but trouble down there.”

The pensioner had a point.I struck my head on an overhanging branch while exiting the cave and needed five minutes or so torecover.

The tunnels have also been the source of problems that are more anti-social than spiritual.

Not all, however, are spooked by Caynton’s mystical reputation.

One villager said: “As for all that stuff about the occult, it’s a load of warlocks.”