Followup: Chaiten Volcano
The small town of Chaiten, Chile was largely destroyed by last year's eruption of a nearby volcano (famous for the lightning-strike eruption photos featured here). Flooded, buried in ash, cut off from utilities and abandoned for many months, the town of Chaiten has been declared "dead" by Chile's government, which now plans to relocate the citizens to a safer location several kilometers up the coast. The volcano is still active, but that has not stopped a handful of die-hard residents who wish to stay in their old town and try rebuilding despite a lack of any governmental assistance. Here a few photos showing recent scenes from the region. (5 photos total)







Birds perch on homes that were evacuated by their owners after a volcanic eruption in Chaiten, Chile, Monday, Feb. 23, 2009. The Chilean government says the town destroyed by a volcanic eruption will be rebuilt six miles (10 kilometers) away and out of the path of the volcano's landslides. The original seaside village is in ruins after the volcano sprang to life in May 2008 for the first time in thousands of years. Volcanic mudflows swept through much of the town and forced the evacuation of its 4,000 residents. (AP Photo) (click to enlarge)



2: An aerial view of the village of Chaiten, which lies about 10 km (6 miles) from the Chaiten volcano crater, in Chaiten, some 1,220 km (760 miles) south of Santiago February 19, 2009. Chile's Chaiten volcano, which erupted spectacularly last year, spewed a vast cloud of ash as well as gas and molten rock on Thursday in a partial collapse of its cone, prompting a fresh evacuation. (REUTERS/Cristian Brown/Intendencia Region de los Lagos/Handout) (click to enlarge)



3: Smoke and ash rise from Chaiten volcano, located some 1,220 km (758 miles) south of Santiago February 26, 2009. (REUTERS/Victor Ruiz Caballero) (click to enlarge)



4: A car is submerged in volcanic ashes near the Rio Blanco river in Chaiten, Chile, Sunday, Feb. 22, 2009. The Chilean government says the town destroyed by a volcanic eruption will be rebuilt six miles (10 kilometers) away and out of the path of the volcano's landslides. The original seaside village is in ruins after the volcano sprang to life in May 2008 for the first time in thousands of years. Volcanic mudflows swept through much of the town and forced the evacuation of its 4,000 residents. (AP Photo) (click to enlarge)



5: A view of the village of Santa Barbara, the place where the new Chaiten town will be built, located some 1,220 km (758 miles) south of Santiago February 27, 2009. Chile says it has found a new home for the 7,000 residents of Chaiten, the town in the verdant South that turned white with ash last year after a volcano dormant for thousands of years exploded back to life. Authorities said municipal buildings could be ready to start functioning within up to three months, but could not say when the new town will be up and running. (REUTERS/Victor Ruiz Caballero) (click to enlarge)

See also: Anger, defiance as Chile abandons volcano-hit town , and Playing with Fire - Life in the shadow of an erupting volcano