An American Classic Since 1866
OUR HISTORY

AN AMERICAN CLASSIC SINCE 1866





A Rich History In 1866, as America recovered from the Civil War, William A. Breyer of Philadelphia hand-cranked his first gallon of ice cream. It was a special ice cream consisting of rich cream, pure cane sugar, fresh fruits, nuts and other flavors – some of the very same ingredients used today. He sold it to his neighbors with the promise that his ice cream was made with the finest ingredients. Word spread quickly, and Breyers® Ice Cream was soon declared Philadelphia’s best.





Breyer opened his first retail ice cream shop in 1882. Within a short time, he and his family opened four more shops. Breyer continued to make all of the ice cream in the back of one of the shops, cranking it by hand and delivering it with his horse-drawn wagon.

In 1896, 30 years after Breyer made his first gallon of ice cream, his family set up its first wholesale manufacturing plant. Breyer’s son, Henry, incorporated the business in 1908 and continued his father’s commitment to produce high-quality ice cream.

By 1918, Breyers® Ice Cream Company was producing more than a million gallons of ice cream a year and shipping it to New York City and Staten Island, New York; Newark, New Jersey; and Washington, D.C. In 1926, Breyers® Ice Cream Company became a division of the National Dairy Products Corporation (NDPC), a growing organization of well-known brands.

In 1993, Unilever bought Breyers® Ice Creamfrom Kraft and made it part of the Gold Bond-Good Humor Ice Cream Company in Green Bay, Wisconsin, renaming the company the Good Humor-Breyers® Ice Cream Company. Today, Unilever continues to own and manage Breyers® and is based in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.

Frequently Asked Questions

Have a question about Breyers® products? Please check out the following frequently asked questions for information about our delicious desserts. If you don't see an answer to your question here, Ask Breyers.

For more information on our Gluten Free products click here.

1) What is Breyers Non-Dairy?

Breyers Non-Dairy is a new range of products that are not made with dairy, but instead use real almond milk. In addition, all of the sauces and inclusions in the products do not contain dairy.

2) What’s the difference between Breyers Non-Dairy and Breyers Ice Cream?

Breyers Non-Dairy is made from real almond milk, instead of cream and milk.

3) What does it mean when products are labeled “Suitable for a Vegan Diet”?

Breyers Non-Dairy Desserts are made with ingredients that do not contain any animal ingredients or animal by-products--including dairy, eggs, honey and sugar refined with bone-char. Appropriate measures are taken to segregate materials and ensure proper cleaning measures are employed to reduce the risk of cross-contamination.

4) I am lactose intolerant. Can I eat Breyers Non-Dairy?

In addition to our Lactose Free Vanilla and Chocolate, our non-dairy products are suitable for lactose intolerant consumers. These non-dairy products were formulated to exclude any of type of milk or dairy products and proper measures are taken to avoid any cross-contamination.

5) What does “Non-GMO sourced ingredients” mean?

To learn more about our non-GMO standards and how they play a part in our recipes click here.

6) What's the difference between ice cream and gelato?

Gelato is made with many of the same ingredients found in ice cream – like milk, sugar and cream. Gelato typically has less fat than ice cream, is denser than ice cream, and the flavors are often more rich. Unlike our ice cream varieties, Breyers Gelato Indulgences come with a unique trio of textures: creamy gelato, luscious sauce and gourmet toppings.

7) Where can I get coupons for Breyers products?

Occasionally we offer coupons and samples on our website and Facebook page. In addition, we invite you to sign up at MakingLifeBetter.com to receive other members-only benefits and special offers for a variety of Unilever brands such as Breyers, Dove®, Lipton®, Suave® and many more.

8) I can’t find my favorite Breyers product at my local grocer. How can I find the nearest retail location?

We apologize for the difficulty you are having locating a Breyers product. Please visit Breyers' Store Locator to determine the nearest store that sells it! If the flavor you are looking for isn't listed, we're sorry, but it may have been discontinued.

9) Do your products contain allergens or gluten?

Some Breyers products do contain allergens, including gluten. However, most of our ice creams and frozen dairy desserts are naturally gluten free. We are currently updating our packaging to make it easy for you to identify all of our naturally gluten free variants. It is our policy that when any of the eight most common allergens (milk, eggs, fish, wheat, tree nuts, peanuts, soybeans and crustaceans) occur in any of our products they will be listed inside the ingredient statement in plain language.

10) What is a Frozen Dairy Dessert?

Frozen Dairy Dessert products are made with many of the same high-quality ingredients that are commonly found in Ice Cream – like fresh milk, cream and sugar – and offer a great taste and even smoother texture. According to the FDA, in order for a product to be labeled ice cream, it needs to meet two key requirements:

Not less than 10% dairy fat

A percentage of overrun that results in a finished product weighing more than 4.5 pounds per gallon

Anything that does not meet both of those requirements is not considered ice cream.

11) Why did Breyers make the change to Frozen Dairy Dessert?

Our consumers are at the center of every recipe decision we make. We work hard to understand what people want most and work to give them the best possible product experience. People have told us they have various flavor or texture preferences. For example, some tell us that they want a smoother texture, which is what we’re able to deliver with our Frozen Dairy Dessert products.

12) Does Frozen Dairy Dessert taste different than Ice Cream?

We have conducted several national taste tests across different flavor profiles to determine how our Frozen Dairy Dessert products perform against ice cream on important product attributes. In these side-by-side taste tests, our fans told us they liked the new recipe just as much as the original.

The ultimate measure of consumer feedback is whether our consumers are purchasing the product. Breyers Blasts!, which has a Frozen Dairy Dessert standard of identity, is the most popular and fastest-growing segment of our business.

13) Are there nutritional benefits to Frozen Dairy Dessert?

Frozen Dairy Dessert tends to have less fat than ice cream.

14) Are there Breyers flavors that are not Frozen Dairy Dessert?

Yes, Breyers offers a wide range of products to meet the different taste, nutritional, and value needs of consumers. Breyers continues to offer many flavors of ice cream, including Natural Vanilla, Natural Strawberry, Chocolate, Mint Chocolate Chip and Coffee.

15) What is the packaging difference between Ice Cream and Frozen Dairy Dessert?

These products follow all Legal & Regulatory requirements for packaging, and thus claim Frozen Dairy Dessert on the front of the pack. Additionally, the ingredient list and nutritional information is updated to reflect changes.

16) Does the price of Frozen Dairy Dessert products differ from that of Ice Cream?

The suggested retail price for Frozen Dairy Dessert varieties will be consistent with the current Ice Cream products.

17) What does Breyers mean when they say that Frozen Dairy Dessert is blended in a new way?

To manufacture our Frozen Dairy Dessert varieties, we use a new manufacturing technique that allows us to more effectively break down molecules of dairy fat and more evenly distribute them throughout the product to deliver a smoother texture with less milk fat solids.

18) How can I contact Breyers for questions or comments?

Through the Ask Breyers page on our website, or by calling us at (800) 931-2826.

19) What is gluten? Gluten is a family of proteins found in many cereal grains. According to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), gluten refers to the proteins that occur naturally in wheat, rye, barley and crossbreeds of these grains. Processing these grains to make flours and other derivatives does not remove gluten. 20) What is Celiac Disease? Celiac disease is a hereditary, chronic inflammatory disorder of the small intestine. It occurs when the body’s natu­ral defense system reacts to gluten by attacking the lining of the small intestine. Without a healthy intestinal lining, the body cannot absorb the nutrients it needs. Delayed growth and nutrient deficiencies can result and may lead to conditions such as anemia (a lower than normal number of red blood cells) and osteoporosis, a disease in which bones become frag­ile and more likely to break. Other serious health problems may include diabetes, autoimmune thyroid dis­ease and intestinal cancers (US Food and Drug Administration).



Celiac disease affects people differently. According to the Celiac Disease Foundation, there are about 300 known symptoms which may occur in the digestive system or other parts of the body. Some people with celiac disease have no symptoms at all (Celiac Disease Foundation) .



Celiac disease has no cure, but individuals who have this disease are advised to avoid all sources of gluten in their diet to protect against adverse health effects associated with the disease (US Food and Drug Administration ) . People with celiac disease MUST READ THE LIST OF INGREDIENTS ON ALL LABELS, EVERY TIME. 21) What is non-celiac gluten sensitivity? People with non-celiac gluten sensitivity can experience symptoms such as abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, constipation, headaches, bone or joint pain, and chronic fatigue when they have gluten in their diet, but other symptoms are also possible. While these are common symptoms of celiac disease, these individuals do not test positive for celiac disease or for a wheat allergy. Do not self diagnose. If you think you have celiac disease or gluten sensitivity, talk to your doctor about testing before you start a gluten free diet. This is the only way to ensure accurate test results (Celiac Disease Foundation ). 22) Is there any risk associated with the consumption of gluten free products? No, the consumption of gluten free products implies no risk , from both a nutritional and a food safety standpoint. Gluten free products can be consumed by everyone, not only people who need or wish to eliminate gluten from their diet. BREYERS® gluten free products can be consumed by anyone. 23) What does a “Gluten Free” claim on-pack mean? In the U.S., the labeling claim “gluten free” means the food bearing the claim does not have a gluten containing grain or any ingredient derived from a gluten containing grain that has not been processed to remove gluten. Furthermore, any unavoidable presence of gluten in the food is below 20 ppm (parts per million) per serving .



Always read the ingredient labels for the most up to date information, as recipes may change. 24) What are the requirements for labeling gluten free products? U.S. FDA regulations require that wheat and ingredients derived from wheat, when present in a food, are declared in the ingredient statement. The source of the gluten must be shown on the label of the product in the list of ingredients (e.g., “wheat flour”), or in a “contains” statement (e.g., “contains wheat”).



Always read the ingredient labels for the most up to date information, as recipes may change. 25) What are the requirements for a manufacturing facility to produce gluten free products? Our manufacturing facility must take all appropriate measures to mitigate the risk of cross-contact from gluten containing grains and gluten containing ingredients that have not been processed to remove gluten at all stages of the process.



At the BREYERS® facility, there are systems in place to prevent cross-contact of gluten on our line of gluten free products. They include employee allergen training, ingredient segregation, cleaning procedures and production planning. The gluten free program within the factory includes validation and verification activities, which include testing on both the product and the production lines. 26) What gluten free products does Unilever offer? We do not have a list of gluten free products and, unless labeled as such, do not guarantee that our products are gluten free. Formulations and ingredients change too frequently to ensure that such lists are always up-to-date and accurate.



Always read the ingredient labels for the most up to date information, as recipes may change. 27) Why aren’t all BREYERS® products gluten free? Some BREYERS® products contain wheat flour and cannot be labeled gluten free without changing their recipe.



There are additional offerings in MAGNUM®, FRUTTARE®, KLONDIKE®, and POPSICLE® that do not contain gluten within the ingredients. However, they are made on processing equipment not validated as being gluten free. Therefore, there is no guarantee that other products made in this factory do not contain gluten.



Please read ingredient labels for the most up to date information. 28) Why are gluten free BREYERS® products better / good for you? Gluten free BREYERS® products are not healthier than regular products. As they do not contain gluten, they are designed to meet the needs of people with celiac disease or non-celiac gluten sensitivity. The claim on pack allows making these products easily recognized by people that need to avoid gluten. Nevertheless, BREYERS® gluten free products can be consumed by anyone. 29) I have seen that many BREYERS® ice cream, frozen dessert currently claim to be gluten free. I do not have celiac disease and I do not strive to eliminate gluten from my diet. Why did you move to gluten free? BREYERS® products that claim to be gluten free have always been free of sources of gluten, as their recipe does not include wheat or other gluten containing cereals. What changed is that now, through a new gluten free program, BREYERS® is able to ensure that these products do not come into contact with gluten in the facility where they are manufactured. Therefore, BREYERS® can now call this property out on pack. BREYERS® gluten free program includes the segregation of gluten containing ingredients, specific production schedules (only in CA), superior cleaning procedures, and regular verifications and audits.



There is no nutritional risk associated with the consumption of gluten free products. In a healthy diet for people with no gluten sensitivity, there is space for different types of food, with or without gluten.

30) Are gluten free BREYERS® products made in a gluten/wheat free facility? No, BREYERS® ice cream products are not made in a gluten/wheat free facility; however, stringent criteria are used to ensure that the products that claim to be gluten free are handled properly.



At the BREYERS® facility, there are systems in place to prevent cross-contact of gluten in products that make a gluten free claim. They include employee allergen training, ingredient segregation, cleaning procedures and production planning. The gluten free program within the factory includes validation and verification activities which include allergen testing on both the product and the production lines.

31) I am allergic to wheat. Can I consume gluten free BREYERS® products? Yes, however, always read the ingredient labels for the most up to date information, as recipes may change. USFDA Ruling on Gluten-Free labeling 32) What is Grade A? In order for a dairy farmer to be classified as a Grade A producer, the producer's facilities and milk must meet more stringent health and sanitation requirements than those of a manufactured grade (commonly called Grade B) milk producer. All of the milk and cream that we use in Breyers meets Grade A production standards as part of our Pledge to use high quality ingredients. 33) Does all ice cream have Grade A milk and cream? While the liquid milk that is sold at your local grocery store is required to be Grade A, there are no Grade A requirements for milk and cream used in ice cream products. We, at Breyers, want to bring you the best, which is why we chose to partner with American farmers for only Grade A milk and cream. 34) What kind of partnerships do you have with farmers? Through Unilever’s commitment to sustainable practices, we work with farmers to continuously improve operations on their farms in the way they use their land, resources, as well as how they treat their animals. In 2018, Breyers has committed funds through the Walls Farmer Fund to help farmers reinvest back into their farms, which in turn will help us make the high quality ice cream you expect from Breyers. 35) Are all Breyers products made with Grade A milk and cream? Yes. We are committed to using only the highest quality ingredients, and our milk and cream is no exception. 36) If this product contains Grade A milk and cream, what was I eating before? Per our Pledge, we always start with high quality ingredients – a promise we’ve made to our consumers for more than 150 years. Our milk and cream is no exception. Putting the claim on pack now is a way for us to respond to consumers who want transparency in what they eat and buy. The Grade A claim provides them with a reassurance of quality. 37) What is the Walls Farmer Fund? The Walls Farmer Fund is a fund established by Unilever that supports farmers, who are at the center of our raw materials to help implement more sustainable practices. 38) What is Breyers doing with Farmers? In partnership with the Dairy Farmers of America and the Innovation Center for US Dairy, the project will help farmers develop healthier diets for their dairy cows. Investing in farmers and their dairy cows, in turn, will help us make the high quality ice cream you expect from Breyers. 39) What benefit will farmers and cows get from this project? The goal of the project is to help farmers optimize the diets of their dairy cows so they live longer, happier and healthier lives. This in turn helps farmers save money and reduce greenhouse gas emissions on their farms. 40) Why is Breyers taking the plastic bands off the lid of most of their products? Through Unilever’s commitment to sustainable practices, we work to continuously improve our operations as well as reduce waste sent to landfills. In 2018, Breyers has committed to remove non-recyclable plastic bands from our Gelato Indulgences and most 16oz products to reduce waste. For more information about Unilever’s Sustainable Living Plan visit https://www.unilever.com/sustainable-living/. 41) What if I see products at the store both with and without the plastic bands? It takes time for new products to hit the shelves and as we transition to the new packaging design you will likely see a combination of both designs at the store. The product inside is the same with or without the plastic band. 42) How will I know that my ice cream is safe to eat without the plastic band? All of our manufacturing and packaging operations are conducted in accordance with Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requirements. In addition, all products are inspected throughout the manufacturing and filling processes to ensure they reach consumers safely, and in optimal condition. 43) What if I suspect my ice cream has been tampered with? If you suspect product tampering, please take note of the date code stamped at the bottom of the package, throw the product away and call us at 1-800-931-2826. 44) Are you removing plastic bands from all of Breyers products? Our goal is to remove the bands from most of our products in the next few years. 45) Are you removing plastic bands from other Unilever ice cream products? Through Unilever’s commitment to sustainable practices, we work to continuously improve our operations as well as reduce waste sent to landfills. For more information about Unilever’s Sustainable Living Plan visit https://www.unilever.com/sustainable-living/.