Leonard Wood | biography - United States general
Leonard Wood, (born Oct. 9, 1860, Winchester, N.H., U.S.—died Aug. 7, 1927, Boston), medical officer who became chief of staff of the U.S. Army and governor general of the Philippine Islands (1921–27).

A graduate of Harvard Medical School (1884), Wood began his military career the next year as a civilian contract surgeon with the U.S. Army in the Southwest, achieving the rank of captain and assistant surgeon by 1891. He was awarded a Medal of Honor for his service with the expedition against the Apache Indians who were resisting the capture of their leader, Geronimo (1886).

After the outbreak of the Spanish-American War (1898), Wood and his friend Theodore Roosevelt recruited the 1st U.S. Volunteer Cavalry (the famous “Rough Riders”), of which Wood was the commanding officer. Meritorious conduct at the battles of Las Guasimas and San Juan Hill, Cuba, brought him promotion to brigadier general. After the war he served as military governor of Cuba (1899–1902). He earned a notable reputation there as an administrator, establishing modern educational, judicial, and police systems and overseeing great advances in sanitation.

In 1903 Wood became a major general in the regular army and was appointed governor of Moro Province in the Philippine Islands. He commanded the Philippine division of the army (1906–08), after which he returned home to the army’s Eastern Department and then became chief of staff (1910–14). He was passed over, however, by the Democratic administration for a command post either at home or abroad during World War I (1917–18). A strong advocate of preparedness, Wood was largely responsible for establishment of the summer camp at Plattsburg, N.Y., to give civilians officer training—a model for similar camps elsewhere.

Regarded by many as the political heir of Theodore Roosevelt, Wood became an active candidate for the Republican presidential nomination in 1920. Despite a large following, however, he lost to Warren G. Harding on the tenth ballot. The following year, President Harding—recognizing Wood’s administrative talent and experience—appointed him to the Wood-Forbes Mission to the Philippines. The mission reported that a grant of immediate independence to the islands would be premature and urged the U.S. government not to be left in a position of responsibility without authority. Wood was then appointed governor-general of the Philippines, a post he held until forced to resign by a terminal illness in 1927.