UPDATE: Claim: Murder victim Shawn Gray testified for grand jury in Michael Brown case by Renee Nal
SEE UPDATE BELOW

Shawn Gray, 23, was reported missing six days before his body was found “lying in the dry river channel” of the River Des Peres in St. Louis, Missouri on Wednesday afternoon. By all accounts Gray seemed to be a happy, well-adjusted and talented young adult with plenty of friends, a penchant for partying as evidenced by his Facebook page, and a loving family, who aggressively worked to find him.

On Saturday, “progressive” freelance reporter Mwili Hakalu wrote an article for the Source Magazine with a curious paragraph regarding Gray’s death:

Some believe that police in Ferguson, MO, are targeting all witnesses who advocated or testified on behalf of slain teen Michael Brown. However, it has not been confirmed yet if Shawn Gray testified for Brown.

The belief that police are targeting witnesses flies in the face of logic as evidenced by statements of numerous witnesses, as compiled at Broadside News, who repeatedly cited a fear of “retaliation” from Ferguson residents, not the police. There was also speculation that DeAndre Joshua, 20, testified for the Grand Jury before his young life was cut short after his lifeless body was found not far from the spot where Michael Brown died, however the Washington Post reported that St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Robert McCulloch’s office “confirmed that Joshua didn’t offer testimony during the proceedings.”

Consider a tweet by Fox 2 St. Louis news reporter Roche Madden back in August after the initial bout of riots:

Painted on Quik Trip pic.twitter.com/nMMeZDE06K — Roche Madden (@RocheMaddenTV) August 11, 2014

Upon further investigation, it is clear that there is plenty of social media speculation that Shawn Gray was a witness to the Grand Jury in the Michael Brown case.

#ShawnGray There is no coincidence that these young men from the Grand Jury witnesses are being found… http://t.co/uQa0TBOYxX — Jah (@eyedreamofjah) December 4, 2014

Another BLACK witness to Mike Brown’s death killed!! Pls dnt let this scare you, it means THEY’RE SCARED #ShawnGray pic.twitter.com/WxgRk3F1eC — Onti (@PrettyyKc) December 5, 2014

But speculation on social media does not count as fact, of course.

The last time Gray was seen was on Thanksgiving night at 11:30 pm, where he was leaving work at Cardwell’s restaurant and bar in Clayton. An autopsy report “could not determine Gray’s cause of death…” and the city medical examiner is awaiting toxicology test results, as reported at the Saint Louis Post Dispatch. Gray’s death has been labeled “suspicious,” and homicide detectives were investigating.

As evidenced by Shawn Gray’s Facebook page, it is clear that he is talented with a guitar, very funny, and quite skilled with a skateboard.

And another:

And another:

While officials rightfully have kept the names of the witnesses secret, it is probably time for the local police to make a public statement about Shawn Gray’s alleged testimony in order to squash rumors and allow for the killers to be found and brought to justice. It is this author’s sincerest hope that the families and loved ones of both young men can find peace and closure someday.

UPDATE: This tweet seems credible enough to put the question of Shawn’s possible involvement in the case at rest: