Bernie Sanders finds support at $1K-a-plate event
CLOSE Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton supporters face off in rallies outside Verizon Wireless Area in Manchester, N.H., Friday, Feb. 5. JESS ALOE/FREE PRESS

Buy Photo Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders speaks at the New Hampshire Democratic Party's 2016 McIntyre-Shaheen 100 Club Celebration at the Verizon Wireless Center in Manchester on Friday, February 5, 2016. (Photo: GLENN RUSSELL/FREE PRESS)Buy Photo

MANCHESTER, N.H. - Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton appeared at the same event for the last time before the first 2016 primary election Friday night. Democratic elites and ordinary voters crowded the Verizon arena in downtown Manchester to hear the candidates speak as part of a New Hampshire Democrat fundraising dinner that cost up to $1,000 for a table seat and dinner, and as low as $25 for a spot in the stands.

Many of those Democratic elites are campaigning for Clinton, including Gov. Maggie Hassan, who is running for U.S. Senate, and Sen. Jeanne Shaheen, two of the most prominent New Hampshire Democrats. Shaheen is one of only two Democrats ever re-elected to the Senate from New Hampshire.

But Sanders had supporters of his own at the $250 to $1,000-a-seat tables, not just in the $25-a-seat stands.

Some, including ice-cream titans Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield of Ben and Jerry’s, were invited by the Sanders campaign. Others were locals who welcomed Sanders’ message.

Salme Perry sat at a table near the stage, while crowds in the nearby stands chanted “Bernie! Bernie!” Perry is chairwoman of the Rollinsford, New Hampshire, Democrats.

She wore a Maggie Hassan for Senate sticker but said she was disappointed in the Democratic establishment’s support for Clinton.

“I feel like they’ve sold out on the ideas of their youth,” she said.

Hassan on Friday repeated her support for Clinton.

“Governor Hassan is confident that Secretary Clinton will be the nominee and that the Democratic Party will be united for the general election,” her spokesman wrote via email Friday.

But Marilyn Brennan, a retired teacher from Bedford, New Hampshire, who is active in Democratic politics, said she thinks Sanders is really resonating.

Buy Photo Supporters of Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders cheer during the New Hampshire Democratic Party's 2016 McIntyre-Shaheen 100 Club Celebration at the Verizon Wireless Center in Manchester on Friday, February 5, 2016. (Photo: GLENN RUSSELL/FREE PRESS)

Brennan plans to support Clinton, in part because she wants to see a female president. But she said she’d work to get Sanders elected president if he were the nominee.

“Did you see the other side?” she said, referring to the Republicans.

Brennan said Sanders does resonate with her, and the more he talks, the more he connects with people in her social sphere.

“There’s a lot of conflict,” she said, adding that some voters, including her husband, Bill, a retired lawyer, still were making up their minds between the two Democratic candidates.

During the formal program during Friday night's event, some Democratic leaders called for unity in the party and focused on Republicans.

Raymond Buckley, chairman of the New Hampshire Democratic Party, said the minor disagreements between Clinton and Sanders paled before the Republicans, who “are appealing to the very worst in society.”

Democratic National Committee chairwoman Debbie Wasserman-Schultz talked up Democratic accomplishments and encouraged Sanders and Clinton supporters to work for high voter turnout.

“I want to see New Hampshire give Iowa a run for its money when it comes to turnout,” she said. “No matter who you support, that turnout is going to be what propels our nominee to the White House.”

Buy Photo Young audience members have different reactions as supporters of rival Democratic presidential candidates Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton trade chants at the New Hampshire Democratic Party's 2016 McIntyre-Shaheen 100 Club Celebration at the Verizon Wireless Center in Manchester on Friday, February 5, 2016. (Photo: GLENN RUSSELL/FREE PRESS)

Others chose a side.

When Congresswoman Ann McLane Kuster declared her support for Clinton, Sanders supporters chanted “Bernie! Bernie!” as she explained that she wanted to support the first female president.

She said she “appreciates the optimism” of Sanders supporters.

Hassan, the governor, briefly mentioned her endorsement of Clinton in the beginning of her speech but spent much of her time touting her accomplishments as governor and attacking Republican Sen. Kelly Ayotte. Hassan is running against Ayotte for a Senate seat.

Sen. Jeanne Shaheen also expressed support for Clinton. She paused in her praise of the former secretary of state to call for respect between supporters of Clinton and Sanders.

“You know, one of the things I really appreciate about New Hampshire is that we’re respectful of other people’s point of view," she said. "So I hope everybody here will be respectful of whatever choices others make. Because we need each other come November.”

Buy Photo Supporters of Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton cheer as she speaks at the New Hampshire Democratic Party's 2016 McIntyre-Shaheen 100 Club Celebration at the Verizon Wireless Center in Manchester on Friday, February 5, 2016. (Photo: GLENN RUSSELL/FREE PRESS)

The remark came across as an admonishment of raucous Sanders supporters in the crowd, and she returned to her prepared comments afterward.

One day after a tense debate against Clinton in nearby Durham, Sanders started his remarks Friday night by speaking to all the attendees, congratulating them on participating in the political process.

He also took aim at the GOP.

“On our worst day, we are a hundred times better than any of the Republican candidates on their best day,” he said.

Clinton also praised the political involvement of attendees. She said she and Sanders have disagreements on issues, but that was "how it should be."

"Compare that to the campaign of insults on the Republican side," she said.

Before the event, organizers said they were expecting 6,000 people for the night, which included speeches by Clinton, Sanders, the DNC's Wasserman-Schultz and state Gov. Hassan. Those who spent the money for the dinner ate a buffet dinner of beef shortrib, pasta, vegetables and cookies.

Although this marked the last time Clinton and Sanders were to appear at the same event before the primary, both candidates are campaigning heavily in the state.

A thick, heavy snow blanketed southern New Hampshire during the day Friday, leaving roads slippery, but more than 400 people braved the snow to hear Sanders at a rally in Exeter. The snow led Sanders to cancel a news conference with an NAACP leader who planned to endorse him.

Contact Jess Aloe at 802-660-1874 or jaloe@freepressmedia.com. Follow her on Twitter at www.twitter.com/jess_aloe.

Read or Share this story: http://bfpne.ws/1T4cT9f