Veterinarian In Burnt Hills, NY USA :: Home
Welcome to Burnt Hills Veterinary Hospital

Your Veterinarian In Upstate NY Capital District

The American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA) sets veterinary standards that member hospitals adhere to and utilize to create a clean, safe, efficient, and effective hospital for client’s pets. The Burnt Hills Veterinary Hospital, founded in 1950 by Dr. Stan Garrison, and owned by Drs. Pete Farrell and Michael Rach since 1984, has been an accredited hospital since 1963. Accreditation by AAHA means that our hospital has been examined and evaluated against the standards written and agreed upon by AAHA members, and been found to be adhering to the standards: cleanliness, record keeping, quality assurance protocols, emergency procedures, medical waste management, surgery, sterility, consistency and quality of radiology, laboratory testing, hospitalized animal care, advanced diagnostic procedures, and continual education. This is a massive undertaking for any veterinary hospital. We are proud to acknowledge that our AAHA accreditation has just been renewed for another three year period. This accreditation provides our clients with the assurance that our hospital has been inspected and evaluated to the most rigorous standards of care. Our clients and their pet families can know that not only will they find a clean, caring, compassionate environment for themselves, they will also experience the best in veterinary diagnostics, medicine and surgery.

Scientists Confirm the Harm in Feeding Raw Pet Foods

By Amanda Carrozza / Published in American Veterinarian / April 2018

Incorporating raw meat into the diet of companion animals has been widely debated. Proponents argue that raw foods provide nutritional value that can’t be achieved through kibble, promote healthier digestion, and reduce periodontal disease. Critics, including the FDA deny such benefits and warn that raw pet foods expose animals to bacterial infection. Several raw pet food products have been recalled in recent months due to the potential for contamination.

Hoping to provide evidence either way, a team of scientists from Utrecht University in the Netherlands tested for the presence of zoonotic bacterial and parasitic pathogens in raw meat-based pet foods. The results, published earlier this year, revealed the presence of Escherichia coli, Listeria Monocytogenes, and Salmonella. What’s more, people are at risk when they handle raw pet food or are licked by and animal that consumed the food.

The investigators analyzed samples from 35 raw meat diet products across 8 brands available in the Netherlands. After thawing the meat, the investigators looked for the presence of Salmonella, L monocytogenes, E coli, and antibiotic-resistant E coli, as well as 2 types of parasites, Sarcocystis and Toxoplasma gondii.

E coli serotype 0157:H7 was found in 23% (8/35) of the products, and the antibiotic-resistant beta-lactamase-producing E coli was found in 80% (28/35). L monocytogenes was present in 54% (19/35); other Listeria species in 43% (15/35); and Salmonella species in 20% (7/35).

Concerning parasites, 11% (4/35) of the products contained Sarcocystis cruzi; another11%, Sarcocystis tenella. Six percent (2/35) of products contained T gondii.

“The results of the study demonstrate the presence of the potential zoonotic pathogens in frozen raw meat-based diets that may be a possible source of bacterial infections in pet animals and, if transmitted, pose a risk for human beings,” according to the investigators. “If nonfrozen meat is fed, parasitic infections are also possible.” They add that pet owners should be made aware of risks associated with feeding their pets raw meat.

Van BreeFPJ, etal. Vet Rec. 2018;182(2):50. Doi: 10.1136/vr.104535.