Mysterious cable ties and door-to-door sellers worry Newport residents after two burglaries
Written byELEANOR BUSBY

A rise in cable tie ‘markers’ and door-to-door sellers have been worrying Newport residents after two burglaries took place in the village last week.

Police are urging people to get in touch if they see any markers or any suspicious activity in the area following the crimes.

A house was targeted by burglars on Tuesday, October 8, when an Apple MacBook and solid gold cufflinks, worth a total of £2,400, were stolen.

The property on the High Street was broken into between 6.45pm and 8.50pm and £4,500 damage was caused to an antique bureau.

Then two days later, on Thursday, October 10, between 9am and 5.45pm, a secure residential garage was broken into on Frambury Lane.

A bucket containing brass and copper, valued at £100, was taken.

It is believed the intruder was scared away by an alarm going off.

On a closed Facebook group for local petowners just days before the first burglary, a member sent a message out saying that white tape had been found on lampposts on Frambury Lane and asked people to remove any they saw.

The member wrote that she believed it was “gangs going around stealing dogs for fighting.”

The post led to a wide discussion about mysterious activity that had been taking place in the village, including strangers asking questions about property and pets.

Some residents said on the group that they had been approached by Irish men asking strange questions.

A number of cable ties and tape were found around the area on trees, posts and gates, according to the Facebook group users who said they began removing the markers and calling the police about their concerns.

An Essex police spokesperson said: “Officers making enquiries about the burglary received several reports of cable ties and strings being tied to lampposts in the area and door-to-door sellers operating.

“While there is currently no information that this is directly connected, police are urging people to be vigilant and to contact them if they see any cable ties in the area or door-to-door sellers they are concerned about.

“If people are aware of anyone putting ties or any kind of markers on lampposts or other types of property they are urged to contact police on 101. Or if they see any sort of crime in the village, such as burglary, they are to call 999.”