Canada Free Press
Obama Actually Committed More Religious Discrimination than Any That Trump Is Accused of Any intellectually honest people who care about immigration should be far more upset with President Obama’s immigration policies than President Trump’s Syrian Christians constitute 10% of the Arabs in Syria, yet during the Obama administration, they constituted from .5% to 1% of the refugees permitted to escape into America from Syria. By Ron A. Y. Rich -- Full Story

The March to Nowhere A day or two before the inauguration of President Donald J. Trump on January 20th, 2017, I watched a reporter interviewing five attractive, intelligent, articulate women from California, who were all making the long cross-country trip to the Women’s March on Washington on January 21st. Amazingly, not one woman was able to express a persuasive or even rational reason for the trip, but instead resorted to time-worn platitudes, bromides, and leftist talking points about “unity” and “solidarity” and “getting the message out.” Um… what message? By Joan Swirsky -- Full Story

Get Ready for the ‘Donald Trump’s fault Terrorism Revolution’ This is what the majority of the left swinging American and Canadian mainstream media want you to believe: last night’s gun massacre on the Quebec City Islamic Cultural Center leaving six dead and eight injured—the one Prime Minister Justin Trudeau calls a ‘terrorist attack on Muslims”— is President Donald Trump’s fault. This should be seen as the best way for the mainstream media to keep anti-Trump protesters out screaming on city streets. By Judi McLeod -- Full Story

The Shooting in the Quebec City Mosque The police have now revised their previous public comments and have now named not two suspects, but one suspect, Alexandre Bissionnettte as the alleged shooter in the mosque who allegedly killed six Muslim men and injured others. I caution my left wing, anti-Trump friends. Hear me out before you wrongly leap to make a connection between Trump’s travel ban and this horrible tragedy. By Mitch Wolfe -- Full Story

Grassroots Conservatives to Congress and the President – Don’t Raise the Cost of Investm Margaret Thatcher reminded us that one of the problems with socialism is you “eventually run out of other people’s money,” but that doesn’t stop liberals like Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-NY) from finding more sources. His latest crusade is an effort to increase taxes on investment income – namely carried interest capital gains. By Megan Barth -- Full Story

The Trump presidency will cost Canadians There is no dispute Canadian people as a whole are politically further to the left than Americans. There are of course conservatives who would not only like to see Justin Trudeau gone but replaced by a Trump-like successor. There is very little chance the latter will happen, at least in the foreseeable future. By Arthur Weinreb -- Full Story

What does the Bible really say about taking in Syrian refugees? It’s always problematic when you look to the mainstream media and other left-wingers for an understanding of what Scripture says. To listen to them, you’d think Jesus was concerned with little more than sending checks to the poor, installing solar panels on roofs and surrendering to any and all foreign enemies. By Dan Calabrese -- Full Story

OBAMA-APPOINTED JUDGE VS. TRUMP’S IMMIGRATION CHANGES A day after President Trump’s executive order suspending immigration from terrorism-producing countries was signed, an Obama-appointed judge on Saturday night followed the advice of George Soros-funded groups seeking to blunt it. By Matthew Vadum -- Full Story

Canada Prime Minister President Donald Trump’s Latest Immigration Saboteur Canada, through its lib-left, Barack Obama-handpicked Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, has just become President Donald Trump’s biggest and nearest immigration saboteur. here “To those fleeing persecution, terror & war, Canadians will welcome you, regardless of your faith. Diversity is our strength,” Trudeau tweeted out to the world at 3:20 p.m., yesterday. The tweet features a recycled picture of Trudeau bending down to welcome a little girl refugee from his Dec. 11, 2015 homepage, taken when he showed up at the Lester B. Pearson International Airport with winter coats for the first planeload of Syrian refugees to Canada. By Judi McLeod -- Full Story

March for Life Breathing Life Back Into America’s Soul They came by the hundreds of thousands to Washington, D.C. yesterday, just as they did for the past 44 years. Continuing their march in an almost total media blackout that was part of their lives for almost half a century; ridiculed, scorned and passed by for more than three generations, they always kept coming, keeping the annual March for Life, prominent in their lives. By Judi McLeod -- Full Story

Scaremongering Tells Time on Doomsday Clock Shortly after the clock struck 12 noon one week ago today, Barack Hussein Obama’s deplorable presidency was mercifully replaced by the one of Donald J. Trump. Anxiety ridden for eight long years of watching their country slipping further into decline, little people sent up rousing cheers;the mainstream media began searching for more cunning ways to undermine the new presidency;ganging up together, feminists, jihadists and celebrities were at home posing with pink p**sy caps in front of the mirror, readying for a screaming, 2 million strong worldwide Women’s March, scheduled for the following day. By Judi McLeod -- Full Story

It doesn’t take a registry to make a certified Muslim Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright is merely stating the obvious when she tells us she’d be willing to sign up as a Muslim if only there were such a thing as a “Muslim Registry”. In reaction to reports indicating President Donald Trump plans on suspending the U.S.’s refugee program for 120 days, Albright hit the Tweet send button Wednesday, saying she is prepared to register as a Muslim in “solidarity”. By Judi McLeod -- Full Story

Google, Take Down Your #KILLALLMEN YouTube The buck for the #KILLALLMEN Internet video stops at Google, owner of YouTube. Self-described “Secular Humanist”, “trans loving Feminist”, “YouTube Vlogger”, “Animal Lover”, “Socialism Fan”. “BlackLivesMatter supporter”, 33-year-old Jenny McDermott, reportedly a native of San Diego, openly calls for the death of male babies and men on the Internet. By Judi McLeod -- Full Story

In Case you missed it:

NO’MAAM! By Doug Hagmann -- Full Story