SCYTL Acquires SOE Software, Becoming the Leading Election Software Provider
BALTIMORE & TAMPA, Fla.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--

SCYTL is the global leader in online voting solutions with a presence in over twenty countries

SOE Software is the leading software company for election management solutions in the United States

The combination of the two companies creates the industry leader in election software with a strong market presence worldwide

SCYTL, the global leader in secure electronic voting technologies, announced today the acquisition of 100% of SOE Software, the leading software provider of election management solutions in the United States. The integration of these two software companies creates the industry leader in the election software market with a full range of solutions covering from Internet voting to election night reporting and online pollworker training, and a strong market presence worldwide.

SCYTL is currently the worldwide leader in the Internet voting space and the acquisition of SOE Software, with its Clarity election management software suite, significantly expands SCYTL’s product portfolio beyond electronic voting. Furthermore, SOE Software’s strong US presence with 900 jurisdictions as customers in 26 states, including 14 state-wide customers, complements very effectively SCYTL’s customer base in the United States and internationally with customers in over 20 different countries across 5 continents, including France, Spain, Canada, Norway, Switzerland, South Africa, United Arab Emirates, Mexico, India and Australia.

“We are very excited about joining forces with SOE Software because their solutions can address the needs for more efficiency and transparency in elections in many of the countries where we are currently working“, said Pere Valles, SCYTL’s CEO. “The high degree of customer satisfaction achieved by SOE Software in the United States demonstrates that their solutions and customer service are very effective in meeting those needs”.

“This integration of our companies will allow us to offer even greater levels of service and functionality to both our existing US customer base as well as new domestic and international customers by being able to expand our existing product functionality on a global scale”, said Marc Fratello, CEO of SOE Software. “SCYTL’s position as an industry leader along with SOE Software’s core competencies and customer base will provide significant capabilities to the elections marketplace”.

ABOUT SCYTL

SCYTL is a technology company specializing in the development of secure electronic voting and election modernization solutions. Based in Barcelona and with offices in Baltimore, Toronto, New Delhi, Athens, Kiev and Singapore, SCYTL’s solutions have been used in public elections by governments from countries such as the United States, United Kingdom, France, Canada, Norway, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates, South Africa, India and Australia. SCYTL is a portfolio company of leading international VC funds Nauta Capital, Balderton Capital and Spinnaker. More information is available at www.scytl.com.

ABOUT SOE SOFTWARE

SOE Software, based in Tampa, has developed Clarity, a suite of 8 software modules that allow election authorities to be more efficient and transparent in their management of elections and in their communications with citizens and media. Over 900 jurisdictions in 26 states across the United States, including 14 state-wide customers, currently use SOE Software solutions in their electoral processes. More information is available at www.soesoftware.com.

Photos/Multimedia Gallery Available: http://www.businesswire.com/cgi-bin/mmg.cgi?eid=50130065&lang=en