Senate unanimously passes bill eliminating 'tampon tax'
ALBANY — The Republican-led Senate on Monday unanimously passed a bill exempting feminine hygiene products from sales tax, two months after the debate over the so-called tampon tax reached Albany.

The bill, sponsored by freshman Sen. Sue Serino, a Republican from Hyde Park, passed with 58 votes.

The vote on the Senate floor took about one minute, just enough time for at least one period joke.

“It is a way of providing some tax relief to women everywhere, young girls in particular,” Sen. Diane Savino said, thanking the bill sponsor. “But on behalf of women of a certain age everywhere, I would love to offer a friendly amendment and ask for a rebate program, Senator Serino. But I know it would probably bankrupt the state.”

It was unusual timing to bring up a bill that would have otherwise garnered a sizable amount of media attention, with Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, Ohio Gov. John Kasich and Donald Trump all in Albany siphoning media away from the Capitol.

The Assembly last month unanimously passed the legislation, which has also received the backing of the Cuomo administration.

"We've said we'd work with the Legislature to repeal this tax and applaud their action," said Dani Lever, a spokeswoman for the Democratic governor.

In March, five women filed a class action lawsuit against the state's Department of Tax and Finance for taxing feminine hygiene products.

According to the state’s Department of Tax and Finance, feminine hygiene products are subject to the state's 4 percent sales tax because they are not used to treat or prevent illnesses or diseases.

Advocates estimate the tax on feminine hygiene products brings in about $8.5 million a year, though there is no way of really knowing because sales taxes are not reported by specific products.

The tax has also been taken up in New York City, where Councilwoman Julissa Ferreras-Copeland is pushing a legislative package to make tampons and pads more accessible.

Her proposal includes a resolution calling on the state to eliminate the tax on feminine hygiene products and a series of bills that would make the products free in public schools, homeless shelters and correctional facilities across the city.

And the debate over taxes on feminine hygiene products has also gone national.

During the first day of the legislative session in California, two assemblywomen introduced legislation to end the so-called tampon tax, sparking conversations about the tax nationwide. President Obama was asked about the issue during a YouTube interview in February.

“I have to tell you, I have no idea why states would tax these as luxury items,” Obama said. “I suspect it’s because men were making the laws when those taxes were passed and I think it’s pretty sensible for women in those states to work to get those taxes removed.”

The bill passed Monday will now go to the desk of Gov. Andrew Cuomo.

--Additional reporting by Gloria Pazmino.