Hornets owner Michael Jordan speaks out on HB2 law in North Carolina
North Carolina's HB2 law, which opponents have described as discriminatory against the LGBT community, has drawn the ire of many across the country, including the world of basketball. With Charlotte set to host the 2017 NBA All-Star game, the city could potentially lose hosting duties if the law is not changed.

The NBA hasn't said they will move the game from Charlotte but they issued a statement on April 15, which stated that "the legislation is problematic, that we feel it is best to engage with the community to work towards a solution, that change is needed and we are hopeful that it will occur.”

Charlotte Hornets owner Michael Jordan, is also hopeful that the law can be changed, saying that his franchise is "opposed to discrimination in any form."

From Rick Bonnell of the Charlotte Observer:

“As my organization has stated previously, the Charlotte Hornets and Hornets Sports & Entertainment are opposed to discrimination in any form, and we have always sought to provide an inclusive environment,” Jordan said in a statement to the Observer in response to an interview request regarding HB2, the North Carolina law called by some as discriminatory toward the LGBT community.

“As has been the case since the building opened, we will continue to ensure that all fans, players and employees feel welcome while at work or attending NBA games and events at Time Warner Cable Arena.”

Here's the previous statement by the Hornets that Jordan references:

The Charlotte Hornets have issued the following statement: pic.twitter.com/5IOzSjjncM — Charlotte Hornets (@hornets) March 25, 2016

Jordan and the Hornets obviously don't want to lose the All-Star game. The three-day basketball extravaganza creates worldwide exposure for the city of Charlotte, the Hornets and also generates millions of dollars. But that's not the reason why Jordan and the Hornets are sticking by the NBA in regards to the problems of the HB2 legislation. It's simply the right thing to do as Jordan essentially says in his statement.

The NBA has always been a progressive and forward-thinking organization and now that one of the greatest to ever play has voiced his opinion and someone who is also a business owner in the state, the pressure is on North Carolina to amend HB2 before it creates an even bigger black mark by having the All-Star game be moved from Charlotte.