OPERATION INHERENT RESOLVE
To learn more about Operation Inherent Resolve, Click on the following links:



Inherent Resolve website



Department of Defense Special Report on Operation Inherent Resolve



Department of State: the Global Coalition to Counter ISIS



Inherent Resolve against terrorist threats



The name Inherent Resolve is intended to reflect the unwavering resolve and deep commitment of the U.S. and partner nations in the region and around the globe to eliminate the terrorist group ISIS and the threat they pose to Iraq, Syria, the region and the wider international community. It also symbolizes the willingness and dedication of coalition members to work closely with our friends in the region and apply all available dimensions of national power necessary - diplomatic, informational, military, and economic - to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIS.



The ISIS Threat: A Global Challenge



ISIS has dramatically undermined stability in Iraq, Syria, the broader Middle East and poses a threat to international peace and security. ISIS continues to commit gross, systematic abuses of human rights and violations of international law, including indiscriminate killing and deliberate targeting of civilians, mass executions and extrajudicial killings, persecution of individuals and entire communities on the basis of their identity, kidnapping of civilians, forced displacement of Shia communities and minority groups, killing and maiming of children, rape and other forms of sexual violence, along with numerous other atrocities. ISIS presents a global terrorist threat which has recruited thousands of foreign fighters to Iraq and Syria from across the globe and leveraged technology to spread its violent extremist ideology and to incite terrorist acts. As noted in UN Security Council Resolution 2170, “terrorism can only be defeated by a sustained and comprehensive approach involving the active participation and collaboration of all States… which is why our first priority is to encourage others to join in this important endeavor.”



The meaning of the CJTF-OIR logo



The swords and olive branch indicate the dual nature of the Coalition – the defeat of ISIS and the restoration of stability to the region. The seven leaves of the olive branch represent the seven peoples of Iraq: Sunni, Shia, Kurdish, Turkmen, Assyrian, Yazidi, and Armenian. The colors used are a reflection of military assets – brown and green for land components; blue for air and naval. The three stars indicate the command, while the color gold represents the quality of excellence performed by the command in the nation’s defense.



One Mission, Many Nations

Combined Joint Task Force Operation Inherent Resolve continues to work by, with and through regional partners to militarily defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, or ISIS, in order to enable whole-of-coalition governmental actions to increase regional stability.