CFA: Lilies Can Be Deadly to Your Cat
Easter Lilies can be deadly for your cat!!! The ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center and the Cat Fanciers' Association warns cat owners: Easter Lilies can be deadly for your cat!!! -- In 2003, The Center Handled Approximately

129 Cases Of Cats Ingesting A Lilium Species -- The ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center is leading a nationwide campaign to warn cat owners about the dangers of Easter lilies and other variations in the lily family. "Easter lily (Lilium longiflorum), Tiger lily (Lilium tigrinum), Rubrum lily (Lilium speciosum), Japanese show lily (Lilium lancifolium) and some species of the Day lily (Hemerocallis species) can cause kidney failure in cats," says Dr. Sharon Gwaltney-Brant, Veterinary Toxicologist at the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center. "Unfortunately, all parts of the lily plant are considered toxic to cats and consuming even small amounts can be life threatening." Within only a few hours of ingestion of the lily plant, a cat may vomit, become lethargic or develop a lack of appetite. These signs continue and worsen as kidney damage progresses. Without prompt and proper treatment by a veterinarian, the cat may develop kidney failure in 36 to72 hours. Cat owners should remove lilies from their cat's access and are encouraged to consider safer alternatives such as Easter orchids, Easter cactus, Easter daisies or violets. The Cat Fanciers' Association (CFA) has partnered with the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center to help raise awareness among cat owners nationally about the dangers of toxic plants as well as offering safe alternatives. According to Michael W. Brim, Public Relations and Marketing Director for the Cat Fanciers' Association, "Part of being a responsible pet owner is to educate yourself on the many different health issues facing your pet. Removing dangerous plants from your cat's home is an important part in having safer, healthier and happier pets." To help educate cat owners about the dangers of lilies and other plants, the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center and CFA have developed online materials including photos of common types of dangerous lilies and a list of non-toxic plants. To download the materials visit www.apcc.aspca.org or www.cfa.org/articles/plants.html.

Other Lilies to avoid if you have a cat in your home: GLORY LILY

Gloriosa Superba TIGER LILY

Lilium tigrinum STARGAZER LILY

Lilium orientalis RUBRUM LILY

Lilium speciosum rubrum ASIAN LILIES

Lily asiatic delicious ASIAN LILIES

Lily asiatic montreaux