Howard Buffett's millions help jump-start Decatur's recovery
When Mandy Christian left Decatur in 2005, she swore she'd never move back to the shrinking city.

The county seat nearly smack dab in the middle of the state didn't have much going for it, Christian thought, and it had a bad reputation when it came to crime.

Yet there was Christian, now 35, sitting on the grass on a muggy June evening amid a drifting cloud of bubbles at a park just outside the city limits. Her 5-year-old son, Caleb, danced around her, his attention torn between the free concert on the park's stage and the bubbles exploding from the machine next to his mom.

The marketing campaign that helped change Christian's mind about the industrial-agricultural city was funded by the charitable foundation of fellow area resident Howard Buffett, who happens to be the 62-year-old son of Berkshire Hathaway's billionaire CEO, Warren Buffett.

Since Howard Buffett moved to the Decatur area in 1992 to become a corporate vice president and assistant to the chairman at agribusiness giant Archer Daniels Midland, the city has been home, at least part of the time. In his mind, it's not as much of a home as Omaha, Neb., where he grew up and where his dad and sister still reside.

Nevertheless, the Howard G. Buffett Foundation has given or pledged $55.1 million in the city and surrounding Macon County over the past two decades to help stanch the area's hemorrhaging population. Dozens of grants, including those paying for a new lakefront amphitheater and a law enforcement training facility, aim to help make the area a better place to live.

"The bottom line is, what can you do to make a community more attractive to younger people, and how do you make it attractive so the people that are here stay here?" Buffett said. "A lot of our contributions, if you cut down to the bottom of it, that's what they do."

That's no small task in the recession-bruised city three hours south of Chicago that was built on industry and soybeans. Though unemployment in the city, which peaked at 14.2 percent in July 2009, has dropped to about 5 percent, the labor force is also shrinking, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Residents are leaving, and despite two decades of investment from the county's No. 1 philanthropist, the data show they're not coming back — at least not yet.

Howard Buffett, the son of billionaire Warren Buffett, lives at least part of the time in Decatur, Ill. The industrial-agricultural city and the surrounding county has been the recipient of about $51.5 million from the Howard G. Buffett foundation over the past 20 years. (Alexandra Wimley / Chicago Tribune) (Alexandra Wimley / Chicago Tribune)

The population of the "Pride of the Prairie" city, as Decatur bills itself, declined 11.2 percent between 2000 and 2016, to less than 73,000, according to U.S. Census Bureau data. Macon County saw a drop of 7.1 percent.

Employment mainstays, such as ADM and earth-moving equipment manufacturer Caterpillar, have delivered blows in recent years by moving or eliminating jobs. ADM, by far the area's largest employer and the only Fortune 500 company based there, moved its global headquarters to Chicago in 2014 but left more than 4,000 jobs and its North American headquarters.

Though there are bright spots on the employment front — like Caterpillar announcing this year that it plans to shift 500 positions to Decatur from its closing plant outside Aurora — it's hard for lifelong area residents like Rita Bollinger to be optimistic. And she tries to be.

The bottom line is, what can you do to make a community more attractive to younger people, and how do you make it attractive so the people that are here stay here? — Howard Buffett

Bollinger, a 62-year-old aesthetician in the neighboring village of Mount Zion, said she knows the city is working to improve. But the "for sale" signs popping up left and right in her neighborhood don't lie, she said.

"I have had three good friends of mine up and leave for other states, and they were lifers. It's sad," said Bollinger as she and her husband, a retired electrical engineer, listened to the free outdoor concert, Chill on the Hill.

"When you're a blue-collar town and those jobs go, it's hard to recover," she said.

But Decatur is certainly trying, and so is Buffett.

"People would laugh at the way I do some things," he said, sitting in an old corn crib turned office on a farm just outside of town. The property is owned by Buffett's Sequoia Farm Foundation, which has received grants from his other foundation.

Buffett recounted a grant his namesake foundation made last year to the city of Decatur to cover nearly $169,000 it had to pay back to the state. He learned about the state's demand for repayment of the overpaid tax funds while watching the 6 o'clock news.

"You take a community like Decatur (which) is in some ways struggling anyway, and then you have the state come along and kind of hit you over the head with a baseball bat," he said. "Some of those things we can pick up on and try to support the city and the county."

Buffett takes no salary from his foundation, which he established in 1999, but it is his main professional commitment. He left ADM in 1995 and now serves on various corporate boards.

Alexandra Wimley / Chicago Tribune Luca Giltner, 5, from left, Krista Giltner, 8, and Calla Giltner, 2, play with bubbles at Chill on the Hill, a weekly summer concert series in Mt. Zion, Ill., on June 29, 2017. Luca Giltner, 5, from left, Krista Giltner, 8, and Calla Giltner, 2, play with bubbles at Chill on the Hill, a weekly summer concert series in Mt. Zion, Ill., on June 29, 2017. (Alexandra Wimley / Chicago Tribune) (Alexandra Wimley / Chicago Tribune)

In 2006, Warren Buffett announced he would gradually give away 85 percent of his fortune, in the form of Berkshire Hathaway stock. Part of it was pledged to foundations his three children had established. Each would receive shares valued then at about $1 billion, paid out in annual installments that vary depending on the stock price.

He made a similar commitment to his kids' foundations in 2012.

Howard Buffett's foundation received this year's gift of shares this month. It was valued at nearly $170 million.

The foundation does not accept unsolicited requests for money. It focuses on funding projects around the world dealing with food security, conflict mitigation and public safety. That work has taken Buffett from South Africa to the U.S.-Mexico border in Arizona.

Despite its global reach, the foundation also is focused on projects in its own backyard.

To pick projects in Macon County, he meets with a handful of people, including the city manager, the county sheriff and a host on local radio station WSOY, who pitch and vet projects.

A $330,000 grant to the city of Decatur last year to help fund the second phase of a high-speed fiber-optic broadband network is an example. The city-owned network could provide service to local government, nonprofits, law enforcement and the like. City Manager Tim Gleason hopes to use the network to spur economic redevelopment in blighted parts of town.

Alexandra Wimley / Chicago Tribune Howard Buffett, center, and Elgin Hawthorne, a deputy sheriff at the Macon County Sheriff's Office, demonstrate a simulation June 30, 2017, at the Grant Farm Training Facility, which trains police in deescalation and use of force, in Decatur, Ill. Howard Buffett, center, and Elgin Hawthorne, a deputy sheriff at the Macon County Sheriff's Office, demonstrate a simulation June 30, 2017, at the Grant Farm Training Facility, which trains police in deescalation and use of force, in Decatur, Ill. (Alexandra Wimley / Chicago Tribune) (Alexandra Wimley / Chicago Tribune)

The nearly $250,000 sculpture garden between the Decatur Park District's Scovill Zoo and the neighboring Children's Museum of Illinois is another example. Buffett said he will probably never visit it, but others convinced him it would be good for the community.