Accused by feds, sun bed-selling doctor settles for up to $5.3 million
For decades, doctors have warned consumers that indoor tanning is a skin cancer risk to be avoided.

But if that was a message sun-starved Chicagoans didn't want to hear, Dr. Joseph Mercola had a tanning bed to sell them.

And he had a sales pitch to sweeten the deal. He claimed the tanning beds that he sold for between $1,200 and $4,000 from his Hoffman Estates based-business not only didn't cause cancer, but also actively reduced the chances of getting it.

There was only one problem with Mercola's spiel, according to a Federal Trade Commission lawsuit: It was nonsense.

On Thursday, the agency announced a settlement of its false advertising claim against the 61-year old osteopathic physician, under which he agreed to pay his customers refunds totaling up to $5.3 million, and promised to stop selling tanning beds for good.

Mercola, 61, uses his website and books to back a number of discredited, fringe medical causes on topics that include vaccinations and fluoridated water. He stars in web videos for his company, Mercola Health Resources, and wrote articles in which he claimed cold winters in the Midwest meant Chicagoans, in particular, would benefit from his tanning beds, which he said could "reverse your wrinkles" and "slash your risk of cancer."

Federal regulators called him out, also accusing him of failing to disclose that he'd paid for an endorsement from the nonprofit Vitamin D Council.

"These types of false claims are especially troubling because of the serious health risks posed by indoor tanning," said Jessica Rich, director of the FTC's bureau of consumer protection, in a news release. "The fact is, indoor tanning is not safe because it increases the risk of skin cancer, including melanoma."

But speaking Thursday, Mercola said he only settled the case as "a business decision," and stands by his claims that his tanning beds had cancer-fighting benefits and that Americans were suffering from what he called an "epidemic" of under-exposure to ultraviolet light, which he said could be treated by "moderate" sun bed use.

"People can die of drinking too much water," he said. "Too much of anything is a bad thing."

It isn't Mercola's first run-in with regulators. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration wrote to him three times between 2005 and 2011 accusing him of violating federal laws by marketing a device he claimed was a "revolutionary" alternative to mammograms. He was also warned about his marketing of unproven dietary supplements.

While he acknowledged Thursday that he'd sold thousands of tanning beds between 2012 and last year, he said his business is not "a tool ... to get me a bigger house and car" but rather a means of funding his mission to "inform consumers" about "natural health."

He said he moved from the Chicago area to Florida, where he owns a waterfront mansion, four years ago because of his belief in the health benefits of the sun. He said that he accused parts of the medical and business communities of having a "carefully orchestrated campaign against me" and said he'd always been open about donations he'd made to the Vitamin D Council, though he disputed that they were made in return for an endorsement.

Under his deal with the FTC, customers who bought a tanning bed from him will receive letters, offering them a full refund.

Should it be approved by a federal judge, the deal would also ban Mercola from making false claims about any other product he sells. Authorities used a similar method to bring down TV pitchman and fraudster Kevin Trudeau, who was eventually imprisoned after a series of civil actions by the government for violating the terms of an earlier court order that he stop lying in his pitches.

kjanssen@tribpub.com

Twitter @kimjnews