Indictment: Ex-lawmaker Mel Reynolds failed to file tax returns for 4 years
Former U.S. Rep. Mel Reynolds has been indicted on allegations he failed to file income tax returns from 2009 through 2012.

A former Rhodes scholar and rising star in the Democratic Party, Reynolds was convicted in two separate cases in the 1990s for having sex with an underage campaign worker and for bank and campaign fraud.

Reached by email, Reynolds declined comment.

The four-count indictment, made public Friday, charged that Reynolds failed to file a tax return for each of the four years despite receiving "gross income in excess of the amount required to file an income tax return."

No arraignment date has been set for Reynolds, 63. Each of the four counts carries a maximum sentence of one year in prison and a $250,000 fine on conviction.

Reynolds had a spectacular fall from grace when a Cook County jury convicted him in 1995 on criminal sexual abuse, obstruction of justice and child pornography charges for having sex with a onetime campaign intern, 16, and then trying to sabotage the case against him.

According to testimony at the trial, the girl told Reynolds he could also have sex with a 15-year-old Catholic schoolgirl.

"Did I win the Lotto?" Reynolds replied.

Later in 1995, he was sentenced to five years in prison.

While serving his state prison sentence, Reynolds was convicted again — in 1997 in federal court on 15 counts of campaign and bank fraud related to illegally raising campaign cash and defrauding banks out of hundreds of thousands of dollars. He was sentenced to 6 1/2 years in federal prison.

Reynolds served 2 1/2 years in state prison and then was transferred to federal prison, but in 2001 President Bill Clinton, hours before leaving office, commuted Reynolds' federal sentence with two years left to serve.

By 2003, Reynolds made the first of several failed attempts at a political comeback, running against U.S. Rep. Jesse Jackson Jr. in the 2004 Democratic primary.

After Jackson resigned in 2012 amid his own scandal, Reynolds again sought to win back his former 2nd Congressional District seat under the slogan of "Redemption," but he again was unsuccessful.

Last year Reynolds was arrested and jailed in Zimbabwe on charges he had sexually explicit photos and videos on his mobile phone in violation of a censorship law. Days later, authorities dropped the pornography charges and Reynolds pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor visa violation and was deported from the country in southern Africa.