Local law enforcement could lose access to some military equipment
Helicopters and snowmobiles from the U.S. Department of Defense can be a big help to local law enforcement. Grenade launchers and bayonets? Not so much.

So said local law enforcement officials Wednesday after President Obama announced plans to stop distributing an array of military equipment to local and state police agencies across the country, trimming back a practice that has raised concerns about the militarization of local police.

Winthrop Harbor Police Chief Joel Brumlik, who also serves as president of Air One Emergency Response Coalition, said the air rescue team uses nine former military helicopters obtained by Illinois and Wisconsin law enforcement agencies.

Through Air One, trained pilots have used surplus military helicopters to rescue capsized fishermen in Lake Michigan, assist with grass fires and deliver aid after tornadoes, said Brumlik, who expressed concern that Obama's announcement would scale back its efforts.

"The program has saved lives. It has helped enhance the ability of local law enforcement and fire to have a tool in their toolbox that they wouldn't have otherwise," Brumlik said.

The Chicago Police Department received at least $1.1 million worth of military equipment from July 2005 through December 2010, records show. More than half of that, however, was for a mine-resistant vehicle that has a value of at least $600,000.

CPD does not have armored vehicles that run on a tracked system instead of wheels, weaponized aircraft or vehicles, firearms or ammunition of .50-caliber or higher, grenade launchers or bayonets, all of which have been discussed as part of Obama's policy.

"While we do not have the full details of the policy yet, based on what we know, this will not affect CPD," said Chicago police spokesman Marty Maloney.

Meanwhile, other local law enforcement officials said Obama's announcement reflected a growing sentiment that police departments lose public trust when they appear overly militaristic.

"If we're seen as an occupying force coming in to rule and control the community, we're not going to be able to get community support and build relationships," said Fred Hayes, Elwood Police Chief and president of the Illinois Association of Chiefs of Police.

In Round Lake Park, Police Chief George Filenko said the biggest assets his department has gained through federal acquisitions are snowmobiles and night vision gear to help locate missing people in wooded areas.

Some gear will be put on a "controlled" list, available only to police who get specific approval and training. The list includes some armored vehicles and tactical vehicles, riot gear and specialized firearms.

"Police departments do have, I hope, the flexibility to understand where the future is going and where we have to go that doesn't include militarization; it includes more of an open approach," Filenko said.

Edwin C. Yohnka, spokesman for the American Civil Liberties Union of Illinois, believes Obama's prohibition on the equipment is an important step in terms of building trust between the police and the community.

The acquisition of this equipment by local law enforcement "really goes beyond policing," said Yohnka, who worries that some agencies may use the equipment indiscriminately.

"The problem we have is that, once you put these tools into law enforcement's hands, there's a danger of mission creep, where the tools are used for other things," he said.

Yohnka said he's never heard any complaints from the public about the Chicago Police Department's use of the equipment. But he thinks law enforcement agencies across the country should have been more open about the equipment with the communities they serve.

"We always thought there was a danger whenever you put these weapons in an urban area," said Yohnka. "There was never a moment or an opportunity for the community to discuss or debate whether it was appropriate."

Chicago Tribune reporter Vikki Ortiz Healy contributed.