Nonprofit Websites with Online Donations $29.95
CharityAdvantage #1 In Custom Websites For Nonprofits

#1 In Web Design Options

#1 In Overall Value 800-677-4180 Contact Us Home

About

Pricing

Samples

FAQ

Order



Login next prev One Package, One Price. Just $29.95/Month! A+ Rating Better Business Bureau

New Custom Website to Brand Your Organization Media is getting more complex and users expect more from your nonprofit website as you compete for their valuable time and attention. We build you a very professional website customized to your needs and based on our 4,000+ website design library. The customization includes innovative banner graphics that brand your organization and quickly tell your visitors who you are and what you do.



However, we always have to remember that after a few seconds, the design no longer the same value. It is your effective content, our advanced interactive features, and an action oriented web page that will make your site a great success. If you want more volunteers, a page for them to learn more is not enough. A quick volunteer form asking for more information on that same page is what you need to create a contact that could last for many years. With CharityAdvantage, your beautiful nonprofit web design will make a positive first impression and the interactive and database management tools will make your site more effective.

Online Donations to Increase Your Funding How much money have you earned online in the last five years? Without an industry standard fundraising form right on your donation page and ready to engage your donors and give them immediate interactivity, you have already lost their interest and their support. It can happen that fast. Donors don’t like to click. They like to donate. We make it easy for them. Your new donations page becomes your portal to online funding. You can raise funds for all your campaigns and appeals in one place. As you send mass emails and use social media connections to drive traffic to this page, your fundraising success begins. Your donors want to support you but they need to learn of your needs (donor education), understand how their funding solves problems (donor empowerment) and make their giving decision (donor action). Our online donations system is designed with the intelligence you need to succeed in the competition for donor funds.

Mass Emailer to Build Awareness and Receive More Funding The marketing method with the highest response rate is email and mass email multiplies the effect. With your website database collecting email addresses of those joining your mailing list, contacting you with questions, making donations, and using your custom forms like events, volunteers and more, you now have a base to grow your organization through effective mass email communication.



Our mass emailer allows you to send compelling emails with relevant subjects to segments of your list or your entire list with one click. You must tell the world about your work, its success, and the impact it is making and do it often. Nonprofits don’t stand still. Your constituents need to hear about how you are moving forward, solving problems, and achieving success. Then they are ready to donate knowing that their valuable dollars are being used to generate more success.

Cloud Technology to Manage Files and Documents Sharing files and documents is easy using our cloud based technology. Uploading audio, video, and other documents such as PDF’s can be done on a daily basis and it can offer you the ability to collaborate with other team members. Many of our users create Secure Pages (explained below) and use the Cloud to share information with particular groups that require a login. You can share information with members, volunteers, staff, board members and more. You can also share information with just one person. For example, if you needed to share sensitive data with one person, you could upload the data to the cloud, and only the assigned person could have access.

Mobile Technology to Connect With Your Users Anytime You may be using a mobile device right now to view our site. We expect that many of your web users will be using mobile as well. Your new website will be mobile friendly for their ease of viewing as well as completing transactions such as online donations, event registrations, volunteer forms, etc. You may also use a mobile device to log into your CharityAdvantage account and use some of the features and tools. Our system is designed for the latest mobile technologies and works on all mobile platforms.

E-Commerce to Receive Credit/Debit Card Payments Online We have a complete online donation system for donors, but perhaps you need to sell products online or collect payments for events, renewals or more. Our online store and shopping cart can handle two products or several hundred. Inventory, sales tax, and shipping are just a few of its many features. For other transactions such as membership payments or event registrations, you can use our custom form builder to create your form and then connect it to a payment processor for credit/debit card payments.

Group Defined Secure Pages to Offer Login Permissions Some organizations have the need to offer login permissions to certain groups so the group can see information that only pertains to them. Our system allows you to create unlimited groups and manage the login information for each user. You can then add web pages specific to each group and offer each group their own unique web experience. You can even have users log into an entire portal of secure web pages that only they can view with its own menu and “home” page.

Secure Hosting to Safeguard Your Data We often wonder why some hosting companies use budget servers. CharityAdvantage always uses the fastest servers with latest technology. Our engineers monitor our systems 24/7 and our hosting environment uses all the industry standard security protocols to insure your data safety. Our backup procedures are timely and thorough.

Easy to Use Web Editor to Keep Your Content Fresh Your website is your message and a main marketing channel to your constituents. With a fast changing world of content and information, it is critical that you keep your site fresh and timely. Managing your website is simple with our sophisticated web editor.



Based on an easy to use Microsoft Office platform with familiar tools and icons, your web content is right where you need it – in front of you ready for edits and exciting content. No technical skills or web design experience are needed and support is always available.

Database to Manage Your Donors and Contacts Most businesses rely on data for success and the field of marketing is largely based on this. Nonprofits must be competitive marketers as well and this means intelligent communications, mass emailing, digital fundraising and more. Unfortunately, most nonprofits do not have the budgets for a website that also has a database collecting information from all their interactive forms online. As a matter of fact, less than 1% of all nonprofits are using database technology and those that do are investing a lot of money in those systems.



CharityAdvantage includes a powerful database management system at no extra cost. You will find incredible value in this added feature, and come to rely on it in many areas of your nonprofit’s administration. Our database system collects information, in a highly secure hosting environment, from all the forms that are on your website including “Join Our List” (can be on every page), “Contact Us” (can be on every page), “Donate Now” (one page, one form), and “Custom Forms” (with unlimited possibilities like events, applications, volunteers, memberships, and more). Use CharityAdvantage as your database manager by logging into your account and interact with your records, and/or export the data to your own internal systems, and/or send out mass email to different segments or everyone in your database.

Events Management and Online Calendar to Increase Participation Calendars are a popular form of website interactivity. If your organization posts events on a calendar your users will find it easy to learn more about them and take action. Our system enables you to enter the time, date, location, and full description for all your events. If you have a dedicated web page for a particular event, you can insert a link into your calendar description.



If you need a form so attendees can register for an event, you can use our custom form feature to build the form to your exact requirements and then edit it anytime. Connect your form to ecommerce credit/debit cards using our system. With full database connectivity of all online forms, you will also have records of all attendees and be able to send mass email to them as a segment using our mass emailer. From posting an event on a calendar to sending out mass email to attendees, our system has everything you need to manage your event including information, registration, payment, and email communication.

Social Media Connections to Get More Website Traffic and Donations Facebook, You Tube, Pinterest, Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn and others all serve a unique purpose but your website is the only main digital portal into your nonprofit. Sending traffic to your website from social media sites can be one of their main purposes since once users are on your site there is much more to do. They can also connect with other social media through your site using links, icons, plug-ins, and feeds. Your site will always be the center of your web world and can serve as a central source of your social media.

Custom Form Builder to Collect Valuable Information Sometimes you need a custom form built to your exact needs and the ability to change it at any time. Our form builder offers that advanced capability and also connects to your database so all your information is saved. Custom forms are perfect for applications, registrations, volunteers, employees, members, etc. You can have as many custom forms as you want with each one connecting to a different segment in your database. This offers you the features of interacting, exporting, and/or mass emailing any segment any time.

Search Engine Optimization to Get More Qualified Traffic You need qualified traffic to your website from Google and other search engines. Users need relevant information about your website displayed on search engines to know if a click should take place. We can help you generate that traffic to your site. Every web page can be optimized for search engines with the exact Page Title, Page Description and Keywords so the intelligent connection can be made. That means that your Volunteer page can be optimized to recruit those searching specifically for “volunteers” both in your “geographic area” and in your “area of service”.

Advanced Plug-ins to Add More Interactivity If you need to post photos on your nonprofit website our latest photo gallery software will impress your website users.



Other plug-ins include our popular discussion forums, survey polls, mini calendars, what’s new postings, national news based on topic, mailing list forms, and more.

Privacy Policy Privacy Policy

Expert Support to Save You Time Even though our system is easy to use, there may be times when you have a question and require support. Our highly trained staff has many years of experience in our technology and understands your needs. Because we offer so many features and each one has so many options, most questions revolve around functionality. Users ask questions like “Can I put more than one event on a calendar day”, “Can I edit the donation’s acknowledgement email that is sent after my donor completes the form”, and so many more. The usual answer is “Yes”.

One Provider to Make it Easy CharityAdvantage is a full service provider for nonprofits and our entire system is fully integrative. Modules communicate with each other and advanced intelligence is built into the entire system which we support. Many users who come to us have a web host, a web company (because they can’t edit their own site), a donations provider, a mass email provider, a calendar or events provider and more. With CharityAdvantage as your digital partner, we bring all those pieces together in one easy to use service that gives you support in one place. Your time is valuable and we make it easier for you to manage your web solution.

Pricing Our normal cost of $39.95 per month has been reduced to $29.95 per month. Your payment of $29.95 includes all services with no setup fees or any other costs. Your rate will never go up. Prefer to save more? Pay for 6 months or longer now and your lower your monthly costs. Term Monthly Cost Discount Pay Today 1 Month $29.95 25% $29.95 6 Months $27.95 30% $167.70 (6 x $27.95) 12 Months $22.95 43% $275.40 (12 x $22.95) 24 Months $19.95 50% $478.80 (24 x $19.95) 36 Months $15.95 60% $574.20 (36 x $15.95) Your costs will never go up. If you pay for 6 months or longer, you can continue to save in the future by renewing at the same rate or by choosing a lower-cost plan. These prices will always be available to you because of our "no price increase" guarantee. Click HERE to get started