Supreme Court rejection of gun case considered a victory by Highland Park
The U.S. Supreme Court's refusal Monday to take up a challenge to Highland Park's ban on assault weapons protects similar restrictions in Chicago and other parts of Illinois and sends a message that municipalities have the right to determine how to best protect their communities, according to legal experts.

The lack of action was a blow to the National Rifle Association and other pro-gun advocates who had hoped the high court would issue a ruling that once and for all clarified whether weapons such as AK-47s, AR-15s and Uzis are protected under the Constitution.

The court's decision to reject the case comes on the heels of a mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif., in which AR-15-style rifles were used to carry out what officials have determined was a terrorist act.

The case placed Highland Park, a mostly affluent suburb on the North Shore, in the midst of the heated battle over Second Amendment rights, but city officials said their goal always has been simply to keep mass shootings such as the one in Newtown, Conn., from happening there.

With its ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines intact, Highland Park Mayor Nancy R. Rotering said the city and other cities and villages in Illinois are now better equipped to protect their citizens.

"No parent sending a child to school, to the park or to the movies should have to worry about whether they will come home or not," Rotering said. "Banning assault weapons and high-capacity magazines is one common-sense action to reduce gun violence and protect our children and our communities from potential mass violence and grief."

The Supreme Court effectively let stand the decision by the 7th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals upholding a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines that Highland Park and about 20 other Illinois cities hurriedly passed two years ago.

City of Highland Park Mayor Nancy R. Rotering speaks after the U.S. Supreme Court rejected an appeal from gun owners to challenge the City of Highland Park's ban on assault weapons and large-capacity magazines. The ban will remain. (Stacey Wescott, Chicago Tribune) City of Highland Park Mayor Nancy R. Rotering speaks after the U.S. Supreme Court rejected an appeal from gun owners to challenge the City of Highland Park's ban on assault weapons and large-capacity magazines. The ban will remain. (Stacey Wescott, Chicago Tribune) SEE MORE VIDEOS

Highland Park, whose defense was backed by the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, likened itself to communities such as Newtown, where a gunman murdered 20 children and six adult staff members at Sandy Hook Elementary School in 2012.

Attorneys for Highland Park argued that "military-style" weapons with high-capacity magazines that hold more than 10 rounds of ammunition were a threat to the public and that banning them was the city's best effort to prevent such a massacre.

While the appellate court ruling allows the law to remain on the books for now, the battle is not over in Illinois. Another lawsuit brought against an assault weapons ban in Cook County is still pending in the Illinois Supreme Court.

The larger question of whether assault rifles are protected by the Second Amendment was left unanswered in Heller v. Washington D.C. in 2008 and McDonald v. Chicago in 2010, the two recent Supreme Court rulings that reaffirmed citizens' rights to have firearms for self-defense.

However, Steven Elrod, a Chicago attorney who works as the corporation counsel for Highland Park, said the 7th Circuit ruling answered that question.

"The issue was whether the Second Amendment has any exceptions to it," Elrod said. "We saw from the U.S. Supreme Court cases in Heller and McDonald that not all firearms are covered by the Second Amendment. What the 7th Circuit said in our case is that firearms that constitute a clear danger or uncommon usage of self-defense are not protected."

Gun rights advocates disagreed and said they won't back down from efforts to protect the use of rapid-firing, semi-automatic rifles that are among the most popular firearms for hunting, recreational shooting and self-defense.

"The Supreme Court hears less than 1 percent of the cases submitted every year, so it's never a surprise to learn a petition for cert has been denied," said NRA spokesman Lars Dalseide. "It's important to remember that the Supreme Court has regularly maintained that a denial is not an affirmation of a lower court's ruling."

The appellate ruling is not broad in scope, Dalseide said, pointing out that it only applies to Illinois, Indiana and Wisconsin. But anti-gun leaders said it continues a trend in the lower courts.

In October the 2nd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a similar assault weapons ban in New York and Connecticut. Those bans were passed after the Sandy Hook shootings.

The Highland Park case was brought by pediatrician Arie S. Friedman, 49, who claimed that the ban passed by the Highland Park City Council in 2013 denied him the right to use his semi-automatic weapons to protect his home and family. The Illinois State Rifle Association was a co-plaintiff.

Richard Pearson, director of the Illinois State Rifle Association, was disappointed the Supreme Court did not hear the case but said his organization is still waiting for the conclusion of the state court case challenging the Cook County ban. He said the group will also keep looking for new plaintiffs in areas that have enacted assault weapons bans.

"We are not going to give up and we're not going to go away," Pearson said.

Gun advocates said their claims are supported in a lengthy dissent written by Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas and supported by Justice Antonin Scalia. Both justices said they would have heard the case and struck down the ban.

Thomas wrote that the appeals court ruling "flouts two of our Second Amendment precedents." Thomas said the weapons ban "is highly suspect because it broadly prohibits common semi-automatic firearms used for lawful purposes" by roughly 5 million Americans.

"The overwhelming majority of citizens who own and use such rifles do so for lawful purposes, including self-defense and target shooting," Thomas wrote.

The case had been under consideration at the high court for two months, but the delay in dealing with it appears mainly due to the time it took for Thomas to finish his opinion.

Assault weapons have been a heated issue in Illinois since 2013, when the General Assembly declined to include a ban in the Illinois concealed carry law. In a compromise, the legislature gave cities 10 days after the bill's passage to enact their own bans or forfeit the right.

Chicago, which already had a ban in place, strengthened its restrictions. Cook County, which initially upgraded its assault weapons ban in 2006, moved to strengthen the law and its penalties in 2013. The county's 2006 law already was being challenged in the state courts. The Illinois Supreme Court has yet to rule on whether it violates the Second Amendment.

The Highland Park ordinance, which is based on the Cook County ordinance, prohibits the sale, purchase or possession of semi-automatic weapons that can hold more than 10 rounds in a magazine. It also bans semi-automatics equipped with a folding, telescoping or thumbhole stock; a shroud attached to the barrel; a muzzle brake or muzzle compensator; a protruding pistol grip; or a pistol grip with a stock attached. It also prohibits the sale and possession of magazines that fire more than 10 rounds.