Judge temporarily blocks Deerfield assault weapons ban, which was to take effect Wednesday
A Lake County judge has issued a temporary restraining order blocking Deerfield from enforcing an assault weapons ban that was scheduled to take effect Wednesday.

In his ruling, Circuit Court Judge Luis Berrones found the village’s ban is pre-empted by both the state’s Firearm Concealed Carry Act and the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act and is therefore unenforceable.

The Deerfield ordinance, which was approved April 2 in the wake of several mass shootings in the U.S., gave residents until June 13 to turn in any guns that fit the village’s definition of assault weapons, remove them from the village or alter the weapons so they would not be prohibited under the ordinance. Residents found in violation could be fined up to $1,000 a day.

Plaintiffs in two lawsuits challenging the village’s authority to prohibit assault weapons asked Berrones on Tuesday to bar the village from enforcing the ordinance. The judge issued a written ruling later Tuesday granting the request.

The temporary restraining order blocks enforcement while the case continues, but does not halt the legal proceedings. Court hearings are scheduled for July 5 and July 20 in the two lawsuits.

In his temporary order issued Tuesday, Berrones found the Deerfield assault weapons ban to be a new ordinance and not an amendment to a prior ordinance — a key distinction because it places Deerfield’s ban outside the time frame that Illinois lawmakers gave municipalities in 2013 to regulate assault weapons.

Deerfield has argued the assault weapons ban is an amendment to an ordinance passed before the state’s July 19, 2013, deadline. After that date, “regulation of the possession or ownership of assault weapons” became the “exclusive powers and functions of the state,” according to the amended Firearm Owners Identification Card Act.

Deerfield’s original ordinance defined assault weapons and placed restrictions on storage and transportation but did not prohibit possession within the village.

“The banning of assault weapons is substantively different than regulations regarding the transportation and storage of such weapons by one who owns or possesses assault weapons,” Berrones wrote.

The village, in a statement posted on its website, said it would honor the temporary restraining order and not enforce the ordinance. “We are reviewing with our legal team the full written opinion that the Judge entered,” the statement said. “We are certainly going to review all of the options available to the Village, including the right to appeal the decision to the Illinois Appellate Court.”

One of the lawsuits was filed by Deerfield gun owner Daniel Easterday, the Illinois State Rifle Association and the Second Amendment Foundation. A second legal challenge was brought by Deerfield gun owner John William Wombacher III and the group Guns Save Life and has the backing of the National Rifle Association Institute for Legislative Action.

“The NRA-backed challenge to the village of Deerfield’s ban on commonly owned firearms and magazines has cleared its first hurdle in the legal process,” said Chris W. Cox, executive director of the NRA-ILA, in a news release hailing the ruling as a significant legal victory. He said his organization is prepared to fight “this anti-self-defense ordinance until it’s overturned in court.”

John Boch, executive director of Guns Save Life, called the ruling significant because “it allows law-abiding Deerfield residents to keep commonly owned firearms and magazines in their homes for self-defense while the case proceeds.”

Representing the village of Deerfield, attorney Christopher Wilson argued in court Tuesday that state lawmakers expressly permitted future amendments to local laws passed within the permitted time frame and required that municipalities notify Illinois State Police of changes. He said Deerfield adopted the ordinance under its home rule power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.

“They have seen what is happening in other communities and said, ‘It is not happening here,’” Wilson said of the decision to amend the earlier ordinance.

But attorneys for gun owners argued that the ban passed in April does not qualify as an amendment.

“In this case, the village went from ‘you can have them’ to ‘you can’t have them at all and if you do the fines are up to $1,000 a day,’” said David Sigale, the attorney representing Easterday and fellow plaintiffs.

Berrones also found the Deerfield ordinance does not prohibit ownership or possession of large-capacity magazines that are not affixed to an assault weapon. A “large capacity magazine” is defined as one holding more than 10 rounds.

In deciding to issue a temporary restraining order, Berrones wrote that the hardships imposed on gun owners outweigh any harm to Deerfield in delaying the effective date of the 2018 ordinance.

The ordinance includes in its definition of “assault weapon” semi-automatic rifles that have a fixed magazine with a capacity to accept more than 10 rounds of ammunition, shotguns with a revolving cylinder and semi-automatic pistols and rifles that can accept large-capacity magazines and possess one of a list of other features. The AR-15, the AK-47 and the Uzi are among a lengthy list of models mentioned by name.

kberkowitz@pioneerlocal.com