Shake-up at Air Force Academy

Top leaders ousted in female cadet sex assault scandal







DENVER -- Four top officials will lose their jobs at the Air Force Academy because of a sexual assault scandal that has placed the reputation of the elite training school in jeopardy, congressional sources confirmed Tuesday.



The shakeup marks a turnaround for the Air Force's top command, which until recently maintained it had confidence in the leadership of the military college. Criticism has been growing in Congress over how leaders handled allegations of rape and sexual assault at the 4,100-student school.



The Air Force plans to announce Wednesday that two top commanders at the Colorado Springs academy--Brig. Gen. S. Taco Gilbert, commandant of cadets, and Col. Steve Eddy, vice superintendent--will be removed. Gilbert was completing a two-year stint at the school.



Also slated to lose their jobs are Col. Bob Eskridge, vice commander, and Col. Sue Slavec, training group commander, according to information presented at a classified briefing Tuesday by Air Force Secretary James Roche to the Senate Armed Services Committee. All four are expected to be reassigned.



"At last, we're taking people out of the academy who are responsible to a large extent for the mess this school is in," said Rep. Tom Tancredo (R-Colo.), who called several weeks ago for top academy officials to be ousted.



During the last decade, military investigators have confirmed 56 cases of alleged rape or assault at the academy. Officials believe as many as double that number may have occurred but not been reported by female students afraid of reprisals.



Air Force officials declined to comment until Wednesday's news conference, and attempts to reach academy officials were unsuccessful.



Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton (D-N.Y.), speaking after the closed-door briefing, said she thought the Air Force was "making progress" but indicated she was not satisfied. "I believe that changing the leadership is a serious action but it is not sufficient," she said.



A Senate aide said the committee was told Col. Johnny Weida would become commandant of cadets at the academy, the No. 2 position, and serve as interim superintendent until a new leader was named.



The current superintendent, Lt. Gen. John Dallager, had previously announced plans to retire in June, after three years leading the school.



Weida, a 1978 graduate of the academy, is commander of the Squadron Officer College at Maxwell Air Force Base in Alabama.



New female leaders



Two of the new leaders to step into the academy leadership will be women. One of them, Col. Debra Dubbe, who graduated from the academy in 1980 with the first class of women, will become vice commander and academy ombudsman responsible for overseeing allegations of sexual assault, according to the Senate aide.



A former cadet group commander at the academy, she is "very sharp, very well-thought of," said Dick Rauschkolb, spokesman for the school's Association of Graduates.



Lt. Col. Dewey Ford, a member of a special Pentagon task force dispatched to the academy, said Roche and other officials also will announce improvements to restore confidence among cadets.



In the past several weeks, officials have discussed grouping female cadets together in dormitories to give them safety in numbers, instead of letting them live with their mostly male squadrons as they do now.



That idea hasn't gone over well with academy graduates, Rauschkolb said. In squadrons, unity and cohesiveness are paramount and segregating women would interfere, they said in e-mails to the Association of Graduates.



Under another proposed change, the sexual assault hot line now operated by cadets would be staffed by other people. Several cadets have said they feel uncomfortable reporting alleged rapes or assaults to their classmates, especially because military laws do not guarantee privacy.



Mentor program possible



Sources said the Air Force may launch a mentoring program for incoming female cadets that would pair them with a female upperclassman.



When students first come to the school, men and women may be separated for a few days to "talk about expectations for their behavior," according to an Air Force Academy graduate familiar with the investigation. And in time officers in charge of cadet squadrons may have to have more extensive experience in counseling, he said.



According to Rep. Joel Hefley (R-Colo.), who met Tuesday with Roche, medical personnel will receive extra training in how to respond to sexual assault cases, people raising allegations of sexual assault will not face sanctions, only juniors and seniors at the academy will be allowed to discipline freshmen, and any cadet found to have provided alcohol to an underage cadet will be expelled.



The academy also will remove a prominent sign that says "Bring Me Men . . . " from a prominent spot near the campus courtyard and parade area.



This week, a three-member team from the inspector general's office at the Department of Defense arrives at the academy to begin a third investigation of alleged sexual assaults.



Republican Sen. Wayne Allard of Colorado, a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, joined the committee chairman, Sen. John Warner (R-Va.), in writing a letter to Roche on Friday.



"It seems apparent to us that despite warnings and clear indications that remedial action was needed, these officers failed to take effective action to correct these problems," the senators wrote. "We have concluded that change in leadership at the academy should be your highest priority."



Allard remains deeply disturbed by the rape investigation process at the academy, spokesman Dick Wadhams said. Some 39 current or former academy students have contacted Allard about alleged rapes or sexual assaults in the last several months. Most do not trust current leaders to deal with them fairly, Wadhams said.







Copyright © 2005, Chicago Tribune



>> Save 47% off the newsstand price - Subscribe to the Chicago Tribune