Without solidarity, the media under Trump will be lost
The most disappointing moment of Donald Trump's frisky news conference Wednesday was when a member of the national press corps stood and asked the president-elect, "Do you think President Obama went too far with the sanctions he put on Russia after the hacking? Do you think they're disproportionate?"

It was a relevant enough question, sure, but disappointing given what came just before.

I've transcribed that exchange as faithfully as possible given how much of it was cross-talk. It begins with CNN's senior White House correspondent Jim Acosta responding to Trump's criticism of CNN's coverage of unsubstantiated allegations that the Russian government has collected information so embarrassing to Trump that it makes him vulnerable to blackmail.

Acosta: Sir, since you're attacking us, can you give us a question? Mr. President-elect —

Trump: (Pointing to another reporter) Go ahead. Go ahead. Go ahead.

Acosta: Mr. President-elect, since you are attacking our news organization —

Trump: (To Acosta) No. Not you. Not you.

Acosta: Can you give us a chance?

Trump: Your organization's terrible.

Acosta: You are attacking our news organization.

Trump: Your organization's terrible. Let's go.

Acosta: Can you give us a chance to ask a question, sir?

Trump: (Pointing to another reporter) Go ahead.

Acosta: Sir, can you state —

Trump: Quiet. Quiet. (To the other reporter) Go ahead.

Acosta: Mr. President-elect, can you state categorically —

Trump: She's asking a question, don't be rude.

Acosta: Mr. President-elect, can you give us a question? You're attacking us.

Trump: Don't be rude.

Acosta: Can you give us a question?

Trump: Don't be rude. No, I'm not going to give you a question. I'm not going to give you a question.

Acosta: Can you state categorically —

Trump: You are fake news. (To the other reporter) Go ahead.

Acosta: Sir, can you state categorically that nobody — no, Mr. President-elect, that's not appropriate.

Trump: (To the other reporter) Go ahead.

What the unidentified reporter who then asked the question about sanctions should have said was, "Thank you, sir, but I yield my question to Mr. Acosta."

Justin Lane, EPA President-elect Donald Trump talks during a press conference in the lobby of Trump Tower in New York, on Jan. 11, 2017. President-elect Donald Trump talks during a press conference in the lobby of Trump Tower in New York, on Jan. 11, 2017. (Justin Lane, EPA) (Justin Lane, EPA)

And if Trump balked at that, the next reporter should have said the same thing. And the next. And the next. Until the news conference ground to an awkward, embarrassing halt and forced Trump either to stomp off the stage or accede to a norm that's now more vital than ever: Politicians and officeholders are not allowed to freeze out major news organizations to punish them for coverage they deem unfavorable.

Refusing to recognize Acosta, who was in the front row, was a coercive act of bullying by Trump, one that sent a message not just to CNN but to every reporter in the room or watching on television: If you or your colleagues publish or broadcast something I don't like, I'll freeze you out. I'll make it harder for you to do your job.

It was bad enough when candidate Trump temporarily yanked campaign media credentials from The Washington Post, Politico, Mother Jones, the Daily Beast and other outlets in little fits of pique over stories he thought were unfair, and when he had security guards eject Univision anchor Jorge Ramos for being too persistent at a news conference.

But now that he is on the verge of becoming our president, Trump's petulance has become ominous. And journalists, as one, must stand up to him just as, in 2010, White House reporters stood with a Fox News correspondent to force the Obama administration to allow the correspondent equal interview access to an official.

I know, I know. Trump's supporters delight in his media bashing, and many of the rest of you think those of us in the Fourth Estate are too pushy, impertinent, biased and self-important. You're delighted by how Trump handled his set-to with Acosta and nodding at the demands from various Republicans that Acosta apologize or be fired.

But you know what? Whatever flaws individual journalists may have, you need them, collectively, to do their jobs without worrying whom they offend. We all depend on their right to be rude to those in power — to be pushy, impertinent, even wrong, at times. The more that fear corrupts their need for access, the less accountable our government becomes. The more they fear being blacklisted, the less they are able to hold our government accountable.

Reporters are competitive. Six more of them asked questions of Trump before the news conference came to an end, and not one deferred to Acosta or referred to how Trump brushed him off.

It was predictable. It was Trump being Trump.

What was disappointing, to the point of being frightening, was the craven, enabling response of the would-be guardians of our right to know.

When they don't have one another's backs, they don't have our backs either.

Sign of the times

Drivers on the inbound Kennedy Expressway near Belmont Avenue might have noticed in recent weeks a new, luminous yet intriguingly blank directional sign over the left lane of traffic. And if they're like me, they've wondered, what's the deal with that?

Well, it's the first of 15 similar LED signs that the Illinois Department of Transportation will be installing at a cost of $6 million to alert drivers to the status of the Kennedy's reversible lanes. The existing, conventionally lit mechanical signs "are aging and having mechanical issues," said IDOT spokeswoman Gianna Urgo.