Family of Cameo shooting victim prepares to sue
Buy Photo The family of O'Bryan Spikes, who was killed in the March 26 Cameo nightclub shooting, asked the public for information as they prepare to sue involved parties (Photo: The Enquirer/Sarah Brookbank)Buy Photo

The family of one of the Cameo shootout victims is preparing to litigate in the wake of the deadliest mass shooting in Cincinnati history.

O'Bryan Spikes, nicknamed "Lucky," was shot and killed in the early morning hours of Sunday, March 26, at the Cameo nightclub.

At Eden Park on Tuesday, the family for the 27-year-old father of three, along with attorneys Christoper P. Finney and Bradley M. Gibson of the Finney Law Firm, announced they would be taking legal action. In a statement, the family listed the shooters, the club operator, the landlord and the Cincinnati Police Department among those potentially being targeted in lawsuits.

"Mosty importantly, we want to help others to avoid being in the situation we find ourselves in – having buried a loved one from a senseless tragedy," the family said in a statement announcing the news conference.

"There remain many unanswered questions, questionable procedures and many other facts to the story that have not been shared." pic.twitter.com/2NwXLUZald — Sarah Brookbank (@SarahBrookbank) April 18, 2017

Raquel Mitchell and Owen Spikes, the mother and father of O'Bryan Spikes, also requested information from the public about the shooting.

"Today, we seek and desire what any family would want for such a tragic loss of their loved one - we want all those responsible for his death to be held accountable: all shooters, club owners, and the Cincinnati Police Department - criminally and civilly," Raquice Mitchell, Spike's oldest sister said.

Finney said the security at the club was not enough and that the club operator, Julian Rodgers, and law enforcement should be held accountable.

"This was not something that was just, somebody (who) slipped in or happenstance," Finney said. "We think this was a regular pattern and practice of the security force, that they allowed certain people to go in with guns and weapons and contraband."

Rodgers did not immediate respond to requests to comment.

While the firm is still investigating the shooting, Finney said Rodgers has been a problem for many years. Rodgers surrendered the club's liquor license after the shooting but still operates OTR Live on 12th Street.

Cornell Beckley, 27, has been charged with murder and police are looking for at least one more shooter. Deondre Davis, 29, would have been charged in the shooting, but following his death from injuries sustained at the nightclub, all charges against him were dropped.

The trial date is set for May 30 for Beckley. He faces up to 230 years in prison if convicted on all charges, which include murder, felonious assault, inducing panic and weapons offenses.

At the funeral, Spikes was remembered as a family man, loving his children, his family and his friends. "He had high spirits, hopes, and dreams and he loved everyone," his family wrote in his obituary. "Anyone that crossed Lucky's path, he made them laugh and feel good."

"We all deserve to know how the perpetrators of this crime were able to bring weapons into a club that apparently had metal detectors and other security measures in place intended to prevent this very thing from happening," the family added in a statement. "We want to understand the interactions of the Cincinnati Police Department in the security procedures leading up to the event and the night of the incident."

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/2oSkUoZ