Answer Man: Nectar Lounge fate, Nutz R Us mental health
The former Northside Grill will host a new yoga studio, slated to open Feb. 28, as well as a restaurant downstairs called Nectar. (Photo: Citizen-Times file photo)

Today's batch of burning questions, my smart-aleck answers and the real deal:

Question: What ever happened to the Nectar Lounge where Northside Grill used to be? There was so much hype, that it was going to open in August or September and there'd be a yoga studio, etc., upstairs. The website listed in the C-T article doesn't exist, and their Facebook page postings stopped in August. Just wondering. Healthy food on the north side is a good thing.

My answer: Seriously, can you get more Asheville than a combo yoga studio/nectar lounge? I wonder if it would've been a hookah-style setup, with folks literally sipping nectar from huge, suspended vases from the ceilings.

Real answer: Indeed, plans have changed.

"OK, so Centerpoint Discovery and Nectar Lounge never happened," Jaime Hadnagy, who was slated to be general manager of the business, told me via email. " I left the project in the end of August, and soon after that, the project ended. Since then, there has been a shift in ownership. Also, the concept has changed slightly."

Hadnagy said she's working on the launch of Veda Studios in the upstairs, and the opening is slated for Feb. 28, "and there will be free classes all day. Yay!"

"Veda Studios is a movement studio offering yoga, dance and martial arts," Hadnagy said. "As far as the downstairs, the restaurant is now being called Nectar. It is opening in the next few months and is a sister business to Veda Studios. The menu will still include raw food and juice, but they decided to add a dinner menu, which is farm-to-table Chinese food. There is a better energy now, and it is exciting that things are moving and more importantly there is an opening date!!"

I could feel the energy through the computer screen. Good luck!

Question: So, this inquiry comes from a psychiatrist at Broughton Hospital in Morganton, Dr. Suzannah McCuen, who a few weeks back sent us a letter questioning the name choice of a local company. "I learned today that a company in the Buncombe County area whose business it is to provide care facilities for the mentally ill is called Nutz R Us," McCuen said. "I found that hard to believe and so Googled them and called one of their homes, White Fawn. The woman who answered the phone verified that Nutz R Us is the corporate name. She seemed to think that using a "z" in the spelling mitigated the harm, I suppose, as she pointed that out to me. An online search reveals this company runs several homes in the area. While I am grateful that this company is providing homes for the mentally ill, I find their choice of a company name offensive, to say the least. I am hopeful that some public exposure will convince them to change the company name while still endeavoring to provide much needed services and homes for the mentally ill in Western North Carolina."

My answer: I attempted a similar softening of an inappropriate phrase one time with one of my editors. Let me tell you, it didn't fly.

Real answer: I didn't have much more luck than the good doctor in getting hold of someone with the company.

I left multiple messages in January and last week with the administrator and at the White Fawn home, and I've not heard anything back.

I don't think McCuen is going to let this go. She's alerted a patient advocacy organization and the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill.

Businesses often use colorful parent company names — I know one or two that would not be appropriate for a family newspaper. But this one does seem a bit tin-eared for a mental health provider.

We'll keep you posted.

Loading...

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1DvWQIe