Brandon band reportedly not allowed to perform Christian hymn
CLOSE

Brandon High School (Photo: Rankin County School District)

The Brandon High School band will not be performing the Christian hymn "How Great Thou Art" as part of its football game halftime show because of a pending federal lawsuit, the band director said in an email to students.

"When I picked the halftime show in late February of last year it was with full administrative support, but the Rankin County School Board has decided that we are not allowed to perform the half time show due to recent court rulings," an email from band director Tim Cagle stated.

School Board president Ann Sturdivant said because of the court order, the board "had no choice" but to make the decision it did.

In 2013, a Northwest Rankin High School student sued the district and then-Principal Charles Frazier over a series of Christian assemblies held at the school. The district agreed it had violated the student's First Amendment rights and settled the lawsuit by entering into an agreement and paying the plaintiff's attorney fees.

However, in July of this year, U.S. District Court Judge Carlton Reeves ruled that the district was in violation of the agreement when it held an awards ceremony where a Christian reverend delivered a prayer and again when it assisted Gideons in distributing Bibles at an elementary school. Both events took place in 2014.









In a statement Friday evening, the Rankin County School District said, "A Federal Court Order was recently issued to the Rankin County School District.

"The order states: 'Defendants are permanently enjoined from including prayer, religious sermons or activities in any school sponsored event including but not limited to assemblies, graduations, award ceremonies, athletic events and any other school event. That means administrators, teachers and staff of the Rankin County School District may not participate in any religious activity, or solicit or encourage religious activities at school or while performing duties as a RCSD employee.'<TH>"

The judge ordered the district pay the plaintiff $7,500 for the violations, in addition to attorneys' fees and costs. It also stated the district will pay a $10,000 fine per violation if it violates the agreement in the future.

"If we were to perform this show, taking a chance of how it would be perceived by others, and the court deems it is in violation of previous rulings, not only would the Rankin County School District face harsh fines, but also RCSD would be forced to terminate the employment of anyone associated with the decision to perform the show," the email from Cagle continued.

"The Rankin County School Board and District Office are very saddened students will not be able to perform their halftime show they have worked so hard on this summer," the statement from the district said.

Brandon High School played is playing Ocean Springs on Friday night at home, according to the school's website.

Cagle said band teachers are working on a new show that will use "elements of what the students have already learned."

Contact Kate Royals at (601) 360-4619 or kroyals@gannett.com. Follow @KRRoyals on Twitter.





Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1EaD2h0