Nan Rich rips Charlie Crist’s Democratic credentials, but says she’ll support him if he wins primary
View Caption Hide Caption Nan Rich speaks at Florida Press Association/Florida Society of News Editors convention this morning.

CORAL GABLES — Denied a chance to share a stage with Democratic primary rival Charlie Crist, former state Sen. Nan Rich ripped Crist’s credentials as a Democrat this morning, likening the former Republican governor to “an apparition who has no solid substance” and saying his changes on issues can’t be trusted.

Rich spoke to the Florida Press Association/Florida Society of News Editors convention a day after Crist addressed the same group. She accused Crist of hurting education, the environment and growth management and appointing conservative Florida Supreme Court justices while he was the state’s Republican governor.

She also said Crist’s refusal to debate her was “almost like a voter suppression.”

But Rich said unequivocally that she’ll support Crist if he wins the Aug. 26 Democratic primary to challenge Republican Gov. Rick Scott.

“I am a Democrat and I believe that the Democratic nominee of our party, despite the fact that I don’t like the way I’ve been treated, I will be supporting the Democratic nominee,” Rich said in response to a panelist’s question.

Rich has trailed Crist in polls and fundraising and has been rebuffed in her efforts to get Crist to debate her or share a stage with her at the FPA/FSNE gathering. Crist said Thursday that he won’t debate Rich because he needs to be “laser- focused” on defeating Scott in November.

“I’m sure you know I would have preferred to be here yesterday,” Rich said at the beginning of her remarks this morning.

She compared Crist, who left the GOP in 2010 and became a Democrat in 2012, to the ghostly “man who wasn’t there” in the 1899 poem Antigonish by Hughes Mearns.

“We need to make sure that we don’t have two Republicans running in the gubernatorial election,” Rich said.

A day after Crist say he believed his four Florida Supreme Court appointees were “doing a pretty darn good job,” Rich criticized Crist’s appointments of conservatives Ricky Polston and Charles Canady. She compared the two to conservative U.S. Supreme Court Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas and clearly did not mean it as a compliment.

“I don’t believe the people out there think that you can change 180 degrees on every single major issue and have people believe that and trust that,” Rich said.