Cleveland police union head threatens to pull cops from Browns games over Isaiah Crowell's Instagram post
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Cleveland's police union president is threatening to tell his officers not to work security at Cleveland Browns games if running back Isaiah Crowell doesn't take his apology over a social media post depicting the death of a police officer further.

The comments from Cleveland Police Patrolmen's Association President Steve Loomis come the same day Crowell apologized by phone to Cleveland Police Chief Calvin Williams, and a day after he issued a written apology for the image, which he posted Thursday on Instagram and quickly deleted.

The image showed a hooded figure cutting the throat of a handcuffed police officer. Crowell posted it Thursday after videos of police killings of black men in Louisiana and Minnesota. It was deleted before the sniper attack that left five Dallas police officers dead.

Crowell said in a written apology that the post was "an extremely poor decision" he made in the midst of emotions of outrage over the killings of Alton Sterling and Philandro Castile.

Williams, who said he spoke to Crowell Tuesday morning, accepted the apology and said he found Crowell to be "very contrite."

Loomis, on the other hand, said Tuesday that Crowell's written apology was not enough.

"If that man needs to make this right, he needs to make a grand gesture," Loomis said.

He called for Crowell to apologize in person to the family of police officers killed in Dallas and donate to their families.

If Crowell does not do that, then Loomis called on the Browns organization or the NFL to sanction Crowell.

If none of that happens, Loomis said he will resort to rallying his officers to refuse to work security for the Browns by adopting an "official union policy" not to work security for the team.

"If the Browns don't think I can get this done, I've got some swamp land in Florida to sell them," Loomis said.

The Browns on late Monday issued a statement of their own, calling a written apology for Crowell's post "insufficient."

"We have spoken to Isaiah regarding his extremely disturbing and unacceptable social media decision,'' the Browns said. "It was completely inappropriate and we have made him aware of our high level of disappointment. Isaiah has apologized but also knows that just an apology is insufficient and that he must take steps to make a positive difference after a very negative and impactful post.''

The Browns were not immediately available for comment Tuesday.

Previous: Browns call Crowell's apology 'insufficient'

The Browns, as well as Cleveland Cavaliers and Cleveland Indians, hire off-duty police officers as security at home games. The officers must get their assignments approved through the department's command staff, and be chosen by the Browns' head of security for the job.

Cleveland police department spokeswoman Sgt. Jennifer Ciaccia said Loomis cannot pull officers off the assignments, but she acknowledged that he could have influence over his union's members to protest private security details at Browns games.

Loomis acknowledged he has no power to force them -- despite earlier comments he made to the gossip website TMZ Sports -- but he said he has spoken with his officers and leaders of other police unions to garner support.

"We support this team year after year when they continue to suck," he said. "We expect them to support us."

Loomis has defended police officers in the past for controversial social media posts, arguing that the department's social media policy violates officers' free speech rights.

Previous: Officer under fire for social media posts

In July 2015, the Council on American-Islamic Relations criticized several anti-Islamic tweets posted by an officer who was promoted to a supervisor position.

"We support the First Amendment rights of every American," Loomis told cleveland.com at the time.

On Tuesday, Loomis denied that his calls for Crowell to face punishment were contradictory to his previous stances.

"I'm not saying he violated anybody's civil rights," Loomis said. "I'm saying he violated his responsibility, just as we have responsibility as civil servants to be role models, so does he, and that's what he violated."