Former Rep. Dennis Kucinich again meets with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad
WASHINGTON, D. C. - Former Cleveland congressman Dennis Kucinich met with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad this week on a trip to the war-torn land with Hawaii Democratic Rep. Tulsi Gabbard that was funded by a Cleveland organization.

Kucinich - who met with Assad before as a member of Congress and as a Fox News interviewer yesterday told Fox that Assad is trying to keep a pluralistic society alive, and withstand "93 different groups coming in from 100 different countries to capsize Syria.

"They're blowing up churches and mosques and making it impossible for a culture to be able to come together again," he continued. "It goes far beyond what anyone thought it was in 2011. Jihadists are using Syria as a platform to train their troops. And where will they export the next violence to, this is something America has to be concerned about."

When Fox's Tucker Carlson asked Kucinich how he could justify meeting with a leader who is widely considered a "war criminal" because of the deaths caused by his regime, he replied:

"Here is the choice: You can let ISIS set up camp in Damscus and use it to change the entire region, which means destruction of Christians and Muslims who are of another sect and also the concomitant effect on Israel that is inevitable if that happens, or you can try to stabilize the region and let the people of Syria make their own decisions about who their leaders are going to be."

A statement from Gabbard said the group visited Damascus, Aleppo, and Beirut "to see and hear firsthand the impact of the war in Syria directly from the Syrian people." In addition to Assad, the group met with refugees, Syrian opposition leaders who led protests in 2011, widows and family members of Syrians fighting alongside groups like al-Qaeda, as well as those fighting on the side of the government.

Congresswoman Tulsi Gabbard Returns From Syria with Renewed Calls: End Regime Change War in Syria Now https://t.co/F6kiSzWOGB pic.twitter.com/IxlYLPPnYi -- Rep. Tulsi Gabbard (@TulsiPress) January 25, 2017

"Originally, I had no intention of meeting with Assad, but when given the opportunity, I felt it was important to take it," said her statement, which called on the United States to stop supporting terrorists in Syria. "I think we should be ready to meet with anyone if there's a chance it can help bring about an end to this war, which is causing the Syrian people so much suffering.

The trip was funded by the Arab American Community Center for Economic and Social Services, a Cleveland-based nonprofit organization. Spokesmen for the group were not immediately available for comment. The organization also funded a 2007 trip to Syria where Kucinich met with Assad.