Rabbit Hash mayor-elect preaches peace and love
CLOSE Brynn, a pit bull, will take over as mayor of Rabbit Hash, Kentucky, in February 2017. Videolicious

Buy Photo Brynn, a 2-year-old pit bull, will be the fourth canine mayor of Rabbit Hash, Kentucky, after a landslide victory. Votes cost $1. (Photo: Sarah Brookbank/The Community Recorder)Buy Photo Story Highlights Brynn, a 2-year-old pit bull, won the Rabbit Hash election by more than 1,000 votes.

The election raised nearly $9,000 for the Rabbit Hash Historical Society.

Cincinnati Councilman Chris Seelbach, sent Brynn a letter congratulating the dog on her election.



RABBIT HASH – With barks and tail-wagging aplenty, the fourth canine mayor of Rabbit Hash surveys the city she will soon take charge of.

In a landslide victory Brynn was chosen to guard the steps of the General Store. The 2-year-old pit bull won the election by more than 1,000 votes.

Brynn will govern Rabbit Hash, a quaint historical district nestled on the shores of the Ohio River. She will take office after the “i-dog-uration” in February 2017, a year after a fire destroyed most of the Rabbit Hash General Store.

She faced steep competition from a slew of other dogs, Higgins the donkey, Bossy the chicken and Stella the cat to win the election. The election is actually a fundraiser for the Rabbit Hash Historical Society. Votes cost $1 each.

Jordie Bamforth adopted Brynn when she was 8 weeks old from a local rescue. Bamforth, 23, is studying to be a veterinary technician and works at the Verona Vineyards location in Rabbit Hash.

“The reason I decided to get a pit bull was to get a better name out there for the breed,” Bamforth said. “It’s been our mission since she was a puppy.”

As a candidate, Brynn’s mission was to bring peace, love and understanding to Rabbit Hash because she knows what it is like to be discriminated against.

“Brynn has declared to be peaceful with any human or animal that comes through Rabbit Hash, especially the cats. Brynn does like to chase the cats around here, but has pledged to refrain from it as much as possible,” Bamforth said.

Brynn lives with her brother Jack, a Pomeranian mix, two cats, a ferret and two other dogs.

Bamforth said the love part of Brynn’s platform is advocacy for another important animal cause. With love comes babies, and Brynn wants to advocate for spaying and neutering pets and adoption.

“Third in her platform is understanding. As a pit bull Brynn, understands being misunderstood,” Bamforth said. “But in Rabbit Hash you’ll find people of all ages running around and coexisting, and animals too. Brynn respects everybody.”

On Nov. 15, while surveying the progress on the Rabbit Hash General Store, Mayor-elect Brynn received a letter from Cincinnati Councilman Chris Seelbach congratulating her on her election.

Money raised by the election benefits the General Store fund

Bobbi Kayser, secretary of the Rabbit Hash Historical Society and mom of current Mayor Lucy Lou, said the election raised more than $8,900 for the historical society.

“The money will go toward the restoration of the Rabbit Hash General Store. Although we are so blessed to have had so many corporate donations and benefits in our name, we still have not reached the original estimated goal to complete the project,” Kayser said.

The General Store is looking nearly perfect, but that comes at a cost of nearly $400,000. The store should be open by September 2017.

“(Lucy Lou) is proud of Brynn and her efforts to promote Rabbit Hash as a peaceful and loving environment and believes Brynn is fully capable of sinking her teeth into this job,” Kayser said.

Kayser said Lucy Lou spent most of election night sniffing Brynn’s butt, a common way of showing or gaining approval in Rabbit Hash elections.

“Lucy Lou’s advise for Mayor Brynn would be not to bite, stay fully vetted, and although it is acceptable to take a bone or two from the general public on occasion, not to make a habit of it. They play hell with a girl’s figure,” Kayser said.

Get to know your Mayor

Brynn Bamfort

Age: 2, will turn 3 in March

Breed: Pit Bull

Likes: tennis balls, children as long as they don’t pull on her tail, her mom, Red River Gorge and Rabbit Hash.

Dislikes: water, grumpy old men and leashes because they make it harder for her to monitor Rabbit Hash.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/2fZDzsZ