Heartless Felons' threat against white police officers unsubstantiated, investigators say
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Rumblings of a threat from Northeast Ohio's Heartless Felons gang ordering its members to target white police officers in retaliation for officer-involved shootings of black people have been deemed not credible by detectives.

The rumors were sparked through a screen-grab of an email circulated through social media, officials said.

The email reads: "Information was obtained via the [Cuyahoga County Sheriff's Office] that the Heartless Felon Gang has issued an order to kill any white police officer in retaliation for recent current event incidents (Ferguson and CPD 12 year old BB gun shooting.)"

John O'Brien, spokesman for the Cuyahoga County Sheriff's Office, said while the sheriff's office did reach out to some local law enforcement informing them of a potential threat, detectives deemed the threat was not credible and no official memo was sent out.

Det. Robert Weis at the Cuyahoga Metropolitan Housing Authority Police Department caught wind of the email around Thanksgiving Day. He said his detectives worked with the sheriff's office, the Cleveland Division of Police and the FBI but were not able to identify the sender, whose name is cut off in the screen-grab. Investigators deemed the threat was not credible.

Despite this, the email quickly spread through Facebook, Weis said.

The message warned officers to use extra caution on duty and avoid patrolling traffic alone.

It also advised officers to monitor their local city halls in light of the Dec. 10 Parma Heights City Hall fire. Officials have said the suspect might have been motivated by the Ferguson demonstrations.

Some departments took extra precautions in light of the rumor. Solon police posted this notice in their department to warn officers of the threat.

Akron Police Chief James Nice has said he was notified of the threat through a police bulletin and decided to staff patrol cars with two officers instead of one.

"We just want our officers to be on heightened alert," Nice said. "We need to remain tactically alert of surroundings when a threat like that is made. This gang is absolutely violent. It's not a threat with no substance."

Weis also investigated reports that gang members were going to create a disturbance during Sunday's protests where demonstrators from Ferguson, Missouri joined Cleveland activists protesting police brutality.

Those demonstrations went on peacefully with no arrests.