Florida Rep. Murphy favors extending payroll tax to incomes above $117,000 as part of Social Security fix
View Caption Hide Caption Reps. Alcee Hastings, Patrick Murphy and Ted Deutch at Social Security event Tuesday.

Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Jupiter, says he’s in favor of extending the Social Security payroll tax to incomes above $117,000 if it’s part of a long-term, bipartisan fix for the program.

Murphy, a freshman Democrat in a Republican-leaning district, says many of his Republican colleagues privately favor the idea but won’t say so publicly.

Murphy appeared in West Palm Beach with fellow Democratic Reps. Alcee Hastings and Ted Deutch at a Tuesday event sponsored by the National Committee to Preserve Social Security and Medicare to mark the 79th anniversary of the federal retirement program.

As it’s currently structured, Social Security will only be able to pay 77 percent of promised benefits after 2033, according to the latest projections by the program’s trustees. That’s when today’s 48-year-olds will reach retirement age.

Employees and employers each pay a 6.2 percent tax on income up to $117,000 for Social Security. Income above $117,000 is not subject to the Social Security tax. Deutch has sponsored legislation, which Hastings has co-sponsored, to phase out the cap and eventually make all income subject to the Social Security payroll tax.

Murphy said in an interview that he supports raising the cap by some amount if it is part of a bipartisan agreement to bolster Social Security’s solvency. Murphy said he has not committed to a specific income level, but used $150,000 as an example.

“If you’re going to be honest about addressing Social Security you have to, I think, take a broad approach to it and look at all options. That is the easiest option, raising that cap to a larger number,” Murphy said. He described raising the cap as “part of a solution…It’s got to be bipartisan, you need both sides chipping in.”

“That’s the number one easiest one to start with and that’s the one that’s discussed most in Congress. It’s toughest because no one wants to say that they’re for raising taxes,” Murphy said.

“You’ve got to be a realist sometimes in life and look at the math and look at the numbers. There are other solutions that are out there but this is the one that makes the most sense because there is a cap on it. And if that small percentage of people that make over $117,000 a year paid up to, say, 150, it wouldn’t be that big of a difference on their everyday life. It would help to secure Social Security for years and years.”

Asked about Republican proposals to eventually raise the retirement age, Murphy said, “That’s part of a longer discussion and something that some of my Republican colleagues have put forward, but again it’s part of a bigger debate and this is where I would start, with raising that cap…I want to get to a real consensus here. There’s a lot of people, a lot of my Republican colleagues that say off the record, ‘Heck yeah, I want to raise the cap.’ But they don’t have the guts to say it.”