Supporters urge Derrick to endorse 'single payer' health care system
QUEENSBURY  The Greater Glens Falls Democracy for America chapter unanimously endorsed Democratic congressional candidate Mike Derrick on Wednesday evening, despite a tense discussion about health care.

Derrick, responding to a question about opening the federal Medicare program to everyone, said he was still studying the topic.

“You need to get educated on that,” chided Bob Rockwell, a member of the local chapter.

Medicare is a federal health insurance program for the elderly and disabled.

“I spent 20 years in the Army and we had, in essence, a single-payer program. So I’m familiar with that,” said Derrick, a retired Army colonel from Peru who is seeking the Democratic nomination to challenge U.S. Rep. Elise Stefanik, R-Willsboro, in 2016.

In a single-payer system, one entity covers all the payments instead of the costs being paid by multiple insurance companies or individuals.

Supporters of the concept say it reduces costs and streamlines the process, but opponents say it eliminates competition and individual control of care.

“It works very well (in the military). When you’re talking about readiness of soldiers, the last thing you need is for them to be concerned about their own health, their own welfare,” Derrick said. “I mean, we didn’t get it right all the time. The VA is a good example of that.”

“Whether or not we should move to a single-payer program in this country right now, I’m not ready to come out on that yet. I just don’t know enough about it,” he said.

Patrick Nelson, a Democratic strategist from Saratoga County, said Matt Funiciello, the Green Party congressional candidate in 2014, made a strong case for single-payer health care.

“Let me say first I admire your courage as a political candidate to say, ‘I don’t know yet,’ ” he prefaced his comment.

Funiciello has said he intends to run again in 2016.

Stefanik said during the 2014 campaign she would not rule out opening Medicare to everyone in the context of “modernizing Medicare.”

Queensbury Democratic Co-Chairman Mike Parwana told about his brother who did not have health insurance.

“I had a brother who died at 30 years and 12 days old. And among his final words were, ‘How much will this cost?’ ” he said.

“It’s a good point, and that’s the poignancy that makes what we are all interested in and what I am trying to do,” Derrick responded.

The group of about 25 people applauded other positions Derrick took, such as his opposition to the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement, support for the Iran nuclear agreement and support for continued federal funding for Planned Parenthood.

“I support Planned Parenthood,” he said.

Members of the audience commented that Stefanik voted to prohibit federal funding for Planned Parenthood, although she did vote against separate legislation that would have allowed states to deny Medicaid funding for organizations that provide abortions.

Stefanik co-sponsored legislation to reject the Iran nuclear agreement, and has said she supports the Trans-Pacific Partnership in concept.

The roughly hourlong question-and-answer session at Uno Pizzeria on Route 9 in Queensbury was one of Derrick’s first public appearances in the Glens Falls area.

He spoke at the Washington County Democratic Picnic this summer and has spoken privately to Democratic committees and party leaders.

The largest applause came when Derrick spoke about five years he took off from the military in the late 1990s to care for his children so his wife, who also was an Army officer, could remain on active duty.

“I look back on it, and it seemed like I was the only guy in the mom’s group,” he said.

“I think that’s a very important talking point,” said Bernice Mennis, a Democracy for America member.