’90s Kids Rejoice! The Spider Eggs They Used To Fill Beanie Babies Are Finally Hatching!
If you were obsessed with Beanie Babies in the ’90s, get ready to fall in love all over again, because the spider eggs they used to fill your favorite Beanies are beginning to hatch! Collectors all over the country have been reporting that the long-awaited day has finally arrived, with brown recluse spiderlings bursting through the seams of Beanies everywhere!

Awesome!

For nearly two decades now, your Beanie Babies have served as protective sacs for the spider eggs they harbor, providing a warm, dark atmosphere for the arthropods to pass through their larval stages. Manufacturer Ty Inc confirmed that each Beanie is stuffed with approximately 6,000 spider eggs, though unless you’ve been storing them in a secure, low-humidity environment, you should realistically only expect between 800 to 1,000 spiders to spawn through your Beanies’ fabric.

Aren’t sure if your Beanie Baby has released its spiders yet? Well, you’ll know your Beanies’ fur is about to tear open when you see hundreds of spider forelegs start piercing through the fabric in an effort to escape. You might even notice little Pugsly or Bongo lurching forward, inch by inch, as the spiders collectively attempt to break free from their snuggly resting place. Awwwww!

Eventually, the spiders will dislodge your Beanies’ eyes and begin cascading from your furry buddy’s face, spreading the fun to every dark corner and crevice of your home. Once they’re freed, don’t be surprised if a few of the larger female spiders eat some of the smaller males to assert their dominance, as this is perfectly natural—and soooooo cute!

If the eggs in your Beanies haven’t hatched yet, don’t worry. Hatchlings have only been reported for Beanies from the original product line, meaning unless you’ve got a Squealer, Patti, Splash, Pinchers, Chocolate, or Cubbie in your collection, you still might have a while to wait. And don’t get your hopes up if you own any of the Teenie Beanies that came with Happy Meals, because, sadly, these were filled with plastic beads and only 100 or so spider eggs.