Democrat Alan Grayson’s TV ad edits Patrick Murphy answer on Social Security
View Caption Hide Caption An edited clip of a CNN interview with Rep. Patrick Murphy appears in a new ad by Murphy's Democratic Senate primary rival, Rep. Alan Grayson.

A new ad by Rep. Alan Grayson accuses his Democratic Senate primary rival, Rep. Patrick Murphy, of advocating cuts to Social Security and Medicare — with Murphy’s own mouth seeming to utter what amounts to heresy in a Democratic primary.

But Grayson — whose 2010 “Taliban Dan” ad is considered a textbook example of unfairly twisting an opponent’s words for a TV spot — created the Murphy sound bite by splicing together two segments of a 2013 CNN interview.

Interviewed about the federal budget the day before he was sworn in as a House member, Murphy’s original words were: “Unfortunately, we have to look at cuts across the board. We’re going to have to look at defense. We’re going to have to look at some structural changes to some programs like Social Security and Medicare.”

As edited for the Grayson ad, Murphy says: “We have to look at cuts across the board, uhh, to some programs like Social Security and Medicare.”

Murphy’s call for “structural changes” was not a reference to cuts but to raising the amount of income subject to the Social Security payroll tax, his chief of staff and political strategist, Eric Johnson, said last year when critics used the CNN clip to accuse Murphy of advocating cuts.

Grayson campaign spokesman David Damron defended the ad and the way Murphy’s words were edited.

“Within the fuller context of the interview, this is a completely fair edit,” Damron said.

In the original CNN interview, after Murphy’s answer about “structural changes,” Ashleigh Banfield pressed him on “where you think we can actually make some painful cuts. Because you know very strictly what Democrats feel and you’re one of them, so where are you going to show some leadership?”

Murphy’s reply: “Well, I just said it. We’re going to have to make some structural changes to programs such as Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid. We’re going to have to make sure they’re sustainable for years to come. Our president put that on the table about a year ago when this whole process began with the sequestration. It’s going to have to be across the board. We have to look at all programs. We have to look at revenues and we have to look at some expenses that we have to cut. This is math. It shouldn’t be partisan politics. It comes down to math.”

Based on that follow-up, Damron said, it’s fair to conclude “structural changes” are synonymous with cuts “especially since she (Banfield) pins him down at one point specifically asking for cuts and he give the same answer that he did before about structural changes to Social Security and Medicare.”