Virginia Tech shootings timeline
Adjust font size:

BLACKSBURG, Virginia (CNN) -- At least 33 people, including a gunman, were killed Monday during shootings in a dorm and a classroom building at Virginia Tech, university officials said. Here is a timeline of the events of the morning, according to university officials and eyewitness accounts.

7:15 a.m. -- Shootings at West Ambler Johnston Hall

Police receive a 911 call about a shooting at West Ambler Johnston Hall dormitory. Virginia Tech and Blacksburg police secure the building and begin questioning residents.

• At least two people killed, a male and female

• Multiple people injured

• Dorm houses up to 895 residents

7:30-9 a.m. -- Police, university leadership assess situation

• University and Blacksburg police search for a "person of interest"

• University officials meet to discuss situation and determine how to notify students

• Police brief school officials on status of residence hall shooting

9:26 a.m. -- Campus e-mail urges caution

Virginia Tech notifies students, faculty and staff of the shootings via e-mail:

-----Original Message-----

Subject: Shooting on campus.

A shooting incident occurred at West Amber Johnston earlier this morning.

Police are on the scene and are investigating.

The university community is urged to be cautious and are asked to contact Virginia Tech Police if you observe anything suspicious or with information on the case. Contact Virginia Tech Police at 231-6411

Stay attuned to the www.vt.edu. We will post as soon as we have more information.

9:45 a.m. -- Shootings at Norris Hall

Caller to 911 reports more shootings across campus at Norris Hall. Arriving officers breach doors chained from the inside. Officers follow sounds of gunfire to the second floor, where they find the gunman has taken his life.

• At least 31 killed; multiple people injured

• Victims found in at least four classrooms and a stairwell, according to Virginia State Police

• Building houses engineering department offices, classrooms

9:50 a.m. -- Campus e-mail advises all to stay inside

The university sends out another e-mail warning:

-----Original Message-----

Subject: PLease stay put

A gunman is loose on campus. Stay in buildings until further notice.

Stay away from all windows

9:55 a.m. -- Officials send message about second shooting

The university says it notifies students of the Norris Hall shootings via e-mail and emergency messages sent to campus phones.

10:16 a.m. -- Campus e-mail announces classes canceled

-----Original Message-----

Subject: All Classes Canceled; Stay where you are

Virginia Tech has canceled all classes. Those on campus are asked to remain where there are, lock their doors and stay away from windows.

Persons off campus are asked not to come to campus.

10:53 a.m. -- Students receive e-mail about Norris Hall shooting

-----Original Message-----

Subject: Second Shooting Reported; Police have one gunman in custody

In addition to an earlier shooting today in West Ambler Johnston, there has been a multiple shooting with multiple victims in Norris Hall.

Police and EMS are on the scene.

Police have one shooter in custody and as part of routine police procedure, they continue to search for a second shooter.

All people in university buildings are required to stay inside until further notice.

All entrances to campus are closed.

12:42 p.m. -- University president releases statement

In a statement released to the campus, Virginia Tech President Charles Steger announces that police are releasing people from campus buildings and that counseling centers are being set up. Steger says the campus will reopen at 8 a.m. Tuesday but classes will be canceled.