Donald Trump accusations fly between Democrats Patrick Murphy and Alan Grayson
View Caption Hide Caption

U.S. Reps. Patrick Murphy and Alan Grayson — bitter rivals for Florida’s Democratic U.S. Senate nomination — are trying to tar each other with Donald Trump.

Murphy’s campaign on Thursday said Orlando congressman Grayson and part-time Palm Beacher Trump “both have a record of outright disrespect” toward women. Grayson’s campaign shot back that Jupiter congressman Murphy has personally benefitted from Trump because his family’s business, Coastal Construction, built luxury highrises that bear the billionaire’s name.

The Murphy camp highlighted Grayson’s 2009 description of a female lobbyist as a “K Street whore” (for which Grayson apologized) and his 1994 work as a lawyer aggressively defending a company that tried to “unhire” a woman after learning she was pregnant.

“Although reckless and risky candidates like Donald Trump and Alan Grayson may try to mislead Floridians, the truth is clear: Florida women deserve better than Alan Grayson and Donald Trump,” said Murphy campaign spokeswoman Galia Slayen. “While they have a lot in common when it comes to the way they treat women, the biggest difference between Alan Grayson and Donald Trump is that unlike Florida Republicans, Florida Democrats are rejecting Grayson.”

Ten minutes after the Murphy release, Grayson’s campaign assailed “The Trump-Murphy Partnership” and pointed to the Trump Royale in Sunny Isles and the Trump Hollywood in Hollywood, both condo towers that were built by Coastal Construction. Coastal CEO Thomas Murphy is Patrick Murphy’s father and Patrick Murphy was a vice president with the company before he was elected to Congress in 2012.

Thomas Murphy told PostOnPolitics.com that Trump wasn’t the developer or an investor for either project and Coastal has never had any business relationship with Trump. Coastal was hired by The Related Companies to build Trump Hollywood and by Dezer Development to build Trump Royale, the elder Murphy said. The developers paid Trump a licensing fee to use his name on the buildings, but Trump did not have any ownership stake in either of them, Murphy said.

Grayson, through his campaign, said: “No other politician in Florida – Democrat or Republican – has gained more financially than Patrick Murphy and his family has from doing business with Donald Trump. Patrick’s construction company still brags about its work to deliver Trump Royale and Trump Hollywood. Thanks in part to those deals, Patrick sits on millions of dollars in company stock that his daddy gave him, and Donald has parlayed those and other real estate deals into a Republican presidential nomination.”

Murphy and Grayson, along with Democrat Pam Keith and five Republicans, are running for the seat that Sen. Marco Rubio is giving up after pursuing his unsuccessful presidential bid.