Man suspected of killing Asst. Chief Deputy Clint Greenwood commits suicide, police say
BAYTOWN, Texas - The man suspected in the shooting death of Assistant Chief Deputy Clint Greenwood took his own life, authorities announced Monday.

Baytown police said William Francis Kenny, 64, was the prime suspect in the case. Police said he shot himself in the head outside Ben Taub Hospital on April 4.

“Investigators also learned that the weapon Mr. Kenny used to take his own life is consistent with the weapon that was used in the murder of Assistant Chief Deputy Clint Greenwood,” Lt. Steve Dorris said.

Police tracked down Kenny using surveillance video of his vehicle, Dorris said. Investigators tracked the vehicle to a convenience store, where they got a photo of Kenny. Surveillance also led police to a rental car and Kenny's whereabouts.

READ: Kenny had long grudge against county, officials say

It wasn’t until investigators were able to identify Kenny that they learned he’d killed himself, Dorris said.

Dorris said multiple agencies were working non-stop on Greenwood's killing and will continue to work the case.

“We will continue to work this case as if (Kenny) is still alive and planning to go forth with prosecution,” Dorris said.

VIDEO: Full Baytown police announcement

Kenny's family addressed the public Monday evening.

"I just wanted to express our condolences to the family of Constable Greenwood. We're so very sorry. Our thoughts and prayers go out to him. I don't know what to say. We're in shock too," John Kenny said.

He also said the family found out today about Kenny's suicide and about how Kenny was a suspect in the case.

WATCH: Kenny's brother speaks

Greenwood, 57, was killed April 3 in a shooting near the Harris County government building in Baytown, police said.

Officials said police were called around 7 a.m. to the 700 block of West Baker Road, where the 30-year veteran had been shot at least once on his way to work.

READ: Clint Greenwood: A lifetime of fighting crime

Greenwood was taken to Memorial Hermann, where he was pronounced dead, officials said.

The motive for the shooting is unknown. Police said it is unclear if Kenny had a past relationship with Greenwood.

“We know he filed complaints with the sheriff’s office and possibly other agencies in the past," Dorris said. "Why Assistant Chief Deputy Greenwood was the person that he went after, we just don’t know right now.”

Click here for a link to the GoFundMe account for the family.

100 Club provides assistance to Greenwood's family

A $20,000 check will be given to Greenwood’s wife to help with immediate financial needs.

Additional financial support for the family will be made after an assessment of their needs is conducted. The average gift from the 100 Club to a dependent family is approximately $300,000.

Donations can be made online at the100club.org or sent to 100 Club Survivors Fund, 5555 San Felipe St., Suite 1750, Houston, Texas, 77056.

Download the Click2Houston news app in your app store to stay up-to-date with the latest news while you're on the go.

Sign up for KPRC 2 newsletters to get breaking news, sports, entertainment, contests and more delivered straight to your email inbox.

Copyright 2017 by KPRC Click2Houston - All rights reserved.