Election candidate says women should stay at home and look after their children, not nurseries
A CANDIDATE for the council elections said the death penalty should be brought back - and floated using the guillotine instead of hanging.

Gisela Allen, UKIP's candidate for Garscadden/Scotstounhill, made the comment in a series of proposals she insisted were personal beliefs, not party policy.

She also said women with small children should stay at home and look after them instead of nurseries getting state support. She wants golf courses abolished and a referendum on assisted dying.

Ms Allen also backed raising the retirement age to 70 and abolishing free bus passes and sex education in school.

She was responding by phone to a Post question about why she was running for Glasgow City Council and admitted at the end of the interview, "I was well advised to be quiet".

Ms Allen said: "I want the death penalty to be re-enacted. It doesn't necessarily have to be hanging. You could have the guillotine. I think the public is entitled to protection.

"I believe the SNP is a public danger. We are heading for World War III. The educational system all over Europe is collapsing and the greatest danger to the world as it stands is China and India - that's my personal view and not the UKIP view.

"UKIP needs a representative and I'm a very good public speaker."

Ms Allen, who said she was retired and used to work with Glasgow Zoo, said: "I don't want increased child care. Women with small children should stay at home and look after their own children. Nurseries shouldn't get support.

"The whole school system needs to be overhauled. Every class should have a classroom and not get moved around.

"No sex education in school and I don't want any LGBT community - it's private life, none of anyone's business."

Bill Kidd, SNP MSP for Glasgow Anniesland, said the comments proved UKIP was out of step with the country.

He said: “It is one thing to be an opinionated individual, that’s what democracy is about, but Ms Allen with these outlandish statements has become a manifestation of all that makes her party so very unrepresentative of the constituents in Garscadden/Scotstounhill, or for that matter in Glasgow and Scotland.

"On a positive note she does state she likes riding stables…”

Labour candidate Eva Murray said she strongly disagreed with Ms Allen's comments.

She said: "I've seen Ms. Allen's comments and I, along with the many people in the communities I have spoken to strongly disagree with many if not most of them. We must aim to be an inclusive and caring society, which is exactly why I'm proud to be a Labour candidate in this election standing on the values of equality and fairness.

"I am sure the people of Garscadden/Scotstounhill will reject these shameful comments from the UKIP candidate."

As well as wanting to re-open public toilets and more community gardens, Ms Allen also said: "I would abolish golf courses because they're an environmental threat and a threat to the safety of people.

"I would support riding stables - it's very important children work with horses and ride horses."

She called for a referendum on "Margaret Macdonald's law", the late MSP's attempt to create legally assisted dying in Scotland.

Ms Allen, who lives in Claremont Street in the Finnieston area of Glasgow, also said free bus passes should be abolished and the retirement age raised to 70.

The Post invited Glasgow UKIP to comment on its candidate's positions.