The Center for Urban Poverty
NEO CANDO Visit the NEO CANDO home page and also the Facebook page. NEO CANDO, Northeast Ohio Community and Neighborhood Data for Organizing, is a free and publicly accessible social and economic data system of the Center on Urban Poverty and Community Development, a research institute housed at Case Western Reserve University’s Mandel School of Applied Social Sciences. NEO CANDO allows users to access data for the entire 17 county Northeast Ohio region, or for specific neighborhoods within the region. Academic researchers, community and economic development professionals, public officials, neighborhood activists, business leaders and concerned citizens of all types can easily use this system to explore aspects of the area such as population trends, poverty, employment, educational attainment, housing and crime. NEO CANDO users can generate data tables, maps, and charts, and either print them or export them into Word and Excel files. NEO CANDO represents a long-term collaboration between various non-profit organizations, foundations and government agencies, including the absorption of CleveInfo, the parcel-based data system jointly organized by the Cleveland Housing Network, the Enterprise Foundation and Neighborhood Progress, Inc. Efforts to enhance the property data tools located within NEO CANDO are underway as recommended by the

National Vacant Properties Campaign report, Cleveland at the Crossroads (PDF) as well as by the Vacant Properties Steering Committee, an interagency task-force consisting of several Cleveland City departments, Cleveland City Council, the Northeast Ohio First Suburbs Consortium, numerous departments within Cuyahoga County, community development organizations, and research interests. NEO CANDO will be a one-stop-shop for identifying vacant and abandoned properties as well as serve as an early warning system to provide a means for preventing more abandonment. NEO CANDO compiles data from many different sources and links to data provided by public agencies in order to have the most recent data available. Before using NEO CANDO, users should read the legal disclaimer and the general information about using the system. NEO CANDO Suite of Applications NEO CANDO 2010+: This updated version of NEO CANDO incorporates data from the 2010 Census and American Community Survey. Additional data sources will be added as they become available. It operates faster, provides updated geographies, and enables on-demand mapping using Google maps. Preparation of NEO CANDO 2010+ was completed by the Northeast Ohio Data Collaborative, a unique partnership between Case Western Reserve University, The Cleveland State University Maxine Goodman Levin College of Urban Affairs, and The Center for Community Solutions and made possible by the generous financial support of several local governments and foundations.

This updated version of NEO CANDO incorporates data from the 2010 Census and American Community Survey. Additional data sources will be added as they become available. It operates faster, provides updated geographies, and enables on-demand mapping using Google maps. Preparation of NEO CANDO 2010+ was completed by the Northeast Ohio Data Collaborative, a unique partnership between Case Western Reserve University, The Cleveland State University Maxine Goodman Levin College of Urban Affairs, and The Center for Community Solutions and made possible by the generous financial support of several local governments and foundations. NST Web App: The Neighborhood Stabilization Team Web Application a specialized application built from the foundation of NEO CANDO, is an online, interactive property data tool focusing specifically on providing data for local community development agencies. It is a repository of information that allows informed decision-making for both community development practitioners on the ground and policy-makers. With everything from foreclosure case information to delinquent tax information available at the parcel-level, the NST Web App allows users to examine individual properties, or larger trends affecting the neighborhood. Users can view data, download data, create instant maps of properties by property characteristics, and add their own neighborhood-specific data.

The Neighborhood Stabilization Team Web Application a specialized application built from the foundation of NEO CANDO, is an online, interactive property data tool focusing specifically on providing data for local community development agencies. It is a repository of information that allows informed decision-making for both community development practitioners on the ground and policy-makers. With everything from foreclosure case information to delinquent tax information available at the parcel-level, the NST Web App allows users to examine individual properties, or larger trends affecting the neighborhood. Users can view data, download data, create instant maps of properties by property characteristics, and add their own neighborhood-specific data. Historical NEO CANDO Data: The previous version of NEO CANDO is based on geographies defined by the 2000 Census and incorporates social and economic, crime, and property data. NEO CANDO historical data will continue to have data in Census 2000 geographies, and currently provides information from more data sources than NEO CANDO 2010+.

The previous version of NEO CANDO is based on geographies defined by the 2000 Census and incorporates social and economic, crime, and property data. NEO CANDO historical data will continue to have data in Census 2000 geographies, and currently provides information from more data sources than NEO CANDO 2010+. Property Data Portal: Parcel-level data for Cuyahoga County is available through the NEO CANDO property data tool. These data are collected from a variety of sources including the Cuyahoga County Auditor and the Cuyahoga County Clerk of Courts. Data sources include: Census

Crime data from the Cleveland Police Department

Vital statistics from the Ohio Department of Health

Property characteristics and sales information from the Cuyahoga County Auditor and Recorder

Public assistance data from Cuyahoga County Employment and Family Services

Juvenile delinquency data from the Cuyahoga County Juvenile Court

Child maltreatment data from the Cuyahoga County Department of Children and Family Services

Mortgage lending data (HMDA) from the FFIEC

Enrollment and attendance from the Cleveland Municipal School District What Are Neighborhood Statistical Profiles The Neighborhood Profiles are intended to provide an overview of the demographic, social and economic characteristics in a neighborhood or municipality within Cuyahoga County. The profiles are available for each of the 36 neighborhoods in the City of Cleveland and the 58 municipalities within Cuyahoga County. Read More Legal Disclaimer