Obama apologizes for Okinawa incident
Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan President Barack Obama and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe shake hands after laying wreaths at the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park in Hiroshima on Friday, May 27. Obama, the first sitting president to visit Hiroshima, called for a "world without nuclear weapons," during his speech but his remarks stopped short of an apology. Hide Caption 1 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama told U.S. and Japanese troops on May 27 at the Iwakuni Marine Corps Air Station in Iwakuni, Japan: "This afternoon I will visit Hiroshima. This is an opportunity to honor the memory of all those who were lost in World War II." Hide Caption 2 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan President Obama greets members of the U.S. and Japanese military as he arrives at Marine Corps Air Station Iwakuni in Iwakuni on May 27. Hide Caption 3 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan From left: Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, French President François Hollande, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, U.S. President Barack Obama, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, European Council President Donald Tusk and British Prime Minister David Cameron walk past the Kagura-den as they visit Ise Jingu shrine in Ise, Japan, on Thursday, May 26. Obama is visiting Japan and Vietnam during his 10th trip to Asia. Hide Caption 4 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan World leaders join in a ceremony to plant trees at Ise Jingu shrine in Ise, Japan, on May 26. Obama and other major world leaders are in Japan for a Group of Seven, or G7, summit. Hide Caption 5 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan From left: British Prime Minister David Cameron, Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, U.S. President Barack Obama and Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau talk together after a group photo session at the G7 summit in Shima, Japan, on May 26. Hide Caption 6 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan U.S. President Barack Obama pauses for a translation during a bilateral meeting with Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe in Shima, Japan, on Wednesday, May 25. Hide Caption 7 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama is greeted by U.S. Ambassador to Japan Caroline Kennedy and her husband, Edwin Arthur Schlossberg, at the airport in Tokoname, Japan, on May 25. Hide Caption 8 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama shakes hands after speaking at a town-hall event in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, on May 25. Hide Caption 9 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Vietnamese rapper Suboi raps during the town-hall event, which was for the Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative. Hide Caption 10 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama tours through entrepreneur demonstrations in Ho Chi Minh City on Tuesday, May 24. Hide Caption 11 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama pays his respects during a visit to the Jade Pagoda in Ho Chi Minh City on May 24. Hide Caption 12 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama waves to locals during a visit to a shopping district in Hanoi, Vietnam, on May 24. Hide Caption 13 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama shakes hands with chef Anthony Bourdain in a shopping area of Hanoi on May 24. The President sat down with Bourdain to film a scene for CNN's "Parts Unknown." Hide Caption 14 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan People gather in the rain to watch Obama's motorcade in Hanoi on May 24. Hide Caption 15 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama meets with members of the Vietnamese Civil Society in Hanoi on May 24. Hide Caption 16 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama delivers remarks at the National Convention Center in Hanoi on May 24. Obama made a forceful case for human rights in Vietnam and called for the "peaceful resolution" of disputes in the South China Sea. Hide Caption 17 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama walks to the left of Thi Kim Ngan, chairwoman of Vietnam's National Assembly, at the Presidential Palace in Hanoi on Monday, May 23. Hide Caption 18 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama meets with Nguyen Phu Trong, the Vietnamese Communist Party's general secretary, in Hanoi on May 23. Hide Caption 19 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama, with Secretary of State John Kerry and other Cabinet members, attends a meeting with Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc, third from right, on May 23. Hide Caption 20 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama gives a toast during a state luncheon hosted by Vietnam's President in Hanoi on May 23. Hide Caption 21 of 23

Photos: Obama visits Vietnam, Japan Obama holds a news conference with Vietnamese President Tran Dai Quang on May 23. Obama announced the United States is fully lifting the decades-long ban on the sale of military equipment to Vietnam. He said the removal of the ban was part of a deeper defense cooperation with the country and dismissed suggestions it was aimed at countering China's growing strength in the region. Hide Caption 22 of 23