What Robert E. Lee can teach us about Confederate memorials
Jonathan Horn is the author of " The Man Who Would Not Be Washington " and a former White House presidential speechwriter. The opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(CNN) A year after New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu proposed removing a famous 132-year-old statue of Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee—and a half year after the city council voted to do so—the battle over what should happen to longstanding Confederate memorials remains as divisive as ever.

Just last week the leaders at the National Cathedral in Washington voted to remove Confederate symbols from stained glass windows that depict Lee.

The unending controversy would not have surprised Lee himself. It is why he opposed building Confederate memorials in the first place.

In April 1865, after four years of civil war, Lee surrendered the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia and soon afterward accepted the presidency of Washington College in Lexington, Virginia. Letters seeking support for memorial projects received reluctant responses from the general-turned-educator, according to documents at the University of Virginia and the Library of Congress. Lee worried that building memorials so soon after the war would anger the victorious Federals.

"As regards the erection of such a monument as is contemplated, my conviction is, that however grateful it would be to the feelings of the South, the attempt in the present condition of the country would have the effect of retarding, instead of accelerating its accomplishment, and of continuing, if not adding to, the difficulties under which the Southern people labour," he wrote.

In June 1866, Lee criticized a plan to build a monument to Gen. Thomas "Stonewall" Jackson, whose fatal wounding at Chancellorsville three years prior had deprived the Army of Northern Virginia of its best corps commander. How could Lee ask war-ravaged families to contribute money for memorials when they lacked funds for food? "I do not think it feasible at this time," he wrote.

As to when the right time would come, later letters suggest Lee thought never. When a Gettysburg memorial association invited Lee to attend a meeting "for the purpose of marking upon the ground by enduring memorials of granite the positions and movements of the armies," Lee declined.

Perhaps expecting the general who lost the Battle of Gettysburg to want his army's movements marked in stone was asking too much, but Lee's refusal went further. Rather than raising battlefield memorials, he favored erasing battlefields from the landscape altogether.

Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – A Confederate Civil War cavalry reenactor shoots at Union soldiers during Pickett's Charge on the last day of a Battle of Gettysburg reenactment on Sunday, June 30, during 150th anniversary celebrations in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. More than 10,000 reenactors will pay tribute to the major clashes that took place in the pivotal Civil War battle in July 1863. Hide Caption 1 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – A smoke ring from a cannon fired by Confederate Civil War reenactors wafts skyward on June 30. Hide Caption 2 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Confederate Civil War reenactors march towards Union positions during Pickett's Charge on June 30. Hide Caption 3 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – A ball of flame erupts from a Confederate canon during the reenactment on June 30. Hide Caption 4 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – A Confederate Civil War reenactor drinks a sports drink while taking a break from the event on June 30. Hide Caption 5 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – An ambulance, taking several people away due to heat exhaustion, departs the area on June 30. Hide Caption 6 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – A spectator watches the event on June 30 from a seat on the grass. Hide Caption 7 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Reenactors take shelter from an evening rain storm in tents on June 29. Hide Caption 8 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Reenactors play poker while on break during the three-day event on June 29. Hide Caption 9 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Participants in the event take a break on June 29. Hide Caption 10 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Women remove Civil War-era dresses while participating in the event on June 29. Hide Caption 11 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Union and Confederate actors skirmish during a re-enactment of the Battle of Gettysburg on Saturday, June 29. Hide Caption 12 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – A Confederate soldier yells orders during a reenactment in Gettysburg on June 29. Hide Caption 13 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Civil War reenactors pose for a portrait in Gettysburg on June 29. Hide Caption 14 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – A Union infantryman lies on the ground during a reenactment in Gettysburg on Friday, June 28. Hide Caption 15 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Confederate troops move into position during a reenactment of the Battle of Gettysburg on June 28. The event is taking place at Bushey Farm, outside park property. Hide Caption 16 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Spectators watch as reenactors portray medical treatment at a Confederate field hospital at the Daniel Lady Farm in Gettysburg. Hide Caption 17 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – A Confederate sergeant waves his saber to rally troops during a reenactment. Another such event is planned next weekend. Hide Caption 18 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Confederate troops march into battle. Hide Caption 19 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Union soldiers fire a volley at Confederate troops. Hide Caption 20 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Members of the 1st Tennessee wait to take part in an engagement at Bushey Farm in Gettysburg. Hide Caption 21 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – A mounted Confederate reenactor takes part in a demonstration. Besides portrayals of the fighting, the reenactment includes about 200 individuals representing the townspeople of Gettysburg in 1863. Hide Caption 22 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Union soldiers are fired on by advancing Confederate troops. "People are here to recognize and honor and commemorate what these people went through, the sacrifices of both soldiers and civilians," said an official with the Blue Gray Alliance, which put on the event. Hide Caption 23 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – In a rare concession to non-period technology, a Confederate officer speaks into his walkie-talkie to position his troops during a reenactment. Hide Caption 24 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – Confederate officers give orders while advancing on Union positions on June 28. Hide Caption 25 of 26 Photos: Photos: Gettysburg reenactments Gettysburg re-enactments – A Union soldier with Murray's Brigade lights his pipe at Bushey Farm in Gettysburg on Thursday, June 27. Hide Caption 26 of 26

"I think it wiser moreover not to keep open the sores of war, but to follow the examples of those nations who endeavoured to obliterate the marks of civil strife and to commit to oblivion the feelings it engendered," he wrote.

The debate over how to handle Confederate memorials today is not altogether different from the question Lee faced regarding the preservation of Gettysburg. Much as some Confederates might have wished that battle had not taken place, the history had already happened. The same is true of Confederate memorials. Much as most of the country would not support building these monuments today, they already stand in streets and squares across the United States. A new report from the Southern Poverty Law Center cataloged more than 700 such monuments and statues.

Lee feared that these reminders of the past would preserve fierce passions for the future. Such emotions threatened his vision for speedy reconciliation. As he saw it, bridging a divided country justified abridging history in places.

Do Americans today agree? Those who say tear down the memorials have a point if memorials exist for the sole purpose of holding up men as ideal role models. Whatever their personal feelings about slavery and secession, soldiers who fought against the Union on behalf of a Confederacy dedicated to securing human property cannot pass that test.

But old statues have a higher purpose than idolatry. At their best, they can engender exactly the response Lee sought to avoid: the emotions that bring history back to life. Gazing at a Confederate statue today makes one wonder how men—in some cases, decent men—made decisions that put them on the wrong side of history and why many Americans not long ago considered these warriors worthy of unquestioning adulation.

Rather than remove such monuments, a country eager to learn from its past should pay more attention to them.