Syria barrel bomb attack: At least 16 killed at wake in Aleppo
(CNN) A helicopter dropped two barrel bombs on a funeral wake for children in the Syrian city of Aleppo, killing at least 16 people, Syrian monitoring groups said.

The wake was being held Saturday in the rebel-controlled neighborhood of Bab al-Nayrab, the same area where 15 people were killed in a barrel bombing Thursday , the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said.

Another group, the Aleppo Media Center, reported a higher death toll of 24 people killed and 30 others injured in the attack.

Barrel bombs -- oil drums filled with explosives and shrapnel and dropped by aircraft -- killed more than 3,000 civilians in Aleppo 2014, according to a report last year by Amnesty International . The human rights organization said barrel bombs are a common tactic of the Syrian government, which has been fighting rebels in a civil war since 2011.

Syrian President Bashar al-Assad categorically denied any use of barrel bombs by his forces in an interview with the BBC in 2014.

'I couldn't see'

Mojahed Abo-Aljood, an Aleppo Media Center activist, said he was filming near the wake when he heard a warning over a walkie-talkie about a helicopter overhead.

He took shelter in a basement and heard two explosions, exiting later to air covered with thick dust.

JUST WATCHED This is what the aftermath of a barrel bombing looks like Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH This is what the aftermath of a barrel bombing looks like 00:59

Abo-Aljood said he grabbed his camera and started moving throughout the area to document the attack and find people to help.

"On my right and on my left I saw dead people and I stepped on top of one myself because I couldn't see due to the thickness of dust," Abo-Aljood said.

"When the first barrel bomb hit near the wake, people started running toward the shelter where we were. Then the second barrel bomb hit near the entrance of the basement shelter," Abo-Aljood said. "That's why there were many causalities."

The two activist groups offered differing accounts of how many children were killed in the barrel bombing Thursday. Aleppo Media Center reported five children were among the dead; the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said 11 children had died.

Photos: Children of conflct 2016: Aleppo, Syria -- Five-year-old Omran Daqneesh waits shell-shocked in the back of an ambulance. He and other members of his family were injured when airstrikes ripped through his neighborhood in August. The photo -- Five-year-old Omran Daqneesh waits shell-shocked in the back of an ambulance. He and other members of his family were injured when airstrikes ripped through his neighborhood in August. The photo inspired international grief and put a face on Syria's ongoing civil war. Hide Caption 1 of 9 Photos: Children of conflct Hide Caption 2 of 9 Photos: Children of conflct 2015: Bodrum, Turkey -- An arresting image of a migrant child's dead body washed up on a Turkish beach -- An arresting image of a migrant child's dead body washed up on a Turkish beach served as a tragic reminder of the risks faced by Syrian refugees. The photo also became a touchstone for discussions about how Europe and other countries should approach the refugee crisis. Hide Caption 3 of 9 Photos: Children of conflct 2014: Gaza City -- A man carries a child as another lies dead after an Israeli airstrike on a Gaza City beach in July 2014. At least four boys, ages 9 to 11, were killed. The Israeli military investigated the tragedy and reported that the location of the attack was known to be a compound of Hamas police and naval forces. "Tragically, in the wake of the incident it became clear that the outcome of the attack was the death of four children who had entered the military compound for reasons that remain unclear," -- A man carries a child as another lies dead after an Israeli airstrike on a Gaza City beach in July 2014. At least four boys, ages 9 to 11, were killed. The Israeli military investigated the tragedy and reported that the location of the attack was known to be a compound of Hamas police and naval forces. "Tragically, in the wake of the incident it became clear that the outcome of the attack was the death of four children who had entered the military compound for reasons that remain unclear," the report stated. Hide Caption 4 of 9 Photos: Children of conflct 2005: Tal Afar, Iraq -- In a time when truly resonant war photos were hard to come by due to the dangerous climate in Iraq, a photographer -- In a time when truly resonant war photos were hard to come by due to the dangerous climate in Iraq, a photographer captured a truly wrenching moment. The girl is Samar Hassan, screaming and spattered with blood after her parents were mistakenly killed and her brother was wounded by U.S. troops. The image was widely used to represent the true civilian cost of international conflict. Hide Caption 5 of 9 Photos: Children of conflct 2003: Najaf, Iraq -- An Iraqi prisoner of war comforts his son in a POW holding zone. The emotional image won the 2003 World Press Photo award. Hide Caption 6 of 9 Photos: Children of conflct 2003: Central Iraq -- A U.S. Navy hospital corpsman holds an Iraqi boy. Confused front-line crossfire ripped apart an Iraqi family. This moment of compassion was captured barely a year after the official start of the U.S.-led war in Iraq. Hide Caption 7 of 9 Photos: Children of conflct 2001: Quetta, Pakistan -- Seven-year-old Fermina Bibi, from Kandahar, Afghanistan, lies wounded in a hospital bed. She and her brother were injured when their home in Kandahar was bombed. They were transported to Pakistan for treatment. Hide Caption 8 of 9 Photos: Children of conflct 1972: Trang Bang, South Vietnam -- Nine-year-old Kim Phuc wails in agony as she and her fellow villagers flee a napalm attack. This unflinching look into the horrors of the Vietnam War earned a Pulitzer Prize. Phuc survived, and -- Nine-year-old Kim Phuc wails in agony as she and her fellow villagers flee a napalm attack. This unflinching look into the horrors of the Vietnam War earned a Pulitzer Prize. Phuc survived, and eventually started her own foundation to aid child victims of war. Hide Caption 9 of 9

'I lost five children'

Activists posted videos of Thursday's barrel bomb attack online. CNN could not independently confirm the authenticity of the videos. In the videos, rescuers help survivors and search for the missing. Residents dig through rubble, looking for loved ones.

Men and women carry dead children covered with dust, sobbing and crying.

In one video, a man sits outside his demolished house, visibly upset. "Don't step over them," he says, referring to his family members. "I lost my five children, oh God."

Another video posted by activists in Aleppo shows a woman speaking to her dead child.

"Hassan, it's your mom," the mother says as she looks at the child whose eyes are still open.

"He is my son ... he is gone," she screams. "My sons, your brother is dead, your brother is dead."

She touches his face and closes his eyes.

Aleppo death toll rising

Aleppo, located in northern Syria, has been besieged for years during the civil war. Fighting has intensified in recent weeks and the death toll is climbing.

Last week the August death toll in and around the city rose to 448, reported the London-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights . That number included 100 children.

Over the past two years more than 12,500 people, including more than 4,500 children, have been killed by Syrian and Russian aerial bombardment, the SOHR reported

Bombings and four years of warfare have reduced large sections of Aleppo to rubble. The International Red Cross has said the city is on the brink of a humanitarian crisis.

Aleppo has strategic importance as the country's largest city and a vital economic hub.

When rebels first launched their attack on the city in July 2012, it sent shock waves through government-held parts of Aleppo. Regime strongholds were no longer seen as impenetrable. Now the Syrian military, aided by Russia, is bombing the city in an attempt to win it back.