Cockeyed.com presents: How Much Is Inside?
Allow me to take you back in time, to June 2001. Visiting Jen in Berkeley, we attempted to shoot photos for two articles in one night.

On Saturday night, thirteen years ago, I decided to find out how much ice cream is in a scoop.

This idea was hatched after comparing three restaurant banana splits: Banana Split Comparison

The amount of fat that disappeared after cooking seemed extraordinary, so I tried making one at home! How Much is Inside a Homemade Quarter Pounder?

I remembered an old gag from Mad Magazine, which named the fraction 1/32nd as the fraction of a pound of beef in a quarter pounder, (weight after cooking). I really liked this gag as a kid, and now that I have a precise scale, I have what it takes to find the real answer. How much does a Quarter Pounder weigh after it is cooked?

Waffles are a big favorite for breakfast. They are a stand-alone breakfast, which is simple and warm and delicious. And they are cheap! Or are they?

Glass wine bottles have a certain archaic appeal, but handling those slippery wine-tubes with their civil war-era corks is a burden that must be borne no longer!

A Dryer Sheet How Much fabric softener is a Dryer Sheet?

Tuna Fish How Much is a can of Tuna Fish?

A Lick of Ice Cream How Much is a Single Lick of Ice Cream?

Breaking Bad How Much Money was in that Giant Pile of Cash?

Cupcakes What portion of a cake does a single cupcake contain?

Dreyer's Slow Churned Ice Cream How Much air is Inside Dreyer's Slow Churned Ice Cream?

A Bottle of Tequila How many shots do you get from one bottle?

A Million Dollars Currency Photos illustrating how large a million dollars is.

Car Wash How much water does it take to wash your car in the driveway?

A Bottle of Wine How many glasses do you get from one bottle?

Reese's Peanut Butter Cups Is there a better ratio of peanut butter to chocolate in the miniature cups?

A Cocktail How much does it cost to make a cocktail at home? Featuring the Cocktail Calculator

A Sandwich How much does it cost to make a sandwich at home? Featuring the Sandwich Calculator

Sunflower Seeds How much of a bag of sunflower seeds is actual sunflower seed kernel?

Cheetos How much air is puffed inside a bag full of Cheetos cheese puffs?

Honey Bunches of Oats How many almonds are in a box of Honey Bunches of Oats?

Yogurt How much fruit is on the bottom of fruit-on-the-bottom yogurt?

Thread Count Are there really 360 threads per inch in 360 thread count cotton pillow cases?

Peanut Butter How many feet of celery stalk can you fill with one jar of peanut butter?

Granola Bars How much granola is in a box of granola bars?

A Shopping Cart What is the total value of an entire shopping cart full of crushed aluminum cans?

Spaghetti How much water is absorbed when you cook a whole pound of spaghetti?

Mustard How many hot dogs can you dress with a bottle of mustard?

University of Chicago University Students preform various product tests

Glad Wrap How many rice crispy treats can you wrap with a single roll of Glad cling wrap?

Goldschlager How much gold is in a bottle of Goldschlager cinnamon shnapps?

Mixed Nuts How much of each sort of nut are in a can of Planters Mixed Nuts?

Ramen How many feet of noodle are in a package of Top Ramen noodles?

Conversation Hearts How many conversation hearts are in a bag?

Salsa How many chips can you load with a single bottle of salsa?

Paper Towels How much spilled gatorade can you wipe up with one roll of Paper towels?

Sharpie How many CDs or DVDs can you label with a single Sharpie marker?

A Christmas Tree How much wood and how many needles are in a christmas tree?

Bacon Bits How many bacon bits can you get from a pound of bacon?

Dial Complete How many pumps of liquid soap can you get from a bottle of Dial Complete?

A Pumpkin How many pumpkin pies can you make from a giant pumpkin?

An Acre How big is an acre?

A Keg How many cups of beer can you get out of a beer keg?

Popcorn How much popcorn pops from a 2-lb. bag of popcorn?

Vegemite How many slices of bread can you cover with one jar of vegemite?

A Chevy Trailblazer How many 76 antenna balls can you fit inside a Chevy Trailblazer?

A Million Dollars How big is a million dollars worth of $100 bills?

Dust Off How much dust can you spray away with one can of Dust Off canned air?

Tobacco How many cigarettes can you roll from a single packet of rolling tobacco?

Oreos How much white frosting stuff is inside a whole pack of Oreo cookies?

Coffee How much hot coffee can you make from one pound of coffee grounds, and how much does a cup of coffee cost when you make it yourself at home?

Coca-Cola How much CO2 gas is inside a 2-liter bottle of Coke?

French Fries How many fries come in a small, medium and large order of french fries, and how many can you get from one potato?

Ketchup How many ketchup packets does it take to fill a whole bottle of ketchup?

Print Cartridge How many pages of porn can you print out from one full black ink cartridge?

Chewing Gum If you chew up all the gum in a Wrigley's chewing gum Plen-T-pack, how much gum remains after you have swallowed all of the sugar and flavoring?

40-Foot Shipping Container How much stuff can you fit into a shipping container?

Magic Shell How many square inches of ice cream coverage can you get out of one bottle of Magic Shell?

Batteries How many hours will a flashlight work with a new set of D batteries?

Doritos How many square feet of corn chip are contained in a bag of Doritos?

Cheerios How many Cheerios are contained in a box of cheerios, and how long would a necklace be if you put every one of them on a string necklace?

Newspaper How many square feet of newspaper are contained in one Sunday newspaper?

Lipstick How many applications can you get from one stick of lipstick? How many square feet of lip can you cover?

Silly String How much string is in a can of Silly string?

Blood How large a puddle of blood would be created if a person bled to death in a parking lot?

Aluminum Foil What's the largest thing you can cover with one roll of aluminum foil?

Expanding Foam How much foam will expand out of one can of expanding foam?

Whipped Cream How much Whipped Cream is in one can of pressurized whipped cream?

EZ Cheese How many crackers can you load with one can of EZ Cheese?

Toothpaste If you squeeze out a whole tube of toothpaste, how long a line would it make?