FOX NEWS CHANNEL RE-SIGNS SHEPARD SMITH TO MULTIYEAR DEAL – Fox News Channel Press
NEW YORK – MARCH 15, 2018 — FOX News Channel’s (FNC) Chief News Anchor and Managing Editor of Breaking News Shepard Smith has signed a new multiyear deal, extending his more than two-decade tenure with the network, announced 21st Century Fox and FOX News Executive Chairman Rupert Murdoch.

In making the announcement, Mr. Murdoch said, “Shepard Smith is an exemplary journalist whose skill in anchoring breaking news is unrivaled. His powerful storytelling on both television and digital platforms has elevated our entire news gathering process.”

Smith added, “I am incredibly proud to be part of a group of journalists who helped build the FOX news division from scratch 22 years ago and extremely thankful for the opportunity to continue to lead our breaking news coverage for years to come. Our team’s commitment to delivering facts to our loyal viewers in context and with perspective, without fear or favor, is unwavering. The investment that Mr. Murdoch has infused into our already strong news division affords us endless opportunities. I am excited for the future and honored to continue to call FOX News my home.”

One of FNC’s original hires in 1996, Smith’s highly relatable reporting has been a trademark of the network since it launched. He has covered virtually every major news story over the course of his career as both a correspondent and an anchor, playing a major role in the network’s innovation of the way news is presented.

As the anchor of Shepard Smith Reporting (weekdays 3-4PM/ET), Smith utilizes state-of-the-art newsgathering enhanced with advanced technologies as well as digital and social media to bring viewers the latest hard news from his signature studio known as The FOX News Deck. In February, the program averaged 1.6 million viewers and 335,000 in the 25-54 demographic, easily beating the cable news competition, according to Nielsen Media Research.

Additionally, Smith, along with his dedicated team of information specialists, interrupts programming at a moment’s notice to bring viewers continuous live developments surrounding major breaking news. His recent coverage of the shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, FL was praised across the board for the clarity and compassion he conveyed during the early hours of a tragic and chaotic event.

Most notably, Smith has anchored numerous breaking news stories in his current position, including: Hurricane Irma and the Las Vegas massacre in 2017; the 2016 terrorist attacks in Nice, France and Belgium; the coordinated terrorist attacks in Paris in 2015, the 2014 riots following the shooting of civilian Michael Brown by a police officer in Ferguson, MO; and the search for missing Malaysia Airlines Flight 370.

Before taking the helm of the breaking news division with Shepard Smith Reporting, Smith anchored The FOX Report and Studio B, both of which ranked number one in their respective timeslots. In this role, among the stories he notably anchored are: the Boston Marathon bombing of 2013 along with the subsequent manhunt and ultimate capture of the Tsarnaev brothers; the financial crisis of 2008; the War in Iraq (2003); the War in Afghanistan (2001), as well as the murderous terrorist attacks and devastating aftermath of 9/11.

Additionally, Smith has traveled to Ukraine to report on the unrest in Kiev and Crimea, and reported live from Rome during the election of Pope Francis, as well as on the retirement of Pope Benedict XVI. In 2011, Smith was on location from Japan following the destructive earthquake and tsunami amid nuclear threats. During that same year, he provided significant news coverage of the anti-government protests and civil unrest in Egypt and Libya. He also reported extensively on the Middle East conflict between Israel and Hezbollah forces from Beirut, Lebanon in 2006.

Prior to joining FNC, Smith was a Los Angeles-based FOX News Edge correspondent, reporting on a wide range of stories for the FOX affiliate news service, including the crash of TWA Flight 800, the Montana Freeman standoff, and the Oklahoma City bombing. Before this, Smith gained extensive local news experience throughout the state of Florida serving as a reporter for WSVN-TV (FOX) in Miami, the former WCPX-TV (CBS) in Orlando, WBBH-TV (NBC) in Fort Myers, FL and WJHG-TV (NBC) in Panama City, FL where he began his television career. He attended the University of Mississippi and is a native of Holly Springs, MS.

FOX News Channel (FNC) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. The number one network in cable, FNC has been the most watched television news channel for 16 years and according to a Gallup/Knight Foundation Survey, is the most objective information source in the country. Owned by 21st Century Fox, FNC is available in more than 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.



FOX News Media Contact:

Caley Cronin/212.301.3972 or caley.cronin@foxnews.com