Obama: The Statue of Liberty Will Be Immediately Closed
(AP Photo/Seth Wenig)

(CNSNews.com) - President Barack Obama warned late Monday afternoon that if the House of Representatives did not agree to a continuing resolution to fund the government after midnight that did not curtail the implementation of Obamacare--and that he would therefore agree to sign--the Statue of Liberty would be "immediately closed."

At the same time, Obama conceded that even if the House refused to pass a CR that allowed the administation to move forward with Obamacare, major government programs would continue. Social Security and Medicare, for example, would go on, and U.S. troops would remain on duty.

Nonetheless, Yosemite, the Statue of Liberty and the museums at the Smithsonian Institution would be closed, Obama warned, speaking to reporters in the White House briefing room.

"With regard to operations that will continue: If you’re on Social Security, you will keep receiving your checks," said Obama. "If you’re on Medicare, your doctor will still see you. Everyone’s mail will still be delivered. And government operations related to national security or public safety will go on. Our troops will continue to serve with skill, honor, and courage. Air traffic controllers, prison guards, those who are with border control--our Border Patrol will remain on their posts, but their paychecks will be delayed until the government reopens."

"I also want to be very clear about what would change," said Obama.

"Office buildings would close," he warned.

"Paychecks [for federal government workers] would be delayed," he said.

"Vital services that seniors and veterans, women and children, businesses and our economy depend on would be hamstrung," he said.

Obama also vowed that unless the Republican-controlled House agreed to a continuing resolution that allowed the administration to implement Obamacare now, private businesses would have trouble raising capital and rebuilding after Hurricane Sandy, the storm that hit in 2012.

"Business owners would see delays in raising capital, seeking infrastructure permits, or rebuilding after Hurricane Sandy," said Obama. "Veterans who’ve sacrificed for their country will find their support centers unstaffed. Tourists will find every one of America’s national parks and monuments, from Yosemite to the Smithsonian to the Statue of Liberty, immediately closed. And of course, the communities and small businesses that rely on these national treasures for their livelihoods will be out of customers and out of luck."