Transcripts
Return to Transcripts main page

NEW DAY

Clinton Puts Trump on Defensive in First Debate; Interview with DNC Interim Chair Donna Brazile; Interview with Kellyanne Conway. Aired 7-7:30a ET

Aired September 27, 2016 - 07:00 ET

THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED.



DONALD TRUMP (R), PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE: I will release my tax returns when she releases her 33,000 e- mails that have been deleted.



[07:00:02] HILLARY CLINTON (D), PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE: I call it Trumped-up trickle-down, because that's exactly what it would be.



TRUMP: Hillary has experience, but it's bad experience.



CLINTON: At least I have a plan to fight ISIS.



TRUMP: No, no. You're telling the enemy everything you want to do.



CLINTON: No, we're not.



TRUMP: I have a winning temperament. I know how to win.



CLINTON: Woo! OK. Join the debate by saying more crazy things.



(END VIDEOTAPE)



ANNOUNCER: This is NEW DAY with Chris Cuomo and Alisyn Camerota.



ALISYN CAMEROTA, CNN ANCHOR: Good morning, everyone. Welcome to your NEW DAY. The highly anticipated showdown between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump was must-see TV. Clinton accusing Trump of racist behavior, while Trump tried to pin the country's problems on Clinton, painting her as a, quote, "typical politician."



CHRIS CUOMO, CNN ANCHOR: Boy, oh, boy. There's only one first. This was the first time we saw them toe to toe. So who won?



We have a new CNN post-debate poll that shows it was a big night for Clinton. Now, how is this debate going to change the race? Both candidates get back out on the hustings.



We have it all covered for you. Let's begin with CNN's Phil Mattingly -- Phil.



PHIL MATTINGLY, CNN CORRESPONDENT: Good morning, Chris. Early and often, that's probably the most apt way to describe the sharp attacks coming from both candidates last night. Now, one thing is for sure. They've had their message they wanted to



get across. Hillary Clinton, prepared, ready for the White House. Donald Trump, the change agent, breaker of the status quo. That doesn't mean they weren't pulling punches. They were certainly throwing some haymakers.



(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)



CLINTON: I have a feeling that, by the end of this evening, I'm going to be blamed for everything that's ever happened.



TRUMP: Why not?



CLINTON: Why not? Yes, why not?



MATTINGLY (voice-over): The highly-anticipated duel between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton began with an exchanging of pleasantries.



TRUMP: Secretary Clinton, yes? Is that OK? Good. I want you to be very happy.



MATTINGLY: But it didn't take long for the gloves to come off.



CLINTON: The kind of plan that Donald has put forth would be trickle- down economics all over again. I call it Trumped-up trickle-down.



TRUMP: NAFTA is the worst trade deal maybe ever signed anywhere but certainly ever signed in this country. And now you want to approve Transpacific Partnership.



MATTINGLY: Trump repeatedly casting Clinton as a typical politician while attempting to portray himself as a change agent.



TRUMP: You've been doing this for 30 years. Why are you just thinking about these solutions right now?



MATTINGLY: Clinton putting Trump on the defensive for much of the debate, baiting the GOP nominee on his business record.



CLINTON: Donald was one of the people who rooted for the housing crisis. He said back in 2006, "Gee, I hope it does collapse, because then I can go in and buy some and make some money." Well, it did collapse.



TRUMP: That's called business, by the way.



CLINTON: Nine million people -- nine million people lost their jobs.



MATTINGLY: Challenging him on his refusal to release his tax returns.



TRUMP: I will release my tax returns against my lawyer's wishes when she releases her 33,000 e-mails that have been deleted.



CLINTON: Maybe he doesn't want the American people, all of you watching tonight, to know that he's paid nothing in federal taxes.



TRUMP: That makes me smart.



CLINTON: He's paid zero. That means zero for troops, zero for vets, zero for schools or health.



MATTINGLY: Trump pouncing on Clinton about her use of private e-mail but not dwelling on it.



CLINTON: I made a mistake using a private e-mail.



TRUMP: That's for sure.



CLINTON: And if I had to do it over again, I would obviously do it differently.



TRUMP: That was more than a mistake. That was done purposely.



MATTINGLY: And insisting she can't be trusted.



TRUMP: I have much better judgment than she does. There's no question about that. I also have a much better temperament than she has.



CLINTON: Woo! OK.



MATTINGLY: Trump on the defensive over years of false claims that President Obama wasn't born in the U.S.



TRUMP: I think I did a great job and a great service, not only for the country but even for the president in getting him to produce his birth certificate.



MATTINGLY: Clinton hitting Trump hard, dubbing his crusade racist.



CLINTON: So he tried to put the whole racist birther lie to bed. But it can't be dismissed that easily. So he has a long record of engaging in racist behavior, and the birther lie was a very hurtful one.



MATTINGLY: Debate moderator Lester Holt fact checking in real time, Trump insisting he did not support the Iraq War, despite proof that he did.



TRUMP: I did not support the war in Iraq.



LESTER HOLT, NBC NEWS: In 2002...



TRUMP: That is a mainstream media nonsense put out by her.



HOLT: The record shows otherwise. But why...



TRUMP: The record does not show that. The record shows that I'm right.



MATTINGLY: The fiery debate ending on a personal attack of Clinton.



TRUMP: She doesn't have the look. She doesn't have the stamina. I said she doesn't have the stamina. And I don't believe she does have the stamina. To be president of this country, you need tremendous stamina.



[07:05:03] CLINTON: As soon as he travels to 112 countries and negotiates a peace deal, a cease-fire, a release of dissidents, an opening of new opportunities in nations around the world, or even spends 11 hours testifying in front of a congressional committee, he can talk to me about stamina.



TRUMP: Hillary has experience, but it's bad experience.



MATTINGLY: But the veteran debater fought back at Trump's critiques.



CLINTON: I think Donald just criticized me for preparing for this debate, and yes, I did. And you know what else I prepared for? I prepared to be president, and I think that's a good thing.



(END VIDEOTAPE)



MATTINGLY: Now guys, there's no question, Donald Trump had strong moments in last night's debate -- in last night's debate, particularly on issues like trade.



But for the most part, he was on defense the entire time. A good reason why: areas like the terrorist attack in Benghazi, the Clinton Foundation, key components -- immigration, the border wall-- key components of Donald Trump's stump speech, of his candidacy on the whole, were not even mentioned last night.



Now, that's an issue that Donald Trump could have brought up on the attack, but he chose not to. That's something I think you can expect will change in the two debates ahead.



Now, as for today, candidates obviously back on the trail: Hillary Clinton in North Carolina, Donald Trump in Florida. Swing states both, two states that both candidates desperately need and want to win on November 8 -- Alisyn.



CAMEROTA: OK, Phil, thanks for all that. Let's see how regular viewers felt. We have a new CNN/ORC post-debate poll of people who watched the debate. And it shows that it was a decisive win for Hillary Clinton. Sixty-two percent say Clinton was the big winner last night. Twenty-seven percent thought Trump won the night.



The poll sample does skew slightly in favor of Democrats, because more Democrats responded than Republicans. But even a majority of independents watching the debate deemed Clinton the winner.



CUOMO: All right. Joining us now is the interim chair of the Democratic National Committee, Donna Brazile. She had a front-row seat at last night's debate.



Donna, good to have you. You were walking around last night saying that you were happy not just because you thought this debate showed Trump at his worst, but because you think the American people got to see Hillary Clinton at her best. How so? DONNA BRAZILE, INTERIM CHAIR, DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE:



Absolutely. Look, Chris, elections are about the future. She was able to look into the camera and talk to the American people about the future of the country, job growth, productivity. And she was able, I believe, to not just respond to some of Donald Trump's trumped-up charges, but when Donald Trump had an opportunity to put his business experience before the American people, he had no -- he had no answer when she said, "People are suing you, waitresses, plumbers, small business people like my daddy." I thought Hillary Clinton was prepared; Donald Trump was incoherent.



But also, he interrupted her 26 times -- 25 times, because I want to get it right, because I know you're going to fact check...



CUOMO: All over it.



BRAZILE: Twenty-five times in the first 26 minutes. That shows you that Donald Trump did not come to play. He came to insult, and he couldn't. And I think advantage Clinton.



CUOMO: He says he is the whiner in chief, that America's angry, it is anxious. There are problems. They are because of the last eight years, and he will come in to fix them.



Now, specifically to Hillary Clinton, he went after her about the e- mails last night. Let's play that exchange.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



CLINTON: I made a mistake using a private e-mail.



TRUMP That's for sure.



CLINTON: And if I had to do it over again, I would obviously do it differently.



TRUMP: That was not a mistake. That was done purposely. When you have your staff taking the Fifth Amendment, taking the Fifth so they're not prosecuted; when you have the man that set up the illegal server taking the Fifth, I think it's disgraceful. And believe me, this country thinks it's -- really thinks it's disgraceful also.



As far as my tax returns, you don't learn that much from tax returns. That I can tell you.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



CUOMO: Now, some argued, why did he shift off that? This is -- this is...



BRAZILE: Why did he pivot? Because he could -- because he wanted to pivot away from the fact that she said, "You're not paying taxes, Donald. If you showed me your tax returns, if you showed the American people, we will learn that you haven't given much to the government. You haven't --you haven't paid -- you haven't given anything to charitable organizations." I thought that was a key moment for Hillary Clinton to once again tell



Donald Trump, you're trying to be someone that you're not. And he didn't have a good response to that.



CUOMO: Do you think that the e-mail thing is a scarlet letter, that there's nothing she can say, it will always be there, and it may be the deciding factor for some voters?



BRAZILE: Look, this was a mistake. She's apologized for it. The FBI investigated her. She was cleared in terms of they did not bring any charges. I think that's -- the American people are thinking about this is about them. This is about their future. This is about education. This is about the future of the country, the safety and security of the American people.



And again, I thought she was prepared. She had -- she came there ready to talk about the future, not to just sit there and insult and whatever Donald Trump called that whining that he was doing.



[07:10:03] CUOMO: Two quick things. One is just to button something up, and then I want to talk about something that was very big that happened last night. The quick thing: Russian e-mail hackers. Trump is open-ended on it. He says, "We don't know the. Clinton..."



BRAZILE: Call me, Donald Trump. Don't tweet. Call me, Boo. Call me.



CUOMO: Do you think it was Russia? You have proof?



BRAZILE: Yes.



CUOMO: How so?



BRAZILE: Because we -- we have brought in the best cybersecurity team in this country, and they have seen this. They know the markers. They've seen it in real time. And Sean Harry, who is the president of Crowd Strike, he was a former cyber security expert at the FBI. WE have good sources that have told us it is foreign and it's possibly Russian.



CUOMO: Possibly or probably?



BRAZILE: Probably, but you know, I'm not -- I'm not the security expert. I'd be -- but it is, yes, the DNC was a victim of a cybersecurity, what I call intrusion.



And guess what? They are still trying to hurt all of us, not just the DNC, but the entire country, by you know, basically trying to dismantle all of our political operations in this country.



CUOMO: Now, there was a big moment last night. I want to play it. It was about President Obama and the birther sham that went on. It was a big opportunity for Donald Trump. Let's see what he made of it.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) TRUMP: Patti Solis Doyle was on Wolf Blitzer, saying that this happened. Blumenthal sent McClatchy, a highly-respected reporter, Ted McClatchy, to Kenya to find out about it. They were pressing it very hard.



She failed to get the birth certificate. When I got involved, I didn't fail. I got him to give the birth certificate. So I'm satisfied with it.



HOLT: We're talking about racial healing in this segment. What do you say to Americans...



TRUMP: Well, it is very -- I say nothing, because I was able to get him to produce it. He should have produced it a long time before. I say nothing. I think I did a great job and a great service not only for the country but even for the president in getting him to produce his birth certificate.



HOLT: Secretary Clinton.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



CUOMO: Now, this was a wow moment, because the expectation was that, when the birther sham comes up, that Donald Trump would own that it was wrong and reach out, because he keeps saying that he wants to be a uniter and heal the divisions in this country.



How did it impact you to hear him say, "I say nothing," to people who are offended by it?



BRAZILE: I spent the weekend with my family at the opening and dedication of the new Museum of African-American History and Culture. And I could tell you Donald Trump should take just a walk through that museum and see what it means to have to produce papers.



I mean, my ancestors could not get papers, because -- simply because they were brought here as slaves. And it took centuries before we could finally get papers.



To bring this up over and over again, and to smear the first black president of the United States, Donald Trump should be ashamed of himself, and he should apologize.



I get emotional. I've got a birth certificate. My parents had a birth certificate. My grandparents did not. My great-grandparents did not. And going back through that museum once again reminded me of the shame and the dehumanization of slavery, and to have the first black president be smeared by Donald Trump, he owes us an apology.



And I know it's not forthcoming, so I know I'm speaking into the wild darkness of Donald Trump, but I think he should be ashamed of himself to bring that up and to say -- and this is what he said: "I'm the one who got him to produce the birth certificate." It's amazing.



CUOMO: You don't think he's the one that got him to produce the birth certificate? BRAZILE: I think it's a shame that we -- we put the president of the



United States through this. It's just awful. And every time we talk about it, it's the wound. It's the wound that won't heal. This is what Donald Trump should understand. It's the wound that will never heal as long as people go out there and exploit racial -- what I call real racial pain and animus in this country.



CUOMO: The question now is how does he adjust, how does she adjust for the next debate? He's out on TV this morning. He's saying his microphone was messed up last night. And he's going to go after...



BRAZILE: I was sitting right in front of him. Maybe he should learn how to talk in the microphone. I was sitting right there. I watched him.



Donald Trump was, you know -- I saw that. He was rocking it. He was not -- he was not speaking to the American people. That's why I think his microphone didn't work.



CUOMO: There was an odd moment at the end that may be a suggestion for the next debate. He said, "I'm very happy with myself. I was going to say something that was really tough on Hillary Clinton and her whole family, but I didn't, because I have respect for Chelsea." The obvious nod is it's going to be Bill's infidelities.



What do you think about that if it comes up as a state of play in this election?



BRAZILE: I think it will backfire. You know, I think, again, that is the way -- Donald Trump has bullied his way onto the political stage. And I think that was Donald Trump's way of saying, "I have something on you, and if you attack me, I'm going to attack you."



First of all, I thought he was disrespectful to Lester Holt. He was disrespectful to Hillary Clinton. He kept interrupting. And you know what? Every time he interrupted, he had nothing to say. "Wrong, wrong." I watched him. I thought this was childish.



CUOMO: Donna Brazile, thank you for your take.



BRAZILE: You miss me?



[07:15:07] CUOMO: I miss you so much that it's hard to conduct the interview.



BRAZILE: But you see, I'm with her.



CUOMO: I know. So now you're on with me.



BRAZILE: High five.



CUOMO: It's good to see you -- Alisyn.



CAMEROTA: Great to see both of you.



What does team Trump think about how they did last night? Trump's campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, is going to join us next.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



TRUMP: Well, I have much better judgment than she does. There's no question about that. I also have a much better temperament than she has, you know. I think my strongest asset, maybe by far, is my temperament. I have a winning temperament. I know how to win.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



CAMEROTA: Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton facing off in a tense debate last night. How does the Trump campaign feel about his performance? Let's ask. We have Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway joining us now.



Kellyanne, great to see you.



KELLYANNE CONWAY, TRUMP CAMPAIGN MANAGER: Hi.



CAMEROTA: I know you've had a long night with little sleep.



CONWAY: Oh, who hasn't?



CAMEROTA: Of course, everybody. What did you think were Mr. Trump's best and worst moment of last night?



CONWAY: Well, the best moments for Mr. Trump clearly were when he was taking on Hillary Clinton's record on trade and job creation, particularly in the first parts of the debate. I mean, he took her on full square on NAFTA and TPP. And also the fact that she's flip- flopped on TPP. She referred to it as the gold standard, and then she's against it, and she defies President Obama on it.



[07:20:20] So I think that's important because why? According to CNN polling and other polls, Alisyn, jobs, the economy is the No. 1 issue.



Another big issue is terrorism. And on that one, too, he put Secretary Clinton on the hook and said, "Look, you guys left a vacuum by the way you got out of Iraq. And that vacuum allowed ISIS -- the birth and growth of ISIS to fester in there, and now it's in 30 countries." I thought those were very strong moments.



CAMEROTA: Was there a moment that you wish he had done differently?



CONWAY: What I would love for him to focus on is that Barack Obama said it best in 2008. He said, "Hillary Clinton will say anything to get elected." And we saw that on full display last night.



I was glad that he was polite and a gentleman to her, particularly at the end when he pulled the biggest punch of all...



CAMEROTA: Meaning that he did not play what he said he wanted to and I guess bring up her husband's sexual past?



CONWAY: And he certainly was prepared to.



CAMEROTA: And he sounded ambivalent about that. He sounded as though he wanted to, so why didn't he go there?



CONWAY: It's a split-second spontaneous decision, Alisyn. He certainly could have. And it was probably on the minds of millions of voters at home, saying, "Wow, she's going to challenge you on a comment you made here or there about a woman. Then goodness, why can't you challenge her on her husband's personal peccadilloes?"



And he decided not to, and he explained to America why that was. He said, "I came here, and I was prepared to do some rough talking about that," quote unquote, "but I see your husband here and your daughter, and I'm just not going to do. But what you're doing in hundreds of millions of dollars in negative advertising is not nice." I think that whole exchange will grow in importance over the next couple of days. Women will like that.



CAMEROTA: Let me play for you a moment that many pundits felt that he didn't answer adequately or well. This was about when it came up, and Lester Holt asked him about the birther conspiracy. Let's watch that moment.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



HOLT: We're talking about racial healing in this segment. What do you say to Americans...



TRUMP: Well, it was nothing -- I say nothing. I say nothing, because I was able to get him to produce it. He should have produced it a long time before. I say nothing.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



CAMEROTA: So he says, "I say nothing to the people who were offended," to the voters, to the viewers. Was that the right response?



CONWAY: I think if you played the portion of that before, when the question first arose, Alisyn, what he's saying is the three things that he said in that press conference 11 days ago, which is where this started. He got him to produce a birth certificate. He believes he was born in this country.



And now he's going to move on, too. And he said that very clearly in the clip that wasn't there. He said, "I'm going to move on to creating jobs, move on to defeating ISIS, move on to talking about the disasters of Obamacare, education fixes, et cetera."



And that's actually what Americans are saying. We expected that question last night. And he was prepared for that question. I just would have liked to have heard more about Benghazi or e-mails or the Clinton Foundation, since these are very clearly in the news.



One of our guests last night was Mark Geist, not Mark Cuban, Mark Geist, who is a Benghazi hero and survivor. And you know, he was within several feet or yards of them. And I think it's a good reminder to Americans of what her record is on that particular issue.



CAMEROTA: Was there -- since you were prepared for the birther question and you knew that would come up, was there any talk in the week leading up to this debate of getting Mr. Trump to apologize for that?



CONWAY: Well, I won't reveal internal debate preparation, but..



CAMEROTA: Would you have liked to have seen him apologize and truly put it to bed?



CONWAY: You know, apologies are so personal. What he has said in the past, very recent past, is that, if he has offended anyone, that he regrets that, particularly if it has, quote, "caused personal pain." And I think apologies should be received by people who feel that regret is meant to be felt by people who feel like they have been caused personal pain. So he put that out there for those who feel like they have been aggrieved.



CAMEROTA: But I mean, not with the birther issue. We just heard Donna Brazile here, who was emotional talking about it. Because she said that, you know, that for her, her family, her grandparents didn't have -- weren't able to have a birth certificate, or her great- grandparents. And so it does offend them and hurt them in a different way. Has he considered apologizing to those people?



CONWAY: You're asking me questions about the way he feels. And as his campaign manager, I can tell you that I appreciated the fact that he took Hillary Clinton on, on super predators, a very hurtful term that she used in the 1990s and elsewhere to describe African-American youth.



CAMEROTA: But she did apologize for that.



CONWAY: Well, she apologized for using the word, since it will cost her votes, perhaps. But she -- but she also apologized for setting up an e-mail server, but we don't know where the 33,000 e-mails are. We don't know why.



I mean, I know that she's not fond of the Second Amendment, but she's very fond of the Fifth Amendment. She's got five people taking the Fifth just last week. This is a current burning issue.



And I think last night people will look at these two candidates, and they'll say, "Was my mind changed at all about who is the change maker, who's the disrupter, who's somebody who's actually created jobs for a living versus somebody who just talks about it."



[07:25:06] I mean, her policies of trickle-down government are very potentially harmful to this country. The regulations, the higher taxes, the lack of energy independence and unleashing an energy infrastructure. There was none of that last night. I don't think anybody turned in and said, "Will my job be safer? Will I get a better paying one under Hillary Clinton?" should feel like they heard anything about it. CAMEROTA: Speaking of burning issues, let's talk about climate



change. Because it's hard to know exactly where Mr. Trump stands on it. So let me play for you that exchange last night.



(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)



CLINTON: Take clean energy. some country is going to be the clean energy super power of the 21st century. Donald thinks that climate change is a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese. I think it's real.



TRUMP: I did not -- I do not say that.



CLINTON: The science is real, and I think it's important that...



TRUMP: I do not say that.



(END VIDEO CLIP)



CAMEROTA: So does he think that climate change is a hoax or not a hoax? Or it's real?



CONWAY: I think that's based on a tweet. Right. I just love that, that this whole man, whether he's giving a "Yes, I guess so" answer to Howard Stern about invading Iraq as a private citizen on an entertainment radio show, or through a tweet, we're supposed to understand all his policies. This woman proudly went and cast a vote for the Iraq War in the well of the Senate. And she's been an interventionist...



CAMEROTA: But on climate change, he's the one who sends out the tweets. I mean, he sends out what his thinking is on these policies. He's the one using that. "The concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to make the U.S. manufacturing non- competitive." I mean, these are his thoughts.



"Snowing in Texas and Louisiana. Record-setting freezing temperatures throughout the country and beyond. Global warming is an expensive hoax." Does he believe that global warming is a hoax?



CONWAY: He believes that global warming isn't actually occurring.



CAMEROTA: Naturally?



CONWAY: Naturally. That climate change is naturally occurring.



CAMEROTA: He believes in climate change?



CONWAY: That there are shifts naturally occurring.



CAMEROTA: He doesn't believe it's manmade.



CONWAY: Correct.



CAMEROTA: So he believes that the idea that it's manmade is a hoax.



CONWAY: No, I didn't say that. CAMEROTA: I mean, he said it. I'm repeating his tweet. So he



believes that that part is a hoax.



CONWAY: He believes that climate change is naturally occurring. We don't know what Hillary Clinton believes, because nobody ever asks her.



CAMEROTA: Well, she talked about it last night. She does not believe it's a hoax.



CONWAY: She gave us the canned, scripted responses, Alisyn, about somebody's going to be the clean energy super power. I mean, she -- look, I can't blame her. She obviously was over-prepared, and she wanted to make sure we heard every single scripted moment, including the snarky ones that she had prepared to stay.



But I don't think people looking at the split screen last night see somebody who projected confidence and a break with the past. I mean, if you're part of the 70 percent of Americans who say, "I want this country to head in a different direction," there's no way that you can say with a straight face, "I want Hillary Clinton, who represents 25 years of the same."



CAMEROTA: What would you tell him to tweak for next time, for the next debate?



CONWAY: Well, I would tell him to take heed of what then-Senator Barack Obama said in 2008, which is Hillary Clinton will say anything to get elected and to realize, have that in his head, to realize that she'll say things that aren't particularly polite and aren't necessarily true and to not let her off the hook with those.



But you know, I think the more she talks is not necessarily good for her, because she sounds very lawyerly, very lengthy, shifting and everything.



Speaking of talking, was there anything wrong with his microphone last night?



CONWAY: I heard that from people who were in the audience. I was backstage. And it seemed fine on TV, but he did seem to feel like it was...



CAMEROTA: Yes, he said that he thinks he had a faulty microphone. Although, people on TV could hear him.



CONWAY: But he -- I guess when he was there, he said it. You know, in other words -- that's what he said. I wasn't at the podium.



But then I also heard from people in the audience immediately their reaction was when we were backstage that was there something wrong with your microphone.



CAMEROTA: In the hall -- in the hall they couldn't hear him as well. Is that what you're saying?



CONWAY: That's what a few people said, yes.



CAMEROTA: Kellyanne, thanks so much for being on NEW DAY.



CONWAY: Thank you. Thanks for having me.



CAMEROTA: All right, coming up in our next hour, we will hear from the Clinton campaign manager, Robby Mook, as well as Trump's running make, Governor Mike Pence.



CUOMO: All right. Now that you've gotten to hear from both sides, we're going to bring you analysis from our panel of experts. Who won round one? And what will it mean going into the rest of the race? Next.



(COMMERCIAL BREAK)