Fareed Zakaria
Fareed hosts Fareed Zakaria GPS, is a columnist for The Washington Post and the author of "In Defense of a Liberal Education" and "The Post-American World." Fareed Zakaria GPS is an international and domestic affairs program on that airs Sundays on CNN/U.S. and around the world on CNN International. The forum is a television destination for global newsmakers, U.S. politicians, CEOs, and thought-leading authors and journalists. He is based in New York.

Interviews on Fareed Zakaria GPS Senator Barack Obama, former U.S. president Bill Clinton, former U.S. vice president Al Gore, U.S. National Security Advisor Susan Rice, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, U.S. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Adm. Martin Dempsey, the Dalai Lama, British Prime Minister David Cameron, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao, Prime Minister of India Manmohan Singh, King Abdullah II, former Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Turkish President Abdullah Gül, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif, Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev, Goldman Sachs CEO Lloyd Blankfein, JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon, World Bank president Robert Zoellick, Google Chairman Eric Schmidt, and Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates, among other newsmakers.

In addition to anchoring his weekend program on CNN, Zakaria regularly contributes his thoughtful analysis of world events and public affairs to CNN.com, quarterly CNN/TIME magazine specials, and other programming across CNN Worldwide.

Primetime Fareed Zakaria GPS specials have included "India at a Crossroads" in 2013 and "The GPS Roadmap for Making Immigration Work" in 2012.

In October 2010, Zakaria hosted his first-ever primetime Fareed Zakaria GPS special on CNN, "Restoring the American Dream", featuring exclusive interviews with four global CEOs and offering rare insights to the international economic crisis. TIME featured his article, "How to Restore the American Dream," as its cover story on October 21, 2010. In 2012, Zakaria was honored with a George Foster Peabody Award for this special.

Zakaria is a highly-regarded author. The Post-American World was published in May 2008 and became an immediate bestseller in the U.S. and around the world; an updated version, The Post-American World 2.0 was published in May 2011. His work, The Future of Freedom, was also an international bestseller published in 2007, has been translated into over 20 languages. From Wealth to Power: The Unusual Origins of America's World Role was published in 1999.

Zakaria was editor of Newsweek International from 2000 to 2010 and a columnist for Newsweek. Prior to his tenure at Newsweek, Zakaria was managing editor of Foreign Affairs, a leading journal of international politics and economics from 1992 to 2010. He has served as an analyst for ABC News, a roundtable member of the ABC News political affairs program This Week with George Stephanopoulos, and as the host of Foreign Exchange with Fareed Zakaria on PBS.

Zakaria has won numerous awards and been named to various lists, including Foreign Policy magazine's list of "Top 100 Global Thinkers" and Newsweek magazine's "Power 50" list of the most influential political figures of 2010. In 1999, Esquire magazine named Zakaria as "One of the 21 Most Important People of the 21st Century."

He serves on the boards of Yale University, the Council of Foreign Relations, the Trilateral Commission, and Shakespeare and Company, a theater group in the Berkshires. He has received honorary degrees from Brown, the University of Miami, and Oberlin College, among other educational institutions.

Zakaria earned a bachelor's degree from Yale University and a doctorate in political science from Harvard University.

On Twitter, follow Fareed, @FareedZakaria. You can also sign up for the Fareed's Global Briefing newsletter here.