You've Never Seen a "Cosmopolitan" Cover Like This Before
In what various media outlets are calling "scary" and "provocative, powerful, and potentially polarizing," Cosmopolitan UK has a mocked-up cover of its February issue featuring a woman suffocating on the magazine's plastic wrapping, in an effort to draw attention to so-called "honor killings," murders in which women and girls are killed by family members for bringing dishonor upon the family, usually by being perceived as breaking expectations around morality, marriage, or sexuality. The cover is a reference to Shafilea Ahmed, a 17-year-old British Pakistani girl whose parents choked her to death with a plastic bag in front of her siblings.

Contrary to some media reports, the plastic cover image isn't the actual February magazine cover — it's a mock-up to support a campaign Cosmopolitan UK is working on with Karma Nirvana, a U.K. women's rights organization. The organization is working with Cosmo to promote a national day of remembrance on July 14 for women and girls murdered in honor killings. Earlier this week, they launched a report by Emily Dyer, a research fellow at the Henry Jackson Society, called Honour Killings in the UK. According to Cosmo UK, the report found that:

"The majority of honour killings are carried out on women, by close male family members — although men can be victims, and women have played both active and passive roles in killings and attempted killings.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

"Due to the nature of the issue, the scale of the problem is unknown, but around 29 cases of killings or attempted killings have been reported in the media over the last five years.

"There is currently a severe lack of awareness among schools, while police forces are failing to properly identify, record, and report 'honour'-based crimes.

"Raising awareness is a critical step in challenging the problem"

"Honor killings" are generally thought to be under-reported and impacting thousands of women every year. Some 1,000 womenwere murdered in Pakistan in honor killings last year alone.

Follow Jill on Twitter.