Chapter Four: The Lash and the Loom
Eli Whitney submitted the above drawing of his cotton gin when he applied for a patent in 1794. In the end, Whitney made little money from his revolutionary invention. (NATIONAL ARCHIVES)

Eli Whitney submitted the above drawing of his cotton gin when he applied for a patent in 1794. In the end, Whitney made little money from his revolutionary invention.

Past the heavy glass doors of the world's most famous jewelry store, two glimmering rings sit waiting to be selected for the proper marriage. One is a diamond-inlaid platinum band selling for $11,700, the other a matching engagement ring priced at $37,900. Though it's not required, a bride and groom might find it easier to afford such luxury if they come from the "right" families. Such was the case with the man who, with a partner, started the world's most famous jewelry store. Charles L. Tiffany originally sold goods in the company store to workers in his father's cotton mills in the hills of 19th century Connecticut, in a town named Killingly. He and the son of another mill owner bet a $1,000 stake they could make it in New York City. They made it. Today Tiffany & Co. is an international business worth $3.3 billion, and a symbol of opulence and success. That $1,000 investment - about $15,000 in today's dollars - is the start of just one of many strands of wealth created by the booming New England textile industry in the 19th century, an explosion that helped turn Connecticut from a colonial outpost of farms and villages into a center of manufacturing and international trade. Behind this transition were men of ingenuity and vision who invented the machinery, built the mills and developed revolutionary industrial processes. What kept the mills humming were thousands of immigrant men, women and children who worked under often-dreadful conditions. And what made it all possible were hundreds of thousands of slaves who, toiling for free under even worse conditions but at a convenient distance hundreds of miles away, provided the raw material: Cotton. Before 1820, Connecticut's main export was food and drink. Most clothing, made from wool or linen, was woven at home. Within 20 years, wool and cotton were the state's top products, and by 1850, tiny Connecticut ranked fifth in the nation in the number of cotton mills. By the Civil War, the state was producing wool and cotton goods worth nearly $14 million a year, not including the mills making thread, yarn and other cotton products. The fortunes of Charles Tiffany and John Young and countless others who made names for themselves in Connecticut as merchants, manufacturers and traders have their roots in what Charles Sumner, abolitionist and later a senator from Massachusetts, called an "unhallowed union ... between the cotton planters and fleshmongers of Louisiana and Mississippi and the cotton spinners and traffickers of New England - between the lords of the lash and the lords of the loom." "The first industrial spy" Samuel Slater grew up in a small mill town near Manchester, England. At 14, he went to work in a factory and for six years learned every aspect of cotton manufacture, including how to build and operate the spinning loom introduced by Richard Arkwright in 1768. Arkwright's innovation helped produce the first sturdy cotton yarn. Though Slater eventually became a mill manager, he soon decided he could find better opportunities in America. In the years after the American Revolution, Britain strictly protected its textile industries, banning the export of any related technology and the emigration of anyone with expertise in the field. So Slater knew he was breaking the law when, in 1789, he disguised himself as a farmer and slipped past British agents to sail for New York. He had the plans for the Arkwright loom in his head. Slater, whom Putnam town historian Robert Miller calls "the first industrial spy," arrived in Rhode Island and created America's first Arkwright-style mill in a small shop in Pawtucket. "Slater system" operations soon sprang up on streams all over the state. He moved into eastern Connecticut in 1804, buying 2,000 acres and the right to use power along the Quinebaug River in Putnam. His father-in-law, Oziel Wilkinson, followed the next year, buying the Pomfret Manufacturing Co. Slater created more than an industry; he created a way of life in southern New England. Each mill and its surrounding village, built around small, fast-moving streams, operated under a single extended family, and ownership and management were based on blood and marriage ties, says Barbara Tucker, a Slater biographer and history professor at Eastern Connecticut State University. Families who lived in the mill villages supplied the labor, including children as young as 7, and often shopped in a company store and attended company schools and churches. By and large, the mill owners saw no conflict between reliance on slave labor for their raw materials and a morality that had begun to condemn the ownership of one human being by another. "They separated their conscience from profit," says Myron Stachiw, an archaeologist, college professor and expert on Rhode Island's textile industry. And those profits were large. When Slater died in 1835, his estate was worth $9 million - more than $153 million today. Some Rhode Island textile manufacturers who were abolitionists had family ties to the slave trade. One of Slater's original partners, Moses Brown, whose family helped endow Brown University, lobbied for the emancipation of slaves while his brother, John, continued the family business of slave trading. Though moral sentiment in New England turned increasingly against slavery in the 1800s, outright opponents of the system who were willing to live out their beliefs were rare. They were akin to the modern consumer who declines to buy shoes made by child labor or a blouse sewn in a sweatshop. Jesse Garrettson Baldwin, a native of Meriden, was one: He became a peddler in the South and returned to his home state committed to the abolitionist cause. "He was obsessive about his anti-slavery views," says historian Elizabeth Ann Warner, author of "A Pictorial History of Middletown." "He would not use cane sugar because it was produced by slave labor. There were stories about him carrying his own lump sugar with him when he traveled. And he refused to wear spun clothing." Baldwin's webbing business in Middletown used cotton grown on a settlement where all the workers were free. He also made certain that the canvas for the sails of his schooner was produced by free labor.

"Apply to Mr. Whitney" Many historians cast Eli Whitney, inventor of the cotton gin, as the man who crowned "King Cotton." But an exasperated William Brown, director of the Eli Whitney Museum in Hamden, insists the story is not that simple. The cotton gin "made short-staple cotton more profitable, but it did not revive slavery by itself," Brown says. "It made cotton fiber less expensive. ... It's a bit like saying net stockings led to prostitution." What's indisputable is that Whitney's timing was perfect. His gin came six years after the Constitutional Convention, which had postponed any federal regulation of the slave trade until 1808. At the time of the convention in 1787, cotton was largely a coastal crop, and many Southern plantations were struggling to survive. Whitney's invention in 1793 revolutionized cotton production, making it easier and more profitable to process. This fueled the spread of cotton as a staple crop across the South, which increased the demand for slaves to work the fields. Whitney, born on a farm in Westboro, Mass., early showed signs of a genius for the mechanical. He graduated in 1792 from Yale at age 27 and the next year agreed to take a job as a tutor for the children of a South Carolina plantation owner. On the boat ride south, he met Catherine Greene, plantation owner and widow of the Revolutionary War Gen. Nathaniel Greene. When he discovered on arrival that his salary had been cut in half, Whitney rejected the job and accepted Greene's invitation to stay with her on Mulberry Plantation in Georgia. Most of the cotton then grown in the United States was the long-fiber variety, or "long-staple," that took its name from the Sea Islands off the coast of South Carolina and Georgia. With fibers up to 2 inches long, the cotton made high-quality cloth that still is prized today; catalog retailer J. Peterman sells a polo shirt made from Sea Island cotton grown in the West Indies for $138. But, then as now, its limited supply and high cost curtailed its utility. Short-staple cotton was better suited to inland soils, but its sticky green seeds defied the rollers used to process Sea Island cotton. A slave, working by hand, could clean only a pound a day. Greene's neighboring plantation owners were bemoaning the inefficient system. She reportedly told them, "Apply to my young friend, Mr. Whitney. He can make anything." "Whitney faced the problem of removing seeds from the cotton," Brown explains. "Instead, he pulled the cotton from the seeds." The gin (short for engine), which has remained essentially unchanged since 1793, uses tiny wire hooks that grip the cotton fiber and pull it through slots too narrow for the seeds to pass through. As the cylinder holding the teeth turns in one direction, a second cylinder with brushes rotating in the opposite direction pulls the lint from the teeth. In support of his 1794 patent application, Whitney wrote to Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson - who wanted a gin for his own plantation - that the gin would allow a slave to clean 50 pounds of green seed cotton a day. With the prospect of a 50-fold increase in production, plantation owners immediately began cultivating more and more acres of upland cotton. They pirated Whitney's invention, built their own gins and began importing more slaves from Africa, the West Indies and states in the Upper South. As the availability of cheap fiber increased, New England's mills expanded, Brown says. That expansion led to a greater reliance on slave labor that affected people far beyond the cotton fields and the mill floor. "The textile industry produced a commodity that dehumanized all the participants," he says - including the owners of the plantations and the mills, who were seen by opponents of slavery as corrupt for profiting on the backs of human chattel. Nevertheless, Brown refuses to indict Whitney, who is widely considered one of the most important innovators in the history of American industry. "Comparisons are odious. He did not complain about slavery; he also didn't advocate slavery. ... Was he aware that he would be a component in the resurgence of slavery? Probably. Did he accept it? Yes." Whitney earned almost no money from his gin, as the Southern planters refused to pay royalties or otherwise compensate him. Disillusioned after years of lawsuits, he turned his attention to other inventions. He designed a system of interchangeable parts that allowed unskilled workers to make complicated products and paved the way for modern mass production. He honed the technology by making rifles at his manufacturing complex, Whitneyville, in the shop that is now part of the Whitney Museum on the New Haven-Hamden line. Samuel Colt eventually took Whitney's machinery north to Hartford and amassed a fortune supplying his famous revolvers and other guns to armies around the world. "Make them last as long as possible" Within 30 years after the appearance of the Arkwright loom and the gin, cotton dominated the U.S. economy. By 1820, it was the most important crop in the nation, representing 32 percent of all exported goods. By the eve of the Civil War in 1860, cotton made up nearly 60 percent of American exports. As cotton grew, so grew slavery. The slave population of the United States more than doubled in 30 years, to 1.5 million by 1820. That year, the nation produced 73,222 bales of cotton (a bale is about 500 pounds). Forty years later, most of the country's 3.8 million slaves were engaged in planting, weeding, picking, ginning and packaging 3.9 million bales. To say it was a hard life almost trivializes what it meant to be a slave in the South. Each state had an elaborate system of laws and customs that delineated how a master might use his human property and institutionalized the concept that blacks were inferior to whites and best suited to a life in slavery. Owners bought and sold slaves, or bequeathed them to their heirs, as they might livestock, with little or no regard to family connections. When whites did express concern for their welfare, it was chiefly in the interest of protecting valuable property.

Kenneth M. Stampp, in his landmark 1956 study of slavery, "The Peculiar Institution," cites a planter writing in an agricultural journal in 1849: "The time has been that the farmer could kill up and wear out one Negro to buy another; but it is not so now. Negroes are too high in proportion to the price of cotton, and it behooves those who own them to make them last as long as possible." On the plantations, slaves worked from "can see to can't see," from first light until dark. At the full moon, work continued into the night. Frederick Law Olmsted, a Hartford native who traveled widely through the antebellum South as a journalist before he became a renowned landscape architect, estimated that the average workday lasted 16 hours on the cotton plantation he visited in 1854 in Natchez, Miss. At noon, the 67 field hands stopped hoeing, planting or weeding long enough to swallow a few mouthfuls of cold bacon. Then they returned to the fields until the overseer called a halt, well after sunset. The slaves most dreaded harvest time, when they "toted" their baskets of cotton to the gin house to be weighed. Solomon Northrup, a free New Yorker who was kidnapped and endured 12 years of slavery in Louisiana, said this was the worst part of the worst season. If a slave had picked more than his usual weight of cotton, the overseer would expect that much extra each day; if he picked less, everyone knew the consequences. "His approach to the gin-house is always with fear and trembling," Northrup wrote in "Twelve Years a Slave," published in 1853. "Most frequently they have too little, and therefore it is they are not anxious to leave the field. After weighing, follow the whippings..." Whippings, the preferred form of discipline, were delivered in the field, too. Watching 30 or 40 women hoeing the fields in Natchez, Olmsted saw "a black driver walking among them with a whip, which he often cracked at them, sometimes allowing the lash to fall lightly upon their shoulders." Some owners preferred that whipping not "mark" their slaves and thereby reduce their market value; but many used much harsher discipline. A man named Gordon, his back scored with keloid scars from lash marks, escaped from a Mississippi plantation during the Civil War and became the subject of a photograph taken by a Union army surgeon that appeared in Harper's Weekly and helped belie the myth of the happy slave. Harriet Tubman, who escaped from a Maryland plantation and gained fame as a conductor on the Underground Railroad, developed epilepsy after an overseer aiming at another slave missed his target and hit her in the head with a lead weight, fracturing her skull, when she was in her early teens. After the routine whippings of Northrup's fellow slaves, the work continued: feeding livestock, chopping wood, baling cotton. "Finally, at a late hour, they reach the quarters, sleepy and overcome with the long day's toil," Northrup wrote. Then it was time to care for their own needs - grinding corn, building a fire to cook the next day's meager dinner. Northrup and his fellow slaves received their weekly allotment of 3½ pounds of bacon and enough corn to equal a peck of meal. On the Natchez plantation, it was 4 pounds of bacon, supplemented at Christmas by gifts such as coffee and molasses. Masters typically gave slaves Sunday off, and sometimes part of Saturday. Slaves were expected to use the time to raise additional food, repair their dwellings and mend their clothing - clothing made from cheap cotton and wool cloth manufactured in the North. Cheap cloth was not simply a matter of economy for Southern planters, it was part of the whole system of degradation. A decree issued in 1822 by a grand jury in Charleston, S.C., stated: "Negroes should be permitted to dress only in coarse stuffs such as coarse woolens or worsted stuffs for winter - and coarse cotton stuffs for summer. ... Every distinction should be created between the whites and the negroes, calculated to make the latter feel the superiority of the former." Killingly's family ties By the time that Charleston grand jury issued its decree, Killingly was on its way to having more cotton mills than any other town in Connecticut. Among the men who helped make the town a leader was Comfort Tiffany, Charles' father. Comfort and his brother, Ebenezer, arrived from Rhode Island in 1807. The Tiffanys formed part of the group that organized the Danielson Manufacturing Co., and it was there that the Tiffany family entered the retail business, operating the company store. By 1820, the company reportedly employed 37 workers in the mill, 20 of them children, producing "yarn, plaids, stripes and checkered shirtings and sheetings." Around that time, the Tiffany brothers sold their interest in Danielson Manufacturing and crossed the Quinebaug River to Brooklyn, where they built the Quinebaug Manufacturing Co. Following the Slater model, they erected a mill village, complete with tenement houses for the workers and a community garden. With the village came another company store. Back across the river, Ebenezer Young had acquired an interest in the Chestnut Hill cotton factory in Killingly. He was a rare specimen among mill owners in Killingly - a native. Educated at Yale, he had a law office in town and served in the state legislature, the Continental Congress and the U.S. Congress. By 1820, he had become the sole proprietor of the eponymous Judge Young Mill. Leonard Ballou arrived from Rhode Island several years later, after building mills in his home state for the Wilkinsons and the Slaters. He and his father-in-law purchased a small gin mill on the Five Mile River, a tributary of the Quinebaug, in 1825. Marriage tied these families together: Ballou's daughter, Lydia, married Ebenezer Young's son, the storeowner John Young, in 1842. The year before, Charles Tiffany had married Young's sister, Harriet. Ballou's mill really began to prosper in 1833, when he started buying his own cotton and selling the cloth independently in New York. As the cotton industry improved, the annual output of the mill during the years leading to the Civil War increased to $60,000 - or more than $1.1 million today. By the time he sold his mill in early 1864, Ballou had amassed a considerable fortune. He settled in Norwich, where he had built two houses in the 1840s. He became a director of two banks and the local gas company, as well as president of two companies that supplied water power to the town. His section of Killingly is still known as Ballouville.