Welcome to the Official Site of Town of Proctor Vermont
Announcements

"Good Stuff"

August 13 - Good Stuff:

The following groups/organizations were recognized for their outstanding service to the Proctor community: Judy Frazier reminded everyone of the Our Yard fundraiser on August 17, 2018 6:00 – 8:00 p.m. at the Marble Museum. Proctor Gas and PES students made the cover of the National Gas Association Magazine. The Music for Vets concert will be held in the Park on August 18, noon-8:00 p.m. Carol Protivansky for making a curtain for the tables. Jim Moore for repairing Gorham Bridge at no cost.

Upcoming Proctor Events

Mark Your Calendars

September 29 - Fall Festival

October 12 & 13 - Proctor Free Library Book Sale

Transfer Station Dump Day

(please note changes to the program)

The Transfer Station on Deere Road will be open to Proctor Residents on Saturday, October 6, 2018 from noon to 5:00 p.m. Trash, Recyclables, Metal, Clean Wood and Yard Waste will be accepted. Tires will not be accepted.

The amount of trash per household will be limited to the equivalent of one pickup load. There will be a charge of $2.00 for Proctor Maroon Bags for small amounts of trash or $20.00 for a Bulky Waste Tag for one pickup load or equivalent. Bags and Tags will be available at the Town Office from 8:00 am to 4:00 pm Monday through Friday. Bags or Tags will not be sold the day of the event. Proof of residency will be required.

The Rutland County Solid Waste District will be at the Transfer Station collecting household hazard wastes and electronics from Noon to 3:00 p.m.

NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE

On July 23, 2018, the Selectboard of the Town of Proctor, Vermont, adopted a Grounds Maintenance Ordinance pursuant to 24 VSA § 2291 (13), (14) and (15) and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59 in order to regulate maintenance of the grounds of properties in the Town of Proctor. This notice is published pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §1972 to inform the public of the ordinance and of the citizens’ right to petition for a vote to disapprove the ordinance.

The full text of the ordinance is available at the Town Clerk’s Office, 45 Main Street, Proctor, Vermont and may be examined during regular office hours.

Title 24 V.S.A. §1973 grants the citizens the right to petition for a vote at a special or annual Town Meeting to disapprove ordinances adopted by the Selectboard. To exercise this right, citizens must present to the Selectboard or the Town Clerk a petition for a vote on the question of disapproving the ordinance signed by not less than five percent (5%) of the Town’s qualified voters. The petition must be presented within forty-four (44) days following the date of the adoption of the amendments. Unless a petition requesting a vote is filed pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §1973, the Grounds Maintenance Ordinance shall become effective sixty (60) days from the date of said adoption.

Click here for full notice Click here for full Ordinance

Front Porch Forum

Local Talk on Front Porch Forum

Have you joined our local Front Porch Forum? FPF helps neighbors connect and build community by hosting a statewide network of online local forums. More than half of Vermont households participate with hundreds more joining every month. People use their FPF to find lost animals, offer assistance to neighbors, organize local projects, share crime reports, draw crowds to events, highlight small businesses, seek contractor recommendations, and much more. Started 10 years ago, FPF is a free service and it's based in Vermont. Learn more at http://frontporchforum.com Click here for more information.

Proctor Water Department

Consumer Confidence Report

Annually the Proctor Water Department prepares a Consumer Confidence Report providing details about where your water comes from, what it contains and how it compares to Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and state standards. This report is designed to inform you about the quality of the water and services delivered to you every day.

Click here to view or download the report.

Town of Proctor Maps

The following link will provide access to Proctor maps.

http://www.caigisonline.com/proctorvt/