No Specific Cause Found Yet Linking Dry Max Diapers to Diaper Rash
The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) and Health Canada (HC) have reviewed consumer incident reports and other information involving Pampers Dry Max diapers. To date, the review has not identified any specific cause linking Dry Max diapers to diaper rash.

Both agencies will continue to evaluate consumer complaints related to Pampers Dry Max diapers and will provide parents with updated information if this assessment changes. As always, parents and caregivers are advised to seek the attention of a medical professional if they have any concerns about adverse health reactions.

From April through August 2010, CPSC received nearly 4,700 incident reports about diaper rash. Nearly 85 percent of these complaints came in May and then dropped off significantly. As part of its technical evaluation, staff from each agency considered certain characteristics of the diaper, including the materials used, the construction of the diaper, and heat and moisture retention issues.

In addition, CPSC staff reviewed clinical and toxicological data found in published, peer-reviewed medical literature. CPSC also critically reviewed data submitted by Procter & Gamble (P&G) and the results of a human cumulative irritation patch study conducted by P&G in May 2010. Further, chemistry, toxicology and pediatric medicine information provided by Health Canada was reviewed by CPSC.

While the investigation thus far does not find a link between the diapers and the health complaints received, CPSC recognizes the serious concerns expressed by parents. CPSC staff cannot rule out that there may exist a health concern for some babies, especially those babies that may be sensitive and develop rashes or other skin problems as a result of contact with the materials in this or other products.

Most babies exhibit diaper rash at least once in their lifetime. If parents or caregivers believe that their child is suffering from a rash that they believe to be related to a diaper, CPSC staff suggests that they discontinue use of the diaper and contact their pediatrician.

Consumers are encouraged to report any health or safety incidents related to the use of a consumer product. Easy-to-use incident report forms are available on CPSC's website at www.saferproducts.gov or on Health Canada's website at http://www.healthcanada.gc.ca/reportaproduct

Additional information on diaper rash can be found on the American Academy of Pediatrics website at www.healthychildren.org

CPSC is still interested in receiving incident or injury reports that are either directly related to this product or involve a different hazard with the same product. Please tell us about it by visiting www.saferproducts.gov

Spanish Version