Frequently Asked Questions

What is Crayola ColorCycle?

Crayola is all about innovative solutions ~ in particular for kids and the environment. ColorCycle is our latest sustainability initiative designed to repurpose Crayola markers.

Can any markers be sent in or just Crayola brand markers?

Crayola ColorCycle will accept all brands of plastic markers, not just Crayola markers. That includes dry erase markers and highlighters! ColorCycle will eliminate placing hundreds of tons of markers into landfills.

Who can participate in the ColorCycle program? Is it available to schools outside of the United States?

Any school, kindergarten through 12th grade in the contiguous 48 United States (excludes Hawaii, Alaska and Puerto Rico) and some areas in Canada can participate. Unfortunately, there are geographic areas that are not included at this time. Please check the ColorCycle registration page to see if your postal code is included in our Canadian program.





Why are consumers, daycare centers and preschools not eligible to participate?

We are hoping to roll out the program to include home schools, daycares and preschools in the future. In the meantime, please feel free to contact your local school and if they are already participating, you can drop off your used markers there. If your local school is not participating, encourage them to do so by visiting www.crayola.com/colorcycle.





How do I get a program started at my school?

It is easy to do! Just visit our registration page to sign up or log-in and get started today. An adult must be the school contact. In just a few easy steps, you can begin to collect markers and print out a label for shipping. This program is free to the schools. Contact your principal or PTO to get them signed up and begin collecting markers. You will find a printable poster and a parent letter on the website that you can use to get things started at your school!





How do I package the markers for shipping? How many markers can we send?

Any sturdy cardboard box with minimal outer markings will work. The more markers you ship, the more efficient this program will be. We suggest a minimum of 100 markers and a maximum of up to 40 pounds.





Where do I get a mailing label for the box?

Go to www.crayola.com/colorcycle to print a Crayola pre-paid FedEx shipping label for delivery of the collected markers to the facility for repurposing.





How can I find out more about ColorCycle and other Crayola environmental initiatives?

For more information about the ColorCycle program, visit www.crayola.com/colorcycle. Visit our Green Initiatives page to read more about all of Crayola’s other environmental initiatives including our 30-acre solar farm.

When registering my school name and address, I receive an error message that tells me to verify the address and try again. My information is correct. What do I do now?

The "school name" field is limited to 100 characters. If you believe you have typed more than 100 characters, shorten or abbreviate your school name and try again.

I am having a difficult time viewing or printing my shipping label. Any suggestions?

We have found that IE 8 does not work well for viewing and printing shipping labels. If you are using Internet Explorer, try another browser such as Mozilla Firefox or Chrome. In addition, make sure you have "Allow Pop Ups" selected in your browser and that Acrobat Reader is installed.



FedEx hasn't come to pick up our marker collection. Can you help us?



Any FedEx representative who visits your school can accept your markers for recycling. If you do not have a regular FedEx pick up, you can: