Prime Buzz
All week long, politicos from Delaware to California were — in the immortal words of songstress Sarah McLachlan — “building a mystery.”

Mystery #1: Why by Friday afternoon were Democrats almost giddy? These are the same Democrats lined up for the November slaughterhouse.

Just listen to Jackson …

Republican Kevin Yoder and Democrat Stephene Moore held their first debate this afternoon in Kansas’ 3rd Congressional District race. There were some pretty clear distinctions made.

Please Fox News, don’t sue Prime Buzz! It’s not our fault poverty is at the highest rate since 1994, or that strippers in Missouri now have to wear clothes. These are tough times. Enjoy them while you can…

Cutting and reshaping the tax structure on both sides of the state line heats up the blogosphere, the Republican Party has found a way to unite courtesy of President Barack Obama’s popularity, and should journalists make campaign contributions?

Remember soccer moms?

Now we’re talking Walmart moms, women with children under 18 who have shopped at the giant retailer within the past month. They’re also not strong partisans.

But they could have a strong voice in who wins the Senate contest between …

City takes earnings tax case to court…Yoder, Moore in first debate…Did Mulally wink at Claycomo?…Nixon to offer “vision” of energy policy in state…

Taxification

Kansas City city attorney Galen Beaufort faces off against Let Voters Decide and the Attorney General’s office …

The White House is denying that first lady Michelle Obama ever described her White House life as “hell.”

Mrs. Obama’s spokeswoman, Katie McCormick Lelyveld, responded Thursday to a purported comment attributed to Mrs. Obama in a forthcoming book, “Carla and the Ambitious,” about French …

TOPEKA | Kansas Attorney General Steve Six said his office has convicted five Kansans as part of a new child pornography and sex crime investigation.

Six, a Democrat, said his office has charged another five suspects and opened 17 additional cases as a result of Project …

Blunt, Carnahan and Nixon in KC today. Is there an election coming up or something? Enjoy…

Democratic congressional candidate Stephene Moore launched her first TV ad of the 2010 campaign this morning.

It’s a combo bio-attack ad.

The ad, and an earlier media statement this week, signals the Moore campaign is beginning to ramp it up.

The Kansas Democratic Party …

Both U.S. Rep. Roy Blunt and Missouri Secretary of State Robin Carnahan are holding events with veterans in Kansas City this afternoon, the key steps to getting a candidate elected, and is Terrence Nash running against City Councilor John Sharp in the 6th District?

This one is called the “Commonsense Ten,” and the group is airing the ad in KC…and later statewide.

Note that all these groups are hammering Roy Blunt on the same “Washington insider” theme.

Carnahan plans KC stops…So does Ford honcho Alan Mulally…New study says Missouri doing better with motor-voter registrations…Moore/Yoder/Pelosi an issue….Metro police push Safe Havens program…

Nothing outruns my V8 Ford

Alan Mulally, Ford’s head guy, speaks to the Chamber …

Democratic candidate for Kansas Governor Tom Holland continued to hammer Sam Brownback Wednesday over the Republican’s one-time support for bailing out Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae.

“He will bail out those special interests but at the same time he won’t help out mainstreet …

The Kansas Chamber of Commerce has released its list of endorsements in this year’s Legislative contests.

The chamber gave its nod to candidates who oppose the recent sales tax hike passed by the Legislature.

“Instead of cutting spending during these tough times, the legislature …