1 dead, 19 injured as car hits crowd after a 'Unite the Right' rally in Charlottesville; driver in custody
CLOSE Graphic video: A bystander captures the moment a car slams into a crowd at a white nationalist protest in Charlottesville, Virginia. USA TODAY

A car plows into pedestrians and vehicles on the mall in Charlottesville after Saturday's white supremacist rally. The driver hit the knot of cars and people at high speed, then backed up and fled the scene. (Photo: Jeremiah Knupp, Special to The News Leader via USA TODAY Network)

CHARLOTTESVILLE — A 32-year-old woman died and at least 19 people were injured Saturday when a car crashed into a crowd of peaceful protesters leaving a "Unite the Right" rally that officials had declared an "unlawful assembly." State officials said the driver was in custody.

The planned rally had already been shut down following bottle-throwing clashes between alt-right demonstrators, counter-protesters, white nationalists, neo-Nazis and supporters of Black Lives Matter.

Al Thomas, Charlottesville police chief, said 35 people were injured in clashes between opposing groups and in the car crash. Their injuries ranged from life-threatening to minor, he said. The driver of the car will be charged with criminal homicide, Thomas said. Albermarle County Regional Jail officials identified the suspect as 20-year-old James Alex Fields of Ohio.

Police officials said Fields would be charged with one count of second degree murder, three counts of malicious wounding and one count of hit and run. In addition, the FBI announced Saturday night it would open a civil rights investigation into the circumstances of the death.

James Alex Fields, Jr., charged with second degree murder in Charlottesville, Va. (Photo: Albemarle Charlottesville Regional Jail)

“Our hearts break for the casualties and injuries,” Charlottesville Mayor Mike Signer said at a press conference.

About three hours after the car crash, a Virginia State Police Bell 407 helicopter crashed about 7 miles from the scene. Police reports said the helicopter crashed in a wooded area and the two pilots died. No one on the ground was injured. The helicopter had been assisting in police supervision of the protests.

Virginia State Police identified the two as Lt. Jay Cullen, 48, of Midlothian, Va. and Trooper-Pilot Berke Bates, 40, of Quinton, Va. Cullen was a 23-year veteran of the force and is survived by his wife and two sons. Bates was a three-year veteran of the force and joined the aviation unit last month.

The driver of a silver Dodge Challenger plowed into one of the groups streaming away from the rally at Emancipation Park through the narrow downtown streets.

More: Trump on Charlottesville brawls: 'There is no place for this kind of violence'

More: Shocking video shows car slam into protesters at 'Unite the Right' rally

More: Why is Charlottesville ground zero for white supremacists?

More: Confederate monuments, more than 700 across USA, aren't budging

President Trump, on vacation at his golf club in New Jersey, condemned “in the strongest possible terms” what he called an “egregious display of hatred, bigotry and violence on many sides” in Charlottesville. He called for “a swift restoration of law and order and the protection of innocent lives.”

Trump said he spoke with Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe and “we agreed that the hate and the division must stop and must stop right now.”

McAuliffe delivered a message to the white supremacists at an evening press conference: "Go home, you are not wanted in this great commonwealth, shame on you."

The governor declared a state of emergency shortly before 11 a.m. as the earlier protests and counter-protests turned unruly. He said he was “disgusted by the hatred, bigotry and violence” and blamed “mostly out-of-state protesters.”

The violence played out against a backdrop of unofficial, armed militia groups ringing the park, where the rally was called to protest the planned removal of a statue of Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee.

Some 500 protesters among the white nationalist and alt-right groups left the park shortly after state police, using megaphones, declared the gathering an "unlawful assembly" at 11:40 a.m., about 20 minutes before the rally was scheduled to begin.

Clusters of alt-right activists and counter-protesters remained, however, raising fears of more clashes. Police then put on gas masks as they stepped up efforts to disperse the crowds, which then left the park.

McAuliffe declared the state of emergency to give local authorities more resources to quell the disturbance. Officials had already deployed police to maintain order and McAuliffe had placed the Virginia National Guard on standby.

This is the Virginia statute on unlawful assembly #cvilleaug12pic.twitter.com/dyqdEN7k71 — VA State Police (@VSPPIO) August 12, 2017

Governor McAuliffe has declared a state of emergency to aid state response to violence at Alt-Right rally in Charlottesville — Terry McAuliffe (@GovernorVA) August 12, 2017

The clashes, mainly between white nationalists and anti-fascist groups, broke out as crowds moved toward the park where the Lee statue is located. At one point, dozens of people used wooden poles from their flags and banners as weapons. Others threw trash and bottles into the opposing ranks of protesters as the crowds swelled.

Numerous protesters came prepared, wearing helmets and flak jackets and charging into crowds holding plastic riot shields. Protesters on one side of a square held up anti-fascist signs and Black Lives Matter banners, while groups on the other displayed Confederate flags and iron cross banners.

Laurel Cummings, who works at the Oakhurst Inn in Charlottesville, said people have been canceling their rooms this weekend due to concerns about safety. She has also been warning guests about avoiding the downtown area.

“I came in to work today praying that no one was going to check in with a Swastika on their arm,” she said. “I knew I would refuse to check them in. If that gets me fired, I’m OK with that.”

From his vacation home in New Jersey, Trump tweeted: "We ALL must be united & condemn all that hate stands for. There is no place for this kind of violence in America. Lets come together as one!"

Unidentified militia has arrived at #EmancipationPark ahead of the #Charlottesville rally with guns in tow. pic.twitter.com/zCLCBU78PF — Craig Stanley (@_CraigStanley) August 12, 2017

As dusk fell Saturday, Charlottesville residents described a city buried in chaos.

"There were fist fights breaking out,” said Brad Slocum, a 2012 University of Virginia graduate who attended Saturday's rally at Emancipation Park. His friends were attacked with flag poles, he said, and he left with some bruises after an attempt to de-escalate a skirmish between a protester and counter protester.

Slocum said the scene was frightening, but showing up was “the right thing to do.”

“I believe in taking direct action to stand up for what I believe is right,” Slocum said. “I consider bigotry and racial discrimination to be completely unacceptable.”

Saturday's violence followed a spontaneous march the previous night by torch-wielding protesters on the University of Virginia campus that was broken up by police as an unlawful assembly after scuffles broke out and pepper spray filled the air.

That came after a federal court injunction rejected the city's earlier attempt to move the "Unite the Right" rally to another park.

On the eve of the rally, McAuliffe, a Democrat, said he would prefer that no one shows up at the "Unite the Right" rally.

"I want to urge my fellow Virginians who may consider joining either in support or opposition to the planned rally to make alternative plans," he said.

Police chief Thomas said the unfolding events created a "lot of anxiety" in the community, but he felt it had sufficient resources to meet the "significant challenge."

City authorities were particularly alarmed by Friday night's march by hundreds of white nationalists who gathered at the feet of a statue of Thomas Jefferson on the UVa. campus, chanting "You will not replace us."

Fights broke out as some marchers bearing tiki torches swung them at others, the Daily Progress reported.

UVa. President Teresa Sullivan said she was "deeply saddened and disturbed by the hateful behavior" displayed by the marchers.

In the past few months, white nationalist groups have paid particular attention to Charlottesville, a progressive college town where over 80% of residents voted for Hillary Clinton.

The Charlottesville City Council voted in May to sell the Lee statue, but a judge issued a temporary injunction that blocked the city from moving the statue for six months, The Daily Progress reported.

After the vote to remove the statue, several dozen demonstrators, led by prominent white supremacist Richard Spencer, gathered at night by the Lee statue, wielding torches.

In July, Ku Klux Klan members held a rally in Charlottesville in Justice Park, where they were met with more than a thousand upset counter-protesters.

White nationalist groups continue to return to Charlottesville partly because they saw the May torch light gathering as a great success, noted Heidi Beirich, director of the Intelligence Project at the Southern Poverty Law Center.

“They loved the imagery of that. They were over the moon about that,” she said. “They viewed it as having been a wonderful recruiting tool."

Gabe Cavallaro reports for The (Staunton) News Leader. Stanglin reported from McLean, Va. Contributing: Sarah Toy, Jayme Deerwester, Nick Penzenstadler.

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2wSjSdf