Want Viagra? Not without a note from wife
CLOSE

Mary Lou Marzian (Photo: File photo)

Kentucky men would have to visit a doctor twice and have signed permission from their wives before obtaining a prescription for Viagra or other such drugs for erectile dysfunction, according to a bill filed by a state legislator Thursday.

Rep. Mary Lou Marzian, a Louisville Democrat, the sponsor of House Bill 396, said it is merely an effort to protect men's health and ensure they are informed about a drug with potentially dangerous side effects.

"I want to protect these men from themselves," said Marzian, a nurse.

HB 396 also specifies that only married men may obtain the drug and requires "a man to make a sworn statement with his hand on a Bible that he will only use a prescription for a drug for erectile dysfunction when having sexual relations with his current spouse."

"This is about family values," Marzian said.

But she acknowledged the bill is a pointed response to several anti-abortion measures in the current legislative session, including Senate Bill 4, which requires a woman seeking an abortion to get counseling 24 hours in advance of the procedure from a health professional. The counseling must be in person or via live telecommunications.

SB 4, called the "informed consent" bill, passed last week and was signed into law by Gov. Matt Bevin.

Marzian, an abortion-rights supporter, said HB 396 also is meant to protest intervention by a predominantly male General Assembly into women's health.

"Do we really want a bunch or legislators interfering in private, personal, medical decisions?" she asked.

Marzian said she doesn't expect her bill to get very far. But she's not done.

Marzian said she also plans to file a bill requiring potential gun buyers to obtain counseling 24 hours in advance from victims of gun violence before the purchase.

"I'm just making sure the government is taking care of your safety," she said.

LIKE US ON FACEBOOK

Reporter Deborah Yetter can be reached at (502) 582-4228 or dyetter@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1XofhXZ