Jiftip's sticker that seals penis shut won't stop STIs
Experts have hit out at a new product designed to allow men to seal their penis shut before sex in place of wearing a condom.

Jiftip is marketed as an 'adhesive flexible sticker covering just the urethra for the containment of urine and semen'.

Makers of the controversial 'hypoallergenic' shield urge men to 'slam the door on foreign invaders and send a few eager baby-seeds back to their room'.

However, the Jiftip website in its small print does state that the product is 'not approved for STIs or pregnancy prevention purposes' – which health professionals have also warned.

Scroll down for video

The Jiftip shield is claimed to 'send a few eager baby-seeds back to their room' (file photo)

The controversial product slogan is to 'Feel your partner, Feel Freedom, Feel Safe'

Natika Halil, chief executive of sexual health charity the Family Planning Association, told The Sun Online: 'There's no evidence to suggest that this product is safe or effective, and it could potentially be very painful.

'As the company themselves say, it isn't approved to prevent pregnancy or sexually transmitted infections - so if you want to avoid either of those, we'd recommend avoiding this product as well.

Jiftip has shared this image on its Facebook page which promotes condomless sex

DON'T GLITTER BOMB YOUR VAGINA WARNS GYNECOLOGIST Now you can put a glitter-bomb in your vagina - and a top gynecologist is warning women to avoid the bizarre trend for the sake of their health. An online retailer, Pretty Woman Inc, is selling 'Passion Dust intimacy capsules' filled with candy-scented glitter. The product description on the website says: 'It is a small capsule that you insert into your vagina and allow it to naturally dissolve and release it's contents' - with a disclaimer to users that it does not cause any magical or supernatural sensations. According to the site they sold out of their stock in a matter of days. Dr Jen Gunter, a leading doctor based in Canada, warns this unusual concept is guaranteed to lead to a dangerous infection.

'It's quite concerning that the company implies that sex without condoms isn't 'real sex', as condoms are the only form of contraception that can help prevent sexually transmitted infections.'

Indeed Jiftip admits on its site on its frequently asked questions page that it does hurt upon removal but says 'you quickly build a tolerance to it'.

The top layer is said to be made out of polyurethane film, and the adhesive layer is used in speciality skin bandages, but with a maximum grip.

'This is not safe sex'

HIV charity Terrence Higgins Trust criticised the product's slogan, which is 'Feel your partner, Feel Freedom, Feel Safe'.

Justin Harbottle said: 'It's alarming that these products are being marketed with this slogan.

'You may feel safe using this product, but it needs to be absolutely clear this is not a tool for safe sex.

'What's more, many STIs, such as syphilis, herpes and HPV, are passed on through skin-to-skin contact, so a product of this nature would never be able to protect against these.

'At the moment, the only effective tool for preventing STIs is a condom.'

The stickers, which are shipped worldwide, are currently being sold in three-packs for $6 (£4.54).

The company's Facebook group also features posts that promote unsafe sex.

When asked about the product's safety and reliability a spokesperson for Jiftip said: 'There's really no way to know. When used as directed it's an alternative to using nothing. Beta trials will help us know more. Feedback is promising.

'The critics always scoff and scorn, what they should be focused on is the same thing we're focused on. That a huge group are currently using nothing.'