First Lady of flamboyance: Michelle Obama's confident off-duty chic on London city break





Flower power: Michelle Obama leaving Westminster Abbey yesterday



Her taste for restrained elegance has earned her the title of First Lady of Fashion.



But Michelle Obama clearly felt something rather more outlandish was in order for a sightseeing trip in London yesterday.



On a visit to Westminster Abbey she wore a trendy colourful tunic embellished with ribbons and fabric flowers.

Teaming the look with a patterned belt the U.S. First Lady made the most of her narrow waist, while smartly referencing eclectic catwalk looks by British designer Christopher Kane.

Worn with dark slim-fitting trousers she topped it off with not one, but two cardigans.



That decision, however, may have had more to do with the chilly British weather than any fashion statement.



Completing the fashion-forward look were a collection of silver necklaces and some smart black pumps.



Mrs Obama, whose husband had flown home following his official visit to France to mark the 65th anniversary of D-Day, has been enjoying a two-day holiday in London with her daughters.



Today the young Obama girls were given a tour of Pinewood Studios, including the set of the final Harry Potter.

As a special treat to mark Sasha's eighth birthday she and her 10-year-old sister Malia, both avid Potter fans, met Daniel Radcliffe, Emma Watson and the other stars of the movie.

They then had a party in the Great Hall on the Harry Potter filmset - along with the cast and drew.



The family had a private tour understood to be conducted by Joshua Berger, an American who heads Warner Brothers UK.

He donated more than $33,000 (£20,456) to various Democrat election funds last year.

Ahead of the visit a source at Pinewood Studios said: 'It’s all been very hush-hush. Only a few people have known about the trip and they are going to pull out all the stops to make sure they have a good time.'

Party time: Michelle Obama and her daughters arrive at the Harry Potter film set today

Excited: The Obamas celebrated Sasha's eighth birthday with a party with the Harry Potter cast



Last night the girls were treated to a trip to watch The Lion King, at the Lyceum Theatre in London's West End.

Police blocked off the roads surrounding the venue as the presidential cavalcade passed through.



Surprised theatregoers on The Strand watched as the Obamas arrived, with the First Lady smiling at well-wishers from the window of her armoured SUV.

The family sat in a private box overlooking the stage. Sadly, for the Obama girls, security concerns meant they had to leave shortly before the end of the performance - making a discrete exit.



Theatre trip: The First Lady and her daughters went to see the Lion King in London's West End



Earlier the First Family enjoyed a crash-course in 1,000 years of English history during their hour-long visit to Westminster Abbey.



Fellow sightseers looked on in near open-mouthed amazement as the Obamas 'did' Westminster Abbey.

Taken on a private tour by the Dean of Westminster the Very Reverend Dr John Hall, they were shown Poets' Corner, the Tomb of the Unknown Warrior, the Coronation Chair and Henry VII's Lady Chapel.

Sightseeing: Malia (wearing pink), ten, and Sasha (in yellow), eight, follow their mother out of Westminster Abbey as Secret Service guards keep a close eye

Happy holiday: Mrs Obama smiling as she left Westminster Abbey yesterday

America’s First family - minus the President - are enjoying a private, two-day holiday in London.

The family flew to London after Mrs Obama decided her daughters needed a more educational excursion following their shopping spree in Paris on Sunday.

The family received a jubilant welcome in the French capital as crowds swarmed outside Notre Dame cathedral and a restaurant in the shadow of the Eiffel Tower.

On Monday they went out for an informal meal at a typical London-pub.



Accompanied by bodyguards and secret service agents, Mrs Obama, Malia and Sasha ate at the Audley pub in Mayfair.

Wearing a printed dress with a short-sleeved cardigan and wide belt, Mrs Obama once again proved her fashion credentials.

The group ate in a private upstairs dining room. The children chose the fish supper, costing just £7.95, while their mother plumped for the sirloin steak at £9.15. The bill for the whole group came to £200. Mrs Obama told staff she had enjoyed the 'food and the atmosphere'.



Just a normal night down the pub: Mrs Obama can be seen in the window of the armoured SUV on the right as they leave The Audley in London's Mayfair on Monday night



Located just yards from the American Embassy, The Audley pub has probably had its fair share of tourists from across the Atlantic.

Off-duty chic: a short-sleeved cardigan and wide belt liven up the First Lady's printed dress

But when the American First Lady led her two daughters into the pub, even the normally unflappable staff were left gobsmacked.

Staff told yesterday of their astonishment as Mrs Obama and her daughters traipsed into the bar, accompanied by secret service agents.

Having spent Monday in Downing Street and the Houses of Parliament - they had tea with Sarah Brown but were at least spared meeting Gordon Brown - the Obamas probably felt they had earned a hearty meal.

However, they eschewed the many upmarket restaurants of Mayfair - such as Scott's and Corrigan's - for The Audley's rather less glamorous surroundings.

Before their main course the girls tucked into a hot cheese platter, washed down with Pepsi Cola. Mrs Obama, 45, shared wine with the adult entourage, who ate burgers.

'We had a booking for a table of 15 but we had no idea it was going to be them,' said waitress Cintia Pinto, 24, who served Mrs Obama, adding: 'We were all speechless when they walked in. I couldn’t believe it. But they were all very friendly. Smiling and laughing. They made us feel calm.

'The girls were so sweet and polite. They thanked us every time we brought them something. It was a real honour.'

The group arrived at the pub, close to the American embassy in Grosvenor Square, at 7pm and ate in the private upstairs dining room.



Manager John Gohery said: 'It was a real surprise and a pleasure. We’ve had other famous people coming in, but nothing on this scale.'

The Victorian pub is, according to Time Out, 'a Mayfair institution'.

Awarding it three stars, reviewers noted:'This [pub] has a lot going for it: a splendid, high-ceilinged Victorian interior with the requisite panelling and chandeliers, cask ales, an imaginative wine list and solid pub grub.'

Silver service: Cinthia Pinto and Adriana Spanova at the table where they served a fish and chip supper to Michelle Obama and her daughters at the Audley Arms on Monday night Following her unofficial visit to the Houses of Parliament earlier on Monday Michelle Obama left clutching a souvenir. But America's First Lady looked distinctly unimpressed at the gift she received after paying a secret visit to the Palace of Westminster.

For she was snapped leaving in an official car with a photo of the Commons' outgoing Speaker Michael Martin, who was forced to quit last month after a no confidence motion was signed by 23 MPs.

Star attraction: News of the the Obamas' presence at the pub spread fast, and delighted passers-by could be seen waiting with cameras as the First Lady emerged



It is not the first time gifts received by the Browns and the Obamas have come under the spotlight.

During the visit to Washington in March, the Prime Minister gave Mr Obama an ornamental pen holder made from the timbers of the Victorian anti-slave ship HMS Gannet.

In return, Mr Obama, the leader of the world's richest country, gave Mr Brown a box set of 25 classic American films on DVD - even though he is not known to be a film buff.

Surprise guest: Regulars at The Audley were stunned to be joined by Michelle Obama for drinks



During her trip the Presidents wife is also thought to have visited Downing Street for a meeting with Sarah Brown, the Prime Minister's wife.

The pair became close when Gordon Brown became the first Western leader invited to Washington by the Obama administration, and renewed their acquaintance when Britain hosted the G20 summit in April.

The two women demonstrated their down to-earth touch when they visited a cancer care centre in London during the summit.

Bizarre souvenir: Michelle Obama leaves Westminster clutching her Michael Martin photograph