Wine can help you lose weight and nightly glass of red keeps you slim
Every night, to round off her evening meal, Linda Monk pours herself a glass of full-bodied red wine.

It’s a relaxing routine, even if it does sound like a recipe for weight gain. After all, as the NHS Direct website points out, doesn’t a glass of wine contain the same calories as a slice of cake?

But Linda, 47, has lost 6lb over the past three weeks and is convinced she has her nightly tipple to thank.

Scroll down for video

Linda Monk, 47 (pictured), has lost 6lb over the past three weeks and is convinced that it's all down to her nightly glass of full-bodied red wine

‘The wine curbs my sugar cravings,’ she says.

‘My long-held desire to snack on sweets, biscuits and chocolate after my dinner has disappeared and the relaxing effect of the alcohol makes me feel that, despite cutting back, I’m not being hard done by.’

Controversial it may be, but Linda is far from the only one extolling the virtues of wine, albeit in strict moderation, as an aid to weight control, even if it does fly in the face of conventional thinking.

In recent years, the British love affair with the bottle has been increasingly linked to the growing obesity epidemic, with experts such as Professor Fiona Sim, chair of the Royal Society for Public Health, insisting there is no reason why calories in alcohol should be treated any differently from those in food.

Indeed, the EU recently backed plans for the calorie content to be clearly stated on the labels of wine, beer and spirit bottles. But there is also a growing body of evidence which suggests that far from making us fat, drinking wine could actually be the key to staying slim.

A 13-year Harvard University study of 20,000 women found that those who drank half a bottle of wine a day had a 70 per cent reduced risk of obesity compared to non-drinkers. And the U.S. government’s official alcohol body, the National Institute for Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism concluded that ‘when alcohol is substituted for carbohydrates, calorie for calorie, subjects tend to lose weight, indicating that they derive less energy from alcohol than from food’.

Linda (pictured) says that the wine curbs her sugar cravings and has a relaxing effect which helps her feel like she isn't being hard done by

Another study, presented at the European Conference on Obesity in Prague last week, found that a glass of red wine every night increased the levels of the ‘good’ cholesterol HDL.

It could help improve type 2 diabetes because it boosted glucose metabolism. This is the process by which simple sugars found in many foods are processed and used to produce energy.

Linda is following a diet plan called The 4-Hour Body: An Uncommon Guide To Rapid Weight Loss, by lifestyle guru Tim Ferris, which entails eliminating refined carbs and filling up on vegetables and lean protein.

And crucially, the author allows a glass of wine a day (he claims to drink one himself), with the idea being that if you’re allowed to indulge occasionally you’re more likely to persevere. Red wine is recommended over white on account of its antioxidant qualities.

Linda (pictured) is following a diet plan called The 4-Hour Body: An Uncommon Guide To Rapid Weight Loss, by lifestyle guru Tim Ferris

‘I couldn’t stand to go on a hideous deprivation regime that I knew I couldn’t stick at,’ says Linda, who runs a boutique and lives with her husband David, 55, an environmental consultant, and their children Oliver, nine, and Lucas, seven, in Chorley, Lancashire.

‘I’ve never drunk to excess, but alcohol has always been an integral part of my life. In my 20s, I lived in Greece, where the Mediterranean culture meant we drank wine every day. My weight was a stable 10st then. I couldn’t imagine not being able to treat myself or giving up my social life for weeks on end just to lose weight.

‘Because alcohol is allowed — encouraged even — on this diet, I’ve found myself drinking more than I normally would.

‘In the past, I’d share a bottle of red wine with David at the weekend. Now, I’m drinking a glass every weekday night. But dubious as I was to start with, the weight’s been dropping off.

Samantha Merrit, 40 (pictured), credits the glass or two of wine she enjoys most nights with helping her lose a stone and a half

‘An average day’s food is scrambled eggs for breakfast, chicken salad for lunch and chilli con carne without rice for dinner, accompanied by a good quality glass of red wine.

‘My weight had been creeping up to 10st 6lb, but I now weight 10st and I’m edging towards a size ten.

‘If I had more than two glasses of wine a night I’m sure I’d suffer unwanted side-effects, but alcohol in moderation is good for you.

‘We all know about its antioxidant properties, but what a bonus that it can give us better bodies as well.’

Samantha Merrit, 40, also credits the glass or two of wine she enjoys most nights with helping her lose a stone and a half.

Samantha (pictured) admits that junk food used to be her vice and she would have a Chinese takeaway at the end of the week as well as countless bars of chocolate during the day

The stay-at-home mother from Stoke-on-Trent, whose partner Reece, 42, is a golfing instructor, admits her vice used to be junk food. She would have a Chinese takeway at the end of the week and countless bars of chocolate during the day as she rushed around after her three children, Charnelle, 23, Nicole, 19, and Reece, 11.

But now that she unwinds with a glass of Chilean red, she says her evening meal has been turned into an ‘event’, which she finds relaxing, as well as slimming.

‘Instead of eating mindlessly on the sofa, Reece and I dine at the kitchen table, and I savour every mouthful,’ she says.

‘I’ve swapped fast food for balanced, home-made meals to enjoy with my glass of wine. I no longer have cravings for crisps and chocolate. I’ve found wine curbs my appetite after my main course and quenches any desire for pudding.

Samantha says that drinking wine in the evenings has turned her meals with her husband into an 'event' that she finds relaxing

‘And, crucially, the calories don’t seem to have made an impact on the bathroom scales. My waist is now 28in, I weigh 9½ st and I’m convinced wine is the reason.

‘When I was eating badly, my weight crept up to 11st and I was a size 14. I didn’t like my wobbly stomach and bottom, but didn’t have the willpower to resist my favourite treats.

‘Now, I can happily say no to a dessert and I treat myself to a glass or two around four nights a week. I found a full-bodied red — never white, which I think is too acidic — helped me sleep and lowered my anxiety levels, too.

‘I never drink enough to get sozzled or to the extent that I’m hungover the next day and reaching for the nearest doughnut to restore my blood sugar levels.

Joanna Kingston, 51 (pictured), has swapped chocolate for a small glass of wine and says that she feels more in control now than she did before

‘Like Mediterranean women — and I have friends in Bulgaria and Spain, who also credit their slender figures to regular wine — my motto is moderation. Reece jokes that I see wine as one of my five fruit and vegetables a day, but I honestly believe the benefits to my health and body outweigh any possible side-effects. I haven’t put on a pound and I have wine to thank for that.’

Drinking in moderation is key, warn the experts. A study funded by the Wellcome Trust found that male and female binge drinkers had larger waistlines.

There are also serious health risks linked to over-indulgence, such as an increased incidence of breast cancer. But a small glass of wine, savoured with a meal, can contribute to a healthy weight. Red wine in particular contains high concentrations of resveratrol, which is found in the skin of grapes, and this compound, according to one study, helps break down fats and reduce the total amount of fat in your body.

Joanna (pictured) says she used to be a 'complete chocoholic' and would have to buy a bar of chocolate if she saw one by the till in shops

Another reason that wine may contribute to a healthy weight is that the process of digesting the drink triggers the body to burn calories, particularly in women, who make a smaller amount of the enzyme that metabolises alcohol than men.

This means that in order to digest a drink, they have to keep producing the enzyme that requires the body to burn energy. In other words, it’s not about the calorie content at all, but about the effect wine has on the body compared with snacking on chocolate, sweet treats or fattening snacks with a similar calorie content.

Certainly, swapping chocolate for a small glass of wine has paid dividends for Joanna Kingston, 51, a professional fundraiser who lives in Manchester.

‘I used to be a complete chocoholic. If I went to the petrol station to fill up my car or just nipped into the shops and saw chocolate by the till, I had to buy a bar.

Joanna (pictured) says she loves the 'warm, slightly merry feeling' she gets after drinking a nice glass of red wine, she also says you don't get the same effect from eating chocolate

‘And I couldn’t resist munching on chocolate when I finally sat down to relax at night,’ says Joanna, who is divorced and has a grown- up daughter.

‘Now I pour myself a nice glass of red wine and the thing is that unlike chocolate, I’m happy with just a glass — so even though it may be a similar amount of calories, I feel more in control.

‘I’ve found that giving up chocolate in the evening has helped my weight loss — together with exercising more. And the remarkable thing is that drinking in the evening hasn’t had any real impact on my weight.

‘I’ve no idea whether this is because, as the research suggests, wine is better than chocolate in terms of metabolising calories. But I don’t really care.

‘Anyway, I love the warm, slightly merry feeling I get after sipping a nice glass of red. You don’t get the same effect from a bar of Fruit & Nut.’

Why I’m certain the calories in wine don’t make you fat

by Tony Edwards

Tonight I will uncork a bottle of robust red wine and drink about half of it. It’s a ritual I’ve been performing for the past 20 years — and one I credit as the key to my ongoing good health.

But according to the medical establishment, this makes me an anomaly as my BMI is a healthy 25. Why it that so odd? Because alcohol, we are told, makes you fat — which is why a number of establishment bodies are campaigning for alcohol to be labelled with its calorie content, which is quite high. In theory, my half- bottle is the same as three slices of cake.

So how come, after a couple of decades glugging half a bottle of wine a day, I’m not a 20-stone porkie?

Let me tell you why I and millions of drinkers like me are not. A year or so ago, I spent months in the Royal Society of Medicine’s library in London, sifting through thousands of medical studies about alcohol. One of the first I read made me sit bolt upright.

Tony Edwards has drunk around half a bottle of red wine a night for the last 20 years and credits it as the key to his ongoing good health

It suggested that in highly controlled laboratory tests, if alcohol calories are substituted for food calories, subjects lose weight. In theory, calories are interchangeable: there’s no difference between an alcohol calorie and a food calorie. But here were top-notch scientists demonstrating this was nonsense.

To understand why, we need to go back to the origins of the calorie system. Back to the 1880s when an American agricultural chemist called Wilbur Atwater decided to see how much ‘energy’ different foods contained.

To measure this, he treated different foods like coal: burn them to ash in a furnace and measure how much heat it produced. He called the units of heat ‘calories’. He measured nine calories per gram coming off high-fat foods and about four calories per gram from carbohydrates and proteins. Alcohol, of course, is highly combustible. So when Atwater tested it, it burned like a firecracker. Hence the high calorie value ascribed to it today.

Now a small but growing number of nutritionists think the calorie theory is flawed. Atwater’s mistake, they say, was to assume that we use the energy in food as if our bodies were a furnace — and that if we don’t use up all the energy, it will be deposited as fat.

But take nuts. They are among the top-ten most calorific foods, yet studies show they don’t cause us to put on weight.

Alcohol is a powerful appetite stimulant, so the more you drink, the more you are tempted to eat

Which brings me to the Glycemic Index — the measure of how much glucose different foods produce in the bloodstream.

Called the GI Theory, it’s beginning to supplant the Calorie Theory as the explanation for weight gain. Foods that have a high GI score — such as bread and cakes — produce a large amount of glucose which, if not used to power muscles, is stored as fat. However, high-calorie foods such as nuts produce little glucose, so have a low GI score, explaining why they don’t put on weight.

Alcohol produces zero glucose, explaining its lack of effect on weight. And though wine has other ingredients (fermented grape juice), these score very low on the Glycemic Index, explaining why it isn’t fattening.

Other good news for wine lovers is that in laboratory tests, wine-drinking rats have been found to gain less weight than water-drinking rats on identical food intakes because wine has the miraculous property of reducing the size of fat cells. Constituents of wine such as ellagic acid and piceatannol may be responsible, but that’s still only a theory.

But what about beer? Finnish researchers have found that beer scores exceptionally high on the Glycemic Index — probably because of its non-alcohol ingredients (mainly malt). That’s why heavy beer drinkers tend to develop a tell-tale tummy — not because of the alcohol.

There is one major link between alcohol and weight, but that’s to do with food. Alcohol is a powerful appetite stimulant, so the more you drink, the more you are tempted to eat.

The clinical evidence from studies on animals and human beings is crystal clear that alcohol calories have no effect on weight. So, putting calorie values on alcohol labels will do nothing to stem the nation’s growing obesity epidemic. My findings prompted me to write a book called The Good News About Booze.

In fact, it may even cause harm: this newspaper has documented the rise in ‘drunk-orexics’ — predominantly young women who don’t eat on days when they intend to drink heavily, in the mistaken belief that alcohol will add to their weight. Labelling would only serve to reinforce their misguided behaviour.

It’s obvious to me what this initiative is really about. It’s about trying to get us all to drink less. This is, of course, wholly laudable. I’m all for heavy drinkers being persuaded to cut down, but not by lying to people.