'Sorry you lost your home in a tornado, but that'll be $170 in charges and early termination fee', DIRECTV tells 83-year-old

A satellite TV company charged an 83-year-old woman who lost her home and all her belongings in a tornado $170 because she had damaged their equipment.

Frances Mulkey, from Greenback, Tennessee, had her home completely destroyed by the recent tornado on March 23.



All that is left is the bent and twisted shell of her mobile home and some belongings scattered here and there.

Scroll down for video report

Frances Mulkey, 83, lost all her possessions and her mobile home in the tornado and would have been killed had she been at home at the time

This bent and twisted frame is all that is left of Mrs Mulkey's mobile home after the tornado ripped through Greenback on March 23 Widespread damage was caused by the tornado in Greenback, Tennessee, which damaged thousands of homes and tore down trees

Had she been at home that day, she would have died.



When her family started the clean up, they contacted her satellite carrier DIRECTV to get the service disconnected and could not believe their ears at their response.

Her nephew Jerry Sharp said: 'They were wanting a $120 early termination fee, then $50 a box if we couldn't, if we didn't return the boxes.

'They did say they were glad she is okay, but that a contract is a contract.'

They told Mr Sharp that when you sign up for satellite TV service, you're renting their equipment - the dish, the receiver and the tuner.

Mrs Mulkey's nephew Jerry shows the broken satellite dish that DIRECTV were trying to charge them $50 for, plus $120 termination fee, despite being with them for seven years

Mrs Mulvey's nephew Jerry, left, and sister Melody could not believe their ears when they found out DIRECTV wanted money for termination fees and losses

Mrs Mulkey had been renting from them for seven years but even being a loyal customer made no difference.

Her daughter Melody Deakin said: 'It's ridiculous. I understand they have processes, but there needs to be an exception process put in place.'

The family contacted TV consumer watchdog 6 on Your Side, who called DIRECTV's headquarters in California.

The president of the company replied saying that the company were happy to waive all the fees on behalf of the Mulkey family and that the customer representative should have handled the family's situation with more compassion.

They said since the tornado zone in Greenback and Blount County had not been declared a disaster area, the company was unaware of the widespread damage.

The company also said it was 'following procedure' when Mr Sharp called, but 'more reasoning was needed to make things right', and they sent their apology to the family.

Mrs Deakin said: 'It's great news. We've got a long road to go so this is one burden off of us.

'But it's a shame that we had to call you out here to get involved. They should have done that at the very beginning.'

About 50 million people in the U.S. have service with DIRECTV.