Portrait of a sister's grief: Woman clutches picture of beloved sibling shot dead in Aurora massacre

Amanda Medek said goodbye to her sister Micayla today, the 23-year-old sibling she lost forever in the Aurora movie theater massacre.



Family and friends gathered to pay homage to the life cut tragically short by the masked gunman who rushed a midnight screening of The Dark Knight rises and unleashed a barrage of bullets into the audience, killing 12 people.



Clutching a photograph of her sister, Miss Medek wept uncontrollably outside the New Hope Baptist Church in Denver.

Scroll down for video

Weep: Amanda Medek said goodbye to her sister Micayla today, the 23-year-old sibling she lost forever in the Aurora movie theater massacre Loss: Amanda Medek, second from the left, was looking for her sister Micayla for hours after the incident Sisters: In this photo provided by the Medek family, a picture of movie theater shooting victim Micayla Medek, left, with her sister Amanda Medek, right, is displayed on a poster during her funeral Last Words: Micayla Medek is eulogized with her own words on a poster during her funeral

The Medek family has been on a horrible journey since they heard Micayla was injured in the July 20 shooting.



Without any information about what happened to her, they rushed to six area hospitals in the hopes that they would find her recovering in a hospital bed.



Powerful photographs of a hysterical Amanda Medek were taken outside the Gateway High School, where people were told to meet up with their loved ones after the tragedy.

The Medeks pleaded for information about Micayla, showing photographs of her to law enforcement officials, but there was no official news at the time.



Her friends told the family that they tried to carry her out of the theater, but were instructed to let the emergency personnel take care of her.



'I was so worried -- is she in the hospital? In the morgue?' her father, Greg Medek said to the Los Angeles Times.

Goodbye: The casket bearing the body of Aurora, Colo., movie theater shooting victim Micayla Medek is brought into the New Hope Baptist Church Mourning: Family members arrive for the funeral of Aurora, Colo., movie theater shooting victim Micayla Medek

News: The Medek family has been on a horrible journey since they heard Micayla was injured in the July 20 shooting

Hope: Without any information about what happened to her, they rushed to six area hospitals in the hopes that they would find her recovering in a hospital bed

Twenty hours after the news of the shooting, the family was told that she had died from the injuries she sustained.



The youngest of three children, Micayla Medek was working to support herself at Subway and pay for her college. She had hoped to save enough money for a trip to India.



'I'm a simple independent girl who's just trying to get her life together while still having fun,' she wrote on Facebook.



Her family set up a memorial fund in her honor at the Fitzsimmons Credit Union . They planned to cremate her.

Grieving together: Rev. Jesse Jackson comforts Kimberlie Hunt, left, and Karen Luke, right, the cousins of shooting victim Alex Sullivan, at a temporary memorial across the street from the Century 16 theater in Aurora

Waiting: Powerful photographs of a hysterical Amanda Medek were taken outside the Gateway High School, left, where people were told to meet up with their loved ones after the tragedy



Search: Her friends told the family that they tried to carry her out of the theater, but were instructed to let the emergency personnel take care of her

'I lost a precious soul,' Mr Medek said. 'I just want to bring my baby home.'



Throughout the week, families of other victims are planning to say their final goodbyes.



Funerals were planned in towns from San Antonio, home of aspiring sportscaster Jessica Ghawi, to Crystal Lake, Illinois, hometown of Navy intelligence officer John Thomas Larimer.



Because many of the shooting victims have families outside Denver, authorities have assigned each victim's family a communications officer to keep them updated on the case.



The suspected shooter, James Holmes, is due in court next Monday, when he will hear the charges against him.



Closure: Twenty hours after the news of the shooting, the family was told that she had died from the injuries she sustained at the shooting

Justice: The suspected shooter, James Holmes, is due in court next Monday, when he will hear the charges against him