Donald and Eric Trump pictured posing with their 'trophy' carcasses on big African hunt
'I have no shame... I HUNT & EAT game': Donald Trump's sons pictured posing with their 'trophy' carcasses on big African hunt



Grisly photos have surfaced of Donald Trump's millionaire sons smiling broadly next to the dead carcasses of wild animals that they shot while on a big game hunt in Africa.

Though the two men- Donald Trump Jr. and Eric Trump- deny any wrong doing and proudly argue that they are hunters, many animal rights advocates are taking jabs at the pair.

In one of the photos, 34-year-old Don holds the sawed off tail of an elephant and another the knife that likely cut it.

Showing their spots: Don (left) and Eric (right), seen here with a leopard that they killed on their trip to Zimbabwe Proud to be a hunter: Don holds the sawed off tail of an elephant on a hunt in Africa

Happy hunter: Don, seen here with a 40" Cape Buffalo Bull, is said to have 'the precision of a true marksman'

Posing with their prey: Eric sits atop one of their kills. In his responses to critics on Twitter, Don said that the animals were used as meat for hungry villagers who do not eat the animals often

Another particularly jarring photo shows the brothers standing beside a 12'8" crocodile hanging from a noose off a tree.

The pictures were posted on the website for the company that ran the hunting trip to the Matetsi area of Zimbabwe near Victoria Falls.



Don denied that he leaked the photos over Twitter: 'Not a PR move I didn't give the pics but I have no shame about them either. I HUNT & EAT game'.

'I AM A HUNTER I don't hide from that,' he said to another critic on Twitter.

Rare game: The pair pose with the 12'8" crocodile that they killed on the trip, which was not their first

Costly sport: The kill fee for this Waterbuck was $1,997.00

The company, called Hunting Legends, detailed the brother's trip and said that it was not the first time that the Manhattan real estate moguls arranged a trip with them.

Though the pricing for the trip is not publicly available, it was certainly a costly endeavor.

The 2012 trophy fees for each of the animals they shot, and for the deer-like animal called the Kudu they paid at least $2,795.00 and another $1,997.00 for the Waterbuck they were pictured with.

'The Trump's soon showed their metal and it was evident from the word go that these two amazing young men are everything but the "city slickers" you would expect!' the Hunting Legends site reads.

'They meant business from the outset of the hunt.'

The tour guide went on to say that they had 'the precision of a true marksman'.

Don has been diligent about responding to angry comments on Twitter, and argued that their actions were justified because the meat was used to feed hungry villagers.

The group: The brothers, seen bottom center and right, went on the trip run by a company called Hunting Legends

'I can assure you it was not wasteful the villagers were so happy for the meat which they don't often get to eat. Very grateful,' he responded to one Twitter user.

Their father does not share the views of his sons, and the elder Donald told TMZ that 'My sons love hunting. They're hunters and they've become good at it. I am not a believer in hunting and I'm surprised they like it.'

'I know that anything they did was 100% OK in terms of the hunting community,' Mr Trump continued.