Ophiuchus the 13th Zodiac Sign? No, It's Not
The recent media hype about Ophiuchus (pronounced Oh-fee-YOU-cuss), "the new 13th zodiac sign," has sent folks spinning into an astrological identity crisis -- as well as overloading our own DH web servers. But the whole thing is not even true!

"Ophiuchus has nothing to do with Astrology," said expert astrologer Rick Levine. "It's not an Astrology issue. It has to do with the stars -- it's not a sign, it's a constellation."

"There are four seasons each with a beginning, middle and end," Levine continued. "That makes 12 zodiac signs, and there's no such thing as a 13th astrological sign."

So why are people freaking out, wondering if they went to bed last night a Gemini and woke up a Taurus? Here are the answers you've been waiting for on this cosmic controversy:

What is Ophiuchus?

Ophiuchus is a large modern constellation commonly represented as a man grasping the snake represented by the constellation Serpens.

Is Ophiuchus the 13th sign?

No. It's just a constellation. Even the founding text for Astrology (Tetrabiblos by Claudius Ptolemy written 170 AD) only mentions 12 signs. A few astrologers who practice the controversial sidereal (constellation-based) zodiac use it as the 13th zodiac sign -- and by a few we mean about 1 percent.

How did this whole myth get started?

It began when astronomy professor Parke Kunkle of Minneapolis Community and Technical College told the Minneapolis Star-Tribune about the precession of stars over time. He said "Two thousand years ago the Sun was 'in' whatever it was in. Now it's about a whole constellation off from that." Kunkle's quote went viral and was picked up by FOX News and other media outlets because people mistakenly assume that Astrology is based on constellations. But that's not true.

So what is the truth?

Astrology is based on the four seasons, not on constellations -- and the seasons don't change. As Levine said above, there are four seasons, each with a beginning, middle and end, which adds up to 12 zodiac signs. There is no 13th astrological sign. Period.

What does this mean for you?

Nothing! Your zodiac sign hasn't changed. If you were a Gemini yesterday, you're still a Gemini today -- don't worry, you'll never wake up a Taurus. Not that there's anything wrong with that.

What can we learn from this?

Listen to the experts, and don't believe everything you read until you check your facts. There are a lot of people out there who think they understand Astrology when they really don't. Dailyhoroscope.com works only with authentic astrologers and we'll be sure to keep you informed of the truth.

Read more about how this 13th zodiac sign media hype began! And tell us, what do you think about all this?

If you like what you see on dailyhoroscope.com, please consider following us on Facebook and Twitter. We need your help to spread the word and fill the world with good Karma!