'Obesity killed my father and sister - I don't want to be next': 52-stone man, 38, goes under the knife to avoid the fate of relatives who died young because of their weight



Was a skinny child but piled on the pounds when his father and sister died

James lives with his mother and sleeps in his father's old reinforced bed

Declared too heavy for weight-loss surgery and likely to die before 65

His father and his sister both died young because they were morbidly obese.



And at 52st, James Jones, 38, from Frankston, Texas seemed certain to follow in their footsteps. He was unable to exercise and subsisted on a diet of fatty takeaways.

But a warning from his doctor that he would not live to 65, the age his father died, was the jolt that James needed to lose the weight he needed to be eligible for bypass surgery.

Scroll down for video



James, 38, knew that drastic action was needed when he weighed in at 728 pounds

James, who lives with his mother Maggie, had been a 'skinny' child when growing up but started piling on the pounds when he was a teenager.



By the time he was 16 years old he already weighed 280lbs (20st). When he left college he went to work as a mechanic but his growing addiction to fast food only served to increase his size.

He moved to work to a desk-bound job in an accountancy firm but found that he found that he used food to unwind from listening to people's problems all day.

'Most people when they get off work want to go grab a beer,' he said. 'I just want to eat.'

James visits the cemetery where his father and sister are both buried

However as his weight increased, his health deteriorated.

'I feel like I’m trapped, like I’m useless,' he said. 'It’s depressing. My knees are just aching. I try not to move too much. I get out of breath, like I’m going to pass out.'

The programme shows James picking up a large amount of fast food on the drive home from work, and then eating another meal at home.

His mother Maggie cooks for him, and said tearfully: 'I guess James blames me for his weight. But I cooked how I knew how to cook. I hope he’s not too bitter at me.'

She added: 'It's not really his fault that he’s overweight – it’s our family history. His dad died and then his sister six months later. Him and her were like twins.'



Eerily, James's sister moved into the bed that her father slept in after he died, and then James moved in once his sister died. Asked his mother fearfully: ‘Is he the next in line?’

James and his mother Maggie wait to see if he is eligible for weight-loss surgery

Weighing in at 728lbs, James is told by surgeon Dr Nowzaradan that he is unlikely to make it to the age of 65, the age his father died, but that he is too heavy for weight-loss surgery.

However after losing 53lbs in a couple of weeks due to a diet consisting mainly of eggs and toast, he sheds the required weight and has a stomach bypass operation.

Said James: 'I know I’ve been hiding behind my weight for too long. It’s killing me – I know it’s time to change. I hope that this surgery will jump start my new life.

He added: 'I can’t fail because there’s a lot of people I don’t want to disappoint.’

His mother Maggie watched him go into the operating theatre.



'I can't lose another child to obesity,' she said tearfully. 'I want my son to be successful and live.'



James found love with Summer, a women he met online and who also had gastric bypass surgery

Said Dr Nowzaradan: 'Because of James’ weight and his family history, nothing but surgery is going to help him. He is one of the largest patients I have ever operated on.'

Within five months James had lost 148llbs and started dating Summer, a woman he met online and who herself had had weight-loss surgery, previously weighing 350lbs.



However the weight-loss slowed down as James gave into his cravings for fast food.



The pair are now house-hunting and talking about marriage and spending the rest of their lives together

But a visit to his father and sister's graves at the local cemetery reignited his determination.



After more surgery to remove his excess skin - which alone weighed a whopping 76lbs- he is back on track, playing golf, joining the local gym - and even doing acqua-aerobics.

A year on and James and Summer are house-hunting. James now weighs just 376lbs, having lost 352lbs, nearly half his body weight.



'I'm excited about the future,' says James. 'I'm in love with Summer and we're talking about getting married. I feel there's a whole new world out there.'