'Petrified' Sandy Hook nurse hid in closet for four hours listening to screams and gunshots



Sandy Hook school nurse Sally Cox was hiding from Adam Lanza in a closet for four hours as she listened to children screaming and hundreds of gunshots.

At one point, when she was hiding under her desk, Lanza walked into her office and paused only a few feet away from her with his boots facing in her direction.

The moment must have seemed like a lifetime.

'I could see him from the knees down, 20 feet away, his boots were facing my desk,' Cox said in a new interview. 'It was seconds… and then he turned and walked out and I heard the door close.'

WATCH VIDEO BELOW



Sandy Hook school nurse Sally Cox was hiding from Adam Lanza in a closet for four hours as she listened to screams and gunshots. At one point he paused just a few feet away from her hiding spot

After the door closed, Cox said the secretary raced into her office, shut the door and hid under her desk.



Together, they pulled the phone off the desk and dialed 911.



They then raced into a supply closet and held the door closed. Cox said they remained there for close to four hours.

'We were petrified,' Cox said. 'We were listening, and couldn’t hear a whole lot, and heard screaming and the gunshots.'

Frank Kulick adjusts a display of wooden crosses representing the victims of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting on his front lawn Monday night

Adam Lanza shot dead 20 students and six staff at Sandy Hook elementary before turning the gun on himself

Lanza would go on to kill 20 first graders and six adults inside the school, before turning the gun on himself, according to police.

When the police made rounds, looking for survivors, they came across Cox and the secretary still in the office, and escorted them out of the building.

Cox said the police shielded them from the horrific carnage in the hallway.

'They told us to close our eyes,' she said.

Cox said at first she didn’t want to know about the victims, to whom she had all administered hearing tests, but eventually came to learn their names when police announced the list on Saturday.



Cox added that she wasn’t sure if she will ever return to Sandy Hook.

WATCH VIDEO HERE



Unfortunately your browser does not support IFrames.