YouTube Craig & Aimee vlogger is slapped in the face by FISH during Storm Gertrude
A vlogger has released footage showing the moment her piece-to-camera was sabotaged by a fish.

Aimee, part of the YouTube duo Craig & Aimee, was recording while presenting during stormy weather at Barry Island beach in South Wales for their travel vlog channel Kinging It.

Within five seconds of filming in the midst of Storm Gertrude, Aimee is captured on film just as a wave launches a fish out of the choppy sea and hits the vlogger around the face.

YouTube duo Craig & Aimee of travel vlog Kinging It have received over 40,000 views on one of their videos after presenter Aimee was hit across the face by a fish

The pair uploaded the outtake to their channel on January 29 with the caption 'When you're trying to vlog and get hit by a fish' and it has already received more than 40,000 views.

In addition the pair shared the clip on their Facebook page where it has so far been shared more than 30,000 times.

Aimee says that they have been overwhelmed by the response the video has got.

The vlogger was filming her piece-to-camera during storm Gertrude on Barry Island beach South Wales when a fish is launched out of the sea

It strikes Aimee across the face in the short five second clip which had now had over 30,000 Facebook shares

She told the Mirror: 'The video has been viewed and shared more than any of our others, and we post videos on a weekly basis,' she said. 'It's gone crazy.

'With Storm Gertrude trending on social media it's been quite popular and people have loved it.'

Despite its popularity, the video has launched some debate as to whether the clip has been staged or not.

Dean C commented on the YouTube clip writing: 'So no way it would get flown out the sea like that.'

Some skeptical viewers have said that the video might be staged but others were more concerned for Aimee

Anne Phillips joined the debate adding: 'A set up me thinks lol, never seen a fish that size on the beach.'

Others commented to express concern for Aimee's well being but Craig has reassured his fans that she is alright.