'It's a reminder all over again, it kills': Vicki Soto's sister talks about gut-wrenching picture of her crying that has come to represent the Sandy Hook massacre

It is a picture that paints a thousand painful words and one that sums up the tragedy that befell the picture-postcard Connecticut town of Newtown on Friday.

Carlee Soto screams into her cellphone, the agony etched on her face, her hand placed over her broken heart. This is the moment she found out her sister Victoria was dead.

This iconic image is one that has come to represent the horror of the Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre, in which 20 children and six adults were killed.



It was one of the most poignant pictures released by the Associated Press that tragic day, and was circulated by media worldwide.

Scroll down for video

Talks about the picture: Carlee Soto said the photo of her is a snapshot of the worst moment of her life, when she found out her sister was among the dead

Agony: This iconic image is one that has come to represent the Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre, in which 20 children and six adults were shot dead - including Carlee's sister Victoria Soto

Carlee Soto, left, says of the picture taken on her on Friday, above: 'It's like a reminder of that moment all over again, it kills'. Her sister Victoria, right, was shot dead in the Sandy Hook massacre

Pain: Donna Soto, right, hugs her daughter Carlee while mourning their loss with Victoria's other siblings, Jillian, far left, and Matthew Soto, second from left, at a candlelight vigil at Stratford High School on December 15

Carlee Soto said the photo of her is a snapshot of the worst moment of her life, when she found out her sister was among the dead.

Speaking to CBS she said: 'It’s like a reminder of that moment all over again. It kills.'

Her older sister Vicki died while saving her young charges. She h id them in her classroom closet and confronted Adam Lanza, telling them the children were at the other end of the school.



But six of them panicked and tried to escape. Victoria put herself in the line of fire so she could save them, but they were all shot multiple times.



It came as no surprise to Carlee and Victoria’s mother Donna Soto that her daughter died trying to save the kids.

Loving family: Donna and Carlee Soto talk to CBS about the moment they found out Vicki had been killed at the hands of Adam Lanza

Vicki died while saving her young charges: She hid them in her classroom closet and confronted Adam Lanza, telling them the children were at the other end of the school Favorite color: Carlee spent all last night making green ribbons for her sister's wake today Photographs released of the young victims of Friday's shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School

'She was truly selfless,' she said. 'She would not hesitate to think to save anyone else before herself and especially children.

'She loved them more than life, and she would definitely put herself in front of them any day, any day, and for any reason.

'We heard at one point that they found some people hiding in a closet and all of us said, "Vicki would never be hiding in a closet, she would be out there protecting those babies".



'So it doesn’t surprise anyone that knows Vicki that she did this,' she told CNN. 'She just loved her kids and talked about them all the time with such fondness and caring. She just adored them.'

Chaotic scenes at the school: Police work to secure the area and bodies are carried out of the school

Victoria Soto at her graduation: Soto was one of the teachers killed at the Sandy Hook Elementary school shooting on December 14 when 20-year old Adam Lanza went on a shooting spree killing 20 children and six adults Gone but not forgotten: Vicki Soto¿s parents, little brother and two younger sisters will bury her today

Teacher's aide Anne Marie Murphy, 52, was also shot dead. The body of six-year-old Dylan Hockley was found in her arms.

Dylan was autistic, just like mass murderer Adam Lanza.

Ian and Nicole Hockley said yesterday: 'We take great comfort in knowing that Dylan was not alone when he died, but was wrapped in the arms of his amazing aide, Anne Marie Murphy.

They added that Vicki was warm and funny, and that 'Dylan loved her dearly'.



Donna Soto described the moment they learned of her beautiful daughter's death.

'We were just praying and praying and praying. Then we got closer, and we parked at a church and walked up the hill and never, never could have imagined the scene that we saw,' she said.

More grief: Family and friends sob as they leave a wake for teacher Victoria Soto on Tuesday afternoon

Heart-wrenching: Mourners cry over the death of Soto (right) who died shielding her young students







'The families of unaccounted-for students and educators were gathered, and the exact words that the governor used were, "Two children were brought to Danbury Hospital and expired", and at that point, the parents just were hysterical. They were on the floor.



'Then another parent said, "Well, where did the other people go? We want to be with our kids". And he said, "Nobody else was taken to a hospital".



'A very angry parent said, "So what are you telling us, they’re all dead?" And he said, "Yes".'



Vicki Soto’s parents, little brother and two younger sisters will bury her today.



Carlee wrote on her Twitter page that she had been up all night making green ribbons for her sister's wake today.

On Saturday she tweeted: 'Still hasn't sunk in that my sister is gone. God Vicki come home and just yell at me already.'