On the last campaign day, Ed Gillespie, Mark Warner rally supporters
Sen. Mark Warner worked his way up Virginia's vote-rich Golden Crescent as GOP challenger Ed Gillespie booked himself a marathon that started in Newport News and jumped to the solidly Republican Shenandoah Valley on the last day of a long, hard-fought campaign.

"We've got a long day, I need something to stick to my ribs," Gillespie told a group of two dozen Peninsula Republican stalwarts, who gathered at Angelo's Steak and Pancake House on J. Clyde Morris Boulevard to share breakfast and help him kick off seven-stop campaign swing across the state, one that would end in Loudoun County, a Northern Virginia bellwether that's also the heart of the most competitive congressional race in the state this year.

Two hours later and on the other side of Hampton Roads, Sen. Tim Kaine told gathering of more than 100 Warner supporters that every vote counts, reminding them that he won his first election, to the Richmond City Council, by a margin of just 92 votes. It was the keynote event for Suzanne Patrick, the Democrat seeking to unseat Rep. Scott Rigell, R-Virginia Beach, in the 2nd District as well.

The weekend and Monday before Election Day, even more than most events in Virginia's increasingly polarized politics, are usually reserved for whipping up the troops in a push to get as many of each party's core supporters to the polls. In a year like this, where the White House isn't at stake, and when Virginians have been telling pollsters for weeks that their minds were pretty much made up, the key is no longer convincing potential supporters but making sure the ones who've said they will vote for you really show up.

So there were plenty of thanks when Gillespie, after finishing a breakfast of waffles, spoke to his Newport News team before boarding his big white Winnebago for the long haul to Roanoke and from there down the Valley.

Adrin Snider / Daily Press Ed Gillespie visits with supporters at Angelo's in Newport News early Monday during the first of seven stops across Virginia on the final day of his campaign for the U.S. Senate Monday. Shown in the foreground are supporters Lyn Smith of Newport News and DeRonda Short of Williamsburg. Ed Gillespie visits with supporters at Angelo's in Newport News early Monday during the first of seven stops across Virginia on the final day of his campaign for the U.S. Senate Monday. Shown in the foreground are supporters Lyn Smith of Newport News and DeRonda Short of Williamsburg. (Adrin Snider / Daily Press)

Gillespie said he felt a wave of support building, and promised it would end up confounding the experts and pollsters who say he is lagging Warner.

In Richmond, meanwhile, Doug Wilder, the first African American to be elected governor of a state, told central Virginia's Democratic faithful that Warner had always been there for him and said the nation needed more politicians who were willing to reach across the aisle to get things done.

That's been a key Warner campaign theme in his re-election bid, while Gillespie contends Warner goes along with President Barack Obama too often.

Both candidates ended up in Northern Virginia – where both called on Republican icons to help rally their troops.

For Gillespie, that was Mitt Romney's wife, Ann, at an event also meant to bring in the votes for Del. Barbara Comstock, R-McLean, who hopes to succeed retiring Rep. Frank Wolf.

Warner's final rally, at the Market Square in Old Town Alexandria, featured former Sen. John Warner – the Republican who defeated Mark Warner in his first bid for the Senate in 1996 but who later became a firm supporter. The two are not related.

Libertarian Robert Sarvis stuck fairly close to home on Monday, visiting a student group's "First of all, we vote" forum at George Mason University, where he earned a graduate degree in economics. Sarvis stressed his opposition to domestic spying and military interventions overseas as well as his support for civil liberties and reform of drug laws, before rallying with his supporters on the campus.

Ress can be reached by telephone at 757-247-4535.