Malala Yousafzai gets 10 A* or A GCSEs
and has since settled in Birmingham

She was awarded a Nobel Peace Prize after standing up for girls' right in Pakistan in a campaign which saw her shot in the head during a failed Taliban assassination attempt.

Now Pakistani teenager Malala Yousafzai has shown she is as intelligent as she is courageous - scoring a string of A*s and As in her GCSEs.

The 18-year-old's proud father Ziauddin Yousafzai took Twitter to announce the news today, writing: 'My wife Toor Pekai and I are proud of Malala getting 6A*s and 4As. Education for every child.'

Scroll down for video

Courageous teenager: Malala is pictured aftre receiving the Nobel Peace Prize last year (left) and recovering in Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham in 2012 after being shot in the head by Taliban gunmen in Pakistan

Proud parent: The 18-year-old's proud father Ziauddin Yousafzai took Twitter to announce the news today

Malala was just 14 when she survived a Taliban assassination attempt in October 2012 after her calls for equal rights and education for girls angered militants in the Swat Valley in Pakistan.

A bullet narrowly missed her brain when she was shot on her school bus. She was flown to Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham, where she was treated for life-threatening injuries.

After her treatment, she was allowed to settle in Birmingham - and last year she became the youngest person ever to win the Nobel Peace Prize.

Malala, who now attends Edgbaston High School, scored particularly well in the sciences, with top A* grades in biology, chemistry and physics - as well as in religious studies.

She also achieved As in history, geography, English language and English literature.

Edgbaston high school, where fees are £3,878 per term in the senior school, had a GCSE pass rate of 98.3 per cent, with 28 per cent of pupils achieving nine or more A* grades.

Malala previously told the Guardian that she wanted to study arts subjects at A-level, despite previously suggesting she might pursue a career in medicine.

Commenting on juggling her busy schedule as a global activist with taking exams, she said: 'I will only miss school for an engagement if it is going to bring real change.

'That is the question I have to ask myself with each request and if the answer is yes, I say, OK, I will sacrifice one day of my school for the education of millions of children who are out of school.'

Taliban shooting: Malala was just 14 when she was rushed to hospital following an attempt to assassinate her, after her calls for education for girls angered militants

In September the Pakistani military arrested ten men, all part of the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), for the attempted murder of Malala.

Pakistani officials said in April that all 10 men were found guilty of contributing to the 'planning and execution' of the assassination attempt against Malala and received a minimum prison sentence of 25 years.

But in June it emerged that only two of the suspects were actually convicted and jailed.

'The trial had absolutely no credibility as nobody was there to witness it but a public prosecutor, a judge, the army and the accused,' the source told the Mirror.

'This was a tactic to get the media pressure away from the Malala case because the whole world wanted convictions for the crime.

'But the truth is that, whether these acquitted men were involved or not in the Malala shooting, the public has been lied to.'

The Pakistan High Commission in London said the eight were acquitted because there was 'not adequate evidence', the paper reported.

It is thought that the men who actually shot Malala fled to Afghanistan after the attack and evaded capture.

Miss Yousafzai was barely 11 years old when she began championing girls' education, speaking out in TV interviews.

String of awards: Malala Yousafzai, receives the Amnesty International Ambassador of Conscience award for 2013 from U2's Bono at a ceremony in the Mansion House, Dublin

Huge impact: The 18-year-old has published a book about her epic journey to become one of the world's most recognised campaigners

The Taliban had overrun her home town of Mingora, terrorizing residents, threatening to blow up girls' schools, ordering teachers and students into the all-encompassing burqas.

Still campaigning, last month Malala called on world leaders to stop 'failing' the people of Syria.

The education activist described the situation in Syria as a 'heartbreaking tragedy', while speaking at the opening of a Malala Fund girls' school in neighbouring Lebanon.

'I am here on behalf of the 28 million children who are kept from the classroom because of armed conflict,' she said at the time.

'Their courage and dedication to continue their schooling in difficult conditions inspires people around the world and it is our duty to stand by them.

'On this day, I have a message for the leaders of this country, this region and the world - you are failing the Syrian people, especially Syria's children.