New Dallas Police Chief Brown picks up where Kunkle left off: chipping away at crime rate
Dallas native David Brown was sworn in as the city's 28th police chief Tuesday, and he promised to reach out to street cops while improving on a historic decrease in overall crime.

"This will be the safest city in the country," Brown said. "To the officers in the department, I commit my passion to you. I commit my respect to you. To the command staff, I will support you, encourage you, lead and guide you to this excellence in policing that I speak of."

Brown, a 1979 South Oak Cliff High graduate, was given the oath of office by retired state District Judge Larry Baraka, who the new chief said pointed him toward law enforcement over 26 years ago. Dallas police Sgt. Cedonia Brown was at her husband's side.

Among the crowd at the brief ceremony at the Jack Evans Police Headquarters were City Manager Mary Suhm, who hired Brown as chief; Mayor Tom Leppert; Dallas County District Attorney Craig Watkins; and Dallas County Sheriff Lupe Valdez. Brown's mother, brother, children and other relatives were also in attendance.

Brown, 49, who served as just-retired Chief David Kunkle's loyal No. 2 for most of the past five years, inherits the department in the midst of a historic six-year reported decline in crime. The 2009 murder total was the lowest in decades, and Dallas finally shed its much bemoaned distinction of having the highest crime rate among U.S. cities with more than 1 million people.

True to his reputation as a demanding leader, Brown says he wants even more from the 3,662-member force, including a seventh year of decline in crime.

Since being named chief, Brown has also made it a priority to smooth relations with the troops. "One of the things that will be a staple in my tenure will be the rank and file, the police officer on the street being a priority," he said.

Though Brown says he largely wants to stay the course that Kunkle set, he says he is open to change. That may mean term limits for non-patrol units other than homicide, easing Kunkle's restrictive chase policy and bolstering stagnant crime watch efforts.

The first official order of business is to outline a summer crime plan, a task Brown assigned to First Assistant Chief Charlie Cato, also a Dallas native. That plan will probably include increased police visibility in neighborhoods and a strategy for combating property crime.

The Brown era will also include an increased emphasis on neighborhood policing.

"What we want to do is institutionalize the beat cop and the beat cop methodology so that every member of the Police Department is involved in a neighborhood, including desk officers," Brown said.

For Brown, the celebratory mood may be tempered by difficult decisions. The city faces a challenging budget process, though it is too early to talk about specific cuts, he said.

"All departments will have to make sacrifices," Brown said, "including the Police Department."