15-year-old identified as St. Louis police shooting victim
A black Missouri teen, 15, has died after being shot in the back by a white cop during a high speed police chase.

Jorevis Scruggs was shot in the back by a white officer after he allegedly pointed a gun at two cops tailing the car. He died moments later.

Police had spotted the car, allegedly stolen at gunpoint the night before, in St. Louis on Tuesday morning, which then took off with the teenager in the front sear. His 19-year-old accomplice had been in the backseat.

Officers caught up with the suspects in an alley and the pair had started to bail out of the car when Scruggs lifted his gun, Police Chief Sam Dotson told River Front Times.

Jorevis Scruggs was shot in the back by a white officer after he allegedly pointed a gun at two cops tailing the car

The white cop, who has not been named, fired multiple times hitting the 15-year-old in the back. Scruggs collapsed and died in the alley moments later.

The officer's attorney, Brian Millikan, said: 'We're not sure if the suspect fired or not, but that's when the policeman fired,' Millikan said. 'It's perfectly consistent with a transverse shot.'

Authorities say they found a handgun next to the body - which had been reported as stolen in November 2015.

The 19-year-old was arrested while the driver fled from police. He dumped the car around a mile away.

The shooting is now under investigation while the 30-year-old officer, a seven-year veteran with the department, has now been placed on administrative duty.

St. Louis medical examiner Dr. Michael Graham told the St. Louis Post-Dispatch that the cause of death for Scruggs was a single gunshot wound to his back.

The 15-year-old died in an alley moments after being shot. Police say they discovered a stolen gun next to the body

St. Louis medical examiner Dr. Michael Graham told the St. Louis Post-Dispatch that the cause of death for Scruggs was a single gunshot wound to his back

Graham added that, 'Everything I've seen is consistent with the officer's account.'

'As I understand it, the kid was running with his arm up shooting or pointing the gun at the officer, who was kind of behind him,' Graham said.

Police have not said publicly whether Scruggs fired the gun.

The fatal shooting in St. Louis, Missouri, took place on the very same day a federal judge approved an agreement between Ferguson, Missouri, and the U.S. Justice Department which called for sweeping changes to the police department.

The agreement was made in the wake of the fatal shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown which sparked riots across the state.

The settlement calls for the hiring of a monitor; diversity training for police; the purchase of software and hiring of staff to analyze records on arrests, use of force and other police matters; and the outfitting of all officers and jail workers with body cameras.

Mayor James Knowles III welcomed the move as 'an important step in bringing this community together and moving us forward.'

The fatal shooting in St. Louis, Missouri, took place on the very same day a federal judge approved an agreement between Ferguson, Missouri, and the U.S. Justice Department in the wake of the fatal shooting of 18-year-old Michael Brown which sparked riots across the state

Ferguson has been under scrutiny since Brown, who was black and unarmed, was fatally shot by white Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson in 2014, and Brown's death was a catalyst in the national Black Lives Matter movement.

A grand jury and the Justice Department cleared Wilson, who resigned from the police force in November 2014, but the shooting led to a Justice Department investigation.

That inquiry found alarming patterns of racial bias in policing and a municipal court system that generated revenue largely on the backs of poor and minority residents.

The Justice Department's critical report in March 2015 prompted the resignations of Ferguson's city manager, police chief and municipal judge. All three were white men who have since been replaced by black men.

Ferguson leaders and Justice Department officials spent months negotiating the settlement. But in February, after a series of public hearings, the City Council rejected it, mostly over concerns the cost could bankrupt the town. The Justice Department sued the next day.