Virginia motorists spot white UN 'combat vehicles' on the interstate
Military U.N. vehicles have been spotted in Virginia, shocking motorists and sparking conspiracy theories.

The white trucks, equipped with large off-road tires, were seen being transported on Interstate 81 on Friday. They appear to be Alpine Armoring's Pit-Bull VX SWAT Truck models.

Jeff Stern posted photos of the vehicles on Facebook, writing: 'Can't begin to tell you how many of these I passed today on 81 near Lexington VA. Interesting times ahead!'

U.N. vehicles have been spotted in Virginia, shocking motorists and sparking conspiracy theories

Fernando Johnson questioned online: 'Tactical Vehicles, with bullet proof glass? Whatever could those be for, and why are UN vehicles here, in THIS country?!'

Meanwhile, Vincent Sammons noted on Facebook: 'They are sealed against gas too.'

Another online commenter said: 'We have U.N. vehicles being shipped on U.S. highways. One has to wonder why?'

Bobby Wayne Guinn posted on Facebook that he had witnessed similar scenes in Texas.

He wrote: 'Wondering why 30 United Nations vehicles, fully loaded with combat-prepared troops, were driving down our highway in Dallas, Texas.'

The white trucks, equipped with large off-road tyres, were seen being transported on Interstate 81 on Friday

Jeff Stern posted photos of the vehicles on Facebook, writing: 'Can't begin to tell you how many of these I passed today on 81 near Lexington VA, Interesting times ahead!'

His post sparked website Liberty is viral to ask: 'Are these U.N. troops here preparing for economic collapse in America? Is this related to Iran ships approaching the U.S. border?' while Alex Jones posted a video warning of the 'U.N. takeover of America.'

The U.N. is an intergovernmental organisation with 193 member states.

Its objectives include maintaining international peace and security, promoting human rights, fostering social and economic development, protecting the environment, and providing humanitarian aid in cases of famine, natural disaster, and armed conflict.

DailyMail.com has reached out to the U.N. for comment.

Alpine Armoring has not responded to requests for a statement.