And baby makes three! Channing Tatum and wife Jenna confirm birth of daughter Everly



Channing Tatum and his wife Jenna have named their baby daughter Everly, it has been revealed.

A statement on the actor's website confirmed that the American couple welcomed their little girl into the world on May 31st in London, England.

The statement, accompanied by an image bearing the words 'Welcome to the world!', read: 'Jenna Dewan-Tatum and Channing Tatum are thrilled to announce the birth of their daughter, Everly Tatum, who was born on May 31st in London.

New arrival: Channing Tatum and wife Jenna have named their newborn daughter Everly

And baby makes three! The pair confirmed the birth and their daughter's name on the actor's website

'Sending love and light to Chan, Jenna, and Ms. Everly!'

Following the birth, Channing's White House Down co-star Jamie Foxx tweeted his congratulations to the couple.

He wrote: 'Big luv 2 my @WHD costar @channingtatum + wife @jennaldewan + their new baby. Welcome 2 the world little Tatum.'

Channing, 33, and Jenna, 32, have been residing in the British capital since March while Channing filmed Jupiter Rising alongside Mila Kunis.

Baby joy: Channing Tatum and Jenna Dewan-Tatum, pictured on Thursday, are said to have welcomed their first child

While Channing has been working during the week, Jenna has been preparing for the birth by attending pre-natal classes and yoga and taking their dogs for walks.



A source told E! recently: 'Jenna and Channing are living in an exclusive apartment building in north London. Their apartment building is one of the best in London with flats costing between £2.5 to 3 million.

'They have a swimming pool in the grounds and underground parking and spacious gardens for Jenna to walk around with her two dogs.'



Hours ahead of the birth, the couple were spotted out near their rented North London home on Thursday walking their pit-Catahoula mix Lulu and Japanese spitz Meeka.

Love on celluloid: Channing and Jenna fell in love after meeting on 2006 film Step Up

Jenna and Channing, who have been married for four years and met in 2005 when they filmed Step Up, announced back in December that she was expecting.



In a recent issue with Glamour magazine, Jenna spoke about her pregnancy: 'I thought my body was going to change so quickly with pregnancy that I’d freak out. But it was really gradual.

'There’s a reason women are pregnant for nine months; by the end, you're ready to have this baby.



'Channing has been great. He takes the route of no confrontation, just support, saying things like, "Do whatever you want! What do you want to eat? I’m going to leave it up to you."'