President Barack Obama appears at press conference without his wedding ring
Where's your wedding ring, Mr President? Obama sets tongues wagging at White House press conference

By Mail Foreign Service

Last updated at 11:47 AM on 11th September 2010

The White House press conference was abuzz when eagle-eyed reporters noticed that U.S. President Barack Obama was not wearing his wedding ring.

Yesterday's event was an opportunity for Obama to get some weight off his shoulders but it appears he's also got some weight off of his finger too.

The New York Times reported last year that Obama's wedding band is 'an intricate gold design from Indonesia, where he had lived as a boy'.

Ringless: Obama was without his wedding ring at today's press conference. It sent a buzz amongst eagle-eyed reporters who noticed the band was missing

The state of the first couple's union hasn't been in question so onlookers were puzzled as to the missing band.

But speculation was soon cleared up when a White House spokesman revealed that the President's ring is being repaired.

Beyond the usual cleaning that most rings get, Obama's intricate gold ring needed some repairing but it's not clear what needed to be fixed.

Happy couple: The First Lady opted for fashion over wearing her own wedding band at President Obama's inauguration

The First Lady shouldn't be too annoyed as she's been known to leave her ring at home, but in her case for fashion reasons.

She famously left her wedding band at home on Obama's big inauguration night.

Michelle instead chose to wear a diamond and platinum art deco ring on her left middle finger.

She was also without it in July while attending the White House musical series honoring Broadway music. She again opted for a large cocktail ring instead of her wedding ring.

Married on October 3 1992, the President's wedding band is distinctly different than his wife's. Her band is a thin traditional gold band whereas Obama's is a thick, carved gold band.

The U.S. President was answering question in the East Room of the White House in Washington DC on Friday as he pushed new ideas to stimulate his country’s sluggish economy.