Omar Mateen's father is running for Afghanistan president and supports Taliban
Mass shooter Omar Mateen’s father Seddique Mateen recently visited Congress, the State Department and met political leaders during a trip to Washington, DC.

Mateen, who made the trip in April, is seen in social media posts posing in front of the State Department and Democratic Foreign Services Committee offices.

The Afghanistan native, who also regularly writes open letters to President Barack Obama, has expressed gratitude Afghan Taliban who hosts the Durand Jirga Show on a channel called Payam-e-Afghan, which broadcasts from California.

Mass shooter Omar Mateen’s father Seddique Mateen visited Congress, the State Department and met political leaders during a trip to Washington, DC, in April

Mateen, pictured above in front of US Rep for South Carolina Mark Sanford in Washington, DC, has made more than one trip to the nation's capital

Mateen also attending a hearing for Afghanistan security in Washington, DC, in March (pictured above)

Photo captions from his DC trip describe meetings with the Foreign Relations Committee and a trip to a hearing for Afghanistan security, according to the Independent Journal.

Pictures from 2015 show Mateen meeting Reps Charlie Rangel, Dana Rohrabacher and Ed Royce. Royce is the Chairman of the United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs.

Dozens of videos are posted under Mateen’s name on YouTube, where he speaks on a range of political subjects in the Dari language.

One video shows him declaring his candidacy for the Afghan presidency.

Posts include topics such as 'Rise Afghan people against Pakistan' and 'Intelligent service and Military of Pakistan real Enemy of the USA (sic)'.

In one video the elder Mateen holds up a sign that reads: 'ISI Pakistan and Military is Destroying 14 years of US work in Afghanistan to cut AID to killers'.

Seddique Mateen, (pictured) the father of mass shooter Omar Mateen, who opened fire at a Florida nightclub killing 49 people, is a strong supporter of the Afghan Taliban

Mateen posts open letters to President Barack Obama on Facebook, primarily focusing on Pakistan and Afghanistan

Seddique Mateen is an Afghan man and also hosts the Durand Jirga Show on a channel called Payam-e-Afghan, which broadcasts from California. Pictured: Mateen (left) holds up a sign to camera

On a Facebook page associated with Mateen , he has posted a video of himself in army camouflage where he appears to be pretending he is the president of Afghanistan

Another photo from his Facebook page shows Mateen wearing Army fatigues while saluting and holding a flag

And in another, he tells the camera: 'Our brothers in Waziristan, our warrior brothers in [the] Taliban movement and national Afghan Taliban are rising up.

'Inshallah the Durand Line issue will be solved soon', according to a translation by The Washington Post.

He is also filmed expressing gratitude toward the Afghan Taliban, while denouncing the Pakistani government.

Only hours before the massacre in Orlando, Seddique posted a video called Provisional Government of Afghanistan on a Facebook page, which he describes as 'social activity for communities to develop a good relationship'.

The video is of himself dressed in army camouflage, where he appears to be pretending he is the president of Afghanistan, and orders the arrest of several high profile Afghan figures.

Mateen is pictured above with US Rep for California Ed Royce (left) and US Rep for California Dana Rohrabacher (right)

Mateen is pictured above with US Representative for New York Charlie Rangel in an undated photograph

In the video he says: 'I order national army, national police and intelligence department to immediately imprison Karzai, Ashraf Ghani, Zalmay Khalilzad, Atmar, and Sayyaf.

'They are against our countrymen, and against our homeland.'

Back in March Seddique also founded a company called Provisional Government of Afghanistan, Corporation, which is registered at his home address in Florida.

It is unclear what, if anything, the company did - though it appears to be playing into his fantasy of running the country.

The most recent video on Mateen's YouTube channel shows him declaring his candidacy for the Afghan presidency, dated May 24, 2015.

In the video, Mateen appears incoherent at times and switching between Pashto - the language of Pashtuns and Dari, as well jumping between topics in an erratic fashion.

Pictured: US citizen Omar Mateen, 29, the suspected Islamic extremist who slaughtered at least 49 people inside a gay club in Orlando

A post on Mateen's Facebook shows his fight for the Afghan presidency. The election is due to be held in October 2016

Police were seen searching Seddique's property in Port St Lucie, Florida, today - with photographers walking into the home and officers inspecting vehicles and objects in the garage.

The four-bed home, valued at $221,000, is located on the same street where his son lived.

Records show that Seddique has no criminal history beyond a speeding ticket that he was issued back in 2006.

The Afghan presidential elections will be held on 15 October 2016. Much of the prelude to the election has focused on the debate over reforming Afghanistan's electoral laws.

Mateen has spoken out about his son's horrific act, telling NBC News: 'This has nothing to do with religion.'

Omar Mateen opened fire on the dance floor inside Pulse nightclub, Orlando, at around 2 am leaving 49 people dead and 53 others wounded, officials confirmed late Sunday morning.

Attack: A woman sits on the ground outside the club while another party-goer, whose legs are covered in blood, stands beside her

Seddique Mateen said that his son got angry when he saw two men kissing in Miami a couple of months ago and thinks that may be related to the shooting.

He added: 'We are saying we are apologizing for the whole incident. We weren't aware of any action he is taking. We are in shock like the whole country.'

The incident is being investigated by FBI as an act of terrorism .

Mateen Jnr was born in New York in 1986 and was listed as living at a residence in Port St. Lucie, about 125 miles south of Orlando.

Seddique Mateen also owns a nonprofit organization under the name Durand Jirga, which is registered in Port St. Lucie, Florida.

Police were seen searching Seddique's home in Florida earlier today, which is located just a s short walk down the same street from his son's house

Officers were seen entering the four bedroom, $221,000 property with cameras (left), while others looked through vehicles and objects in the garage