Science-Denier Bill Nye: Is It Time To 'Penalize People For Having Extra Kids?'
In the 13th and final episode of Bill Nye, The-Not-A-Scientist-Guy's new Netflix series, the hardcore, human-hating leftist who chases trendy science like Bill Clinton chases tail, moved things in a rather dark and some might say Nazi-ish direction while discussing the issue of population control.

First a little context …

Thanks to the spreading of human freedom, and the ingenuity and technology that comes with it, the population scare of the 1970's did not work out the way scientists secretly hoped and openly predicted; meaning, the boom in population over the last 5 decades has not resulted in widespread famine and despair – quite the opposite, in fact. It should also be noted that these are the very same scientists who predicted a new Ice Age as the result of – try not to laugh – Global Cooling and the utter depletion of natural resources like oil, ores, and even water.

Again, none of that proved true; the exact opposite occurred.

So …

If you are a anti-human tyrant-disguised-as-a-scientist desperate to use centralized government as a means to control the lives of others, but … all those hoaxes your brethren invented 40 years ago blew up in their face, what do you do now?

Well, naturally, you come up with a brand new hoax. And in order to control our lives, Nye and his guests are all over the latest shiny scam of Climate Change. You see, children, climate change (which is a hoax) is caused by greenhouse gases, and you will never guess what the "main driver" of greenhouse gases is.

Are you ready for a 70's flashback?

Population!

People!

You and me!

Yes, according to Nye's guest Travis Rieder, who holds the creepy title of a Bioethics Ethicist, you and I and our precious children are what Rieder calls "individual emitters," meaning we are inconvenient to the Greater Good because our individual emissions of carbon contribute to global warming (which is a hoax).

But we are not all guilty of doing "a lot of emitting."

Even though they have one of the highest fertility rates in the world, the good people of Niger, according to Rieder, are totally awesome because they "are doing almost no emitting." Yes, these amazing people emit only "0.1 metric tons of carbon annually," while we American pigs emit "160 times" that amount.

Oddly enough, though, what Nye and Rieder fail to tell us is that Niger is a hellhole of humanity that ranked as the country with the world's worst standard of living in 2009, a standard that has only gotten worse since. The "absolute poverty rate" in Niger was 61% and climbing in 2012.

But when his guest mentioned Niger, Nye said approvingly, "They burn some charcoal [only] now and then."

Well, when all you own is a wooden bowl, an old blanket, and herd of bed bugs …

Anyway, things then got super-creepy …

Billy Nye: So, should we have policies that penalize people for having extra kids in the developed world? Travis Rieder: I do think that we should at least consider it. Bill Nye: Well, "at least consider it" is like "Do it." Travis Rieder: One of the things that we could do that's kind of least policy-ish is we could encourage our culture and our norms to change, right?

Couple points …

1) HITLER!

2) Niger has an infant mortality rate of 71.2 deaths per 1000 live births – one of the highest in the world. America's infant mortality rate, which the left-wing Washington Post called an "embarrassment," is only 6.1 per 1000.

Life expectancy in Niger is 61 years (the same age as Tom Hanks!). Life expectancy in America is 79 years. America's poor live like kings compared to the average Nigerian.

So maybe instead of penalizing developed countries, we should use all that activist energy to help develop Niger?

But the inhuman tyrants we call environmentalists actually fight against the modern development of countries like Niger. Like real-life Bond villains, all they care about is their golden calf of Gaia. While they sip lattes and burn more carbon with their television shows than I will in ten lifetimes, they are comforted by the fact that the people of Niger – although miserable, dying, exploited, and despairing – are living worse than animals do on American farms.

The other truth that goes unmentioned is that developed countries like ours are much, much, much cleaner than human hellholes like Niger. Our water and air is cleaner. We use much better methods to dispose of our garbage and sewage. We preserve, recycle, and replenish our natural resources. For example, no one plants more trees than the private logging industry. America has more trees today than we did 100 years ago. Nothing produces a clean environment better than private ownership. You take care of what is yours.

Developed countries that allow for human freedom are not the problem, they are the solution. People are not the problem, they are a blessing and the very ones who invent, create, and come up with the ideas that have, overall, improved both living and environmental conditions throughout the world.

But science-denying monsters like Bill Nye would have us believe the opposite is true. Because it is not about the science. It is about the depraved power that comes with controlling the lives of others.

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC. Follow his Facebook Page here.