Biggest Supermoon 'to spark huge tidal waves and massive earthquakes' NEXT WEEK
THE biggest Supermoon since World War 2 could trigger monster waves and earth-shattering earthquakes that will wreak havoc across the planet, conspiracy theorists have warned.

GETTY RARE: The Supermoon will not be this close to Earth again until November 25, 2034

The rare event will see the moon come the closest to Earth in 70 years – since January 26, 1948 – at 1.50pm on November 14. And now researchers in Tokyo are reportedly predicting how a major earthquake may be triggered by the huge phenomenon. According to conspiracy site UFOsightinghotspot, research from their study concluded the huge tremors are more likely to wreak havoc during full and new moons. It claimed this is the two occasions each month when the tidal stresses are the highest.

GETTY STUDY: Nine of the 12 biggest quakes rocked the planet near or on full or new moons

“There is a strong correlation between tidal stress fluctuation and earthquake occurrence” Researchers They said: “There is a strong correlation between tidal stress fluctuation and earthquake occurrence in several regions close to the epicentre of the Tohoku earthquake.” The study – published in the Nature Geoscience journal – draws on evidence from other notorious quakes including those that shook Indonesia in 2004, Chile in 2010 and Japan in 2011. Also, the research team found there were high levels of "tidal stress" before massive earthquakes struck. Nine of the 12 biggest quakes rocked the planet near or on full or new moons, the study revealed.

UNCLASSIFIED: Extraterrestrial objects spotted on the Moon and Mars Daily Star Pictures brings you the most mysterious images of strange objects spotted on the Moon and on Mars. 1 / 20 Getty Images Can you spot these extraterrestrial objects?

The Supermoon will not be this close to Earth again until November 25, 2034. NASA said: “The full moon of November 14 is not only the closest full moon of 2016, but also the closest full moon to date in the 21st Century. “The full moon won’t come this close to Earth again until November 25, 2034.”

GETTY EXPOSED: The rare event will see the moon come the closest to Earth in 70 years

GETTY DESTRUCTION: Huge tremors are more likely to wreak havoc, the study found

The top 10 conspiracy theories From mind control, to the missing Malaysian airways flight MH370, here are the top 10 conspiracy theories. 1 / 10 AFP/Getty Images In 2011, Osama Bin Laden was killed by US Navy Seals and buried at sea, but now conspiracy theorists claim that it was all a lie and he is still alive