Pete Sessions rival Katrina Pierson says '97 shoplifting charge helped turn her life around
On and off the campaign trail, congressional candidate Katrina Pierson sometimes discusses the hardscrabble background that she says ultimately made her a conservative firebrand.

The troubles in her youth, records show, included an arrest for shoplifting.

In 1997, five days before her 21st birthday, Katrina Pierson, then named Katrina Lanette Shaddix, was arrested on a charge of theft of greater than $50 and less than $500.

Pierson, who is running against Dallas Rep. Pete Sessions in the March 4 Republican primary, acknowledges the mistake. She told police then, and repeated recently, that she was talked into shoplifting by a friend.

“Like an idiot, I went along for the ride,” Pierson said in a recent interview.

She and the other woman were accused of trying to lift nine pieces of women’s clothing from a J.C. Penney store in Plano. They stuffed the clothes into shoe boxes in a clumsy, failed heist.

According to a Plano police report, Pierson said she and the woman with her, Laura Elizabeth Nelson, told police they needed the clothes for jobs they were trying to obtain.

Pierson told police she was “scared at first and did not want to go through with it.”

Pierson exited the store with four items of clothing in a shoe box inside her shopping bag. They were valued at $168. The report said Pierson had her young son with her when the incident occurred.

She was booked into the Plano City Jail. She eventually pleaded no contest to the charges and received deferred adjudication.

“That’s what the attorney guy told me to do,” she said. “My defense was as good as I could afford.”

Pierson, a tea party leader from Garland, said she knew her background would be open for scrutiny if she decided to take on Sessions, the powerful incumbent.

Pierson says the incident helped turn her life around, showing her that mistakes often come with consequences.

And the 37-year-old says the shoplifting charge was nothing compared with what could have happened in her life.

Pierson says she was born to a 15-year-old mother and grew up exposed to the wrong crowd, folks involved in gangs and other unsavory activities. An early marriage lasted just three months.

“I’m surprised I made it out,” Pierson said.

Pierson said Sessions’ supporters are mounting a smear campaign, but added that she has nothing to hide.

A Sessions spokesman declined to comment on the arrest. Sessions has said he’s never been arrested.

Pierson says she’s willing to discuss her shoplifting charge, and other issues, with Sessions, chiding her opponent for refusing to consent to a public debate before the primary.

“Why don’t we both meet up in a public forum and talk about it?” she said.

Follow Gromer Jeffers Jr. on Twitter at @gromerjeffers.