Christopher Harrison Jr 'doused his co-workers with gas and set them on fire'
A Baltimore man has been arrested after he allegedly doused two of his coworkers with gasoline and set them on fire in the middle of a highway.

Before the horrific incident, Christopher Harrison Jr., 28, and three of his coworkers had walked to a fuel station after one of their cars ran out of gas on Friday.

On their way back the coworkers are said to have got in an argument that they decided to settle with a fistfight. But then Harrison poured the gasoline and two of them and set them on fire, according to police.

WARNING: GRAPHIC CONTENT

Christopher Harrison Jr. has been arrested after he allegedly doused two of his coworkers with gasoline and set them on fire, a horrifying scene that was captured on video

The video shows the two men burst into flames, with one of them running up an embankment (left) while the other runs across the highway (right) as he screams for help

A horrifying video, which was later posted online, shows the two men in flames - one of them running up an embankment while the other runs across the highway as he screams for help.

The second man is seen extinguishing the flames by rolling on the ground, only clad in his underwear after the fire burned off his clothes.

Harrison, 28 (pictured), has been charged with attempted first-degree murder, assault and reckless endangerment

Both men are now in hospital.

One victim suffered burns on 90 percent of his body and is in a critical condition, according to Baltimore County Police Cpl. Shawn Vinson.

The second victim, David Campbell, received burns on 60 percent of his body and is in a stable condition, his friend Cody Yeager wrote on a GoFundMe page set up for him.

The reason for the workplace dispute has not been revealed but witness Anthony Rodriguez, who works with the three men, said Harrison had an ongoing dispute with one of the victims.

'They kept pushing him and pushing him, saying that they wanted to fight him,' Rodriguez told WBAL-TV.

David Widener, who was also at the scene, pulled out his camera to record what he thought was going to be a fist fight.

'They had agreed to settle it,' he said. 'Nothing besides that was said, even leading up to the altercation. They both took their shirts off and appeared like they were going to fight.'

Rodriguez said Williams then threw gas on one of the men.

'It just happened so quick,' he told the network.

Harrison has been charged with attempted first-degree murder, first and second-degree assault and reckless endangerment, according to The Baltimore Sun.

Police said the video filmed by Widener is being used as evidence for the investigation.

Harrison is being held without bail at the Baltimore County Detention Center.