Bataclan victims castrated by ISIS killers and had their eyes gouged out
The French government suppressed the media from reporting the gruesome torture of several of the Bataclan terrorist attack victims, it has been claimed.

A government committee has heard from a leading investigator that policemen on the scene of the attacks last November vomited after witnessing victims with their eyes gouged out. They claimed that some had been castrated with their genitals put in their mouths and that women were stabbed in the genitals.

But prosecutors at the parliamentary inquiry into the Bataclan deaths in France have cast doubt over the claims after revealing that no sharp knives were found at the scene.

The news comes after 84 people were killed when a terrorist gunman drove a 25-tonne lorry through crowds on a mile-long killing spree in Nice, France, on Bastille Day on Thursday night.

Scroll down for video

The French government blocked the media from reporting the gruesome torture of several of the Bataclan terrorist attack victims, it has been claimed

The Bataclan inquiry heard that the alleged torture was the reason that some bodies of those who died were not released to their family, reported HeatStreet.

The investigator told the inquiry: 'After the assault, we were with colleagues at the passage Saint-Pierre Amelot when I saw weeping from one of our colleagues who came outside to vomit. He told us what he had seen.'

He then confirmed that his colleague had seen 'acts of torture' on the second floor of the Bataclan.

Terrorist attackers were planning on using filmed footage of the torture victims for ISIS propoganda, it was claimed.

Some of the victims were beheaded by the terrorist attackers, according to the claims.

The inquiry heard from the president of the committee, Georges Fenech, that one father had been told while visiting his son's body at the morgue that the right side of his face was unrecognisable because terrorists had 'punctured his eye and sliced down the right side of his face.'

The attacks happened after three terrorists took hostage concert-goers who were watching the band Eagles of Death Metal perform in the venue.

Initially after the terrorists opened fire, many members of the crowd mistook gunshots for pyrotechnics.

The attacks happened after three terrorists took hostage concert-goers who were watching the band Eagles of Death Metal perform in the venue

France needs to set up a national counterterrorism agency to oversee the fight against dangerous militants, according to the parliamentary inquiry into security failings that allowed the attacks.

The recommendation for a body modelled on the U.S. National Counterterrorism Center reporting to the prime minister was one of 40 proposals made by a parliamentary committee after the five-month inquiry.

Poor coordination between security services in France and at the European level let crucial information slip through about militants who killed 130 people in coordinated attacks in and near Paris on a stadium, cafes and the Bataclan, the inquiry found.

'We are not up to the task (in the fight) against those who threaten us today,' conservative lawmaker Georges Fenech, who headed the committee, told a news conference earlier this month.