Uber slammed for price surges during London terror attack
Rideshare app Uber has been slammed online by users accusing the company of profiting from the London terror attack by enforcing price surges around the affected area.

Disgusted Uber users shared screenshots of ride fares around central London, particularly Borough Market, claiming it 'ramped prices up in hit areas knowing people need to get home'.

One screenshot shows a £38 fare ($65) for a trip in Vauxhall, southwest London where the app notes: 'fares are higher due to increased demand.'

Many have shared screenshots of their Uber fare prices which they claimed have surged

Twitter users furiously slammed Uber for its price surges during last night's terrorist attack

'Absolutely disgusting'': Some Uber users accused the app of being disrespectful

'Absolutely disgusting that Uber prices surge in London tonight? How disrespectful to the situation can you be?' one horrified Twitter user wrote.

'Big fan of Uber but bitterly disappointed in profiting from a terrorist attack. £7 Knightsbridge to Victoria. Charging £40,' another said.

One furious Uber customer wrote: 'Reading of people trying to get home safe - Uber surge ON this Saturday night in London... are you taking the p***?!? Overpaying for safety.'

Countless furious app users also pointed out in previous terror attacks in London taxi drivers had rallied together to provide free trips to bring victims to safety.

'London black cabs getting people home safe tonight often not charging. Whereas UBER have triggered a surge,' one said.

But Uber has responded to angry Twitter users by saying it stopped fare surges as soon as it learned about the terror incident.

'We suspended dynamic pricing as soon as we heard about the incident, as we did previously with Westminster and Manchester,' it wrote.

Countless furious app users also pointed out in previous terror attacks in London taxi drivers had rallied together to provide free trips to bring victims to safety

'Lonodn black cabs getting people home safe tonight often not charging. Whereas UBER have triggered a surge,' one Twitter user said

Uber usually raises its fare prices during peak times including Saturday nights

But Uber has responded to angry Twitter users by saying it stopped fare surges as soon as it learned about the terror incident

Five jihadi terrorists shouting 'this is for Allah' have reportedly killed seven people and left dozens more injured in a horrific rampage around two locations in central London

The surge has sparked a boycott backlash with many announcing they have deleted their Uber apps.

But some have defended the ride-sharing company and said the app automatically enforces price surges based on supply and demand.

'It's Saturday night. The system is automated. The higher prices encourage more drivers to serve the demand,' one man said.

Six people have been killed and 48 were injured when a white van drove into pedestrians on London Bridge before three jihadi terrorists launched into a frenzied stabbing attack.

The three terrorists were shot dead by armed police within eight minutes of the attack beginning.

Tom Elvidge, General Manager of Uber in London, said: 'Our hearts go out to everybody affected by yet another horrific attack on our city. We'd like to thank all the drivers who helped tens of thousands of Londoners get home safely last night.

'As soon as we heard about the incident we immediately suspended dynamic pricing all around the area of the attacks - and shortly afterwards across the whole of central London - just as we did following the attacks in Manchester and Westminster.

'We are also ensuring all rides from around the affected area were free of charge. Our team is also working with the Metropolitan Police to help them get any footage from drivers who were in the area at the time.

'Despicable': Countless Uber users took to social media to criticise the price surges