Donald Trump called pregnant wife Melania 'a monster' and 'a blimp'
Two months prior Trump made lewd comments about women on a hot mic

Donald Trump told Stern she had become a monster 'in all the right places'

His wife of almost a year Melania Trump was pregnant with son Barron

The Republican nominee talked to Howard Stern in December 2005

Donald Trump called his pregnant wife 'a monster' and 'a blimp'.

The GOP nominee spoke to radio host Howard Stern in December 2005, while his wife Melania was expecting their son Barron.

Trump and his wife had been married for almost a year when the Republican candidate lampooned her changing appearance.

'Like a blimp — in the right places. In her case, the right places. I mean she really has become a monster — in all the right places,' he told Stern.

Scroll down for video

Donald Trump told Howard Stern in December 2005 that his pregnant wife Melania had 'become a monster' and was 'like a blimp'. Both are pictured during her pregnancy in late 2005

Trump and his wife had been married for almost a year when the Republican candidate lampooned her changing appearance. They are pictured last month

Trump's comments were reported at the time on SF Gate. The report, which back then relied on Page Six, is still live on the website.

'You know, they just blow up, right?' Trump asked Stern, referring to pregnant women.

Trump also insulted supermodel Heidi Klum's physical appearance. She had given birth to Henry, her second child, two months prior.

'I looked at her the other day, and it's off. There's no question,' he said.

Trump's comments regarding his wife's and Klum's physiques came just two months after he made lewd comments about women in a conversation with Billy Bush.

'I mean she really has become a monster — in all the right places,' Trump told Stern in September 2005. He is pictured with her and daughter Ivanka the following month

On Friday, Trump (pictured with his wife in July) was revealed to have made disparaging comments about women in 2005

A video published Friday by the Washington Post features the Republican presidential candidate saying stars can 'do anything' to women, including grabbing them 'by the p***y'.

'You know I'm automatically attracted to beautiful — I just start kissing them. It's like a magnet. Just kiss. I don't even wait,' Trump told Bush in September 2005.

'And when you're a star, they let you do it. You can do anything.

'Grab them by the p---y. You can do anything.'

His wife condemned the remarks on Saturday, saying his words were 'unacceptable' and 'offensive'.

At least 33 Republican senators, representatives and governors have withdrawn their support from Trump, including John McCain.

Trump has vowed to remain in the presidential race.