Charlie Sheen sues Warner Bros & Two And A Half Men's Chuck Lorre for $100m
'You corporate trolls were warned': Charlie Sheen sues Warner Bros. and Two And A Half Men creator Chuck Lorre for $100m

Lorre hits back, branding Sheen's lawsuit recklessly false and unwarranted

Sheen 'took pills to prevent cardiac arrest after four overdoses in six months'

His ex-wife demands actor undergo psychological evaluation before seeing sons again

Actor explains his bizarre behaviour and catchphrases as 'performance art'

Charlie Sheen has filed a lawsuit against Warner Bros.and Two And A Half Men creator Chuck Lorre, for $100 million today.



As the news broke, he tweeted: '#Fastball; Torpedo away... You corporate trolls were warned. And now you've been served!'



He is demanding to be paid for eight episodes of the show and is suing on behalf of the cast and crew.



Close to death: Charlie Sheen, pictured here during one of his disturbing webcasts earlier this week, is said to have had four near-fatal drug overdoses in six months

His lawyer, Marty Singer directly addressed Lorre in the written lawsuit.

Singer also claims that the decision to cancel the show came before Sheen criticised Lorre and that they were using the actor's bizarre antics as a subsequent scapegoat.

Lorre's lawyer has now fired back, branding Sheen's lawsuit a 'fantasy 'lottery' pay-day for Charlie Sheen.'

Howard Weitzman told TMZ: 'The allegations in the complaint against Mr. Lorre are as recklessly false and unwarranted as Mr. Sheen's rantings in the media.'

The lawsuit states: 'Chuck Lorre, one of the richest men in television who is worth hundreds of millions of dollars, believes himself to be so wealthy and powerful that he can unilaterally decide to take money away from the dedicated cast and crew of the popular television series, Two and a Half Men, in order to serve his own ego and self-interest, and make the star of the Series the scapegoat for Lorre's own conduct.

SHEEN'S $100m LAWSUIT

The lawsuit states: 'Chuck Lorre, one of the richest men in television who is worth hundreds of millions of dollars, believes himself to be so wealthy and powerful that he can unilaterally decide to take money away from the dedicated cast and crew of the popular television series, Two and a Half Men, in order to serve his own ego and self-interest, and make the star of the Series the scapegoat for Lorre's own conduct. 'Warner Brothers capitulated to Lorre's egotistical desire to punish Mr. Sheen and to stop work on the Series for the rest of the season and used its powerful public relations machine to create a myth to justify their conduct by wrongly blaming Mr. Sheen.'



'Warner Brothers capitulated to Lorre's egotistical desire to punish Mr. Sheen and to stop work on the Series for the rest of the season and used its powerful public relations machine to create a myth to justify their conduct by wrongly blaming Mr. Sheen.'

The suit also says that Warner Bros. fired Sheen when he was 'sick,' which violates State and federal law.



Warner Bros and Lorre have not commented on the lawsuit.



Meanwhile, as Sheen continues to embark on his bizarre media blitz across America, more claims have emerged regarding his addition to cocaine.

The former Two-And-A-Half-Men star is said to have suffered four near-fatal overdoses in the last six months,

according to the National Enquirer

.

The report claims friends and staff members at his Beverly Hills mansion have had to take swift action to prevent the the 45-year-old star from going into cardiac arrest by administering a Nitroglycerin pill, a tablet that contains a chemical compound commonly used to prevent a heart attack.

'Since Charlie's latest tailspin began in October, he's suffered at least four potentially fatal cocaine overdoses - maybe even more - but his life was saved each time by people who rushed to his side and rescued him,' a source told the publication.



Filed: Sheen's lawyer filed a lawsuit against Warner Bros.and Two And A Half Men creator Chuck Lorre, for $100 million today

Twitter blast: Sheen took to his Twitter account today to declare his excitement about the new lawsuit against Chuck Lorre and Warner Bros.



Aware of the potential to overdose, Sheen apparently carries the pill around with him and slips it under his tongue whilst he is indulging in the drug.

When his heart starts to race, he will pop the pill immediately, waiting for it to take effect and essentially 'save his life'.



An insider told the Enquirer that there have been times when Sheen has found himself in situations when he hasn't been able to take the pill in time, causing a near overdose.

Friends and assistants have apparently found Sheen, 'strewn across the floor, sweating bullets, while he was going in and out of consciousness.'



'Luckily they got to him in time and were able to get him in time and were able to get a nitroglycerin pill under his tongue,' said an insider.

Media blitz: The father-of-five filmed a spoof cookery show for the FunnyOrDie.com website yesterday



Sacked: The actor was fired from Two And A Half earlier this month



Meanwhile, reports have also emerged claiming Sheen's ex-wife Brooke Mueller is so worried about the actor's mental state, that she is demanding he get a full psychological evaluation.

'Brooke is extremely concerned for the safety of Bob and Max when it comes to being with their father,' a source told RadarOnline.com.

'She is demanding that Charlie get a full mental health examination before he is allowed to have his next visit with the boys.'

And it seems that Mueller will not back down.



'Brooke will not waiver on this demand, period. The mental health professional would be someone that both parties agree to, however, Charlie is absolutely refusing to undergo any examination, period,' the source said.



'If Brooke needs to go to court to make this happen she will. Brooke won't allow the boys to be with their father again until the mental health evaluation takes place.'

Mueller has custody of the two twin boys she shares with Sheen, Bob and Max, who both turn two next week.



The boys were both placed with her after being removed from Sheen's care by court order last week.



She was granted a temporary restraining order, which orders Sheen to stay 100 yards away from her and the twins.



Yesterday the father-of-five hosted a spoof cookery show for the FunnyOrDie.com website.

Playing up to his new 'winning' catchphrase, the troubled actor wore a tiger-patterned chef's hat as he presents 'Charlie Sheen's Winning Recipes'.

Goddess: Charlie has been spending a lot of his time with one of his goddesses of Natalie Kenly

As Sheen was filming at home, a porn star was outside with a 'special delivery' from adult entertainment company Brazzers.

Actress Britney Amber turned up with a large box addressed to Sheen while wearing a T-shirt reading 'Charlie's Goddess'.



After Sheen claimed he had tiger blood running through his veins, he's also been spotted drinking a bottle of red liquid with the words 'tiger blood' written across it.

In another interview, with Australian radio network, Nova, the actor attempted to explain his bizarre behaviour and catchphrases as 'performance art'.



'You have to sort of go into performance art,” he said of his dealings with the Press.



'You just prepare for it because you know its coming because they're [media] transparent and predictable. It’s a skill set you don't worry about encountering.



'You can dismiss it with the illusion that there's some measure of compassion behind the answer,' Sheen said.