South Carolina man confesses to 13-year old quadruple murder
A judge has denied bond for a convicted rapist charged with a 2003 quadruple murder and holding a woman captive in a metal container on his property after authorities said he confessed to seven murders.

Todd Christopher Kohlhepp, 45, appeared before a magistrate judge in Spartanburg on Sunday. Magistrate Judge Jimmy Henson said a circuit court could revisit the issue of bond later.

Kohlhepp wore an orange jumpsuit and declined to speak when Henson offered him the chance to make a statement. He didn't have an attorney.

He is charged with four counts of murder in the shooting deaths at Superbike Motorsports in Chesnee 13 years ago. The family members of victims were there in court on Sunday.

In an investigative report filed Saturday, the Spartanburg County Sheriff's Office said Kohlhepp confessed to the killings.

He is also charged with kidnapping a woman and keeping her chained on his property in rural Woodruff, South Carolina. Kala Brown's rescue on Thursday led to the break in the 13-year-old cold case.

Spartanburg County Sheriff Chuck Wright said Kohlhepp also showed police officers the grave sites of two of his other victims buried on his 95-acre property on Saturday. That's in addition to the body that was found on Friday in a shallow grave at the site.

Wright and Coroner Rusty Clevenger identified that victim as 32-year-old Charles Carver, the boyfriend of Brown, who was found in a locked metal container on Thursday.

Investigators brought Kohlhepp back to his property late Saturday afternoon as part of a massive search of the area.

Kohlhepp's arrest has put to rest for local law enforcement and the families of the victims a mystery that has haunted them for more than a decade.

Scroll down for video

A judge has denied bond for Todd Christopher Kohlhepp, a convicted rapist, charged with a 2003 quadruple murder and holding a woman captive in a metal container on his property

Judge Jimmy Henson speaks to the family members of the bike shop murder victims during a bond hearing for Todd Kohlhepp at the Spartanburg Detention Facility on Sunday

Kohlhepp (pictured left), 45, the man accused of kidnapping Kala Brown, 30, showed detectives two additional graves on his farmland Saturday and confessed to a 2003 quadruple murder (a 'wanted' poster related to the case is pictured right)

But authorities have yet to locate the bodies contained in the two shallow graves revealed by Kohlhepp, Wright said on Saturday night. Detectives will continue searching the property for additional bodies and evidence.

But Kohlhepp has been 'very cooperative', Wright told reporters on Saturday.

He added 'God answered our prayers' in solving the 13-year-old cold case.

'We got 'em today. We got 'em today. I'm rejoicing that this community can know that four people who were brutally murdered, there's no wondering about it anymore,' Sheriff Wright said late Saturday night.

The crowd gasped when Wright announced Kohlhepp had confessed to the Superbike Motorsports murders.

Owner Scott Ponder, 30, his mother Beverly Guy, 52, service manager Brian Lucas, 29, and mechanic Chris Sherbert, 26, were found fatally shot on November 6, 2003.

Sherbert's and Guy's bodies were found at the back of the store, while Lucas and Ponder were found in front of the shop, according to a cold case report on Crime Watch Daily.

The suspect at the time was described on 'wanted' posters as a white male between 25 and 40 years old, with dark brown feathered hair, approximately six feet tall and weighing from 175 to 200 pounds.

The case was Spartanburg County's first quadruple homicide, according to the Greenville News.

Kohlhepp hasn't revealed a motive in the killings and police have never been able to establish one.

Todd Christopher Kohlhepp (circled in red) returned to his property in Woodruff, South Carolina Saturday afternoon as investigators launched a massive search of the farmland

The crowd gasped when Wright announced Kohlhepp had confessed to the Superbike Motorsports murders. Owner Scott Ponder (left) and his mother Beverly Guy (right) were found fatally shot on November 6, 2003

Mechanic Chris Sherbert (left) and service manager Brian Lucas (right) also died in the 13-year-old quadruple murder. Their bodies were found in front of the shop while Ponder's and Guy's were found at the back

Investigators are seen working on Todd Kohlhepp's 95-acre property near Woodruff, South Carolina, on Sunday

Law enforcement personnel stand near police tape on Todd Kohlhepp's property on Sunday. A wooden storage shed is seen in the background

But the wife of one of the four people killed said Kohlhelpp was a disgruntled customer.

Melissa Ponder said she was resigned that her husband Scott's death would never be solved before getting a phone call on Saturday evening from one of the case's original detectives.

Ponder says detectives told her Kohlhepp was an angry customer who had been in the shop several times.

'He knew too much about the crime scene,' Ponder said of Kohlhepp's account to detectives. 'He knew everything.'

The Superbike killings stunned the Chesnee community, with rumors like they were committed by a Mexican drug gang or were part of a love triangle crushing the families of the victims.

'It isn't closure, but it is an answer,' she said. 'And I am thankful for that.'

Terry Guy, whose wife and stepson were among those killed in 2003, said the unexpected arrest will bring the families peace.

'I'm just so relieved,' he said outside Spartanburg County jail on his way to Kohlhepp's hearing on Sunday.

Tom and Lorraine Lucas lost their son, Brian, who was the service manager gunned down at the store. They spoke to reporters ahead of a bond hearing for Kohlhepp on Sunday, the 13th anniversary of the killings.

Standing with his wife outside the Spartanburg County Detention Center, Tom Lucas said he wants to be in court to look the man accused of killing his son in the eye.

Tom Lucas said, 'We want to see the face. I want to look at him, and I want to try to use that in healing.'

Authorities believed Kohlhepp's confession because, Wright said, he told them 'some stuff that nobody else ought to know'.

One reporter asked Sheriff Wright on Saturday night if investigators thought they had a serial killer on their hands. 'It appears to be that that's what we're looking at,' Wright said.

'I'M JUST SO RELIEVED': FAMILIES OF 2003 QUADRUPLE MURDER SPEAK OUT Family members of victims in the 2003 bike shop murders comfort each other in the courtroom of Judge Jimmy Henson The arrest of a convicted rapist in a 2003 quadruple murder has put to rest for the families of the victims a mystery that has haunted them for more than a decade. Scott Ponder, 30, his mother Beverly Guy, 52, service manager Brian Lucas, 29, and mechanic Chris Sherbert, 26, were found fatally shot inside Superbike Motorsports in Chesnee, South Carolina, on November 6, 2003. The case stunned the community and baffled police for more than a decade. Rumors swirled that the slaying was committed by a Mexican drug gang or the victims were part of a love triangle, crushing the victims' loved ones. Now, on the 13th anniversary of the murders, the families say Todd Kohlhepp's arrest will bring them some peace. Kohlhepp is charged with four counts of murder in the shooting deaths and the Spartanburg County Sheriff's Office said that he has confessed to the killings. Terry Guy, whose wife and stepson were among those killed, spoke with reporters outside Spartanburg County jail on his way to Kohlhepp's bond hearing on Sunday. Guy said Kohlhepp's arrest means his relatives and the families of others killed can now finally be at peace. 'I'm just so relieved,' he said. Tom and Lorraine Lucas lost their son, Brian, who was the service manager gunned down at the store. Standing with his wife outside the Spartanburg County Detention Center, Tom Lucas said he wants to be in court to look the man accused of killing his son in the eye. 'We want to see the face. I want to look at him, and I want to try to use that in healing,' he said. Melissa Ponder said she was resigned that her husband Scott's death would never be solved before getting a phone call on Saturday evening from one of the case's original detectives. Ponder says the detectives told family members of all four victims the news at the same time - that Kohlhepp confessed to the killings. 'He knew too much about the crime scene,' Ponder said of Kohlhepp's account to detectives. 'He knew everything.' She added: 'It isn't closure, but it is an answer - and I am thankful for that.'

Doris Henry, Guy's sister and Ponder's aunt, is pictured left being comforted by her husband while awaiting to hear about them in 2003 after hearing four people were found dead. Pictured right is a deck of cards made by Lucas' father and passed out to inmates in South Carolina prisons

The building that once housed the Superbike Motorsports shop in Chesnee, South Carolina (pictured) has been abandoned since the quadruple murder rocked the city 13 years ago

Detectives told DailyMail.com they have begun sifting through missing persons records as they continued the search for more bodies in farmland where Brown was held captive.

It emerged on Friday that Kohlhepp was released from prison in Arizona in 2001 after being convicted of raping a 14-year-old at gunpoint.

At 15 years old, he was convicted of raping his teenage neighbor at gunpoint and threatening to kill her siblings if she called police. Kohlhepp had to register as a sex offender.

And he was described by a judge as 'impulsive, explosive, and preoccupied with sexual content' from the age of nine.

But that didn't stop him from getting a South Carolina real estate license in 2006 and building a firm.

Wright said 'it's strange' that Kohlhepp managed the pretext of a normal life for so long.

Scott Waldrop, who's lived next door to the Woodruff property for nearly 22 years, said he thought Kohlhepp was a serious Doomsday 'prepper' who liked his privacy, but 'he didn't seem like a threat.'

Waldrop said when he saw the container, it was full of bottled water and canned goods. After buying the property two years ago, Kohlhepp immediately started putting a chain link fence around it.

Waldrop said Kohlhepp paid him to put no trespassing signs, cut trees for him and other odd jobs around the property. Kohlhepp also installed deer cameras and put bear traps throughout.

'I was the only one he let over there, I think because I laughed at his jokes and listened to him,' he said. 'I just hate to know somebody who's done something like this.'

Kohlhepp has a house about nine miles away in Moore, where neighbor Ron Owen said Kohlhepp was very private, but when they did talk across the fence, he was a 'big bragger.'

Kohlhepp liked to talk about the money he made day trading online, for example, and about his two BMWs. He recently told Owen, 76, that he'd spent $80,000 on the chain link fence.

'We didn't see any signs whatsoever that this was going on,' Owen said. 'My first reaction's a baseball bat, but I know I'm not to take that in my own hands. God will deal with him.'

Brown (left), 30, was found chained up in a metal container on Kohlhepp's property after going missing in August. Authorities announced Saturday that a body found on the property was that of Charlie Carver (right), 32, her boyfriend

Meanwhile, a visibly shaken Sheriff Wright told reporters on Saturday: 'I do think this helps with a little bit of closure but I don't think this make everything better. We certainly wanted a different outcome.'

Authorities were still trying to determine how long Carver had been buried. They didn't find any ID on Carver's body and they said it wasn't immediately possible to identify him based on his appearance.

His mother Joanne Shiflet had told the Greenville News earlier Saturday: 'Until I see a body, I can't give up. For this to be over, I have to see him.'

Brown said her alleged captor had shot dead her boyfriend and told her there were four victims in all.

Scores of officers are searching the farmland, which sits back from the main road and where Brown was held captive in a container.

Wright told DailyMail.com: 'I'm going to be honest with you. I don't chain my dogs up and I wouldn't treat my dogs the way this lady was treated.'

Scores of officers are searching the farmland, which sits back from the main road and where Brown was held captive in a container. Investigators are pictured excavating one part of the property on Friday

One reported asked Spartanburg County Sheriff Chuck Wright (pictured) Saturday night if investigators thought they had a serial killer on their hands. 'It appears to be that that's what we're looking at,' Wright said

Police search for evidence on property owned by registered Kohlhepp today. Officers have marked off areas for searching in a grid pattern and special lights were brought in today to provide for night searches

He said Brown was fully clothed when she was found by police but the container had no air conditioning light.

She said her captor had fed her while keeping her in chains around her neck and ankles.

Asked about the enormity of the task in searching the land for more bodies, he said officers were well prepared.

'It doesn't make any difference if it was 500 acres because we think we have evidence out here. The men are resolved not to give up until we find everything that we need to find, period.

'It doesn't matter how long it takes. It is not an issue. This is one of the biggest crime scenes that I have ever been involved in.

'We are trying to make certain that nobody walks through anything and overlooks anything.'

Investigators relied on cadaver dogs, other means of investigation and 'God's grace' to find Carver's body, Wright told the Greenville News.

Officers have marked off areas for searching in a grid pattern.

A home owned by Kohlhepp in Moore, South Carolina, is pictured on November 5

The backyard of a home owned by Kohlhepp, in Moore, South Carolina, is pictured on November 5

On April 19, four months before the kidnapping, Kohlhepp replied to a post that reads: '(People need) to start appreciating the effort I put in to not be a serial killer.' Kohlhepp chillingly responded to the post: 'Why? Serial killers need love, too' (pictured)

Brown is said to be doing well and texting friends who supported the hunt for her after she and her boyfriend disappeared on August 30.

She was discovered on Thursday by deputies acting on a tip-off they received. She and Carver had last been seen on August 30. His car was found on the property on Thursday night.

Late Friday evening, Brown's family released a statement saying the brave survivor needed privacy to cope with what had happened.

'While Kala is doing well physically, emotionally she's having good moments and bad moments,' the family said.

'She's requesting privacy at this time and will make an official statement as soon as the authorities give her permission to do so. Right now Kala needs time to process and begin to cope with the events that have occurred.

'She thanks everyone for their love and support.'

On April 19, four months before the kidnapping, Kohlhepp replied to a post that reads: '(People need) to start appreciating the effort I put in to not be a serial killer.'

Kohlhepp chillingly responded to the post: 'Why? Serial killers need love, too.'

Spartenburg coroner Rusty Clavenger confirmed a corpse had been unearthed by police, less than 24 hours into the investigation of the sprawling property in Woodruff, South Carolina.

About two weeks after Brown went missing, Kohlhepp posted on his Facebook about 'filling ravines' on his property. It is unclear if this was in the area where the deceased body was found.

Flowers were left on a fence surrounding property owned by Kohlhepp, in Moore, South Carolina, on November 5

Brown has told investigators that there may be other victims and speculated that there were as many as four bodies buried on the property (pictured as police dig for evidence)

Carver's body was unearthed by police, less than 24 hours into the investigation (pictured, police search a field on property owned by Kohlhepp on Thursday)

'We're trying to get all this sorted out and figure out what were going to charge him with. One of the charges will be kidnapping, it could be murder. It could be a number of things,' Wright said after the search began

Todd Kohlhepp (pictured in blue shirt) appeared at a bond hearing at the Spartanburg County Detention Center Friday. He is likely to face at least one murder charge, and is being held without bond. His first court appearance is set for January 19

Solicitor Barry Barnette said Kohlhepp was 'a very, very dangerous individual' who kept chains in his bedroom, along with silenced handguns, assault weapons and an 'unbelievable' amount of ammunition

Earlier on Friday afternoon, Kohlhepp appeared before court for a bond hearing in the Spartanburg County Detention Center.

There, lawyers for the Woodruff Solicitor's Office said that Brown told deputies she saw the 45-year-old murder her boyfriend.

Solicitor Barry Barnette said Brown saw her captor shoot her boyfriend dead, and described him as 'a very, very dangerous individual'. She added: 'She told us this individual did kill him in her presence.'

Kohlhepp had a public defender during his appearance. He was not handcuffed, but sat with his hands behind his back.

Barnette then went on to tell the hearing Brown was found with chains around her neck and ankles, and that addition chains were found in Kohlhepp's bedroom, along with an 'unbelievable' amount of ammunition.

Investigators also found silenced 9mm handguns and assault weapons, he said.

He is to remain in jail without bond until his first court hearing on January 19, the judge ruled.

Investigators went to Kohlhepp's Moore, South Carolina, home and impounded his vehicles (pictured) after he was arrested on Thursday

A county sherriff helicopter lands at a property owned by Kohlhepp, where Carver's body was found Friday afternoon

Police are seen standing around a hole in the ground that had been dug as part of the search for bodies on the property Friday

A look at Kohlhepp's Facebook page suggests that the man became considerably more active online after Carver and Brown's disappearance on August 30.

Chilling: In a chilling Facebook post 16 days after Brown and Carver went missing, Kohlhepp posted about how most people who vanish turn up again

Between the start of July and the end of August, he only posted nine times, mostly showing properties that Kohlhepp - a realtor - was selling.

But in September he posted more than 40 times - sometimes multiple times a day, and more frequently about his feelings and thoughts on life.

The first post in this more active phase is on August 31, the day after the couple disappeared, in which he appears to have been focusing on the news.

'Its wednesday, the trash people picked up my trash at 5:30 this morning,' he wrote. 'this post is still way more interesting than whats on the news.. carry on.'

A more chilling post came on September 15, when he wrote: 'Reading the news.. this person missing, that person missing, another person missing.. oh wait.. that person just went to beach with friend, other person found with her parole violation boyfriend...

'In the event I become missing, please note no one would take me. I eat too much and I am crabby, they would just bring me back or give me 20 bucks for a cab ride.

Abuse: Kohlhepp also said that his family would hit him for as little as setting down a cup too hard at the table. His Facebook usage increased dramatically after the couple disappeared

'Most likely if I am missing, its because my dumb ass did something on that tractor again and I am too stubborn to go to the doctor... I got 9 lives.. I aint done yet..'

And in a post from September 26, he talks about how he was beaten by several members of his family.

'In my family you got backhanded for talking back or being disrespectful... actually acting up ended up a spanking that was epic.. you do NOT want to make the same mistake in my family again,' he said, going on to complain about rioters he'd seen on the news.

'My family believed raising me was a group effort,' he added in the comments. 'That means when I messed up, mom beat my a**, step father beat my a** when he got home.. next time I went to grandparents I got my a** beat... they made a believer out of you..'

He continued: 'you stood up for anthem, you shut up with adults spoke.. you sure as hell never set that cup down hard on the table.. noooooooooooo... and cop an attitude over anything... well.. you lost tv, bike.. friends that month..

'After the spanking.. you just didnt act up... these kids ( and adults ) just dont know.... damn shame too.. they might learn to appreciate if they did.'

Carver's family have said that some of the Facebook posts that he apparently made after his disappearance were out of character, and they believe that his account was hacked by someone who made fake updates.

Police stand guard outside a building on the property owned by Kohlhepp, who was arrested after a woman was found chained up in a metal container

Police use a backhoe on the massive property in South Carolina as part of the ongoing search for as many as four bodies investigators believe may be buried on the land

Helicopters were seen at the property on Friday morning, along with a backhoe and police dogs that were being used in nearby woods as part of the search.

A Greenville News reporter who flew over the property noted on Twitter that there was what appeared to be a camouflaged metal storage shed on the land.

Kohlhepp was also arrested for the kidnapping and sexual assault of a 14-year-old girl in 1986, when he was 15. He was jailed from 1987 to 2001 over the incident.

Court documents, obtained by WFXG, detail how Kohlhepp pointed a 'small blue steel handgun at (the victim's) head' and led her into his house. Inside, he 'placed gray duct tape over her mouth' and 'tied her hands together with a rope', before removing her clothes and 'forcing the victim to have sexual intercourse with him'.

The judge who ruled on the case described Kohlhepp as 'impulsive, explosive, and preoccupied with sexual content' from the age of nine.

'He has not changed. He has been unabatedly aggressive to others and destructive of property since nursery school.

'He destroys his own clothing, personal possessions and pets apparently on whim,' court papers state. The documents also cite a psychiatrist's report that says the 45-year-old has 'emotional difficulties and poor impulse control'.

Kohlhepp got his realtor's license in 2006, before background checks for applicants were made compulsory.

A mugshot of Kohlhepp after his arrest shows him with a cruel smirk.

TODD KOHLHEPP'S SHOCKING PAST AS A 'MONSTER' WHO WAS JAILED FOR RAPING A 14-YEAR-OLD GIRL Kohlhepp raped a 14-year-old girl at gunpoint in 1986, when he was 15, and openly admitted to the crime when police arrived to question him. This mugshot from that arrest shows him with a cruel smirk. He was jailed from 1987-2001 Court documents from an incident in 1986 that saw Todd Kohlhepp jailed for 14 years have shed light on his shocking past. Kohlhepp, who owns the property where Kala Brown was found chained up like a dog in a metal container on Thursday, kidnapped and sexual assaulted a girl when he was 15. A sentencing report, obtained by WFXG, claims Kohlhepp lured the girl outside by telling her an ex-boyfriend wanted to talk to her. When the two were outside, he then pointed a 'small blue steel handgun at her head' and 'told her to walk down the alley towards his house.' Once they got into Kohlhepp's bedroom, according to the documents, he duct taped her mouth, tied her hands together, and, 'removed her clothes, then his clothes and forced the victim to have sexual intercourse with him.' The victim allegedly told police Kohlhepp had threatened to kill her and her siblings if she told anyone about the incident, however she still called police when she got home. The document continues: 'When contacted by police, the defendant was holding a .22 caliber rifle which was pointed at the ceiling. When questioned regarding this incident, the defendant fully admitted his guilt and indicated he used the victim's ex-boyfriend as a ploy.' The judge who ruled on the case described Kohlhepp as 'impulsive, explosive, and preoccupied with sexual content' from the age of nine. 'He has not changed. He has been unabatedly aggressive to others and destructive of property since nursery school. He destroys his own clothing, personal possessions and pets apparently on whim,' court papers state. The documents also cite a psychiatrist's report that says the 45-year-old has 'emotional difficulties and poor impulse control'. It described him 'destroying his bedroom with a hammer; destroying other children's projects; hitting other children; cloroxing a goldfish; shooting a dog with a BB gun; being dismissed from the Boy Scouts because he was too disruptive; shredding his own clothes'. The judge's report said: 'He is extremely self-centered with high levels of anti-social personality functioning, and likely continuing aggressive behaviors toward others in the future.'

Carver's family released a statement on Friday afternoon, shortly before Kohlhepp's bond hearing got underway and before authorities identified the deceased body as Carver's.

'We, Charlie David Carver's family, would like to begin by saying how wonderful it is Kala has been found and that she is receiving care and is back with family and friends,' it read.

'The outpouring of concern and affection from the community has been overwhelming and we are very thankful.

'At this time we know that no more than what has been reported within the media or statements made by law enforcement.

'We ask that you continue to pray for Kala's healing and for David's safe return as well. In the meantime, we ask for some time to ourselves as we process events as they unfold.

'Thank you for your understanding and expect updates as they become available.'

Brown's close friend, Leah Miller, said the 30-year-old started working for Kohlhepp only weeks before she vanished.

She said Brown helped Kohlhepp clear and clean properties before he put them on the market, according to Greenville Online.

'I was supposed to be helping Kala, but I recently had neck surgery,' Miller said.

A private property sign can be seen on a fence surrounding Kohlhepp's 100-acre property in Woodruff, South Carolina

A police staging area is seen being set up on the property where Brown was found in a metal container on Thursday

A county sherriff helicopter flies over the South Carolina property, where police are conducting a massive investigation after the discovery of Brown on Thursday

A shed for animals is seen surrounded by a wire fence on the property owned by Kohlhepp

'I'm just in shock, wondering if she tried to reach me to help her before she disappeared.'

Another friend, Lindsey Mayson, told WSPA the suspected kidnapper did not seem like a bad person when she met him.

'We went by his house to get a key before we went by his house to clean. Didn't seem like a person who would do anything to anybody. He seemed down to earth,' Mayson said.

Earlier, Wright said Brown was 'chained inside the container like a dog' when police found her.

He said she told deputies she had been kept in the container - which measured 30 feet by 15 feet by 10 or 12 feet - for two months and had been fed regularly.

'It's all by God's grace that we found that little girl alive,' Wright told NBC News.

A massive investigation is now underway on the 100-acre property owned by Kohlhepp. Authorities search a field on the property above

A deputy is seen leaving out of Kohlhepp's home carrying a computer on Thursday

Brown was taken to local hospital for treatment and Wright said she was 'obviously traumatized' but 'alive and well,' according to The State.

Anderson Police Chief Jim Stewart said his department's investigation into the disappearance of Brown and Carver led authorities to the property near Woodruff, 80 miles northwest of the state capital of Columbia, where the woman was found.

Stewart said more than a dozen search warrants were issued.

'We got computer and cellphone records that ultimately led us to the area in Woodruff,' Stewart said.

'We knew that was the last place that a cellphone tied to this case pinged.'

Kohlhepp was added to the sex offender registry in 1987 when he was convicted and sentenced to prison for kidnapping and raping a 14-year-old girl in Arizona in 1986.

Records indicate Kohlhepp, orginally from Arizona, is a licensed real estate agent as well as a licensed pilot.

Another deputy is seen leaving the home carrying a brown paper bag filled with evidence form Kohlhepp's home

Authorities said Brown (pictured left and right) had a chain around her neck when she was found on Thursday. She told deputies she had been kept in the container for two months and had been fed regularly

Kohlhepp, pictured in a Facebook photo (left) and in a mugshot in March (right) was added to the sex offender registry in 1987 when he was convicted and sentenced to prison for kidnapping and dangerous crimes against children in Arizona

Kohlhepp (pictured left flying and right in a photo for his real estate work ) is a licensed real estate agent as well as a licensed pilot

Authorities removed the cars from Kohlhepp's garage include his BMW

Brown (left) and Carver (right) had been dating for a few months before they vanished on August 30

He is listed as a self-employed and as the owner/broker in charge at Todd Kohlhepp and Associates LLC located in Greenville on his Facebook page.

Carver and Brown were last seen together leaving a friend's home on August 30.

The next day, surveillance footage caught Carver leaving his work. That day marked the last the couple's friends or family heard from them.

Carver and Brown had been dating just a few months, and had moved in together over the summer as Carver was going through a divorce.

After failing to answer calls or messages from their loved ones, the couple's parents searched their apartment a few days later and found Brown's Pomeranian inside without any food or water.

As the search for the missing couple started, Carver's Facebook - which he does not typically use - started becoming more and more active. Above shows an exchange on his Facebook page on September 6

Medications and Brown's glasses were also left behind in the abandoned apartment.

Neighbor Nicholas Arocho told Greenville Online that Carver's family took Pomeranian and paid the couple's rent for a couple of months after they disappeared.

Relatives believe that the account has been hacked. Above, a message that someone received from Carver saying he was 'fine'

The family later packed up the couple's belongings, he said.

As the search for the missing couple started, Carver's Facebook - which he does not typically use - started becoming more active.

On September 1, the account posted an update that the two had gotten married and then on September 6 his profile picture was changed.

Other posts include links to stories and GoFundMe fundraisers for the missing couple.

There are also several bizarre posts unrelated to the couple's disappearance, such as memes and comic book illustrations.

The most recent post from October 2 reads: 'What color ribbon supports the cure for people who can't keep their nose out of other people's business?'

When one concerned family member reached out to Carver on the account, they received a private message saying 'yes I'm fine'.

But family members believe the account was hacked since the posts are not in Carver's style.

Meanwhile, Brown's Facebook - which she used more than her boyfriend - has been completely silent.

A friend of Brown and Carver's mother told police that someone the couple knows has 'given them problems before'.

Brown's car was found in her apartment complex and her cellphone had not been used in the 48 hours before she vanished.

Pictures of the couple and 'MISSING' posters were shared on Facebook after their disappearance in August