Cruz meets with Pence, but no shift on Trump
WASHINGTON — Sen. Ted Cruz met Tuesday with Donald Trump's running mate, Mike Pence, but the Texas Republican sounded no closer to endorsing his party's presidential nominee.

"I will say the revelations about Hillary keep getting worse and worse," Cruz told reporters as he entered the National Republican Senatorial Committee headquarters on Capitol Hill. "And it's absolutely clear that Hillary Clinton is unfit to be president of the United States."

NEW: Cruz tells @HallieJackson that Clinton is "unfit to be president" when asked if he's closer to endorsing Trump. pic.twitter.com/UquWzTPA7J — Vaughn Hillyard (@VaughnHillyard) September 13, 2016

Cruz has long been clear about his unequivocal opposition to Clinton, but it is his lack of support for Trump that has rankled some of his fellow Republicans. The senator pointedly refused to endorse Trump in his Republican convention speech in July.

"I am not in the habit of supporting people who attack my wife and attack my father," Cruz said in a tense meeting the next morning with the Texas Republican delegation, dismissing concerns that he was violating a pledge to support the eventual nominee.

"That pledge was not a blanket commitment that if you go and slander my wife that I am going to come like a servile puppy dog for maligning my wife and maligning my father," he said.

Jeff Roe, Cruz's former campaign manager, emerged from the meeting right as Cruz left out of a side entrance in a car with windows sealed.

"No breaking news," Roe said, adding that Cruz and Pence "just hadn't seen each other in a while, so it was good. Two good, principled conservatives hanging out."

Asked if Cruz would be endorsing the Republican ticket any time before election day, Roe waved the question away.

After attending a lunch with Pence and other Senate Republicans, Cruz said that he had a "good and productive conversation" with the Indiana governor, calling him "a good man, a friend" and "a strong conservative." But he too declined to answer questions about any potential endorsement, before directing a few more parting shots towards Clinton.

"When you see Hillary Clinton stand up and describe tens of millions of Americans as 'deplorables,' that level of contempt from a candidate for the people is really disappointing," he said. "It's a level of condescension, Hillary has admitted that she views much of the country essentially as flyover country. That is not the respect for the American people we expect from our president."

Earlier in the day, Pence met with House Republicans to try to assuage the lawmakers' concerns about the Trump campaign. The vice presidential candidate has long-running relationships on Capitol Hill, dating to his time as a congressman from Indiana and chairman of the House Republican conference.



“I will always be a man of the House,” Pence said as he opened a news conference with congressional Republican leadership after the meeting.

Pence offered effusive praise for House Speaker Paul Ryan, which Ryan returned in kind. As members left the meeting, many volunteered a positive reaction to Pence’s pitch.

"You couldn't ask for a better spokesman," said conservative Rep. Dave Brat of Virginia.

On Twitter:

@jslovegrove