There's no Las Vegas link to Fairport murder-suicide
CLOSE The mass shooting in Las Vegas left 58 people dead and 489 wounded. Here are the names and photos of the people who lost their lives. Wochit

Scene from Fairport shooting (Photo: TINA MACINTYRE-YEE/@tyee23/staff)

If you get your local news from the Democrat and Chronicle or television news stations in town, there’s a lot you haven’t heard about the Fairport man who killed himself and his daughter last week.

Namely that the man, John Beilman, was a “key witness” in the Las Vegas mass shooting and was “wanted by federal agents” in connection to the massacre.

More: Fairport man killed disabled daughter, himself, police say

It isn’t true, but it’s been widely circulated online via social media courtesy of bogus news websites and their readers, most of whom are unschooled in news literacy and unable to parse fact from fiction.

Of course, many consumers of such news outlets are conspiracy theorists who don’t trust government or traditional media. Those in that category will dismiss debunking the Beilman-Las Vegas link as an attempt by the establishment to control their thoughts.

Nevertheless, exposing the lies for what they are is necessary to set the record straight and help educate unwitting purveyors of misinformation, many of whom have contacted local journalists, including myself, demanding to know what we’re covering up.

It's also the right thing to do. The lies are so pernicious and pervasive that they’re tormenting a grieving local family that has suffered enough.

The Beilman-Las Vegas connection appears to have originated on a website called WhatDoesItMean.com in a report dated Oct. 7 under the bizarre byline of “Sorcha Faal, and as reported to her Western Subscribers.”

Faal is a suspected pseudonym of the website’s owner. Shoddy and fictitious sourcing, half-truths and bewildering leaps of logic are trademarks of her reporting.

For instance, she reported in March that former President Barack Obama was linked to a fishing boat called Lady Michelle that was carrying 4.2 tons of cocaine worth $125 million when it was seized by the U.S. Coast Guard.

Her report stated Obama “fled” Washington on March 10 for Hawaii via stops in New York City; Omaha, Nebraska, and San Jose, California, to stay one step ahead of Treasury Department investigators who wanted to interview him about the drug bust.

There are kernels of truth in Faal’s report.

The Coast Guard did seize a boat called Lady Michelle in the Caribbean Sea and 4.2 tons of cocaine aboard her. Obama was in New York City, Omaha and San Jose, where he was spotted meeting with Bono of U2, Warren Buffett and tech sector leaders, respectively.

But Faal’s sole source of Obama being wanted for questioning was what she called “an intriguing Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) report circulating in the Kremlin,” to which her story neither hyperlinked nor quoted directly.

The Foreign Intelligence Service, known as the SVR, is the Russian successor to the Soviet-era KGB intelligence agency.

For her story linking Beilman to the Las Vegas massacre, Faal cited “a grim new Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) report circulating in the Kremlin.” Once again, she didn’t furnish a copy of this purported SVR report or quote directly from it.

Citing the SVR report, Faal reported the FBI discovered a cell phone charger in the Mandalay Bay Hotel room of the gunman, Stephen Paddock, that had no accompanying phone, and that the charger is used to power a special battery found in communication devices used by the U.S. Army Special Forces and the CIA.

Faal reported the company that makes this battery is Ultralife Corp., of Newark in Wayne County, and that Beilman was the lead engineer who designed the battery.

“Fearing that Ultralife Corporation had been secretly funneling their US military communications systems to the CIA, this (SVR) report notes, this past Tuesday (Oct. 3), the FBI raided the home of John Beilman under a secret U.S. Federal Court warrant – and that caused Beilman, less than 12 hours later, during the early morning hours of Wednesday (Oct. 4) to wheel out his severely disabled daughter Nicole into his home’s backyard where she was executed, with Beilman then killing himself too,” Faal reported.

Again, her story contains some truth.

A Las Vegas NBC News affiliate reported that, early in the investigation, police found a cell phone charger in Paddock’s room for which a matching phone wasn’t immediately located. That initially led investigators to speculate that perhaps Paddock wasn’t alone.

But the speculation was put to rest a few days later when the Las Vegas police undersheriff announced at a news conference that he was “confident” Paddock was alone and that investigators had matched the charger to a cell phone of Paddock’s.

Beilman worked at Ultralife Corp. as a “product design and manufacturing professional” from 2007 to 2012. He had a LinkedIn page that said as much.

He also committed his murder-suicide the morning after FBI agents executed a search warrant at his Fairport home. That was reported by the Democrat and Chronicle and other local news outlets.

More: John Beilman's Fairport home searched by FBI the day before murder-suicide

But there’s nothing other than Faal’s elusive “grim new Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) report” to suggest that Beilman designed the Ultralife battery, that the battery is found in devices used by the CIA or Special Forces, that FBI agents raided Beilman’s home because they feared Ultralife was “secretly funneling their US military communications systems to the CIA,” or that the search caused Beilman to kill himself and his daughter.

Going further, the Ultralife battery cited by Faal is, according to the company, non-rechargeable and used in things like smart security cards and toll road transponders.

None of this has stopped her story from being circulated by websites known to publish schlock and sensational disinformation for the purpose of profiting through clickbait. Two such sites are Neon Nettle and USSA News, which bills itself as “The Tea Party’s Front Page.”

From there, the story has been spread like wildfire on social media by unsophisticated news illiterates whose reality is so muddied they can’t tell truth from fiction anymore. It’s sad and dangerous and undermining our institutions.

Is it coincidence that Beilman committed the murder-suicide within hours of the FBI search of his home? We don’t know for sure, but probably not. It’s very likely that the search motivated Beilman to act.

What federal agents were looking for at Beilman’s house hasn’t been reported because the search warrant affidavit, which was signed by a judge authorizing the search, is under seal.

Unlike Faal and WhatDoesItMean.com, real news organizations have standards for sourcing the information they relay to their audiences.

To report the reason for federal agents searching Beilman’s home, the D&C requires reporters to have one or both of the following: A primary source document, like the search warrant affidavit that’s under seal, or an on-the-record statement about the reason for the search from someone in a position to know, like an FBI agent or spokesperson.

In the absence of those items, the D&C will accept off-the-record comment from three unrelated people in positions to know. That’s a high threshold that has caused the D&C to lose good scoops from time to time.

Democrat and Chronicle reporters have been unable to meet those thresholds in the case of the search of Beilman’s home. Reporters have off-the-record comments from people in positions to know, but not enough people.

What I can say about those comments is that none of them referenced Las Vegas.

It stands to reason that other news outlets haven't been able to meet their sourcing standards, either, since none but Sorcha Faal of WhatDoesItMean.com has reported a motivation for the FBI search of Beilman’s home.

The FBI has declined to comment, citing protocol that forbids the agency from commenting on any investigation.

That’s a shame in this case, because its silence is perpetuating the fabrication. If the FBI had any sympathy for the Beilman family it would say something to debunk the Las Vegas link.

There’s concern at the FBI that commenting on bogus news lends it legitimacy. That’s a valid worry. But so is the fact that people believe lies such as that Obama ran a cocaine-smuggling ring or that Beilman was a key witness to the Las Vegas tragedy.

The latter is an assault on a family in our community and shouldn’t go unchallenged.

All I can do is expose the source of the Beilman-Las Vegas link for what it is, and be honest about what the real media can and can’t report at this time.

Who are you going to believe, Rochester: Me or Sorcha Faal?

David Andreatta is a Democrat and Chronicle columnist. He can be reached at dandreatta@gannett.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/2wP7StD