Obama brings frequent critic Ted Cruz aboard Air Force One to Dallas police memorial
WASHINGTON — Grief over the Dallas police ambush knows no partisan bounds, and the passenger list today as Air Force One headed to Love Field reflects that.

Aboard the presidential aircraft was Sen. Ted Cruz, a nemesis of President Barack Obama on a host of issues but particularly guns — a central point of contention in the aftermath of a massacre that left five officers dead, and a nation reeling.

Three Democratic lawmakers also were aboard: House Minority leader Nancy Pelosi; Rep. Eddie Bernice Johnson of Dallas, whose district includes downtown; and Rep. Marc Veasey of Fort Worth, whose district includes parts of Dallas. They landed at 12:15 p.m., and Cruz walked down the front stairs a moment after the first couple, just behind Johnson.

Air Force One is a symbol of U.S. might and prestige. Obama, like Republican leaders, has called for unity since the Dallas tragedy, and the sight of him and Cruz emerging from the plane in Dallas is a dramatic way to project that.

"It's in moments of tragedy that this unity is revealed," White House spokesman Josh Earnest said Tuesday.

In Dallas, Obama will seek to salve wounds bared by racial tensions, police shootings and unrest.

"President Obama invited Sen. Cruz to travel on Air Force One to the memorial service to honor the fallen officers in Dallas. The Senator accepted the invitation," spokesman Phil Novack said.

But their differences run deep.



The president is "intensely frustrated" that Congress, controlled by Republicans, refuses to curb access to firearms. Cruz is a hard-liner on gun rights and built his presidential campaign in part on his staunch defense of the Second Amendment.

After the Newtown school massacre, Cruz played a key role in blocking Obama's push to curb access to assault-style weapons and high-capacity ammunition magazines.

In October, after a mass shooting at an Oregon college that left more than a dozen people dead, Obama angrily demanded national action. It was time to politicize the issue of gun violence, he insisted, because inaction has left too many innocents dead.

Cruz made the opposite case: Gun-free school zones put people at risk, and disarming law abiding citizens would only make the public less safe.

Cruz blistered Obama a month ago for failing to explicitly blame the Orlando gay nightclub massacre on Islamic terrorism.

Given the president's strong views on the connection between guns and violence, it's unlikely he'll pass up an opportunity to at least allude to that agenda in the Dallas memorial service.

Sen. John Cornyn of Texas, the deputy Republican leader, will speak before former President George W. Bush and Police Chief David Brown.

On Twitter:

@toddgillman