Police: Fairport man killed disabled daughter, self
CLOSE Fairport police seek to calm nerves after the shooting deaths of two people shatter the quiet of the village. (Oct. 4, 2017) David Andreatta

Buy Photo Fairport Police Chief Sam Farina, left, gives an update on the homicide from earlier today in Fairport during a press conference at the police department Tuesday, Oct. 4, 2017. Farina said that earlier today, John Beilman shot and killed his 27-year-old disabled daughter before killing himself in the backyard of their home. (Photo: SHAWN DOWD/@sdowdphoto/, STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)Buy Photo

A 60-year-old man shot and killed his 27-year-old disabled daughter before turning the gun on himself at their Fairport home early Wednesday.

Fairport Police Chief Samuel Farina said John Beilman shot his daughter, Nicole Beilman, with a 12-gauge shotgun in the backyard of their home at 19 Williamsburg Dr.

Officers responded to the location after a neighbor reported hearing gunfire at 5:22 a.m.

Inside the home was Beilman’s wife and Nicole’s mother, Donna Beilman, whom Farina said did not hear the shots and knew nothing of the deaths of her husband and daughter until she was informed by police at the scene.

More: Nicole Beilman, slain Fairport woman, loved family, music and nature

"She was extremely distraught to hear the news and didn't know what had happened until we brought it to her attention," Farina said.

Buy Photo Police outside a Fairport home where two bodies were found Wednesday morning. (Photo: TINA MACINTYRE-YEE/ @tyee23/staff photographer)

Officers found what Farina described as a “goodbye note” to Donna from Beilman that Farina said indicated the circumstances of the shooting but not the motive.

“This was a very, very difficult crime scene for us to address due to the nature of this violent act,” Farina said. “Our sympathies go out the family at this difficult time under these very shocking and disturbing circumstances.”

Farina described Nicole Beilman as suffering from Rett Syndrome, a rare neurological disorder that left her confined to a wheelchair and fully dependent on her parents for care.

The school she had attended issued a statement Wednesday afternoon.

"The administration and staff at Mary Cariola Children’s Center is saddened to learn of the tragic death of a 2011 graduate of our program, Nicole Beilman," the statement said. "Our thoughts and prayers go out to her family, caregivers and our sister agencies who knew her."

Neighbors described the residents of the house as "quiet" and "friendly" and people who kept to themselves. They said they often saw Nicole being transported by bus to and from the house in the mornings and afternoons.

Public records suggest the Beilmans moved to their Williamsburg Drive home in 2008.

Farina said that police had never responded to that address for any prior calls.

The incident shattered the tranquility of a quiet neighborhood.

Residents awoke to a heavy police presence, finding their winding leafy street closed to outside traffic and crime scene tape ringing the tidy yellow colonial house with green shutters where the shootings took place.

Investigators and the medical examiner remained on scene throughout the morning.

"You normally don't expect something like this to happen in a small town like Fairport," said Jarrod Dumond, 19, a village resident.

Dumond had slept over at the house of his friend, Slade Savitch, who lives a few doors down from the scene, the previous night. They said they didn't hear the gunfire.

CLOSE Fairport police found a man and woman in a Williamsburg Drive backyard after responding to a 911 call for gunshots. Tina MacIntyre-Yee

"I would never expect this to happen right down the street from me," said Savitch, 19. "My mom's getting calls from all the neighbors, all the people in town. It will definitely be talked about for a while."

Fairport police were assisted in the investigation by the Monroe County Sheriff's Office.

At a joint news conference Wednesday afternoon, Sheriff Patrick O’Flynn called the crime “unconscionable.”

“This is an unconscionable situation when a father would take the life of his daughter,” O’Flynn said. “I mean, it’s just unbelievable to fathom someone being able to do that.”

Farina said Beilman had no criminal record in New York and that there was nothing to indicate Beilman possessed the gun used in the shootings illegally.

Farina said he didn't know the last time there was a homicide in Fairport.

"It's been such a long time," Farina said.

"Because it's so infrequent, people when they see things like this take place they get very upset, very concerned," Farina added. "We have a great community here. They're very supportive of the police here, and on top of that they're very good about knowing their neighbors. It's a very close knit community."

SLAHMAN@Gannett.com

DANDREATTA@Gannett.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/2yI7s8C