Dave Barry
FAQ

A note from the staff (2009): The contact info listed here is updated and correct; even though Dave doesn't write a weekly column for the Miami Herald any more, he does still work there and we are still in the Herald office. COLUMN REPRINTS



I want to run Dave's weekly column (currently "Classic" columns) in my newspaper and/or magazine. Our circulation is huge and/or almost non-existent. How much will it cost?



We have no idea. Please contact Tribune Media Services at 800-245-6536 (main switchboard) or the TMS Sales Dept. at 800-637-4082, fax 312-222-2581 for all syndication questions for US publications. I want to run Dave's weekly column in my newspaper and/or magazine in New Zealand. Can I do that?



Yes. For syndication and reprints in all foreign markets, contact Tribune Media Services International, Triton Court, 14 Finsbury Square, London EC2A 1BR, UK ( tel +44-20-7588 7588; fax +44-20-7638 3011; web: www.tmsinternational.com) I want to reprint one of Dave's columns in my company newsletter. Do I need permission to do that? Who can give me permission?



Yes, you need permission to reprint any of Dave's columns. We wish we could do something really bad to copyright violators, but so far, everything we've come up with is (also) illegal. But for wonderful, law-abiding persons like yourselves, here's how to get permission:

1) If it's a recent column (published for the first time within the last 3 months), you can contact Tribune Media Services International, Los Angeles Times, Permissions Desk, 10th Floor, 202 West 1st Street, Los Angeles, CA 90012; (213) 237-4565--phone, (213) 237-6515--fax. They handle both non-profit and for-profit publication requests for one-time rights of current columns.

2) If you want to reprint a column that originally appeared more than 3 months ago, reprint any column in a book, use an excerpt only, or if you have any other special requests (no, I won't send you the photos of Dave and the goats), please contact Judi Smith at jsmith@herald.com for further information.

3) No internet or web site "reprinting" is allowed. Links to the Miami Herald's web site are permissible as long as you're not a wackjob.



COLUMNS - PERSONAL USE

PLEASE READ THIS ENTIRE SECTION BEFORE YOU SEND US A COLUMN REQUEST I am in urgent need of a copy of the column Dave wrote about guys, but it's not on the Miami Herald's web site any more. I can't find it in the archives at herald.com. How can I get a copy?



To get a copy of a specific column (for personal use only) (and we mean that in the nicest possible way), visit the Herald Store at http://www.miamiherald.com/reprints/ or fax 305-376-5287. Unfortunately (for you, anyway), there is a charge for this service, and it will probably take a while.



But I have to have it by Thursday!



And we would really like to know why. You should try to go through proper channels. But this will help us locate the column you're looking for:

1) Try to give a specific scenario or an unusual key word that you are sure is in the article. Were there weasels involved? How about chainsaws? Ok, so those aren't exactly unusual terms for Dave, but each term may help. We are searching the computer, so every piece of specific information helps us to locate the column you actually want.

2) "I saw it in my newspaper awhile back" doesn't narrow it down much. Was it published within the last year, or 10 years ago? Again, be as specific as possible.

3) Most newspapers make up their own headlines for the columns. So unless it was "Weasels use chainsaws to cut a hole in Dave's boat in January 2001," the headline alone probably won't get you the right column.

4) We are not kidding about specific words. "I'm looking for a column Dave wrote about girls and sports" was an actual recent request. Could you find that one?

And if you really need to have it by Thursday, you can email us at jsmith@herald.com and we'll see what we can do. Can you email it to me? No. Sorry. It has to be snailmail. We don't send out any of Dave's columns in email. Why not? This should answer your question: Did Dave really write that piece floating around the internet, "16 Things I've Learned in 50 Years?" Well, he wrote something like it. But it's been changed during its travels around the world in email, and you can no longer count on anything in it being Dave's actual work. Why would anyone do such a thing? We don't know. Dropped on their heads at birth, perhaps? The original list, as he wrote it, is called "25 Things I Have Learned in 50 Years" and can be found in the book Dave Barry Turns 50. And we said this up there ^ but since you didn't read it, we are going to say it again:

Please note that we do not give permission to post Dave's columns on your website, period. We do not give permission to send columns out in email (including email newsletters). We are happy to have you contact us regarding newsletters, photocopies, and reprinting, as long as it's in print form. We really do appreciate it when you ask permission, and will do our best to accommodate your requests as quickly as possible.



COLUMNS - WRITTEN BY YOU

I've written a funny/smart/fabulous/wacky book/column/article/Christmas letter that I know Dave would love. I want him to critique it/use it in his column/tell me who will publish it/send me a blurb/write a foreword for it. Where can I send it to him? Well... to be honest, Dave 1) claims he is no good at critiquing 2) doesn't use things written by other writers 3) doesn't have a clue who might publish your work and 4) no longer does blurbs, endorsements or forewords. Also, his evil step-assistant won't even let him see your work, because she is an overprotective b... seems somewhat insane doesn't want anyone to be upset if Dave writes about something similar in an upcoming column or book. So she will send back your work and tell you that Dave suggests Writer's Market (an annual book of available markets) or Writer's Digest magazine for beginning writers, and for people trying to market their work or find an agent. (Dave also reminds everyone that editors are the ones who can get you published, and you should send your work to them; other writers really can't help you.) But I write a great column that many readers love, published regularly in my local paper or online. Can Dave tell me how to get syndicated? And fast? Not really. The way Dave did it is: He got information about various syndicates from Editor & Publisher's annual syndicate directory, and sent them samples of his published columns. Fact: After five years, he'd been picked up by one small syndicate and his column was running in five papers. So you probably don't want to quit your day job just yet.

Okay, but all I want is for Dave to read my manuscript and/or column and tell me if it's any good. But you keep saying no. In a variety of entertaining ways, but still, the answer seems to be no. Why do you keep saying that? It's short, it's good, and all my friends love it. It doesn't have to be an in-depth critique; just a quick read-through and a thumbs-up or thumbs-down. Really. I'm looking for honest criticism here.

You are not. No, REALLY, I am.



Okay, maybe you are. But probably not. At any rate, the answer is still no. If you want to know why, and you can handle some bad language (yes, he uses the F-word) (a lot), please read this blog post by Josh Olson: I Will Not Read Your F***ing Script.

Gee, thanks. I may never write again. We are sorry. Honestly. Now read it again.

COLUMN TOPIC REQUESTS Can Dave please write about my book/product/project/fundraising event/good cause/grandmother's birthday in his column? No, I'm afraid not. If he did, pretty soon his column would be nothing but "Shout-outs" and book reviews. And nobody wants that. Do we?

UPDATE: Dave's not writing his weekly column any more. He writes occasional columns for The Miami Herald, most of which are syndicated nationally, but he still can't write about your cause, however good it is, or your book or product or grandmother. We're sorry.



BOOKS Where can I buy Dave's books? (We're not kidding, this is a frequently asked question!)



At a bookstore. Dave never comes to Dubuque on book tour! What's wrong with Dubuque? HUH?!? And how can I get my book signed?



Don't blame us! Dave's publicist decides which cities he'll visit on book tour. He's the one that hates Dubuque.

If you want to get your book signed, you can send it to Dave at the Miami Herald, One Herald Plaza, Miami FL 33132. (Yes, even though he's not writing a weekly column for the Herald, the office is still open.) Please include a self-addressed, postage-paid mailer for its return. Please do NOT send checks or cash to pay for postage. Seriously. We need a self-addressed, stamped return mailer to return the book to you. That's the only way. We're not joking.

(We were joking about Dave's publicist hating Dubuque. But not about the SASE. No sir.)



A note from the staff:

Dave is happy to sign a book for you, but we're aware of the existence of eBay, if you know what I mean. So please don't send a box of books with a note that says "I love your work. It would mean so much to me if you could sign these seven copies of the same book. Signature only, please, because I want to pass them on to my seven children when I die." (This really happened. Now I ask you, do I look that stupid? Be honest.)

Another note from the staff:

We are strong, but we are not beavers. Wrapping your package in a 2-inch-deep layer of packing tape will almost guarantee a damaged book (and sometimes it's even an accident!). It will be in much better shape upon its return to you if we are able to open your package in less than 20 minutes, and/or without power tools. It's a book. A precious book, yes, but not a condor egg.



Yet another note from the staff, to be read in the voice of your fourth grade teacher when she's letting you go to the bathroom for the third time since lunch:

We are actually serious about sending in boxes of books for signature only. Just Don't Do It. Please.



SPEAKING ENGAGEMENTS How do I book Dave to speak at a corporate event? If the event isn't next week, or next month, please contact Xeno Management at JWDiLaw@aol.com. They'll talk with you about Dave's availability and give you the booking details. If it is next week or next month, Dave's probably already booked, but you can email his assistant using the contact info below. AUCTIONS: Sorry, but we can't participate in every celebrity auction from here to Qo'noS. If you have a particular interest in Dave, please make it known when you contact us. We do not do any auctions via email, but requireletterhead sent snailmail c/o Dave Barry, Miami Herald, One Herald Plaza, Miami FL 33132. EMAIL



Can I email Dave? No, no, a thousand times (the number of times he received the Nigerian money-laundering scam before he decided not to get email any more) no. But there is an email address on the front page of this site that will reach his assistant. Ok, ok, we'll make it easy for you and just tell you what it is: nolowflow@davebarry.com. Also, you can email stuff for the blog to daveblog@herald.com. Another snotty helpful note from the staff: Please consider the amount of spam we get when you send an email. Sending email with nothing in the subject line is just stupid likely to get your email deleted immediately. We also don't read emails with subject lines such as "humor" and "hello" and "weird" and "quirky" and "help," as a rule. So if you want someone to read your email, please consider that we are wading through 50 spam emails for every legitimate email, and make it easier for us. Use a brief but descriptive subject line. This is not bad advice for any email you send, but especially for emails you are sending to complete strangers. Also, if you are using aol, figure out how to reply with the previous email's text in your email, for Pete's sake. (This has nothing to do with whether or not we read your email, but it's really annoying to get emails that say, for instance, "Did you find the column yet?" with no reference emails below it. Come on, people. It's 2009.)

We are sorry we are so cranky. But it's fun to vent. Thank you for this opportunity.