For evangelical voters, Rafael Cruz may be Ted’s best apostle
‘We are not talking about theocracy’

Evangelicals are crucial to Ted Cruz’s electoral chances. To win he must become their preferred candidate, beginning in Iowa, where evangelical Christians will constitute as many as 6 in 10 caucusgoers.

“I see Rafael Cruz just being a real asset for his son because it gives everyone a glimpse into how Ted was raised, what the leadership was like in his home,” said Bob Vander Plaats, who, as head of the Family Leader, is a key figure in evangelical politics in Iowa.

But Daniel Williams, a historian of religion and politics at the University of West Georgia, wonders whether Rafael Cruz’s old-school focus on issues like prayer in school is frozen in time at the moment of his political awakening.

“Starting in the 1990s there was a shift in rhetoric of the Christian right, a shift toward viewing themselves as a religious minority in America that would not necessarily take power but would seek to preserve its own rights,” said Williams, who in 2010 wrote “God’s Own Party: The Making of the Christian Right.”

“Rafael Cruz is still saying those things that were very common 35 years ago but not very common today. That’s why they seem strange to some people,” Williams said. “To me, I think Rafael Cruz would have played much better in 1980 than he would today.”

But Rafael Cruz is not a standalone character.

“If you believe as Rafael and many others do, from quite a theological range, that God intervenes and punishes individuals and whole nations, if America was the chosen nation and is supposed to rise and be the Christian nation, then if it is failing that, if it’s legalizing abortion, legalizing gay marriage and throwing prayer out of the schools and all the awful things America has done, then to get right with God is going to require somebody like Ted Cruz to make things right, and I would be very certain that Ted would see it that way too,” Clarkson said. “But unlike anyone we’ve seen before, he is an effective politician. He is a very smart and carefully spoken man.”

Rafael Cruz, on the other hand, “is an overt theocrat,” Clarkson said.

There is, for example, Cruz’s Aug. 26, 2012, sermon, posted online, at New Beginnings, a mega church in Irving, led by pastor Larry Huch, a Christian Zionist, in which Cruz speaks at great length using the Biblical language of Dominion Theology, which Clarkson said is a rising tendency on the religious right that seeks not just a role in government, but dominion.

Cruz bristles when asked about that sermon.

“That’s a misquote because I was reading a verse of scripture and the verse of scripture uses the word ‘dominion,’” Cruz said. “What I meant by saying that is that we should be having an influence on every area of society, and so should every member of society. This is not something I’m saying exclusively to Christians. I mean, if you have a worldview, aren’t you going to try to share that worldview with others? Because we’re not called to be hermits, because none of us wants to be hermits living in a cave.”

“We are not talking about theocracy,” Cruz said. “We’re talking about the foundational principles that are the basis for the Constitution, and those foundational principles we find in the word of God. This is what I call a Judeo-Christian ethic, and what is that? Well, first of all it is a moral code of conduct, and then it’s honesty, integrity, individual responsibility, the rule of law, free enterprise, limited government.”