The father of the ‘adorable drug kingpin’ is a special agent for the DEA
By now everyone knows of 19-year-old Sarah Furay of College Station, Texas, whose smiling mugshot went viral via several news blogs — including our own, in which we admittedly refer to her as an “adorable drug kingpin” — after she was arrested for alleged possession and delivery of 31.5 grams of cocaine, 126 grams of high-grade marijuana, 29 tablets of Ecstasy, an undisclosed amount of methamphetamine and 60 hits of LSD. The Black Lives Matter movement, among other criminal justice activists, called out the hypocrisy of the media’s lighthearted approach to Furay’s arrest. And for good reason.

Why? As mentioned in our letter of apology for our flippant coverage of Furay’s arrest, you don’t see 19-year-old men and women of color described in reports as “cute” or “adorable.” For that matter, you don’t see them smiling in mugshots. One needn’t wonder why. The criminal justice system and mainstream media are fixed in favor of profiles such as that of a lily-white, college-age girl — and particularly Furay. New information brought to the attention of Death and Taxes reveals that Furay’s father is Bill Furay, a supervisory special agent for the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration. He is currently serving as the DEA’s diplomatic attaché at the U.S. Ambassador’s office in Panama City, Panama, and was previously Resident Agent in Charge at the DEA office in Galveston, Texas.

Furay has been with the agency since 2008.

Furay’s mother, Shawn Creswell, is principal of Coulson Tough Elementary School in the Woodlands, Texas. She has been a school educator for 20 years, the past 15 of which have been served in greater Houston’s Conroe Independent School District. Sarah Furay’s parents are divorced (Creswell has since remarried), but having a mom and dad with well-established positions within departments of law enforcement and education certainly doesn’t hurt when it comes to getting your drug-dealing ass out of jail.

Furay was booked into the Brazos County Detention Center on Friday, November 6. The following day, she was released at a remarkably low bond of $38,000 for distribution. Having a mother with strong ties to the community and as a school administrator gives Furay’s attorney the opportunity to argue their client as a low-flight risk. As for dear ol’ dad’s vocation, by no means are we suggesting this is some kind of family business or that any corruption is connected to this particular case. The city of Houston has long been described as a hub for the distribution of illegal narcotics, pharmaceuticals and controlled substances, much thanks to drug traffickers and a convenient five-hour drive from the border. And College Station is a 90-minute drive from Houston.

But, again, it certainly couldn’t hurt.