Claire Davis dies from injuries in Arapahoe High School shooting
Claire Davis, the 17-year-old who was shot in the head during the Dec. 13 shooting at Arapahoe High School, died Saturday afternoon with her family at her side.

The high school senior died at 4:29 p.m. at Littleton Adventist Hospital after eight days on life support.

As the news of her death spread, the memorial at the school glowed from freshly lit candles, and more and more visitors gathered in subfreezing temperatures and light snow to say goodbye to Claire.

Allison Bruhn, a junior at Arapahoe, arrived Saturday evening just as she had the previous eight days. This time, she carried a poster from the school's dance team, expressing the members' love for Claire. Tears welled up in her eyes as she lit candles and hugged friends.

"I've been coming every night and praying for an hour, praying that Claire would be OK, that she would get better," she said. "Our school loves Claire. She was such a nice and giving person."

Shannon Wilhelm, her husband and her 5-year-old son, Deagan, placed flowers at the foot of the fence as snow flurries covered its crush of poster boards, photographs and written messages left by the community.

The Wilhelms did not know Claire, but Shannon cried and held her son tightly in her arms.

"Being a parent, the fact that you have to lose your child around the holidays or any time, it's just not something you want anyone to go through," she said.

When Camille Nyls and her daughter Kendall, a sophomore at Arapahoe, learned that Claire had died, they purchased a bouquet of flowers and brought it to the memorial.

"She had such a pretty smile, and you know she had a big heart because she loved animals," Nyls said. "The thing that bothers me the most is that we have kids killing kids for no reason."

Hundreds of Arapahoe High School students gathered for a candlelight vigil on Dec. 14 night to share their prayers for Claire Davis who was shot inside the school Friday, December 13, 2013. (Karl Gehring, The Denver Post)

The hospital had announced the teenager's death in a Facebook posting at 5:15 p.m.: "Despite the best efforts of our physicians and nursing staff, and Claire's fighting spirit, her injuries were too severe and the most advanced medical treatments could not prevent this tragic loss of life. Claire's death is immensely heartbreaking for our entire community, our staff and our families.

"The Davis family would like to thank everyone who have sent their best wishes and prayers, and are grateful for the kindness and support of the community. They know that you all are mourning with them, and again request privacy during this time of grief."

The hospital said that information regarding a public celebration of Claire's life would be announced later and said the public could continue to leave cards for the Davis family in the "Cards for Claire" box, located in the main entrance of the hospital.

About 6:30 p.m., the family also posted a statement.

"Although we have lost our precious daughter," the family said, "we will always be grateful for the indelible journey she took us on over the last 17 years — we were truly blessed to be Claire's parents. The grace, laughter and light she brought to this world will not be extinguished by her death; to the contrary, it will only get stronger."

While asking for privacy, the family thanked the first-responders, school, sheriff's office and others for their "extraordinary work" on Claire's behalf.

Claire Davis was shot at point-blank range with a shotgun after a gunman stormed into the school's north entrance in the noon hour of Dec. 13. She was sitting in the hallway and had no time to react before the 18-year-old Arapahoe student shot her and moved into the library, where he took his own life.

Authorities believe she was a random victim. Although she and the gunman were acquainted, they were not friends, officials said last week.

Arapahoe County Sheriff Grayson Robinson said investigators believe the gunman's main target was a librarian who was also the debate coach.

Claire was taken to the hospital, where she remained in critical condition. On Dec. 15, her family announced that the girl was stable but in a coma.

Classmates and community members immediately rallied around the teenager, raising thousands of dollars for her care and asking the community and nation to keep her in their thoughts and prayers. They sold T-shirts and started funds to help pay for her medical expenses. The hashtag #PrayForClaire trended on Twitter and social media.

Neighbors called her the best babysitter in the community, and classmates and friends talked of her love for horses.

On Thursday, the band One Direction, one of Claire's favorite musical groups, uploaded a get-well video to her on YouTube.

On Friday night, about 100 people gathered at Shepherd of the Hills Lutheran Church in Centennial, just a few blocks south of the school, to pray for Claire at a candlelight vigil.

Staff writers Ryan Parker and Jordan Steffen contributed to this report.