Report: 'Deep racial disparities' exist at Valley
CLOSE It has been more than a year since fights along racial lines rocked Valley High School. For some, the fights were emblematic of a growing divide within a school that has become increasingly diverse.

Buy Photo Valley High School Assistant Principal David Maxwell sits in on a history class in April while students discuss the forums the district hosted after fights at the school. The district received a report from Iowa State University researchers that said the school has a culture of "deep racial disparities." (Photo: Register File Photo)Buy Photo

A culture of "deep racial disparities" exists at Valley High School, creating an inequitable, toxic environment for students of color, according to a report from Iowa State University researchers.

The audit found that students of color at the West Des Moines school are more likely to be labeled as "special needs" and "at risk" than their white peers. Students of color also are more likely to face discipline or suspension and less likely to be tapped for gifted programs.

"The traditions, curriculum, and common teaching methods within the school assume students' upper class whiteness as the norm or archetype, which can marginalize and demoralize students of color whether intended or not," researchers wrote.

The report comes more than a year after violent confrontations between students prompted a series of community discussions on race relations at the school. The first of those February 2015 fights was provoked by a social media post that claimed someone was "planning to shoot the black kids at school."

Four researchers from ISU were brought in last October to analyze data and statistics from the district, hold focus groups with students and staff, and observe student interactions. Their work resulted in a 60-page report.

Superintendent Lisa Remy called the results of the audit "troubling and unacceptable," but she said the information will be valuable in creating an action plan to address racial inequity. The West Des Moines school board discussed the plan Monday night.

"This work is important, to our schools and to society," Principal Tim Miller said. "We're ready to lead this work and to do all we can to make sure all kids at Valley High School have a positive learning experience. Every single one of them."

Students of color face inequitable treatment

Valley High School, which serves about 2,000 students in grades 10-12, leads its suburban neighbors in the percentage of minority students enrolled.

The report, which looked at 2014 numbers, showed about one in four Valley students, or 24.2 percent, was from a minority ethnic group. That has since increased to 26 percent, according to state data.

Urbandale High School has the next highest minority enrollment among suburban schools at 21.2 percent, according to Iowa Department of Education data. On the opposite end of the spectrum, minority students make up only 9.2 percent of Ankeny Centennial's student body.

The percentage of ethnic minority students is much higher in Des Moines high schools, ranging from 69.2 percent at North High School to 45.3 percent at Lincoln.

Researchers expect Valley to become increasingly diverse as the district's elementary students grow older. West Des Moines' overall elementary enrollment is 27.3 percent students of color.

While Valley's enrollment has grown more diverse, its teaching staff has not. Only one in 25 certified teachers at Valley High School is a person of color. Of 263 employees, there are 20 people of color. There are no minority counselors at the school.

Researchers found that black students at Valley are twice as likely as their peers to be identified as having special needs. Researchers say the school is likely under-identifying white and Asian students as special needs, and over-identifying other students of color.

Black students are also three times more likely to be labeled "at risk" by the school administration, although black students have higher attendance rates than most of their peers. The same is true for Hispanic and multiracial students. Poor attendance is often one of the reasons a student is placed in the "at risk" category. As a result, more students of color are sent to Walnut Creek, the district’s alternative high school.

In addition, black students are four times more likely to be suspended.

"These students of color are actually not misbehaving at disproportionate rates but are instead watched more closely by adults and thus reprimanded more frequently," researchers wrote.

In addition, white and Asian students are more likely to be labeled as gifted than other students of color. Multiracial students are eight times less likely to be enrolled in gifted classes. Black and Hispanic students are three times less likely to be tapped for those classes.

Minority students are scoring "significantly lower" on standardized tests in reading, science and math. Black students are the lowest scoring in reading and math, and Hispanic students are the lowest in science.

"The school is not supporting African-Americans and Hispanic students academically through its teaching practices, curriculum and course enrollments," researchers wrote. "… African-American and Hispanic students could achieve at similar rates as their peers if properly supported in schools …"

Valley High School is not alone. A Des Moines Register analysis of test scores found a lower percentage of black 12th-graders in Iowa are on grade level, college ready or advanced than the national average. Black students in Iowa also earn lower test scores.

In addition to the data, ISU researchers found through interviews that white students and staff at Valley High School are uncomfortable talking about race or racism and often are confused about concepts related to racism. The white students and staff did not perceive an issue with race or inequity, the report says.

Students of color, on the other hand, reported being called racist names, being the target of stereotyping and being avoided by their white peers. Some minority students reported self-silencing in class, skipping school and assimilation as "survival strategies."

Buy Photo Principal Tim Miller leads a forum at Valley High discussing racism and how it relates to the school and greater society in March 2015. (Photo: Register File Photo)

'This isn't going to be a quick fix'

Administrators were given a draft of the report last week to come up with an action plan, which was reviewed by the school board Monday night.

Immediate steps include creating a districtwide equity team and a Valley High School equity team to create a plan "to eliminate systemic racial inequity and provide equitable educational opportunities," Remy said. The goal is to have those committees formed by the end of October and the plan identified by the end of February. Both teams will be made up of students, staff members and parents.

Remy sees every school in the district as having its own equity team at some point.

The equity teams will be tasked with hiring an outside consultant to help with professional development. Remy said the district's teachers and administrators could benefit from outside expertise for ongoing education on racism and equity.

Once the equity teams are established and a consultant hired, the district will begin to address its hiring practices to ensure its staff is more reflective of its student population, she said. The district will create a plan to provide equitable opportunities in extracurricular activities and develop curriculum that addresses race and racism and celebrates diversity in schools.

"For me, it’s focusing on moving forward to really help our environment and improving our culture and climate in our schools," Remy said. "… This isn’t going to be a quick fix."

Share your thoughts

The West Des Moines school district will hold another community forum to discuss the study's findings and hear feedback from teachers, students and their families. It's scheduled for 7:30 p.m. Sept. 27 in the Valley High School media center, 3650 Woodland Ave., West Des Moines.

Metro high schools' minority enrollment in 2015

Ankeny Centennial* — 9.2 percent

Ankeny* — 10.5 percent

Bondurant-Farrar — 7.9 percent

Carlisle — 9.9 percent

Dallas Center-Grimes* — 7.1 percent

East High School — 61.7 percent

Hoover High School — 66.5 percent

Indianola — 8.1 percent

Johnston* — 17.7 percent

Lincoln High School — 45.3 percent

North High School — 69.2 percent

Norwalk — 7.3 percent

Roosevelt High School — 47.8 percent

Saydel — 11.7 percent

Southeast Polk — 14.4 percent

Urbandale — 21.2 percent

Valley* — 26 percent

Waukee — 14.2 percent

*Denotes schools that serve students in grades 10-12. All other schools are grades 9-12.

— Iowa Department of Education

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/2cjQoLz