From fine china to boxing gloves, Clintons rake in $190,027 in gifts
WASHINGTON — Steven Spielberg and his wife sent china worth $4,920. New York insurance magnate Walter Kaye provided the china cabinet. Denise Rich, whose fugitive ex-husband was given a presidential pardon, chipped in two coffee tables and two chairs.

In the year before President Clinton left office and Hillary Rodham Clinton entered the Senate, the first couple received $190,027 worth of furniture and other gifts.

As a senator, Hillary Clinton is prohibited from accepting most gifts worth more than $50. But since the presents arrived while she still was first lady, no such limit applied. There were indications that some of the larger gifts rolled in late in the year, just before the Clintons' left the White House.

"The timing certainly does look bad," said Charles Lewis, head of the Washington-based Center for Public Integrity. "The appearance is that she's enriching herself from public service."

Hillary Clinton's spokesman, Howard Wolfson, did not respond to the criticism.

"The Clintons received many gifts over the course of their administration, which they disclosed like other presidents have," Wolfson said. Other presidents also have accepted lavish gifts, he said.

When Ronald Reagan left office in 1989, about 20 wealthy friends bought him and wife Nancy a $2.5 million house in Bel Air, Calif.

After more than two decades in government housing, the Clintons now have two big homes with rooms to fill — a five-bedroom house in Chappaqua, N.Y., and another five-bedroom home in the Embassy Row area of Washington.

They should have little trouble. Financial disclosure documents released last week show the Clintons accepted gifts of sofas, easy chairs, rugs, an ottoman, paintings, lamps, china, flatware and sculptures.

Some of the gifts came from close friends. Actress Mary Steenburgen and her husband, Ted Danson, gave $4,787 in china. Ronald and Beth Dozoretz, Democratic activists in Washington, gave a dining table, server and golf clubs, all valued at $7,000. Sylvester Stallone gave boxing gloves worth $300, Jack Nicholson a $350 golf club.

"NBC Nightly News" reported Wednesday that Rita Pynoos of Beverly Hills, Calif., a friend of Hillary Clinton, helped solicit the gifts, and Clinton had registered "like a bride" at Borsheim's Fine Jewelry and Gifts, based in Omaha, Neb. Wolfson and a top Borsheim's executive disputed that.

"The first lady did not register with us," Borsheim's chief executive officer Susan Jacques said Thursday, and no registry was set up on her behalf.

Pynoos told the New York Daily News, "None of it's true. Whatever they're talking about, it's not true."