» (Hoax) Derober Exclusive: Donald Trump leaves waiter a $10,000 tip!
~Roll mouse over photo to derobe~

~Keep Rolling for story!~





The following story is made out of thin air -enjoy:

Dee:We just received this story from our Celebrity Gratuity Database. It’s the best we’ve heard so far!Where? Buffalo Club (very private hangout for Hollywood’s old guard) Location: Santa Monica, CA

“Donald Trump came in for dinner on Monday at the Buffalo Club. The reservation was under his friend’s name so nobody was expecting him to come in. I assume he’s in LA preparing for the celebrity Apprentice thing he’s doing. We have a special area for VIP’s so the celebs can see and be seen with each other. Donald ordered an ice tea and his friend showed up 10 minutes later. When I was telling them about the specials, I felt like an airline steward must feel giving instructions before takeoff. They just talked over me. Neither touched the soup.Donald ordered the pasta and the other guy had the same. When they were finished, they both ordered cappuccinos. We’re sort of famous for our capps! My co-worker wanted me to ask him for his autograph so he could give it to his dad for Christmas. Yeah right.I finally brought them out the check. Trump grabbed it and actually spoke to me from the first time.“What’s the biggest tip you ever got?”“Jerry Bruckheimer comes in a lot. He tipped me $500 on a $1000 check once.”Trump nodded his head.“You’re very good at your job.”“Thanks.”Trump and the other guy got up to leave, said thanks again and left.I went back to the table to grab the check but didn’t have time to look at it until later. When I did, I couldn’t believe what I saw. Honestly, at first I thought he had tipped me $1000. But when I looked a second (and twentieth) time, it was actually $10,000. I was speechless. Honestly, it was a really rough month for me. Who thought Donald Trump of all people would make my year? But he did. I actually tried calling his office to say thanks which is impossible. So if you’re reading this, Mr. Trump, thank you!”

Donald himself writes about leaving big tips in HIS blog, Click Here to read, “The Waiter Rule” by Donald Trump

UPDATE: Derober’s John interviewed by LA Times. Click here!

New Youtube Video: Billy D. Spends the $10,000! Click here.

E! News:

O’Reilly calls Trump a Patriot:

Access Hollywood:

Here is the Derober exclusive video interview with Billy D., the waiter who received the tip talking about how he’s gonna spend his millions thousands:



——————————–