Sanders' stance on Vietnam continues to disappoint
Buy Photo Presidential candidate Bernie Sanders (Photo: Register file)Buy Photo

I authored a column that appeared in The Des Moines Register entitled “How can Sanders be commander in chief?” (Aug. 27). Being a Vietnam veteran I wondered how Sen. Bernie Sanders, who claimed conscientious objector status during the Vietnam War, could become the commander in chief of the most powerful military in the world and order his fellow Americans to go to war when he refused to go to war himself. The Des Moines Register also asked Sanders about this during an editorial board meeting on Sept. 3.

Within a lengthy explanation Sanders specifically said, “I applied for conscientious objector status because I very strongly disagreed with the war in Vietnam and I would not have fought in that war.” Sanders’ answer about refusing to fight in the Vietnam War shows a disrespect toward the U.S. laws that were established during that time period.

As a commander in chief, Sanders could be called upon to support the authorization of a draft and order people to serve in the military during peace or wartime. This happened to six other presidents during the 33 years the draft was active in our country from 1940 to 1973. Presidents during the Civil War and World War II also faced these challenges.

KATHIE OBRADOVICH: Sanders drops foreign policy crumbs

The members of Congress and the six presidents from 1940-1973 did not make the decision to maintain a draft or going to war lightly. It was done to ensure our national or world security. U.S laws require Congress to reauthorize a draft every two years. A majority vote by Americans elects the public officials who make these decisions. The bottom line is that during the Vietnam War, Congress and the president asked Sanders, along with millions of other Americans, to serve their country and fulfill their duty. To this day he openly admits, “…I would not have fought in that war.”

If a president leads by example, Sanders’ own draft dodging behavior could encourage young men and women today to turn their backs on the U.S. government and their president if they were asked to serve. It could set a dangerous precedence. There is a fragile line between acts of civil disobedience and the principles of freedom. Our democratically structured system of government draws and defines that line.

It is often difficult for people who did not grow up between the years of 1940-1973 to understand the feelings of 18-year-old males who faced the draft and the possibility of going to war. Although citizens have the freedom to peacefully protest the draft or a war, they do not have the option to pick and choose which war to participate in when America asks them to serve. Those who refused to serve their country were breaking the law. I knew no one who liked the draft or wanted to go to war, but the people I served with were extremely proud of having fulfilled their duty and obligation to their country.

Our laws cannot be ignored by calling it our right to freedom of expression. Veterans will tell you freedom is not a right, it is a privilege. The many people who have served their country in the military sacrificed their freedom, health and even their lives to protect that privilege. President John F. Kennedy put it well, "ask not what your country can do for you, ask what you can do for your country.” This is an idea America currently needs to embrace again. While I certainly do not want a "hawk" to become our next president, I don’t think a person who to this day still says, “I would not have fought in that war.” is qualified to be our commander in chief. His statement diminishes the many sacrifices veterans made who did serve in the Vietnam War.

Steve Wikert is a native Iowan, Vietnam veteran and retired educator in Cedar Falls.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1F2chM7