Report: Arapahoe High School shooter wrote in diary of coming rampage
Arapahoe High School shooter Karl Pierson wrote this chilling diary entry three months before he rushed inside the building with a bandoleer of ammunition strapped to his chest and a pump-action shotgun: "I will shoot up my school, Arapahoe high school, before the year is over."

WATCH: Video of officials discussing the Arapahoe County High School shooting report.

Pierson, who killed fellow senior Claire Davis that day, said he hoped to pick an "incredibly cold" day during finals week.

Claire Davis was killed in the Arapahoe High School shooting in December 2013. (Provided by the Arapahoe County Sheriff's Office)

"I am a psychopath with a superiority complex," the 18-year-old wrote. "I will do something I have wanted to do for a while — mass murder and be in a place of power where I and I alone are judge, jury and executioner."

Pierson wrote that he hoped people would talk about "elementary school teasing" after his rampage. "Words hurt, can mold a sociopath, and will lead someone a decade later to kill," he wrote.

Arapahoe County Sheriff David Walcher revealed the diary entries during a Friday news conference, attended by Claire's parents, concluding a nine-month criminal investigation of the Dec. 13 shooting.

"Karl Pierson was angry and, in fact, very angry," the sheriff said.

The 37-page report — which included 200 interviews, a review of 4,000 documents and 13 search warrants — showed that school administrators failed to act swiftly as they learned of escalating concerns about Pierson, who threatened to kill his debate coach three months before the fatal shooting.

Students leave Arapahoe High School during their lunch break, October 10, 2014. (RJ Sangosti, The Denver Post)

DOCUMENT: Read the full sheriff's report on the Arapahoe County High School shooting.

A threat assessment done by the school psychologist determined he was a "low level of concern." Pierson's mother took him to a mental health center, but therapists there said he was not dangerous.

School officials did not suspend Pierson when his speech and debate coach told them he was on the brink of resigning out of fear for his life. Instead, his mother kept him home from school for three days.

Arapahoe County Sheriff David Walcher answers questions during a press conference at the Arapahoe County Sheriff's Office in Centennial, October 10, 2014. (RJ Sangosti, The Denver Post)

For two weeks, administrators ignored debate coach Tracy Murphy's requests to see a parking lot video in which Pierson said he wanted to kill him. By then, the tape was reused and evidence of the threat was erased, according to the report.

A school-security expert who Friday reviewed the report said the investigation found undeniable evidence that officials knew not only of the threat by the shooter but also of the concern the debate coach had for his life and safety.

"The documented progressive decline in the shooter's behavior is something that a well-trained school staff with a more formal threat-assessment protocol might have detected and handled in a different manner that may have saved lives," said Kenneth Trump, president of National School Safety and Security Services.

"This report screams out for the need for school officials to revisit the top lessons learned from Columbine," Trump said, referencing the 1999 shooting at a Jefferson County high school that left 13 people and the two gunmen dead.

The Arapahoe County Sheriff's Department found no criminal wrongdoing on the part of Arapahoe High or the district, but it raised questions about how officials handled the threat. District Attorney George Brauchler said Pierson alone was criminally liable and kept his murderous plans and thoughts to himself.

"The criminal liability died on the floor of the library," Brauchler said. "That is not to say there aren't other questions to ask. The public needs to ask the hard questions of everyone, everyone involved."

Littleton Public Schools Superintendent Scott Murphy declined to answer most questions Friday about the failures identified in the report.

He said administrators reviewed the school's threat-assessment procedures, but he would not say whether they were followed correctly in Pierson's case. The superintendent declined to discuss why school officials didn't show Tracy Murphy the parking lot video and how they handled the threat Pierson made against him.

"I will not speak to any one individual student or employee. Period," Scott Murphy said.

Parents, including Pierson's father, have called on school administrators to acknowledge failures in their handling of Pierson's previous threats against Tracy Murphy and to outline steps taken to keep students safe.

DOCUMENT: Read letter from the Davis family.

"In my office, if someone said they were going to kill someone else, that would be a big deal," said Jeffrey Schaefer, whose daughter graduated from Arapahoe in the spring and whose son is a junior there. "I think obviously the response was inadequate, but I don't think we as parents have been told what the school district did incorrectly and what they would like to do better should something like this happen again. And I'm not talking about the shooting. I'm talking about the three months leading up to the shooting."

Deeb Hansen, whose child attends Arapahoe, said he felt Scott Murphy "didn't answer anyone's questions."

"There was nothing to give me any confidence that they have the systems in place to keep a bad element out of the school," Hansen said.

The investigation and Pierson's diary show that his mental state was declining rapidly, causing school staff to label him as "narcissistic." But the school psychologist who assessed him said he was a "low level" threat. And a mental health clinic in Highlands Ranch, where Pierson was taken by his mother after he threatened to kill the debate coach, determined he was "not a threat to himself or others."

In his diary, Pierson said he was careful not to blow his cover by telling anyone he planned to shoot up the school.

Pierson and his parents met with school officials after he threatened to kill his debate coach.

"Threat assessment" documents show Pierson was to see a psychologist weekly and would work on anger management. Paperwork from the assessment included this note: "Mom reports deep-seeded anger & Karl agrees that he's had anger mgmt issues for a while."

On Dec. 13, Pierson rushed into the school with ammunition, a machete, three Molotov cocktails and a pump-action shotgun. He entered through a door that was often propped open and shot Claire Davis, 17, before killing himself in the school library.

A maintenance worker had seen Pierson running toward the 2,100-student school and alerted staff, prompting a lockdown. Once inside, he fired three rounds. One bullet hit Claire in the head and the other ricocheted off a wall and into her back, the investigation found.

Pierson then fired two rounds at the debate coach, missing him. Tracy Murphy ran out of the school, and he stated later in an interview that he thought Pierson would follow him.

In early December, Pierson wrote that he bought a gun. "Mom does not know about it."

A few days later, he texted his mother that he took $800 out of his bank account and gave it to a friend for flying lessons. She told him to return the money, the report says.

On Dec. 6, Pierson bought a shotgun from Cabela's sporting goods store in Lone Tree for $229.99, according to the report. The store provided video showing him making the purchase.

On the day of the shooting, Pierson wrote in his diary that he went bowling and bought Mountain Dew so he could use the glass bottles to make Molotov cocktails. "Today is going to be fun," he wrote.

Search warrants of Pierson's home revealed ammunition, an instruction manual for the shotgun and a receipt from the bowling alley.

Pierson's mother also provided investigators with a copy of the book "Columbine: A True Crime Story" and an assessment from Highlands Behavioral Health System that said he was not recommended for in-patient care.

At the news conference, Michael and Desiree Davis sat quietly as the sheriff described Pierson's rampage and their daughter's injuries.

Desiree Davis closed her eyes and took long, deep breaths as the sheriff talked about Claire's brief interaction with Pierson and how she was carried to the other side of the high school.

In a letter to the community, the family thanked the sheriff's department for the investigation and said it shows Pierson "was an adolescent that allowed himself to become filled with confusion and darkness, and he failed to see any love around him or any hope for the future."

The couple, who called on the community to forgive Pierson at their daughter's funeral, asked lawmakers to make schools safer and address the "emotional and psychological needs of adolescents in our schools."

"The people of Colorado deserve more than to have to sit idly waiting for the next student in imminent crisis to harm or kill another person or themselves," they said in a statement.

Officials on Friday said the sheriff's office has added another deputy to serve as a resource officer at Arapahoe with funding help from the district. Walcher said his office is working with the city of Centennial in an effort to double the number of school resource officers in the district.

The district allocated an additional $810,000 to increase the number of counselors, social workers and psychologists in schools.

Now that the criminal investigation is finished, a third-party review will begin, but the sheriff stressed that the review will not be a second criminal investigation.

The review will cover events leading up to the shooting, the shooting itself, law enforcement's response and any changes that can be made. A company has not been selected.

Staff writers Jesse Paul and Yesenia Robles contributed to this report.

Report Highlights

Highlights from the sheriff's report on the Dec. 13, 2013, shooting at Arapahoe High School: