Lisa Kudrow says the Friends reunion is "not going to happen"
So no one told you life was gonna be this way... but it looks like the Friends reunion is definitely NOT happening, ever – according to Lisa Kudrow anyway.

The 53-year-old actress, who played Phoebe Buffay in the long-running comedy series, discussed the possibility of all six friends coming together again, only to reveal that it's not going to happen.

Speaking to heat magazine, she said: "I feel like I'm just constantly bursting that little bubble of hope, each and every time it's asked.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

"It's been 13 years, 13 years of the same question and right now, or in the future, it's not going to happen. And every time I say that, I get yelled at."

© NBC Universal

Kudrow continued: "What's it going to be about? Really, how is it going to work? This is what everybody is forgetting.

"They no longer hang out at the coffee house, they have all moved away. Chandler and Monica live upstate, Phoebe and Mike, probably the same.

"[W]hat reason would there be for them all to come together for a significant amount of time. The setting, and that time of life, worked brilliantly for then."

She added: "It would be great [if it happened]. It would be a lot of fun. But even just from a logistical purpose, it would never work because everyone is on a totally, ridiculous work schedule, that's the opposite of someone else.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

"It's even impossible for us to get together for dinner, it's really hard. It's six people, how easy it is for you to get six of your friends together?"

© Getty Images NBC/Warner Bros

The actress previously told Today's Savannah Guthrie on NBC, that she "doesn't see it happening".

"Think about it," she said. "The thing we liked best about the show was that they were 20-somethings and they were their own family.

"Now, they all have families, so what are we going to watch?"

It comes after the news that FriendsFest is returning this summer with a new UK tour.

In partnership with The Luna Cinema, expect the best of the fest from previous years including Monica's apartment (don't even think about putting a mug on her table without a coaster), Central Perk, Monica's Moondance Diner and Ross and Rachel's Vegas wedding chapel.

And this year, fans can also visit a full scale set of Joey and Chandler's apartment as well – complete with a corridor leading to Monica's apartment.

Visitors can have the ultimate throwback photo at the gang's high school prom too and grab a drink in the newly enhanced Chick and Duck bar, as well as take part in the ultimate Friends quiz and visit newly-themed food stalls.

© Comedy Central

This year, the FriendsFest tour will visit the following locations...

Hillsborough Park, Sheffield: July 7-July 16

Bute Park, Cardiff: July 21-July 30

Heaton Park, Manchester: August 4-August 13 ( venue sold out )

) Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire: August 18-August 27

Hylands House, Essex: September 1-September 10

Clissold Park, London: September 15-September 24

Buy tickets to Comedy Central UK's FriendsFest at friendsfest.co.uk.

Want up-to-the-minute entertainment news and features? Just hit 'Like' on our Digital Spy Facebook page and 'Follow' on our @digitalspy Twitter account and you're all set.