DigiCamHistory
(DIGICAMHISTORY.COM IS A REGISTERED U.S. TRADEMARK) Established 5 Sep 2001

das Original Original! The first ever, and still by far the most complete virtual

history museum of film camera to digital photography

and space exploration imagers on the web Our monthly viewership is approximately 200 times that of our nearest competitor even though that site utilizes many, many domain names in order to falsely elevate its appearance in search results. To check out our current stats at any time go to: http://digicamhistory.com/usage/

(To go to space exploration images and information provided by astronomical imaging engineer James R. Janesick click here)

WELCOME!



DigiCam History Dot Com is a non-profit, educational site provided for the free use of all digital camera enthusiasts. Material on this site is provided for the free use of interested persons and we do not require that you obtain our permission to use any part of this site. On the contrary, site operators in non-English speaking countries are encouraged to copy and translate site contents into their native language. Unlike some similar sites, we provide reference URL links so that researchers can easily obtain additional information or photos of each of the items shown on our site. Visitors, including manufacturers, are encouraged to submit topics or photos concerning the historical development of consumer digicams for inclusion on this site as well as corrections, and/or additional information (please provide sources such as URLs that can be easily verified, or arrange to mail hard copies of articles, photocopies of book pages, etc...)

R



Rodger L. Carter Our 17th Anniversary - 5 Sep 2001 - 5 Sep 2018 - Now averaging more than five million hits per year DigiCamHistory.Com Stats as of February 2018: 2127 Photos on site, 1196 links to other sites 604 items in collection (yellow stickers) - 178 film cameras, 307 electronic cameras

119 other items in collection 105 Technological firsts (blue ribbons) - 35 film era firsts , 70 electronic era firsts



Space Technology Donations

A total of 42 items have been donated by James R. Janesick from his personal collection of astronomical and spacecraft vidicon tubes and CCD/CMOS imagers. You can go directly to the Janesick extension page by clicking on the link above the Hubble Space Telescope shown near the top of this page.



NEWS ALERT!







Jim has just been awarded the 2019 International Image Sensor Society Exceptional Lifetime Achievement Award for work done in field of solid-state image sensors, especially development of the Photon Transfer Curve which is recognized world-wide as THE standard for characterizing image sensors. Thirty-seven of the items sent by Jim have been placed in a shadow box and wall mounted - click on photos to see large images. Check this site out - www.digicammuseum.de - A must-visit site for those interested in digital camera collecting, camera repair and many other subjects. Covers many topics not available on our own site. Operated by Boris Jakubaschk with input by noted photographer Ralf Jannke and others . It is a German site, but available in various languages including English. We give it a 10 out of 10 rating. Once you visit there you will go back again and again.



Latest Photo Technology Additions



1. Casio CP-1000 Thermal Printer Camera - 1993 2. Eikonix -1982 3. Microdia QuickShot - 1996 D-N

4. Dunker 70mm contact photo printer, middle of 1950s page - 1950 5. Panasonic PV-L958 hybrid camcorder - 1998

6. Bell Labs First CCD TV Video Camera - 1972 7. Sound Vision SV-MICRO - 1997 8. Pentax EI-C90 Prototype - 1996

9. Earthlink Xirlink DCS Pro - 1996 10. Cromemco Cyclops - 1975 11. Kodak Still Video System - 1985



12. Koala MacVision digitizer - 1985 13. Fuji DC-X - 1992 14. 3Com TV Phone - 1997 T-Z 15. Additional photos, Fujix PR-1 - 1991

16. Additional photos. Fujix ES-20 - 1988 17. Kodak Number 1 - 1888 - see below 18. Additional info, Sharp VL-DH4000 - 1996 S-Z

19. Casio CP-300 - 1994 20. RCA CDS4100 - 1998 Q-R 21. Sony MVC-FDR1 and FDR3 - 1998 S



22. Canon Optura MV1 Hybrid - 1997 A-D 23. Xirlink C-it XVP510/525 - 1998 T-Z 24. Pentax DM-1100 - 1997 E-H

Click on images below to see attached photo albums



Ohio Swim Man on the Moon MX Underground Missile Test Project ICBM Minuteman II Launch Control Facility

Not quite like pulling a tooth Click here if you dare

From China with Love

3 Pages







2013 inflation adjusted values of original MSRPs of cameras in the DigiCamHistory.Com collection at that time.



HELP WANTED! Click here to assist in identifying unknown digicams.

Article:

F-Stops Defined (F-stops simplified). This article appeared in the April / May 2000 issue of MAV! online magazine. It provides an explanation of f-stops, how they were derived and why they are used.





Cameras: If you are looking for a particular camera click on the "FINDER" page in the below table. It will take you to the page of any camera listed.

THE AMERICAN CONNECTION: U.S. technology and research was the driving force behind the development of today's digital photography. Click on the blue lettering to see a list of more than fifty major American contributions leading to the digital cameras now used throughout the world.







Want to Become Immortral? Click Here!





The blue ribbon next to an item indicates a technological first. The above rectangle indicates that an item is included in the DigiCamHistory.Com museum collection. (If you have a camera that does not have the yellow rectangle beside it, feel free to donate!) The above icon is used to indicate items that have been used in our spy sattelite program

Please visit www.cyclomobile.com to read about my grandfather, Earl M. Morley, a 20th Century inventor.

NOTE: You will find the following statement after many of the items on this web site, "We believe we were the first digital camera history web site to provide a photo and information concerning this camera." Unfortunately, one photography web site that came into existence many years later than ours has used the material on our web site to establish their own web site, which we don't mind, but in addition to not crediting our site in any way, has attempted to imply that their site is the first (das original) digicam history site, going so far as to suggest to us that we close down our site so that their site would be the only site on the web that anyone could go to when researching the history of digital photography! Of course we did not, but that is the reason we have added the above text where appropriate.



Why stop at 1998? Except for a few cameras we purchased after 1998, this site is dedicated to those digicams that came before 1999. There are several reasons for this. The first is that current popular photography sites such as DP Review are not historical sites, thus do not have a section devoted to the very early digicams, nor to the film cameras that came before them. The second reason is that, beginning about 1998, there was an explosion in the popularity of digital photography and sites such as DP Review have covered all new digicams of significance since that time. Of course, they do not cover minor brands or very inexpensive models that are of no interest to serious historians as some sites do. However, those sites, and there are very few, receive almost no viewer traffic.





A word about dates. When known, the earliest applicable date is shown. This is usually the date of introduction, announcement, or when the camera first appeared at one of the various technical shows. Since any particular digicam took some time to engineer and prepare even in prototype form, a date of one year prior to an announcement date is also appropriate in many cases. Dates shown on other web sites are usually the market introduction date in a particular country and sometimes fall into a calendar year following the date shown on our site.





CAMERA OBSCURA - 1490. Leonardo da Vinci wrote the first detailed description of camera obscura in his Atlantic Codex, a 1,286 page collection of drawings and writings. The principle of camera obscura involves punching a hole in a dark box and putting a piece of light-sensitive material on the other side thereby providing a photo-like image, but upside down. The first picture of a pinhole camera obscura is a drawing by Gemma Frisus' De Radio, an astronomer (above photo on the left). He used the pinhole in his darkened room to study the solar eclipse of 1544. Viist the web site of Stewart Lewis Woodruff at users.rcn.com/ stewoody/quote.htm and learn how to build and use pinhole cameras (camera obscuras).

www.boston.com/.../ Galleries/DaVinciGadgets?pg=4





1800s



FIRST PERMANENT CAMERA PHOTOGRAPHS - 1825-26. Photographic history has recently been rewritten following the discovery of what is now considered to be the world's oldest photograph. The image, a reproduction of a 17th century Dutch print, predates by one year Frenchman Niepce's previous heliogravure of the view from his window at Le Gras, regarded until now as the earliest surviving photographic image.

In the early 1800s, Joseph Nicephore Niepce experimented with lithography at his home near Chalon, France. Nicephore explored light-sensitive varnishes, trying to find a coating that would record drawings after exposure to light. In 1816, he took photos using a camera and paper sensitized with silver chloride. He had some success, but was dissatisfied because the images were reversed (negatives) and could not be made permanent. He had tried to produce a positive print, but was unable to do so. He did find that nitric acid helped to preserve images for a while, but would not prevent eventual fading. Niepce's breakthrough came in 1822 when he made a permanent image using a camera obscura. After exposing coated pewter plates to a camera image, he used the vapors from heated iodine crystals to darken the silver and heighten contrast. The method would later inspire Louis Daguerre's successful mercury vapor development process. Within a few years the two inventors would become partners. Niepce was able to produce a copy of an engraving by passing light through the original photo onto a piece of glass coated with bitumen of Judea, a type of asphalt. Light hardens bitumen of Judea, so when Niepce washed the plate with solvent only the unexposed portions were removed, leaving a permanent image on the plate. He named this process heliography or sun-writing. He made numerous heliographs during the next several years and continued his attempts to produce a permanent camera image. In 1825, he was successful.



Oldest known photos, 1825 and 1826. Click on images for enlarged views.

The first image is a reproduction of a 17th century Dutch engraving showing a man leading a horse. The photograph was sold at Sotheby's in Paris on March 21, 2002, to the French National Library for $443,000. The Niepce correspondence that accompanied the print gave a step-by-step account of how Niepce made his discovery. The print is the only surviving testament to Niepce's achievement in the summer of 1825 using light alone to make a plate from which an image could be printed.

The world's second oldest known permanent camera image, bitumen on pewter, is a view taken from Niepce's second floor window. The exposure took approximately eight hours. The third image was reportedly also made in 1826.

Additional information concerning Joseph Niepce can be found at:

http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/low/world/europe/1885093.stm

http://www.artsjournal.com/archives/zvisual%20arts%2003-02.htm

http://www.photogallery.it/storia/icrono.html

http://www.olinda.com/Art/art_lectures.htm

http://www.olinda.com/Art/Beginnings/early_photography.htm

http://www.chez.com/photoimage/niepceet.htm

WILLIAM HENRY FOX TALBOT FIRST NEGATIVE - 1835. The inventor of calotype process, the precursor to most photographic processes of the 19th and 20th centuries. He was also a noted photographer who made major contributions to the development of photography as an artistic medium. His work in the 1850s on photo-mechanical reproduction led to the creation of the photoglyphic engraving process, the precursor to photogravure. Talbot is also remembered as the holder of a patent which, some say, affected the early development of commercial photography in Britain.

Talbot's original contributions included the concept of a negative from which many positive prints can be made (although the terms negative and positive were coined by Herschel). Talbot's negative/positive process eventually succeeded as the basis for almost all 19th and 20th century photography. The daguerreotype, although stunningly beautiful, was rarely used by photographers after 1860, and had died as a commercial process by 1865.

The photograph on the left is of Talbot in 1864 by John Moffat. The photo on the right is a print from a Talbot negative, the oldest known negative in existence.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Fox_Talbot





FIRST PRODUCTION CAMERA - 1839. Daguerrotype cameras of 1839 produced by Giroux in Paris. They weighed 120 pounds each and cost 400 Francs (about $50). See the George Eastman Photography Collections Online for much additional information concerning this camera as well as excellent photos and detailed information regarding many other early cameras.



https://www.eastman.org/collection-highlights-technology



https://www.eastman.org/search-collections



FIRST PHOTOGRAPHS OF THE MOON, FEMALE FACE, PEOPLE - 1839-40. Daguerre himself is believed to be the first person to take a photograph of the moon, using his daguerreotype process, on January 2, 1839. Unfortunately, in March of that same year, his entire laboratory burnt to the ground, destroying all his written records and much of his early experimental work and that historical image of the moon. A year later, John William Draper, an American doctor and chemist, took his own daguerreotype of the moon. John William Draper (1811-1882) was an American scientist, philosopher, physician, chemist, historian and photographer. He is also credited with producing the first clear photograph of a female face when he took a photo of his sister and assistant, dorothy. Daguerre is credited with the first photograph of people as seen in the lower left of the photo above.



http://time.com/3805947/the-first-photograph-of-the-moon/

http://www.davidreneke.com/the-first-astronomy-photograph-in-history-january-2-1839/

https://ragingfluff.wordpress.com/2014/03/23/the-first-photo-of-the-moon-march-23rd-1840/







BAIN'S TELEGRAPH - FIRST FACSIMILE (FAX) - 1843. In 1843, Scotsman Alexander Bain patented a design for a mechanical device which used a stylus attached to an electromagnetic pendulum to send typed words over a telegraph line. The first commercial fax service was opened between Paris and Lyon, France, in 1865. Popularity of facsimile machines increased significantly in 1906 and thereafter when they were employed for transmitting newspaper photos. For many interesting photographs and a complete history of facsimile machines see

http://www.hffax.de/html/hauptteil_faxhistory.htm

SHELLAC CONDUCTING ROLLER - 1847. Frederick Bakewell, England, improved upon Bain's design by using a clock mechanism and was the first to demonstrate a facsimile transmission.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frederick_Bakewell

PHOTOGRAPHY - 1850. Above, early photographer's portrait studio. The complete photographist kit as found in an 1850 catalog: (Kit in this case would mean a horse-drawn wagon!) Estimate for a complete Daguerreotype Apparatus, suitable for the professional photographist, consisting of a large-sized camera and compound lens for large views, portraits, and groups; small size camera, with large aperture and short focus combination of lenses, for taking portraits up to 4 inches by 3 inches in dull weather; polishing lathe, with series of circular buffs; three hand buffs; set of metal plate holders and supports; heating stand; large bromine and iodine apparatus and set of frames; set of plate boxes to hold two dozen each; table stand for camera and rollers; adjusting chair, with head rest; adjusting head rest, with heavy iron foot for full-length portraits, &c.; large mercury box for the different sized plates; lantern, with yellow glass shade; metal still and worm tub for obtaining distilled water; a large and small gilding stand; stoneware barrel and cock for holding distilled water; porcelain dishes; filtering stand; funnels and filtering paper; spirit lamps; set of daguerreotype colours and brushes, and flexible India-rubber bottle; glass measures; two painted back grounds, &c., with a full supply of all the necessary chemicals, polishing materials, &c., complete, Wills, Camfield and Deirdre. History of Photography: Techniques and Equipment. Exeter Books. New York. 1980. Pages 13, 24.

PONTI MEGALETOSCOPIO - 1859. The interesting device, built by Carlo Ponti, allowed the owner to view his photographs in black and white in the daytime and in color at night. This was accomplished by coloring the back of photographs and then viewing them when lit from behind during darkness (one wonders why they didn't just color the front of the photographs rather than build such and elaborate device). The model shown is unique in that almost all other similar models made by Ponti were of plain design while the above model was inlaid with ivory as was the photo storage stand. This model was in the Thurman Naylor Collection and on 19 October 2007 was auctioned off for $42,500. http://shutterbug.com/features/0906treasure/

PANTELEGRAPH - 1861. Giovanni Caselli, Italy, developed the first commercial fax machine, sending meassages between Paris and Lyon France.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giovanni_Caselli

BUSINESS CARD - 1880s. Photographer's business card, 1800s style. Advertisement on the front, sample print on the back. Some business cards at that time were a little larger than today's credit-card sized models. This one is 4 x 6.5 inches.





ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL - 1880s. Bell proposed an optical system for transmitting telephone signals without wires. Additional information concerning Alexander Graham Bell can be found at: http://www.iath.virginia.edu/albell/homepage.

http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/bellhtml/bellhome.html







PAUL NIPKOW - 1884. Nipkow, a German inventor, developed and patented the world's first electromechanical television system, however, he had no method of amplifying the very weak signals (produced by a selenium cell) needed to build a workable receiver. Nipkow used a rotating disk to send pictures over a wire in 1884. This early idea of "cable television" was abandoned as impractical since the receiving screen couldn't be any bigger than one square inch! Additional information concerning Paul Nipkow can be found at:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Gotlieb_Nipkow





FIRST KODAK PATENT - KODAK NUMBER 1 - 1888. Copy of the first page of George Eastman's first patented camera design. Eastman coined the slogan, 'You press the button, we do the rest,' when he introduced the Kodak camera in 1888 and within a year it became a well-known phrase. He designed and patented it in 1886. It was a box-box with a roller cassette designed for 48 (100 when it went on sale) negatives of 4 x 5 inches format, with a focusing optics. After several improvements, in 1888 George Eastman released the revolutionary amateur camera Kodak number 1. The camera lens transmitted a circular image of 2.25 inches in diameter onto the film (1888 photo, girl on a couch). At $25 it was much cheaper than other cameras of the time. After the film was removed, the buyer mailed the device along with the roller to Eastman Company in Rochester, New York, where the film was taken out, developed, printed, and the device was recharged, for which the client paid $ 10.



http://inventors.about.com/od/estartinventors/ss/George_Eastman.htm













BOUTAN-CHAUFFOUR FLASH BULB - 1893. The first flash bulb was designed by Frenchman Chauffour for use by underwater photographer Louis Boutan. It contained magnesium inside a glass bulb filled with oxygen under pressure. A platinum wire heated by passing an electric current through it ignited the magnesium. Additional information concerning Louis Boutan can be found at:

http://encyclopedia.jrank.org/articles/pages/1249/Twentieth-Century-Photographic-Lighting.html



AMSTUTZ ELECTRO-ARTROGRAPH - 1895. The cover story of a Scientific American issue described the Amstutz Electro-Artrograph which could scan photographs and transmit them over wire. Illustrations showed a photograph, drawings of the devices on route to the destination, and the photo as reproduced by a receiving device. Drawings of transmitter and receiver shown above. Scientific American, April 1985, page 12. "Digital Deal: Anniversaries Everywhere for Everything," Don Sutherland, Photo Trade News, August 2000.



https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-amstutz-electro-artograph/







THE CATHODE RAY TUBE (CRT) - 1897. Electronic television is based on the development of the cathode ray tube (the picture tube found in modern television sets). Cathode rays were first identified in 1859 by Julius Plucker, a German mathematician and physicist, but it was not until 1878 before William Crookes, a British chemist, would confirm the existence of cathode rays by building a tube that displayed them. English physicist Ambrose Flemming, working with Crookes' tube, would discover that cathode rays could be deflected and focused. This was accomplished by wrapping the tube with wire and passing an electric current through it creating a magnetic field. In 1897, German physicist Karl Braun developed the first cathode ray oscilloscope. Braun illuminated the cathode rays by placing fluorescent materials at the end of the tube. As time passed these developments would be applied to the scanning system for today's television. Additional information concerning the cathode ray tube can be found at:

http://inventors.about.com/library/inventors/blcathoderaytube.htm





POULSEN TELEGRAPHONE - 1898. On December 1st 1898, Valdemar Poulsen filed a patent in Denmark for the Telegraphone, the first device in history to use magnetic sound recording. An extract from his patent reads: "The invention based upon the fact that when a body made of magnetisable material is touched at different points and at different times by an electromagnet included in a telephonic or telegraphic circuit, its parts are subject to such varied magnetic influences that conversely by the action of the magnetisable body upon the electromagnet the same sounds or signals are subsequently given out in the telephone or recording instrument as those which previously caused the magnetic action upon the magnetisable body." At the 1900 Paris Exposition Poulsen recorded the voice of Emperor Franz Joseph, creating what is believed to be the earliest surviving magnetic recording. Additional information concerning Valdemar Poulsen can be found at:



http://www.sfmuseum.org/hist/poulsen.html

http://toutelatsf.free.fr/poulsen.htm