Stop Desecration of Bladensburg WWI Veterans Memorial
The Memorial’s Story

A century ago, thousands of American service members paid the ultimate price fighting for freedom in World War I, the “great war to end all wars.” Among those, were the “Fallen 49” heroes of Prince George’s County, located just outside of Washington, D.C.

In the aftermath of this horrific conflict, 10 Gold Star Mothers, led by Martha Redman and Mrs. WilliamFarmer, began their earnest mission to build nation’s first WWI veterans memorial to honor their sons’ sacrifice. To them, the Bladensburg memorial was and IS their sons’ “grave stone,” as many never made it back from overseas.

Shortly after the project began, returning veterans of the war – members of the local American Legion post – worked arduously to complete the Bladensburg WWI Veterans Memorial, which was accomplished in 1925.

Today, this proud symbol of sacrifice stands at the intersection of the National Defense Highway, nearest to Washington, D.C. and just 26 miles from Annapolis. On its base, a bronze plaque lists the names of the 49 fallen heroes, along with the dates 1917 and 1918, and the inscription: This Memorial Cross Dedicated To The Heroes of Prince George’s County Who Gave Their Lives In The Great War For The Liberty Of The World.

Above the plaque, at the heart of the memorial’s base, four words pay tribute to these “Boys of Bladensburg,” who gave their last full measure: Valor, Endurance, Courage, Devotion. These words pay tribute to the men it honors, like Medal of Honor recipient, Henry L. Hulbert; George B. Farmer, the first boy to fall from Prince George’s County; and, William F. Redman, the first fallen Navy man from the county.

A brightly colored image of The American Legion emblem is emblazoned on the memorial on both sides of the intersection of the cross shape.

Incredibly, the Bladensburg Veterans Memorial – built with private funds on private land –is being targeted by a radical humanist group hell-bent on its destruction. They want its arms chopped off or the memorial—this gravestone—bulldozed. Whatever it takes to rid this scourge from public view.

But this is only the beginning.

If this radical group has their way, veterans memorials across the country with religious imagery will be a target, including those right down the road in Arlington National Cemetery, such as the Tomb of the UnknownSoldier, the Argonne Peace Cross and the Canadian Cross of Sacrifice.

If history teaches us a great lesson, it is this: we forget what we do not see.

Memorials are living reminders of our country’s history and the cost of war, especially because we forget what we do not see. Gold-Star mothers and The American Legion who erected this gravestone to the 49 sons of Prince George’s County knew that we would forget the service of their sons and husbands unless the living honored their sacrifice.

Read more about the case.