Food and Flavorings
DOW PuraGuard™ Propylene Glycol USP/EP can be used for direct as well as indirect food additive applications (21CFR184.1666) and is tested against the requirements of the:

Food Chemicals Codex (FCC)

United States Pharmacopeia (USP)

European Pharmacopoeia (EP)

Japanese Pharmacopoeia (JP)

It also meets the requirements of the Brazilian Pharmacopoeia (FB).

DOW PuraGuard™ PG USP/EP can be used in direct food applications as:

Humectant and stabilizer (in prepared fruits, vegetables and bakery goods)

Solvent in flavor solutions and extractions (and in food additives, such as colors, antioxidants, enzymes and emulsifiers)

Plasticizer and softening agent for items such as cork seals

Flavor extraction solvent and processing aid in the isolation of natural flavoring materials (extracting vanilla from vanilla beans, for example)

It also has the following indirect food application uses:

Heat transfer fluids for food and beverage chilling and freezing applications

Solvent for printing inks used in food packaging

Equipment cleaner, to remove contamination from food processing equipment

Dow is the first company to achieve third-party IPEC GMP certification for propylene glycol (PG) from the International Pharmaceutical Excipients Auditing, Inc. (IPEA) for its PG manufacturing facilities in Freeport, Texas, and Plaquemine, Louisiana.

Propylene glycol is cleared for use as a carrier and carrier solvent in colors, emulsifiers, antioxidants and enzymes at a maximum content of 1 gram per kilogram of final foodstuff. Propylene glycol was assigned the E-number E1520.

In countries of the European Union, propylene glycol is not cleared as a general-purpose food grade product or direct food additive. The European Council Directive 95/2/EC on food additives regulates its use in foodstuffs for human consumption.



Now Available: FSSC 22000 Certified Propylene Glycol from Dow

For Additional Information:

Flavor and Extract Manufacturers Association†

Find a Distributor, or Contact Us for specific product and application support.

† Note: These links allow you to leave dow.com. We are not responsible for content on external sites. Please see our privacy policy for more information.