Ukraine v. Russia: A potential game-changing lawsuit comes before the ICJ
The case in the Hague could go down as one of the most spectacular in years. On Monday, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) held its first hearings in a suit Ukraine has brought against Russia. The opposing parties will initially each get four days of divided hearings at the highest international court.

UN and OSCE reporting as evidence

The detailed 45-page indictment outlines alleged violations of two UN conventions. To begin with, the Ukrainian government is accusing Russia of violating the Terrorist Financing Treaty through its support of "illegally armed groups" in the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republic. Russia denies this.

The second part of the claim covers the alleged mistreatment of Crimea's Tartar and ethnic Ukrainian populations when Russia annexed the area in March 2014. In allegedly imprisoning people and by banning the Majlis of the Crimean Tatar People – its representative body - Russia is accused of violating the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD). Ukraine cites UN and OSCE reports from the region, as well as NATO satellite imagery as evidence. The suit calls upon the court to hold Russia to account for its crimes, including the downing of MH17 and firing on civilians. Reparations are demanded.

A Russian flag flies in the courtyard of the parliament building in Simferopol, Crimea.

Ukraine's legal recourse

The lawsuit was filed in January 2017, almost three years after the events in the claim began. Ukraine has filed claims in other international courts, but chances of success are more limited. The International Criminal Court (ICC), also based in the Hague, was established for handling war crimes. Russian President Vladimir Putin announced in 2016 that his country would not be part of the Rome Statute that governs the ICC, which Russia had signed, but not ratified. Ukraine has not ratified it either, but it granted the ICC limited power to investigate in 2013, which the court is currently doing. Since 2014, Ukraine has filed five suits at the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR), with a sixth being prepared. Russia's Supreme Court declared it would have the final word on any ECHR ruling.

Parallels to Georgia v. Russia

Ukraine: Living on the front lines Caught in the crossfire Every evening, the shelling begins around sunset. The front lines near Donetsk see nightly mortar and machine gun fire as the conflict between the Ukrainian military and pro-Russian separatists’ rages on. Caught in the crossfire are many elderly civilians who are too impoverished to go elsewhere. Ivan Polansky, above, surveys the damage on his home in Zhovanka.

Ukraine: Living on the front lines ‘Waiting for a shell’ Residents of Zhovanka in the so-called ‘gray zone,’ a thin strip of land separating warring militaries, line up to see a visiting doctor. Medics hold pop-up clinics in the town once a week. "Each day, you are waiting for the shell to land on your house and you never know when it’s going to come," said local resident Ludmila Studerikove.

Ukraine: Living on the front lines Without electricity and heating Zhovanka was once home to 1,000 people, but the number has dwindled to about 200 since the war began in mid-2014. It has been three months since residents have had electricity and gas. "Sometimes I’m so scared that I lay in bed at night and just shake,” Studerikove said. “My husband stays by my side and holds my hand."

Ukraine: Living on the front lines Nowhere else to go Olexander Voroshkov, program coordinator for the regional charity SOS Kramatorsk, said residents continue to live in half-destroyed homes with leaky roofs, even through the winters, because rent in nearby Ukrainian cities has skyrocketed since the beginning of the conflict. "Rents in Kramatorsk are now similar to those in Kiev, but the salaries are much lower than in Kiev," Voroshkov said.

Ukraine: Living on the front lines Reliance on humanitarian aid Women line up to receive medicine and multivitamins in Zhovanka. Food and humanitarian supplies are delivered to the town by charity organizations, as crossing checkpoints sometimes requires people to wait more than a day in line. "We had everything; we had fresh air, nature. It was very nice here. Now we just have the cold," said local resident Vera Sharovarova.

Ukraine: Living on the front lines Adapting to DNR frontlines Vera Anoshyna, left, speaks with neighbors in Spartak, a town in what is now the Donetsk People’s Republic (DNR). Anoshyna said she has done her best to adapt to the conflict. "If you don’t have water, you find it," she said. "If you don’t have electricity, you find a solution. But you never know where the next bomb will land."

Ukraine: Living on the front lines Six broken ribs Svetlana Zavadenko stands before her home in Spartak. She was injured when the walls collapsed after several mortars exploded in her yard. Neighbors had to dig Zavadenko out of the rubble and she was sent to the hospital with six broken ribs and a ruptured liver. She smokes “Minsk” brand cigarettes and laughs when asked what she thinks about the war.

Ukraine: Living on the front lines 'We lost hope' Zavadenko recovered from her injuries and lives alone with several pets. Spartak has not had electricity, gas, or water services since 2014, so she uses a grill to cook her food. For firewood, she goes to an abandoned furniture factory nearby and collects plywood. "Last winter we thought [the war] would finish, but now, honestly, we lost hope," she said.

Ukraine: Living on the front lines Possibility of a drawdown Damage from shelling on the outskirts of Donetsk. Despite past failures in deescalating the war, a new ceasefire may be in sight after an October peace summit in Berlin, where Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said he was ready to end hostilities in eastern Ukraine and would withdraw troops from the region.

Ukraine: Living on the front lines 'We lost too many soldiers to stop now' Even if both sides agree on a ceasefire, they will face opposition from their militaries, who claim their sacrifices were too heavy to simply put down their weapons. "We lost too many soldiers to stop now," said Vladimir Parkhamovich, colonel of the 81st Airmobile Brigade in the Ukrainian military. "If they give us an order [to stop] we’ll consider them traitors." Author: Diego Cupolo



The situation is different with the ICJ. Founded in 1945, Russia fully recognizes its authority and, as a permanent member of the UN Security Council, reserves the right to appoint a Russian to serve as one of the court's 15 judges. Ukraine can call for an ad hoc judge to participate specifically in this proceeding.

The ICJ heard a case that Georgia brought against Russia for the 2008 war in Georgia's South Ossetia region, and it was "highly controversial," former ICJ judge Bruno Simma told DW. He served on the court from 2003-2012. As Ukraine is doing now, Georgia used CERD as the basis for its suit. By just one vote, the court granted an "interim injunction," calling on both sides to cease violations. Later, the court sided with Russia and dismissed the case on the grounds that it lacked jurisdiction.

Ukraine's stumbling blocks

The court could rule the same way this time, Simma said. It is "always difficult to deal with cases of war involving major powers." In the claim of persecution of minorities, CERD contains a provision calling for "serious negotiations" between the parties in advance of bringing a case to the ICJ. Unlike the conflict in Donbass, this has not taken place regarding Crimea.

Court proceedings could last up to three years, Simma said. "An interim injunction could come in April, followed by a decision on jurisdiction a year later. Then, the decision itself could be handed down a year and a half after that." Ukraine's chances of success are not nil, he said. An interim injunction on its own would be a "success for Ukraine."

The only active checkpoint for civilians to cross the border between Ukraine and the Lugansk People's Republic.

Ukraine looking to 1986

It was 30 years ago that the ICJ ruled the US had violated human rights by supporting the Contras in Nicaragua. The ICJ decided that the US had breached international law. "The US didn't have to pay any fines," explained Simma "but it was a huge publicity coup for a the small country of Nicaragua." The case also garnered support for the ICJ as an independent UN institution.

But Simma declined to offer a prediction on Ukraine's chances of a similar result. He said, "It's a complicated situation."