About Duffel Blog — Duffel Blog
Duffel Blog has been serving the men and women of the U.S. military with insightful commentary and hard-hitting journalism since 1797. Starting from humble beginnings by squatting office space in an abandoned military barracks, the publication quickly became known as edgy and ahead of its time after Duffel Blog reported on President John Adams’ $200 per-week cocaine habit in March 1799, and it received high praise for its investigations into the military-reflective-belt-industrial-complex.

Duffel Blog has received numerous accolades, to include a nomination for The Pulitzer Prize in 2012 for “excellence in journalism,” its being nicknamed “the American military’s most-trusted news source” by Columbia Journalism Review, and recognition as a world leader in military news by other, lesser outlets such as The Wall Street Journal, National Public Radio, The Military Times, NBC News, Gizmodo, USA Today, and Business Insider.

Our History

Duffel Blog was founded in 1797 by Lance Cpl. Alfred Whittingham, a U.S. Marine stationed at Tun Tavern in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Whittingham, a prolific binge drinker and avid boxer, served as a recruiter for the newly formed Marine Corps.

As legend has it, Whittingham would force new recruits to drink shots of whiskey and challenge them to a dueling match before allowing them to sign the enlistment papers — a practice that is still used by Marine recruiters across the United States today.

The role of editor-in-chief was taken up by a number of luminaries over the years. Army Pvt. Earl Williams (1823-1833), for example, set the publication’s tone with groundbreaking articles such as “I Hate My Sergeant Major And Here’s Why You Should Too.” And Phil Brady, a former Navy SEAL (1977-1983), modernized the editorial workflow, implemented style guidelines, and limited writers to a 12-drink minimum during working hours.

Duffel Blog endured a particularly dark time when the duties of editor were passed to Gunnery Sgt. Elias Rodriguez (1997-2001), who wrote most of the articles himself, and replaced words such as “the” and “source” with “Oohrah” and “Devil Dog.” Readership plummeted in the following years.

The current editor-in-chief is B. Gordon Willard.

Disclaimer

Duffel Blog is a parody of a news organization, and all content it publishes is satirical in nature. No content should be regarded as truthful, and no reference of an individual, company, or military unit seeks to inflict malice or emotional harm. All characters, groups, and military units appearing in these works are fictitious. Any resemblance to real persons, living or dead, or actual military units and companies is purely coincidental.

Duffel Blog is not intended for readers under 18 years of age.

Frequently Asked Questions

How can I contact Duffel Blog?

Mailing address 2377 S. El Camino Real, Suite 220 San Clemente, CA 92672

Advertising [email protected]

Press and Events [email protected]

Feedback [email protected]

Website Issues To report a website bug or other issue, please submit an email to [email protected] describing the problem, your device and browser information, and screenshots, if possible.



Please note that unsolicited bulk email or spam will be filtered and immediately discarded upon receipt.

Can I submit articles or ideas to Duffel Blog?

No, Duffel Blog does not accept outside submissions, and will not respond to unsolicited materials. However, we do frequently accept applications for regular contributors. You can find more information on becoming a contributor here.

I’m a journalist wanting to write about Duffel Blog. Where can I find more information?

Please send media inquiries to [email protected]. You can find more information and images for Duffel Blog in our press kit.

You used a photograph of me in one of your articles. Can you remove it?

Like other military news sites, Duffel Blog illustrates its articles with photos of service members, military vehicles, and aircraft. Many of these photos are considered public domain and can be used by media organizations since they are taken by official military photographers for the Defense Media Activity.

Service members are often thrilled to have “made Duffel Blog” with their photo being chosen. However, we do realize that in some cases a service member’s photo appearing on Duffel Blog can be detrimental, and we would be happy to remove or modify the image, if you email [email protected] with details of the photo in question and reason it should be removed.

Where can I find Duffel Blog?

Duffel Blog is available online only at duffelblog.com. Outside of the website, we can also be found in print format with our published book, and on the following social media channels:

What is Duffel Blog‘s privacy policy?

You can find our privacy policy here.

Can I advertise on Duffel Blog?

Yes. Please send advertising inquiries to [email protected]. You can find more information on advertising opportunities in our media kit.