Crazy World: Live animals in keychains
Live animals in keychains

Picture used for illustrative purpose only. (AGENCIES)

Live fish and turtles sealed in small key rings sold in subway entrances and train stations in China have got animal protection groups up in arms, reports 'Asiaone'.

Filled with coloured water, each seven centimetre-long key ring, sold at Sihuiv subway station, encapsulated either one Brazil turtle or two small kingfish.The vendors claim the water in the rings have nutrients and so the fish can live for months.

Some clients buying the key rings claim it brings them good luck, while a few others buy to free the animals.

However, no actioncan be taken against the sellers as "China only has a Wild Animal Protection Law," Qin explained. "If the animals are not wild animals they fall outside the law's scope," said chief of NGO Capital Animal Welfare Association.



Dream ride of £200,000

(AGENCIES)

One driver based in London has pulled out all stops to go on his dream drive. He spent a cool £200,000 to convert the Ferrari 360 Coupe into a luxury limousine.

And he toiled for six-long months to achieve it, reported 'Daily Mail'. However, extra reinforcing had to be used to sustain the weight of the vehicle and the power of the car's 400 BHP engine. And this is one reason why the dream limousine can't quite match up to its original speed.



Aliens are real...

Picture for illustrative purpose only. (AGENCIES)

Aliens and flying saucers are indeed 'real'. So claims top secret memos. The explosive claims were unearthed after classified FBI documents were made public. UFO experts said the files could be final proof that aliens and flying saucers "are real", reports 'The Sun'.

Real-life FBI X-Files say the extra-terrestrials landed in the US town of Roswell before they were sent to the infamous Area 51 US airbase.

Three circular-shaped spaceships crashed containing the bodies of extra-terrestrials which were only three feet tall, said a special agent in 1950. "Each one was occupied by three bodies of human shape but only 3ft tall dressed in a metallic cloth of a very fine texture. Each body was bandaged in a manner similar to the blackout suits used by speed flyers and test pilots."

British UFO expert Nick Pope - who investigated mystery air threats for the Ministry of Defence - said: "These are the real life X-Files. This document could be the smoking gun that proves UFOs are real".

The FBI published the document along with thousands of files available in a new online archive called 'The Vault'.

Another secret FBI memo could confirm the 1947 Roswell UFO incident.

It claims in the same year that an object was found at the base "purporting to be a flying disc".

The disc was "hexagonal in shape" and "suspended from a balloon by a cable", according to the "urgent" memo sent to the FBI director.

The disc was initially thought to be a weather balloon - but the memo claims the US Air Force "had not borne out this belief".



Brit banker in dare death fall

A general view of Marina Bay Sands Singapore. (AGENCIES)

In a dare game that went wrong, a British banker fell to his death from a rooftop bar in Singapore, reports 'The Sun'.

William Hart tumbled from the seventh-floor of a luxury hotel into the waters of the city's Marina Bay, reports .

Witnesses saw Hart climb over metal railings as well as a glass wall.

His body was recovered two hours later by search parties.

One theory is that he jumped from the bar, named Lantern, as part of a game of dare late on Thursday night.

Police are investigating the case.