Methane Emissions from the Natural Gas Transmission and Storage System in the United States
This study utilized probabilistic emission and activity models and Monte Carlo methods, as in Ross, (21) to estimate emissions and associated uncertainty. These methods propagate the variability of input emissions and activity data through to a distribution of methane emission estimates that we term the “study model estimate” (SME) for the T&S sector.

The emission modeling approach is described in Figure 1 , using rod packing emissions for reciprocating compressors in operating mode as an example. Each emission category was modeled using empirical cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) constructed with emissions and activity data obtained in a field measurement campaign, (16) data from six partner companies who are major T&S operators, and public data from the GHGRP program. In total, the model is based on new emissions data for 677 facilities and activity data from 922 facilities ( SI , Table S6-b), representing more than one-third of all United States T&S facilities. None of these data, to our knowledge, have been used in previous national estimates. Emissions categories are based on those defined by the GHGRP and include compressor isolation and blowdown valves, seal vents, and rod packing vents; pneumatic devices; component leaks; and tanks ( SI , Section 4). Facilities are divided into multiple groups for simulation ( SI , Section 6). For each emission category in each group of facilities, each Monte Carlo iteration provides a single emission estimate obtained by drawing an emissions rate(s) from the appropriate emission CDF(s) and combining it—typically multiplying—with the appropriate activity data (e.g., number of compressors). This process was repeated 50,000 times, and these iterations were combined to develop a distribution of emissions estimates for each category for each group of facilities. These estimates were then combined using Monte Carlo methods to develop a distribution of estimates for the entire sector.

Figure 1. Schematic of an emission submodel (rod packing vent emissions for reciprocating compressors in operating mode for partner facilities) to illustrate the overall modeling approach. This model is based on cumulative distribution functions (a) containing 44 emission rate measurements from the field measurement campaign and (b) showing operating mode hours, from partner data, for the 1,850 reciprocating compressors in this portion of the model. On each Monte Carlo iteration, an emission rate is drawn from (a) for each compressor and multiplied by the operating hours for that compressor, as shown by the arrows, and to produce (c), a distribution of emissions per compressor. Following each of the 50,000 Monte Carlo iterations, population emissions are computed by summing simulated emissions for all compressors to produce a distribution of emissions as shown in (d).

Emissions Models

Seventeen emissions models (in addition to super-emitter and exhaust models, below) were developed from 2,292 new onsite measurements of individual emission sources. Of these, 1,279 measurements were collected during a six month field measurement campaign at 45 T&S facilities operated by six partner companies, (16) and the remaining 1,013 measurements were made during 2012 by three of the partner companies as part of their greenhouse gas reporting activities, using instruments and protocols aligned with the project measurement protocols described by Subramanian et al. (16) Emission categories are detailed in the SI , Section 4, and the origin of all measurements is documented in CDFMaster.xlsx in the SI zipped file.

A detailed analysis of the field measurement study data can be found in a recent paper published by the authors, (16) but key results are included here. A crucial question is whether onsite measurements accurately represent facility emissions. To address this, the field study simultaneously measured methane emissions using two established, independent techniques —comprehensive onsite measurements and downwind tracer flux—to verify that the comprehensive onsite surveys captured all major sources. In addition to measuring sources included in the GHGRP, the onsite protocol also required measurements in all compressor operating modes (e.g., “not operating pressurized”) and sources (e.g., dry seal vents) that are not included in the GHGRP, restricted the type of measurement instruments that could be utilized, and used engineering estimation for unmeasured emission sources. Tracer flux methods estimate the facility level emission rate by comparing the downwind concentrations of methane to those of tracer gases released from the facility at a known rate. (22)

For 38 facilities with paired onsite and tracer flux measurements, onsite and tracer flux measurements agreed to within the experimental uncertainty. The agreement between these two independent methods creates confidence that the onsite measurements captured most methane emissions and therefore allows emissions at T&S facilities to be modeled in detail using the category-specific activity and emission data. Category-specific modeling supports detailed understanding of the drivers behind emissions, and differences between this study, the GHGI, and the GHGRP. Two facilities with paired onsite and tracer flux measurements were identified by the tracer flux technique as having emissions greater than 200 standard cubic feet per minute (SCFM) and are treated as super-emitters in the model (see below). Standard conditions are defined as 60 °F and 1 atm.

do not exhibit a long tail, these models may underestimate emissions. These models include rod packing vents in one operating mode, wet and dry seal vents, and tank vents. The equipment-level emission data are highly skewed. Figure 2 presents cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) of the emissions data for the 17 emission models developed from field study and partner data ( SI , Table S7-b). A long tail is readily evident in most models. In 12 of the 17 models, the maximum measured emission rate is at least double the 97.5% fractile of the distribution. The inset plot shows the fraction of aggregate measured emissions in each model attributable to the largest 5% of measurements. In 13 models, 5% of measurements account for at least 30% of total emissions, and in 8 models, more than 50% of total emissions. The inset illustrates that the highly skewed character is in every model containing more than 90 observations but in no model containing less than 40 observations. This highlights the importance of large data sets, such as the one used here, to accurately characterize the long tail on emissions distributions. Conversely, for the four models whichexhibit a long tail, these models may underestimate emissions. These models include rod packing vents in one operating mode, wet and dry seal vents, and tank vents.

Figure 2. Normalized cumulative distributions of the 17 emission models developed from data collected in this study (SI, Section 7). Inset illustrates the fraction of all measured emissions due to the largest 5% of measurements. Green lines/symbols indicate models with substantial “long tail” behavior, where 5% of measurements are responsible for >30% of total measured emissions. Blue models are substantially less skewed. The orange model exhibits other behavior, namely, a high zero offset present in field measurement data. Inset illustrates that skewed behavior is detected in all models containing more than 90 observations and detected in no model containing less than 40 observations.

Since the GHGRP specifies measurement and reporting methods all reporters must use, the mean of reported emissions in each emissions category should be approximately equal between large subpopulations of facilities. However, an examination of data reported to the GHGRP indicated that reported emissions from nonpartner facilities were, on average, approximately 1.4 times larger than that those reported by partner facilities ( SI , Table S8-a). Differences were particularly pronounced in categories where the GHGRP requires direct measurement, such as reciprocating compressor venting (1.8 times larger), tank vents (4.6 times larger), and centrifugal compressor venting (7.7 times larger). A difference in reported emissions suggests emissions are impacted by differences in equipment, operational methods, or maintenance practices between partner and nonpartner facilities. Therefore, SME emission models used to analyze nonpartner facilities were modified to account for the reported emission differences, using scaling and differential methods described in the SI , Section 8. Similarly, different models for pneumatic device counts were developed for partner and nonpartner facilities to capture significant differences in pneumatic device utilization ( SI , Section 9).

Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors (AP-42) Models for engine and turbine exhaust methane emissions were based upon data underlying EPA standard(AP-42) (23) and additional measurements provided by the study partners. AP-42 source data were filtered to include only measurements with complete machine type information and direct measurements of methane. These were combined with partner measurements, particularly for four-stroke, rich burn engines, to develop exhaust emission factors ( SI , Section 10).