Ex-KKK Leader David Duke: 'Voting Against Donald Trump Is Treason to Your Heritage'
Former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan David Duke had an important message for his radio listeners this morning: Get out and vote for Donald Trump. Buzzfeed reports that the white nationalist and—sweet Jesus—former member of the Louisiana House told his audience that voting for anyone besides the apricot demagogue is problematic.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

"Voting for these people, voting against Donald Trump at this point, is really treason to your heritage," he said, referring to Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz. "I'm not saying I endorse everything about Trump. In fact, I haven't formally endorsed him. But I do support his candidacy, and I support voting for him as a strategic action. I hope he does everything we hope he will do."

Duke also urged listeners to get out and volunteer for the orange guy from New York.

"And I am telling you that it is your job now to get active. Get off your duff. Get off your rear end that's getting fatter and fatter for many of you everyday on your chairs. When this show's over, go out, call the Republican Party, but call Donald Trump's headquarters, volunteer. They're screaming for volunteers. Go in there, you're gonna meet people who are going to have the same kind of mind-set that you have."

He's probably right.

In recent polls, Trump supporters have shown a fondness for white supremacist talk. Twenty percent of his supporters nationally disagree with the Emancipation Proclamation. Thirty-eight percent of his supporters in South Carolina wish the South had won the war. Only 69 percent disagreed with the statement that whites are the superior race. Seventy percent of respondents in that same group wish the Confederate Flag had not been taken down from the capitol building.

Duke had expressed support for Trump as recently as December, but has always stopped short of a full endorsement. That's probably because Trump is not considered a bona fide white supremacist—he's just opened up some room for the real ones to run riot. As Duke told Politico:

"He's made it OK to talk about these incredible concerns of European Americans today, because I think European Americans know they are the only group that can't defend their own essential interests and their point of view. He's meant a lot for the human rights of European Americans."

Trump 2016: Not Racist, Not Really!