US Earthquake Weapon Test Fails Again, Destroys New Zealand City
Home » Breaking News, Environment, Manipulation, North America » US Earthquake Weapon Test Fails Again, Destroys New Zealand City

A grim report prepared for Prime Minister Putin by Russian Space Forces Command (VKS) states that the catastrophic 6.3 magnitude earthquake that destroyed New Zealand’s second largest city of Christchurch on 22 February was another “failed test” of a United States “earthquake weapon” similar to the one that destroyed the Caribbean island nation of Haiti last January (2010) killing over 500,000 people.

To the deadly US “earthquake weapon” that destroyed Haiti we had previously reported on in our 14 January 2010 report US Quake Test Goes “Horribly Wrong”, Leaves 500,000 Dead In Haiti, and to which, sadly, the only world leader to speak out against was Venezuelan leader Hugo Chavez, and as we can read, in part, as reported by Fox News:

“The United States apparently possesses an “earthquake weapon” that set off the catastrophic quake in Haiti and killed 200,000 innocents. Don’t believe it’s true? Just ask Hugo Chavez.

Citing an alleged report from Russia’s Northern Fleet, the Venezuelan strongman’s state mouthpiece ViVe TV shot out a press release saying the 7.0 magnitude Haiti quake was caused by a U.S. test of an experimental shockwave system that can also create “weather anomalies to cause floods, droughts and hurricanes.”

The station’s Web site added that the U.S. government’s HAARP program, an atmospheric research facility in Alaska (and frequent subject of conspiracy theories), was also to blame for a Jan. 9 quake in Eureka, Calif., and may have been behind the 7.8-magnitude quake in China that killed nearly 90,000 people in 2008.

What’s more, the site says, the cataclysmic ruin in Haiti was only a test run for much bigger game: the coming showdown with Iran.”

The United States nearly complete control over their propaganda media organs had previously been evidenced in our 11 February report CIA Spy Captured Giving Nuclear Bomb To Terrorists wherein we detailed that Russian intelligence services had “confirmed” that Raymond Allen Davis was a CIA agent, but the American people were not allowed to know the truth, and as we can read, in part, as evidenced by Press TV in their article “US orders media to lie over CIA killer”, which says:

“A US investigative journalist says Washington had ordered the American media to lie about the identity of the CIA agent, Raymond Davis, who has killed two Pakistanis. “The New York Times has admitted that they knew this and withheld the information at the request of the Obama administration from some time maybe as far back as Davis’s arrest,” David Lindorff, author and investigative journalist from Philadelphia, told Press TV’s US Desk on Tuesday.”

Further evidence of US government control over their propaganda media organs we had, also, detailed in our 4 January report Top US Official Murdered After Arkansas Weapons Test Causes Mass Death, but which only this past week had London’s Daily Mail revealed in their article “Pentagon aide ‘was killed by hitman’ claims distraught widow” the truer facts of this case, and as we can, in part, read:

“Prominent Washington aide John Wheeler was assassinated by a hitman in a targeted killing, his widow has claimed. Katherine Klyce said the way her late husband’s body was dumped at a landfill site could only have been carried out by a professional. The 66-year-old suggested his work with the Pentagon over his decades-long career could have made him enemies who wanted rid of him.”

To the catastrophic damage done by this latest “failed test” of a US “earthquake weapon” new reports are saying that, aside from the hundreds believed killed, the cost in damage has made it the seventh-most costly natural disaster for insurers since 1970 estimated at over $12 Billion.

According to this VKS report, the US test of this “earthquake weapon” originated from the joint Australian-US Planetary Defence Base named Project Wormwood (photo right) located at the Learmonth Solar Observatory that upon “warm up” caused a 4.7 magnitude earthquake to hit the Northern Territory, and less than 24 hours later was “directed” at New Zealand’s Tasman Glacier located in their Southern Alps region 120 miles (200 kilometers) from the now destroyed city of Christchurch.

[Note: The Wormwood Project is named after the apocalyptic “end of days” star Wormwood found in the Christian Bible’s New Testament Book of Revelations.]

The purpose of this “earthquake weapon” test, this VKS report says, was for the “benefit” of a US Congressional delegation reported to have left Christchurch barely 2 ½ hours before the catastrophic trembler hit, but who left behind one of their “members”, the United States Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Deputy Administrator Timothy W. Manning, who is now coordinating America’s response to the disaster.

Important to note is that in the test of their “earthquake weapon” last year the American military had, also, pre-positioned General P.K. Keen, the Deputy Commander of the Southern Command, in Haiti to coordinate his countries disaster response.

Equally important to note, this VKS report continues, is that just like Haiti was the catastrophic victim of a US “earthquake weapon” due to a previously unknown fault line, so was New Zealand, and as we can read, in part, as further confirmed by London’s Independent News Service: “The devastating earthquake that tore through Christchurch on Tuesday is the product of a new fault line in the Earth’s crust that seismologists were previously unaware of”.

To the science these US “earthquake and weather” weapons are based upon we have previously detailed in numerous reports, including those linked in this report and: Norway Time Hole “Leak” Plunges Northern Hemisphere Into Chaos and Leaked Cable Reveals Obama Sent To “2012 ALICE Bunker” Due To Norway “Spiral”.

Most unfortunately for the American people in all of these events is their continued blind obedience to their government controlled propaganda media organs regarding the truth of these things, and who only need to say “turn away” to get these mindless souls to quit seeking truth for themselves.

Source

Rate this item: 1.00 2.00 3.00 4.00 5.00 Submit Rating Rating: 4.2/5. From 37 votes. Please wait...

Loading...

RELATED ARTICLES

Did you like this information? Then please consider making a donation or subscribing to our Newsletter.