My friend wants me to sign on for a gift exchange
I suppose in theory it's possible. The chain letter works (at least in some version that I remember) is there is a list of people. When you receive the letter, the person who sent it is in the #1 slot in a list of people. I'm going to go with 6, since that's what your friend says, and let's just go with a $1 bill for simplicity.Your friend sends you $1 in an envelope with a list of six people. Your friend is in the #1 slot on that list of six. You have to turn around and send $1 to all six people on the list (including her, since she's in the #1 slot), PLUS you have to send the chain letter to six of your other friends and family with $1 included, and of course you include that original list of people your friend sent you. At this point, YOU go in the #1 slot while your friend moves to #2, and the person who sent it to her drops to #3, and that sixth person drops off the list, as s/he has now moved to #7. Now if everyone participates, you will receive $1 from every single person who receives the letter with the list until your name drops off the list. The amount of money or books or recipes can increase exponentially compared to the $12 you originally put into it.Does that make sense? We're pretending that everyone who receives this letter will participate.It never works. I recently got a chain letter from some stranger from some other state promising all kinds of financial returns. Here's the thing -- they sent me nothing. Not a dollar, not a book, not a package of stickers, or a recipe. Nothing. So what am I supposed to do? Turn around and send them something? I suppose some people do, which is where this becomes quite the scam, and if your friend only loses 10 bucks out of it, this is hopefully a lesson learned without completely breaking her.It has the potential to be a fun exchange. Unfortunately, this is not reality, and likely a scam. A one-on-one exchange ends up with a one-on-one return (if that person actually sends a gift back, which they likely will not).Anyway, I wouldn't do it and would encourage your friend not to. There is that long lost relative in Nigeria who needs money, and you will inherit millions of dollars if you send him cash for a plane ticket. I also have some ocean front property in Arizona to sell you, if you're interested.(I'll throw the Golden Gate in free).Just tell her you're not interested. It might be a fun exchange if this was her personal group, like a church group or community service group or knitting group raising money for charity, plus you get some fun out of it, but this whole thing seems too scammy to me, and if it's just a secret santa (one-on-one) exchange, there's no way she'll be getting the returns being promised.