Are Muslim women exempt from screening? (& other TSA myths)
Today I once again don my tinfoil hat to tackle a series of internet rumors about the new TSA screening procedures. These procedures include body scanners and random pad-downs (what most people would probably being frisked). I am actually taking an airline flight from Atlanta Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport today. While riding in from the parking lot, I had the rare opportunity to talk to a TSA officer on an informal basis about the new procedures. While many of his answers are incorporated into this article, I will respect his anonymity.

Are Muslim women wearing burkas exempt from screening? One rumor making the rounds is that Muslim women wearing hijabs (scarves that cover the head and face) or burkas (loose garments that cover the entire body, leaving an opening for the eyes) would be exempt from TSA screening due to religious reasons. This rumor seems to stem from a press release by the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) that notes that Muslim scholars say that full body scans are a violation of Islamic law. The press release gives a list of recommendations that include the suggestion that they ask to pat themselves down, but does not claim that they be exempt from screening.

According to the officer I spoke with, the only instance in which self-pat-downs are allowed is in the case of turbans. The wearer still must go through screening, including the body scan, but is allowed to pat down the turban himself. The TSA screener then conducts a chemical test of the wearer’s hands to ensure that no explosives are present. This exception is due to the religious significance of the turban to Sikhs and is consistent with CAIR’s recommendations.

Note that CAIR does not claim that Muslims are exempt from either body scans or pat-downs. The press release notes that “if you opt out of the full-image body scanner, you have the right to request that the manual search be conducted in private.” This is a tacit acceptance of the fact that Muslims do have to abide by the law and undergo body scans, pat-downs, or in some cases both.

Further, the TSA website notes that travelers who wear baggy clothing or head coverings could be subjected to additional screening, rather than being exempted. A claim that President Obama exempted the Muslim women from screening appears to be ungrounded in any sort of reality.

Can the TSA search me if I decide to leave the airport and not fly? According to my source, it depends on where you are in the line when you decide to leave. If you are simply standing in the queue, you are free to leave without being searched. However, if you have placed your personal items on the conveyor for screening, you have committed to being searched. If you attempt to leave the line after placing your items on the conveyor, the TSA considers you to possibly be dangerous.

Is there a radiation hazard from the body scanners? Officially, the TSA says that it would take 1,000 scans to approach the maximum allowable radiation dose. Unofficially, my source confirmed this, saying that it would take several scans to equal the radiation from a normal medical x-ray. Thinking logically, a medical x-ray must penetrate the body, while a TSA x-ray need only penetrate clothing. Considering this, even flight crews and frequent flyers should have nothing to worry about.

Additionally, only about half of airport scanners use x-rays. The remainder use millimeter-wave technology that poses no known health risk. If you are still concerned about the risk of radiation, however, you have a right to request a pat-down.

Are travelers subject to strip searches? One viral video that generated a lot of anger and angst showed the TSA screening a shirtless toddler. In another case, a man stripped down to his briefs after refusing the body scan. In both cases, the travelers themselves took the initiative to remove their clothing. The toddler’s shirt was reportedly removed by his father (who remained with him). The man who stripped to his briefs was arrested on unspecified charges (public nudity?).

The TSA does not have the right to strip search travelers in public. They do have to right to subject you to additional screening if they cannot determine that your clothing is free of threatening items. You have the right to request that the additional screening take place in a private room. The additional screening will be performed by a TSA officer of the traveler’s gender and does not include being stripped.

Can airlines opt out of TSA screening and hire private security firms? This is partially true. Airports, not airlines, are responsible for security screening. The airport authority does have the right to contract with private security firms for screening rather than using the TSA. If the airport elects to use private security, travelers are still subject to the same regulations and searches as at TSA-served airports.

Continued in part 2:

http://www.examiner.com/conservative-in-atlanta/are-muslim-women-exempt-from-screening-other-tsa-myths-part-2

Are TSA screenings constitutional?

http://www.examiner.com/conservative-in-atlanta/are-tsa-screenings-effective-and-constitutional