NFL players who protested during the national anthem in Week 1
Former San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick started the pregame protest of racial oppression and inequality in the United States last season by sitting down during the national anthem before a preseason game, and then kneeling during the anthem in Week 1 and throughout the season. Kaepernick remains a free agent, but several NFL players have continued protesting during the national anthem this season, including during the preseason.

Here are the players who protested in Week 1 (most recent updates first):

Seattle Seahawks: Defensive lineman Michael Bennett remained seated during the national anthem before the Seahawks' opener against the Green Bay Packers. He was again flanked by center Justin Britt, who stood next to Bennett with a hand on Bennett's shoulder. Running back Thomas Rawls was on the other side. Defensive end Cliff Avril again joined Bennett in sitting on the bench for the tail end of the anthem. Bennett last week accused police officers of racial profiling, saying they pointed guns at him and used excessive force during an incident in Las Vegas last month. -- Brady Henderson

Green Bay Packers: Tight end Martellus Bennett stood at the far end of the Packers' bench with his right fist in the air during the anthem before Sunday's game against the Seattle Seahawks. Meanwhile, Ha Ha Clinton-Dix didn't protest, but he helped hold the giant flag at midfield before the game. Bennett said earlier this week that he wasn’t sure whether he would make any kind of protest during the national anthem after news of his brother Michael’s incident with police became public. When asked whether he would do anything during the anthem, he said: "I like to speak through my art, my words and things like that. I wouldn't be surprised if I draw another political cartoon or some s---, but other than that, I don't know right now. I'm more of a spur-of-the-moment-type guy, type of thing." -- Rob Demovsky

Los Angeles Rams: Outside linebacker Robert Quinn raised his right fist in the air during the national anthem before Sunday's game against the Indianapolis Colts, maintaining his custom since the start of last season. Quinn shook his head earlier this week when asked about Michael Bennett. “It just goes to show you what’s happening in America,” Quinn said. “It’s crazy, you know. You can’t keep making excuses.” -- Alden Gonzalez

San Francisco 49ers: Safety Eric Reid knelt for the national anthem before the 49ers' game against the Carolina Panthers, following through on his promise to continue the protest he was a part of all last season along with Colin Kaepernick. Ten teammates – yes, 10 -- surrounded Reid with a hand on his shoulder as he knelt. -- Nick Wagoner

Oakland Raiders: Running back Marshawn Lynch continued his practice of sitting during the national anthem, which he has done since the first preseason game. Lynch, however, has not explained why he is sitting and/or whether he is protesting. -- Paul Gutierrez

Philadelphia Eagles: Safety Malcolm Jenkins continued his protest (which began last season) by raising a fist over his head prior to the Eagles’ opener at the Washington Redskins. Defensive end Chris Long kept his hand on Jenkins' back for the entire playing of "The Star-Spangled Banner" as he did during the preseason. Safety Rodney McLeod put a hand on Jenkins' shoulder, as well. -- Tim McManus

Cleveland Browns: No players knelt during the anthem before Cleveland's game vs. the Pittsburgh Steelers, but the Browns were joined by police officers, firefighters, EMTs and the military as they ran onto the field. Before the anthem was played, several Browns players and coach Hue Jackson were featured in a video that spoke to the importance of unity and equality. -- Pat McManamon

Kansas City Chiefs: Cornerback Marcus Peters was seated on an equipment table behind Kansas City’s bench for most of the national anthem before Thursday night’s game against the New England Patriots. Peters wore his helmet cocked back in his head. Peters protested by raising his fist during the national anthem for the Chiefs’ season opener last year. -- Adam Teicher