Horror as Neo-Nazi groups spring up in Europe under ‘promise to DESTROY EU’
GETTY A worrying trend: Far right neo-nazi parties growing throughout Europe

The racist organisations are springing up in Greece, Germany and Scandinavia, among others, under different names but with an anti-EU message in an aim to legitimise their ideology.



The groups are jumping on fury at the migrant crisis, economic hardship, terrorism and disillusionment with the ailing EU which is fuelling the rise of a new wave of Nazism.

In Greece the ultranationalist Golden Dawn are now the fourth largest political party, with MP Ilias Panagiotaros who described Hitler as a “great personality, like Stalin” and denounced homosexuality as a “sickness”.



In recent weeks, Golden Dawn members, including some of those on trial for murder, have travelled to Greek islands hosting large populations of refugees to whip up anti-foreigner sentiment.

Inside Hitler's Bunker Fri, October 28, 2016 The inside of the bunker where Hitler spent his final days has been revealed for the first time. Play slideshow 1 of 18

Across Sweden, Denmark, Norway and Finland a group called the Nordic Resistance Movement, who praise Hitler in publications, advocates an immediate stop to mass immigration to Scandinavian countries.



Slovakia has also seen a surge in Neo-Nazisim, with their fascist party Our Slovakia winning 14 seats in the parliamentary elections. The group salutes Hitler and describes NATO as a “terror organisation”.

The German supreme court tried to ban the National Democratic Party (NPD), which is the successor to the German Reich Party, defining the group as having an “affinity with national socialism”.



Neo-Nazi groups are harnessing anger against German chancellor Angela Merkel and migrant attacks, including a refugee who stabbed his girlfriend 30 times.

GETTY The Greek Party have been hit with criminal charges but it does not seem to have hindered them

A perfect storm has propelled them into the mainstream Political expert Alina Polyakova

Atlantic Council political expert Alina Polyakova referred to the movements as “subcultural” and said “it's a struggle to really understand how big they are”.



Speaking about the rise of the right, she told the Daily Star: “Many of these political organisations have been around for many many years and a perfect storm has propelled them into the mainstream.

GETTY Many of the neo-nazi movements have prospered by clinging to populist policies