The Punaro Group: About Arnold Punaro and The Punaro Group
The Punaro Group is your trusted guide to the federal market place, offering advice, analysis and strategy backed by 40 years of unparalleled experience and proven performance, enabling you to seize opportunities and accelerate growth.

We are committed to your success by ensuring you have clarity on federal trends and decisions, that you receive timely analysis on markets and events that affect business, and that you have confidence to move forward with an informed strategy that influences the outcome and wins business.

Arnold L. Punaro is the chief executive of TPG. His 40 years of unparalleled experience provides a competitive advantage in the Washington landscape. With TPG, the client receives:

The sense of urgency of an Executive Vice President for Business Development, Government Relations, Communications and Washington operations, from his 14 years in corporate America for a top-ten government contractor.

The experience of a Senate staff member repeatedly rated among the most influential by Roll Call during 24 years of service on the Hill, 14 as Staff Director of the Senate Armed Services Committee.

during 24 years of service on the Hill, 14 as Staff Director of the Senate Armed Services Committee. The insight of a figure of influence in national security who has been called to chair and serve time and again on various presidential and Defense Department boards and commissions.

An insider’s view of the military and modern warfare drawn from a 35-year career in uniform culminating in service as a U.S. Marine Corps Major General.

The experience drawn from leadership in crisis and risk management for a Fortune 250 company.

The entrepreneurial spirit of a current small business owner.

A deep understanding of national security decision making drawn from an illustrious career spanning legislative and executive branches and the defense industry.

The ability to convey to others the essence of decision making as illustrated by 10 years as an adjunct professor at Georgetown University teaching a graduate course on national-security decision making during which he was ranked by students in the top 1% of all Georgetown professors.

Arnold L. Punaro Biography

Arnold Punaro is chief executive officer of The Punaro Group, LLC, a Washington-based firm he founded in 2010 specializing in federal budget and market analysis, business strategy and capture, acquisition due diligence, government relations, communications, sensitive operations, business risk analysis and compliance, and crisis management. He consults for a broad array of Fortune 100 companies and was recognized by Defense News as one of the 100 most influential individuals in U.S. Defense.

In November 2015, Mr. Punaro completed a two-year term as the Chairman of the National Defense Industrial Association, the country’s largest defense industry association with over 1,600 corporate and 91,000 individual members. He is Chairman of the Reserve Forces Policy Board, which serves as an independent advisor to the Secretary of Defense on Reserve and National Guard matters.

He is a retired Marine Corps Major General who has also served as the executive vice president of an $11 billion technology and professional services firm, and as the staff director of the Senate Armed Services Committee, among other positions.

Mr. Punaro is the author of the book On War and Politics: The Battlefield Inside Washington’s Beltway, that was published by the Naval Institute Press in October 2016. Learn more about the book at www.arnoldpunaro.com .

Corporate Leadership

As an executive vice president at Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) from 1997 to 2010, Mr. Punaro served as a sector manager, deputy president of the Federal Business Segment, and led SAIC’s Corporate Business Development organization. He was the senior corporate official responsible for SAIC’s government affairs, worldwide communications and support operations, to include crisis and risk management, as well as general manager of their Washington operations and supervisor of SAIC’s corporate Small and Disadvantaged Business office.

U.S. Senate Leadership

From 1973 to 1997, Mr. Punaro worked for Senator Sam Nunn in national security matters. He served as his director of National Security Affairs, and then as Staff Director of the Senate Armed Services Committee (eight years), and Staff Director for the Minority (five years). In his work with Senator Nunn and the Senate Armed Services Committee, he was involved in the formulation of all major defense and intelligence legislation and the oversight and review of all major defense and intelligence activities, civilian and military nominations.

U.S. Marine Corps Leadership

A retired U.S. Marine Corps Major General, Mr. Punaro served as the Director of the Marine Corps Reserve, Deputy Commanding General, Marine Corps Combat Development Command (Mobilization), and for three years as the Commanding General of the 4th Marine Division. Other assignments were Commanding General, Marine Corps Mobilization Command, and Deputy Commander, Marine Forces Reserve. In December 1990, he was mobilized for Operation Desert Shield. In December 1993, he completed a tour of active duty as Commander of Joint Task Force Provide Promise (Forward) in the former Yugoslavia. He was mobilized for a third time in May 2003 in support of Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom. He served on active duty as an Infantry Platoon Commander in Vietnam where he was awarded the Bronze Star for valor and the Purple Heart.

Policy Organization and Board Leadership

Mr. Punaro is on the Board of Advisors for the Center for a New American Security, Senior Adviser at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) and a visiting scholar at the Bipartisan Policy Center in Washington, D.C. He serves on the non-profit boards of the Atlantic Council, the University of Georgia’s School of Public and International Affairs Board of Visitors, Syracuse University’s Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs, the Georgia Institute of Technology Sam Nunn School of International Affairs.

Personal Awards

Mr. Punaro is the recipient of numerous recognitions including the Secretary of Defense “Medal for Distinguished Public Service” and two awards of the Secretary of Defense “Medal for Exceptional Public Service.” He received the Marine Corps League’s “Iron Mike Award” in 1993 for “exceptionally outstanding service” and “unwavering commitment” for over 20 years to “ensuring a strong national defense.” He has received the Air Force Association’s “Exceptional Service Award,” the National Guard “Minuteman Award,” the

Army’s “Meritorious Public Service Medal,” and the Secretary of the Army “Public Service Award”, the Reserve Officers Association’s “Minuteman of the Year Award”, and was the recipient of the SAIC’s “Founders Award” and two special CEO awards. In 2018, Mr. Punaro received the Forrestal Industry Leadership Award from the National Defense Industrial Association (NDIA). He has over 20 military awards and decorations to include the Distinguished Service Medal as well as numerous civic awards.

Education and Early Life

Mr. Punaro has a Masters of Arts degree from the University of Georgia and a Masters of Arts degree from Georgetown University, the latter in national security studies. He was on the Adjunct Faculty of the Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University for ten years where he taught an annual graduate level course entitled “National Security Decision Making.”

He was born and raised in Macon, Georgia where he graduated from Mount de Sales Academy (Georgia). He is the son of the late Angelo J. Punaro, a civil engineer, and Annina Benedetto Punaro, a teacher. His father and mother were 2nd generation Americans whose parents immigrated from Italy.

Boards and Commissions

Current Boards

Board Dates Member, Defense Business Board July 2015 – Current Chairman, Reserve Forces Policy Board September 1, 2011 – Current Board of Visitors, Member, UGA School of Public and International Affairs August 2010 – Current Member, Georgia Institute of Technology Sam Nunn School of International Affairs January 2013 – Current Member, Syracuse University Maxwell Advisory Board April 2012 – Current Member, Board of Directors, The Atlantic Council August 2007 – Current Senior Adviser, Center for Strategic and International Studies February 1997 – Current Visiting Scholar, Bipartisan Policy Center September 2011 – Current

Previous Boards and Commissions