'Black Moon' eclipse to signal 'end of the world' in just FIVE DAYS
Getty The Black Moon will plunge the US into darkness and has been branded a warning.

Some evangelical Christians are convinced the solar eclipse, known as the Black Moon, on August 21 is a sign that our days on Earth are numbered and the Rapture will soon begin. This month’s solar eclipse will be the first in more than a century to travel all the way from the east coast to the west coast of America, and evangelicals claim it represents a chilling warning. Known as the Great American Eclipse, the Black Moon term is also used by followers of the Wiccan religion and astrologers.

Getty The total solar eclipse takes place on August 21.

Popular YouTube conspiracy theorist, Pastor Paul Begley, who hosts the radio show ‘Coming Apocalypse’, said: “I believe it is a prophetic sign.” Mr Begley references the Book of Joel, which says “the sun shall be turned to darkness” on the day before Christ’s return. The pastor added “somebody sound the trumpet” as the eclipse means “we are living in the last days”. But Mr Begley has form for predicting the apocalypse is near on many previous occasions that have yet to materialise. He, however, is not the only one to believe that the solar eclipse on August 21 will mean the end of the world.

Mark Biltz, author of the 2016 book God’s Day Timer, said: “From a biblical point of view, a solar eclipse is meant as a sign from God. “When there is a total solar eclipse, it is a warning to a specific nation or nations depending on its path. “Could God be giving us a warning that we need to repent or judgment will be coming to the United States? The timing couldn’t be clearer!” Mr Blitz was involved in claims that the infamous Blood Moon eclipse in September 2015 signalled the end of the world – yet nothing happened after the event. Another conspiracy theory claims that a mythical planet called Nibiru, or Planet X, will crash into Earth and destroy humanity.

Christian numerologist David Meade has warned of the possibility that this month’s solar eclipse is a warning for the world ending in September. In a shocking claim Mr Meade says he believes an eclipse later this month could spell doom for mankind setting into action a chain of events that could wipe out the human race. Mr Meade said: “The Great American Eclipse of August 21, 2017, is a major, huge, harbinger.” He believes Nibiru will appear in the skies on September 23 before crashing into Earth.

He said: “See, the day of the Lord is coming – a cruel day, with wrath and fierce anger – to make the land desolate and destroy the sinners within it. “The stars of heaven and their constellations will not show their light. “The rising sun will be darkened and the moon will not give its light.” Using a calculation based on the Bible, Mr Meade warns the eclipse will start in the US. He said: “The moon involved is called a black moon. These occur about every 33 months. In the Bible, the divine name of Elohim appears 33 times in Genesis.

Total eclipses are so phenomenal and so overpowering and so amazing that some people have ascribed a ‘super spirituality’ to them. Dan McGlaun

“The eclipse will start in Lincoln Beach, Oregon - the 33rd state - and end on the 33rd degree of Charleston, South Carolina. “Such a solar eclipse has not occurred since 1918, which is 99 years - or 33 times three." Nibiru, which is also referred to as Planet X, is a hypothesised planet on the edge of our solar system. Mr Meade has used passages from the Bible to back his theory, in particular Chapter 13 of the Old Testament Book of Isaiah.





Longest Total Solar Eclipse This Century Wed, July 22, 2009 Play slideshow 1 of 20 The moon covers approximately 75 percent of the sun during a partial solar eclipse in Hong Kong