Heavenly heatwave spots YOU need to know about: Where to top up your tan this weekend
Getty This weekend is set to be a scorcher where will you be spending it?

After a freezing April, the blossoms are finally out and the UK is heating up nicely. Finally summer is here and May is starting in style with temperatures hitting up to 26 degrees celsius in London this weekend. Some places in the UK are set to be hotter than LA and Madrid. Here’s some of the best places across the country you should spend it.

Getty Will you be getting your deckchair out in Brighton this weekend?

Brighton Brighton is the place to be this weekend. Sure, it’s going to be busy, but when the sun is out the atmosphere is amazing. Brighton’s Naturist Beach (Black Rock) or Hove Beach might be less crowded. It’s also the start of the Brighton Fringe Festival, which is packed full of great music, art and cinema. Saturday 7th will also see the perfect weather for the children’s festival parade. There's nowhere better than Brighton to dip in the water for a surf either. Especially if you catch a glimpse of a sight like this twerking surfing girl.

Heatwave Britain Wed, July 20, 2016 Hot air from the Continent has pushed temperatures in the UK to a staggering to 34C. Play slideshow Henry Nicholls SWNS.com 1 of 56 Lily and Georgia make the most of the sweltering weather today at Portishead Lido in Somerset

Getty These two girls make most of topping up their tan in London's parks

Manchester Beer gardens and al fresco afternoon drinking is where it’s at in Manchester like Sinclair’s Oyster Bar in Exchange Square. Spinningfield’s also has plenty of outdoor bars. There’s nature right on the doorstep in the form of the gorgeous Dovetones Reservoir for hiking in the sunshine. Newcastle A short hop from Newcastle City Centre on the metro is Whitely Bay, a great place to spend a sunny weekend sunbathing with a bag of fish and chips on the sands. Jesmond Dene also weighs in as one of the best spots in the city for a picnic and a game of frisbee.

Getty This boy cools down by running through the water fountains