Pastor attempting to walk on water like Jesus is eaten by crocodiles
Jonathan Mthethwa was killed by three crocodiles as he carried out a religious demonstration in Zimbabwe. Shocked witnesses said the clergyman had “prayed the whole week” before the stunt went tragically wrong. He had also fasted in the lead-up to the attempted miracle, which was inspired by a Biblical tale of Jesus walking on water during a storm. Horrified members of the Saint of the Last Days Church said the pastor was completely devoured in a “couple of minutes”.

GETTY A pastor died after being attacked by crocodiles in Zimbabwe

He promised he would demonstrate his faith to us today, but he unfortunately ended up drowning and getting eaten Deacon Nkosi

He had waded around 30 metres into what was known locally as 'Crocodile River'. At this point he had promised his congregation he would rise up above the water. Instead he was brutally attacked by a group of crocodiles who had been hidden in the deep water. Deacon Nkosi said: “The pastor taught us about faith on Sunday last week. “He promised he would demonstrate his faith to us today, but he unfortunately ended up drowning and getting eaten by three large crocodiles in front of us.

GETTY The attack occurred when the pastor was attempting to walk on water

“We still don’t understand how this happened because he fasted and prayed the whole week.” He said his death was quick and brutal. Mr Nkosi said: “They finished him in a couple of minutes.

Scariest washed up sea monsters Mon, September 25, 2017 Unknown washed up sea monsters that haven't been identified prove the ocean is a terrifying place Play slideshow @preetalina/Twitter 1 of 29 This creature washed up on the shores of a Texas beach

“All that was left of him when they finished eating him is a pair of sandals and his underwear floating above the water.” Emergency services rushed to the scene but arrived too late to save the man. Crocodile attacks are a regular part of life in Zimbabwe, where efforts are being made to reduce the number of fatalities.

Last month an 11-year-old boy was killed by a crocodile while swimming in a river swollen by heavy rains. Men from the boy’s village then hunted down the crocodile, killing it and cutting it open to retrieve the victim’s body.

GETTY The man was killed by three crocodiles