Find A Grave Memorial
Birth: Jan. 17, 1949

New York

New York County (Manhattan)

New York, USA Death: May 16, 1984

Los Angeles

Los Angeles County

California, USA

Comedian, Actor. Started out in show business working in various comedy clubs in the Northeast in the early 1970s. He was discovered by agent-manager George Shapiro, who had picked up on his talent right away. He was then offered a spot on the inaugural broadcast of Saturday Night Live. Andy Kaufman brought the house down with a hilarious off-shoot of the "Mighty Mouse" song. His performance brought him much critical acclaim. He was then offered a spot on the new TV sitcom "Taxi," which initally balked, but later agreed for it would provide the springboard for which he and his partner Bob Zmuda could launch many comedic ventures. Among the things he (and Zmuda) did outside of "Taxi" were a television comedy show, appearences as lounge singer Tony Clifton, wrestling women and taking on the Southern Heavyweight Champion Jerry "The King" Lawler. Although many critics described these ventures as outlandish and erratic, they were also noted for their originality and even genius. In the Fall of 1983 Andy Kaufman, a non-smoker/drinker/drug user, was diagnosed with a rare and deadly form of lung cancer known as 'Large Cell Carcinoma'. With the cancer already in advanced stages, he began chemotherapy, consulted with a "Holy Man" and even flew to the Phillipines to get medical aid from a "Miracle Doctor". Unfortunately none of these methods worked, and his cancer was quite virulent and spread rapidly. He died at Cedars Sinai Medical Center in May 1984. In December 1999, a much-anticipated biographical movie "Man on the Moon", starring Jim Carrey was released nationwide. Carrey's performance of Andy Kaufman's life and times introduced a whole new generation to his works. (bio by: Soorus)



Family links:

Parents:

Stanley Kaufman (1922 - 2013)

Janice T. Bernstein Kaufman (1925 - 1989)



Cause of death: Lung Cancer

Inscription:

Beloved Son, Brother

And Grandson

We Love You Very Much

Burial:

Beth David Cemetery

Elmont

Nassau County

New York, USA

Plot: Section 1 Block 4 (One 4) (between Brandeis/Cardozo) Temple Ahavath Sholom of Flatbush

GPS (lat/lon): 40.69736, -73.70773

Maintained by: Find A Grave

Record added: Jan 01, 2001

Find A Grave Memorial# 1789