Hon. Elijah Muhammad fulfills prophetic role, says Minister Farrakhan
The Final Call | National News

Hon. Elijah Muhammad fulfills prophetic role, says Minister Farrakhan

By Ashahed M. Muhammad -Asst. Editor- | Last updated: Mar 12, 2012 - 7:38:27 PM

What's your opinion on this article?

A redeemer

The Most Honorable Elijah Muhammad

CHICAGO (FinalCall.com) - Maintaining an incredibly grueling schedule, the Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan spoke for the third time in seven days, delivering Part 2 of his Saviours’ Day message to a standing room only crowd at the Nation of Islam’s headquarters Mosque Maryam March 4.

After delivering an intense message a week earlier to thousands at the United Center, three days after a message in Grand Rapids, Mich., and coming off a five-day liquid fast, a beaming Minister Farrakhan stood before the crowd to deliver divine guidance.

“I said so much last week that I wondered what would God guide me to say today?” said Minister Farrakhan to the crowd in the mosque sanctuary, next door at the Muhammad University of Islam gymnasium, and those watching via the internet worldwide. Ultimately, he decided to begin by sharing a word about the identity of the Most Honorable Elijah Muhammad.

“You cannot imagine the unspeakable joy that Black people in America have had a visitation from God,” said Min. Farrakhan. “You may not think that you are worthy of such, because as a people we have been destroyed, but God saw our affliction, and he heard our cries and He came Himself to deal with it, and from our ranks, He raised a beautiful human being from Georgia, and taught him for three years and four months, and that man whom he taught, is now, the grand master teacher of us all.”

The Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan Photo: Richard B. Muhammad

The Minister said it might sound strange to some, however, Muslims think and speak very highly of Jesus and all of the prophets of God, because Muslims believe in Jesus and all of the prophets. In fact, these divine servants were Muslims, because a Muslim is one who submits his or her will to do the will of God.

“Jesus according to the Bible is the most magnificent of human beings because Jesus reconnects all humanity back to God. He’s the reconciler, he’s the redeemer, he’s the savior,” said Min. Farrakhan. Jesus of 2,000 years ago and Prophet Muhammad of 1,400 years ago were in the prophetic mode, meaning they spoke and did their work in the absence of God, he explained. The Holy Qur’an is clear that Prophet Muhammad is the seal of the prophets. But both spoke of divinely guided ones coming after them and Jesus and Muhammad foreshadowed events to come, Min. Farrakhan continued.

“You have an historical Jesus, and the Honorable Elijah Muhammad told us 75 percent of what you read about Jesus and what he would do is a future man. It never was fulfilled 2,000 years ago,” said Min. Farrakhan, addressing scholars of Christianity. “If Satan had two more thousand years to do his devilishment, the Jesus that comes on the scene at the end times, is the one to absolutely destroy the works of Satan. Jesus 2,000 years ago would be too soon, so he talked about one coming after him.”

Then turning to scholars of Islam and holding up a copy of the Holy Qur’an, the Minister took the audience further into the theological discussion.

Audience at Mosque Maryam in Chicago, Ill. Photo: Richard B. Muhammad

“Why would God give Muhammad a revelation about all of the prophets—many of them—that preceded him and how God dealt with them? The weather, the wind, the rain, the drought, the earthquakes that God used to destroy the wicked in the past—not one of those was fulfilled during the time of Prophet Muhammad,” explained the Minister. “When Prophet Muhammad was teaching the Arabs, none of those kinds of plagues happened, so why would God give him a book telling him about all of the plagues that were used against the wicked in the past and it not happen in his time? It is because he foreshadowed the Muhammad that would be on the scene when all of these calamities would come to pass.”

The people are now being struck by plagues and judgments because they have ignored God’s anointed messenger. This is prophesied, said the Minister. God is trying to get the attention of the governing powers and world rulers by seizing the people with “distress and affliction that they may humble themselves,” he said.

The ruling powers are corrupt, referred to in scripture under such names as “dragon, beast and snake” never upright, and now, America is being judged.

Min. Farrakhan said his controversy with some members of the Jewish community also fulfills prophecy.

During his Feb. 26 Saviours’ Day keynote address, he warned those who heard him to continue to watch the weather, saying this year would be worse than a record for some disasters last year. Within days, a deadly spawn of tornadoes blasted sections of the United States. According to the Weather Channel, the preliminary tornado count for March 2 was 74 and once more storm surveys and estimates were completed, the number was likely to rise. The average number of U.S. tornadoes in March is 87. At Final Call presstime, 38 people reportedly died in the storms.

These are all signs indicating that the end of this world has arrived.

Those who study the Holy Qur’an are reading the words of God talking to Prophet Muhammad telling him what to say, and what to do, said the Minister. In reading the Gospels, Jesus is speaking in parables, and is also telling the people what God said, and what God said to do, he noted.

Crowd applauds Min. Farrakhan’s message.

“The Muhammad of the Holy Qur’an is the Jesus of the Bible!” the Minister stated emphatically. “The Qur’an is the book of Jesus, as well as the book of Muhammad.”

The identity of the Messiah

Minister Farrakhan described the characteristics of Jesus the Messiah, who is not a prophet but represents the end of prophets and the presence of God. You can recognize the Messiah by looking at his actions, said the Minister.

“He opens the eyes of the blind, he makes the deaf hear, he makes the dumb speak, and he raises the dead to life, by God’s permission. Well, he’s not God himself, but by God’s permission, he does these things that only God can do, so when Jesus is working, God is working in and through him,” he said.

It is written in the scriptures that even though Jesus was a Jew, the Jews of that time did not like him. He was not their kind, said Min. Farrakhan. Jesus of 2,000 years ago was controversial, he appeared during the Roman empire, and challenged the elite ruling powers, saying the kingdom of God was coming, their rule was coming to end and they would be replaced. This is exactly what Minister Farrakhan is doing today to the government of America and powerful people.

“They rule in wickedness not in righteousness,” said Min. Farrakhan.

Black people are the Aboriginal people of the Earth, the father and mother of all humanity. When Black people read of Adam in the book of Genesis, this is referring to White people, Min. Farrakhan said. Black people are the “pre-Adamites.”

“Adam is the new man that was given power and authority to rule, but the rule was limited to 6,000 years, so you can’t blame Caucasian people when they have this feeling that ‘I’m the boss’ whenever you are in their company,” said the Minister. “That’s why the Bible says God gave him dominion, power, and authority over the fowl of the air, the fish of the see and every creeping thing that crawls, and White people have exercised that dominion, that authority while you slept.”

The presence of truth in the Teachings of the Most Honorable Elijah Muhammad through the voice of Minister Farrakhan is now waking up the true rulers so they can take their rightful place. The majestic pyramids and the sphinx are signs of a great past and future, said Min. Farrakhan. Black people are the symbolic carcass, the remains of a once great people, he added.

“Anybody can rule somebody that’s sleep, the question is, can you rule us when we are wide awake?” asked the Minister. “You (Black people) are the father of it all but you’ve been asleep to who you are!”

Ever since the fall of the Original people, man has always desired to come back to their original position with God, he explained. The scriptures prophesy of a Son of Man born of and rising out of the people to deliver them from their suffering, and facilitate their rise, Min. Farrakhan said.

“When they cry out to rise, out of the womb of the Black nation, a son would be born to change their reality, that’s why Isaiah the prophet says for unto us a child is born, a son is given and a government shall be upon his shoulders and he shall be called wonderful, counselor, the mighty God, the prince of peace, the everlasting father and of the increase of his government of peace there shall be no end. Well who is that talking about? Jesus did not have a government on his shoulders; he came talking about a government!”

Audience at Mosque Maryam in Chicago, Ill. Photos: Timothy 6X

The Minister also pointed out that only Black people in America fulfill Genesis 15:13 which reads, “God said to Abram, ‘Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years; And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance.’”

“What we have suffered goes beyond what any human being has been asked to suffer, so God is duty bound to deliver us like He delivered those before us. That is His pattern and His pattern does not change,” said Minister Farrakhan.

When looking at the students of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, a man who never made it to the fourth grade, there is a pattern of great men who impacted the world, observed Min. Farrakhan. Malcolm X only went to the eighth grade and confounded scientists with what he learned. Cassius Clay, now known as Muhammad Ali, was a high school graduate and the late Imam W.D. Mohammed never went to college. Minister Farrakhan only finished three years of college. This is a testament to the wisdom delivered from Master Fard Muhammad to and through the Hon. Elijah Muhammad.

“Elijah Muhammad, he is more than a messenger,” he said.

Elijah Muhammad lives

The Minister discussed his struggle after hearing along with the rest of the Nation of Islam that the Hon. Elijah Muhammad died in 1975.

“In 1975 Elijah Muhammad departed from us. By 1977 I decided to rebuild the work of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad,” said the Minister. “So I meet my brother, Jabril, and we were in Hollywood … he and I walked for about three hours.”

The Minister was referring to his longtime brother and companion, Nation of Islam theologian and religious scholar Jabril Muhammad. When the two arrived back to the hotel, following their walk and talk, Jabril Muhammad gave him a book he had written. The Minister took the book back to his hotel room and began to read it.

The Minister said Brother Jabril came to check on him after one day, saw the Minister was still reading it, and he left him alone to continue to deal with the text.

“But on the third day,” Min. Farrakhan continued. “After three days, he (Jabril Muhammad) came back in that room and I said to him, ‘Brother, your eye operation has been successful, the scales have been removed from my eyes.’ ”

Min. Farrakhan added, “I went to work that very night teaching. It was as though I had not lost a step.”

During one of their discussions, Minister Farrakhan said Jabril Muhammad, referring to the Hon. Elijah Muhammad said, “you know brother, he’s not dead.”

“In my mind I said, ‘Poor brother, he loves the Honorable Elijah Muhammad so much he can’t even bear the thought that his leader is dead.’ So I looked at him and said, ‘Well brother, he’s not here, so the job is on us to do.’ ”

The Minister continued to work, but later in 1980, he came to the realization that the Honorable Elijah Muhammad was in fact physically alive.

“I haven’t been the same since,” said Min. Farrakhan. “Because everything that Elijah Muhammad said to me made sense. It would not make sense if he were dead, it could only make since if he’s alive and all the things he told me about myself and my future didn’t make sense if he was dead. But when I came to see that he was alive, Saviours’ Day 1981, I mentioned it.”

He recalled how his son Joshua was on post at the hospital, and was the one to inform him that the Hon. Elijah Muhammad had passed, but many of the words spoken to him by the Hon. Elijah Muhammad about death plots and his future, became clearer as time went on.

“He (Joshua) said he saw this huge cloud come over the hospital. Black. Real dark. Now, I don’t know how he (Elijah Muhammad) got out, but I’m about to find out. Before he left he said to me, ‘Brother, if Allah can’t save me, that’s a sign that he can’t save you.’ ”

Elijah Muhammad is now in an exalted state of power at the right hand of God, he said.

“This man from your ranks—from Georgia—I like that! That a man from Georgia who witnessed the worst type of oppression is given the power now to deal with wind, rain, snow, hail and earthquakes. I’m talking about a Black man from us who has been made into a God!” said Min. Farrakhan.