Mandarin church touts controversial Alabama Senate candidate
JACKSONVILLE, Fla.- A Mandarin church is once again drawing attention for their signs in front of the building.

The First Conservative Baptist Church on Old St. Augustine Road has "God bless Judge Roy Moore. Give him the victory." on the sign in front of their church.

Moore is the Alabama Republican Senate candidate who has been accused of inappropriate sexual behavior with more than half a dozen women who were underage at the time, including at least one who has accused of forcing himself on her when she was 14 years old and he was 32, according to the Washington Post.

First Coast News has reached out to the Pastor Gene Youngblood at the church, who asked our crews to leave and called us "fake news".

First Conservative Baptist Church has this message out front. We reached out to the Pastor but he responded by calling us “fake news”. pic.twitter.com/cFl0rJGjDw — Shelby Danielsen (@NewsShelby) November 30, 2017

First Conservative Baptist Church has this message out front. We reached out to the Pastor but he responded by calling us “fake news”. pic.twitter.com/cFl0rJGjDw — Shelby Danielsen (@NewsShelby) November 30, 2017

Neighbors who spoke off-camera tell First Coast News that they feel the messages are "inappropriate". Some nearby churches think the message is only there for attention.

Eric Spurling who lives near the church and identifies as Christian said, "It's stuff that is not taught in the Christian doctrine at all, stuff that is re-worded to fit their agenda and all I can say is I will be praying for them as well."

Spurling said he believes the church does not promote the "true Christian teaching."

"It would be one thing if he prayed for his [Moore's] victims and their families, what they went through and were tormented with for all these years, and things like that, but to support him, I mean, wow, just wow," said Spurling.

This is not the first time the same sign has made headlines at the church. In 2015, the church had a message that read "Homosexuality is a sin choice. It does not trump my bill of rights.". In 2012, the sign promoted replacing then President Obama saying "Pray for our president to be replaced."

The same sign on the church in 2015 PHOTO: Mike Bunker, First Coast News

An online petition has cropped up to take away the church's tax exempt status for supporting a politician.