Limiting Lead in Lipstick and Other Cosmetics
<< Lead in Cosmetics Main Page

As a part of FDA’s overall mission to protect public health, the agency undertook a project to determine levels of lead in lipstick and in a variety of other cosmetics.

Lead occurs naturally in the environment, and its occurrence, as an impurity, in cosmetic products can’t be avoided. FDA has taken action whenever necessary to remove products from the market that contain lead at unsafe levels.

In December 2016, FDA issued draft guidance to industry on lead as an impurity in cosmetic lip products, such as lipsticks, and other cosmetics, such as eye shadows, blushes, compact powders, shampoos, and body lotions. Our guidance recommends a maximum level of lead in cosmetic products.

How FDA Tested Lipsticks and Other Cosmetics for Lead

In October 2007, the Campaign for Safe Cosmetics (CSC) reported finding lead in a small selection of lipsticks on the market. We decided to follow up with our own assessment of lead levels in lipsticks.

In addition, as part of our ongoing efforts to monitor cosmetics on the market, we also looked at lead levels in several externally applied cosmetics, including eye shadows, blushes, lotions, mascaras, foundations, body powders, compact powders, shaving creams, and face paints.

FDA scientists developed and validated a new method for analyzing lead in lipsticks, and used this method to find the lead content in several hundred cosmetic lip products on the U.S. market, including 20 from CSC’s report that were still available. We used a more common extraction method to find the lead content in additional cosmetic lip products. We used both of these methods to find the lead content in a total of 685 cosmetics on the U.S. market.

More than 99 percent of the cosmetics we surveyed contained less than 10 ppm lead. Based on our surveys we determined that manufacturers are capable of limiting lead content in cosmetic products to 10 ppm or less if they are careful about selecting their ingredients and follow good manufacturing practices.

For results of our surveys, see—

How FDA Determined That Up to 10 ppm Lead in These Products Would Not Pose a Health Risk

Exposure to lead from lipstick is mainly by swallowing, such as after a consumer licks her lips, so we used the same approach for cosmetic lip products that we use to estimate exposure to lead from food. We determined that exposure to 10 ppm lead from incidental ingestion of cosmetic lip products is very small and cannot be measured in routine blood testing.

Exposure to lead from other cosmetics is by absorption through the skin, but the amount absorbed is very small. This means that exposure to lead from a product such as eye shadow or body lotion is even lower than exposure to lead from a lipstick or other lip cosmetic, and also cannot be measured in routine blood testing.

Based on these factors, we concluded that up to 10 ppm lead in cosmetic lip products and externally applied cosmetics would not pose a health risk.

FDA’s Draft Guidance for Industry on Lead in Cosmetic Lip Products and Externally Applied Cosmetics

FDA has issued draft guidance to industry recommending that cosmetic lip products and externally applied cosmetics not contain more than 10 ppm lead as an impurity.

Although most cosmetics on the market in the United States generally already contain less than 10 ppm of lead, a small number contained higher amounts, and we are aware that some cosmetics from other countries contain lead at higher levels. This makes guidance on recommended maximum lead levels all the more important as more products are imported into this country.

You can comment on FDA guidance documents at any time. But to make sure FDA has time to consider your comments before the draft guidance becomes final, you should submit your comments within 60 days of its publication.

To learn more, including how to submit comments on the guidance, see “Draft Guidance for Industry: Lead in Cosmetic Lip Products and Externally Applied Cosmetics: Recommended Maximum Level.”

Background on How Cosmetics and Color Additives Are Regulated

The law doesn’t require cosmetic products or ingredients, other than color additives, to have FDA approval before they go on the market, and it doesn’t require cosmetic firms to share their safety data with the agency. Cosmetics must be properly labeled and safe when used according to their directions or when used in the customary or expected way.

FDA monitors the safety of cosmetics on the market, and we can take action against cosmetics that don’t comply with the law.

Unlike other cosmetic ingredients, color additives must have FDA approval for their intended use, and most color additives have limits for lead as an impurity. When we consider approving a color additive, we look at information such as how the color additive will be used, amounts consumers will be exposed to, and whether the color additive will be safe for its intended use.

In addition, some color additives may be used only if they are from batches certified by FDA. This includes testing each batch for lead. FDA regulations usually limit lead as an impurity in color additives to no more than 10 or 20 ppm. However, because color additives are used in such small amounts to achieve their intended effects, these levels of lead are unlikely to pose a health risk.

Related Resources

Data Tables