Food Allergy Research & Education
15 Results for kellogg's

...Channel Ingredient Notices News Channel Description Title October 2015: Kellogg's Special K Flatbread Sandwiches Now Contain Soy Publication Date 10/13/2015 8:57:00 PM UTC

...Famous Amos® Double Chocolate Chip cookies * Famous Amos® Chocolate Chip Pecan cookies * Kellogg's® Special K® Mini Brownies Blondie * Kellogg's® Special K® Mini Brownies Fudge * Mother’s®

... Description Kellogg Company would like you to know that Kellogg's FiberPlus® Berry Yogurt Crunch cereal will now include peanut, almond, pecan and walnut ingredients and may contain other tree nu

... Description UPDATE FROM THE KELLOGG COMPANY (4/19/2016) Dear Parents, Several weeks ago, we let you know that we would be updating the allergen labels on some of our Keebler and Austin Sandwich

...Channel Ingredient Notices News Channel Description Title May 2014: Kellogg's® Rice Krispies Treats® flavor addition Publication Date 5/20/2014 1:58:00 PM UTC

... Description The Kellogg Company would like you to know that starting in July, 2014; Keebler will be changing the allergen statement on two flavors of cookies under the Keebler® label. The flavor

... Description The Kellogg Company would like you to know that starting in April, 2016; Keebler will be changing the allergen statement on four flavors of sandwich crackers under the Keebler® label.

... Description The Kellogg Company would like you to know that starting in May, 2013, Pop-Tarts will launch two new flavors of toaster pastries under the Pop-Tarts Gone Nutty!™ label. The flavors, P

... Description The Kellogg Company would like you to know that starting in May, 2014, Mother’s will be changing the allergen statement on four flavors of cookies under the Mother’s® label. The flav

... Description The Kellogg Company would like you to know that starting in April, 2015; Austin will be adding milk ingredients to the ingredient statement and milk to the allergen statement on three

... Description The Kellogg Company would like you to know that starting in July 2015, Jack’s cookies and Jackson's cookies will be adding milk ingredients to the ingredient statement and milk to the

... Description The Kellogg Company would like you to know that starting in February, 2015; Murray will be adding milk ingredients to the ingredient statement and milk to the allergen statement on si

... Description Kellogg Company is voluntarily recalling certain graham crumbs because they were made using Grain Craft flour which may have contained undeclared allergen peanut residue. To date, the

... Description Tippin’s Gourmet Pies, LLC today is voluntarily recalling select Key Lime Pies because they may contain flour with undeclared peanut residue. Tippin’s initiated the recall after we be