Will We Rid Ourselves of This Pollution?
The probable presidential candidacy of New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg will blast apart whatever credibility is left of our idiotic campaign financing laws, with their tax-code-like complexity. The time has come to junk the whole corrupting apparatus and let everyone give as much as they want to whomever they want, as long as the information is posted promptly on the Internet. That way candidates, if they're able to get some sizable donations, can spend more time campaigning instead of fundraising.

In 1968, for instance, a handful of wealthy donors who wanted to end the Vietnam War bankrolled the candidacy of an obscure senator, Eugene McCarthy, against incumbent President Lyndon Baines Johnson. McCarthy knocked Johnson out of the race. But under today's rules a McCarthy-like insurgency would be impossible; with the $2,300 cap on individual contributions, such a candidate would never be able to get the money necessary to assault a seemingly entrenched incumbent.

Bloomberg will spend upward of $1 billion to support his independent bid. Already most of the major Democratic and Republican presidential candidates have announced they will forgo federal funding for the primaries and instead rely entirely on private contributions. Even campaign finance reform scourge John McCain is opting out.

Why? To get around federal restrictions on how much a candidate can spend in each state. The money needed to compete effectively in the first two contests, Iowa and New Hampshire, greatly exceeds the caps. In previous campaigns, for instance, candidates sent their staffs to motels in Massachusetts so their lodgings wouldn't be charged against the New Hampshire limit. Moreover, the limits on what a candidate can spend overall are now unrealistically low for a national presidential campaign.

Current rules are so complex that campaigns have entire staffs working to ensure compliance. One example of how stupid the rules have become: If you charter a plane, you must pay for the flight in advance. If you pay afterward, you're in violation of federal law and will be fined accordingly. Yet with other vendors you are free to pay after you receive the product or service. Why such an arbitrary rule? Who knows?

Another example: When I ran for the GOP presidential nomination in 1996, the Federal Election Commission sued me and my campaign because I continued to write my Fact and Comment editorials. I never mentioned my candidacy in them or touched on any campaign issues. But the FEC alleged that I was receiving an illegal in-kind contribution from FORBES magazine. I refused to pay even a nominal fine and ultimately beat the bureaucrats. Needless to say, though, the effort took time and plenty of money.

Current laws have also led to a plague of independent committees that run attack ads against candidates. Nobody knows who actually writes the checks. Thus there is less transparency and accountability than ever. The rules have increased the clout of special interest groups that know how to get their members to write checks to a candidate.

The changes in the schedule of the primaries next year lends urgency to genuine reform. California, New York and a host of other states will have primaries on Feb. 5. Even if a low-budget candidate does well in Iowa and New Hampshire, he will have a difficult time raising the tens of millions of dollars needed to compete effectively in such large states, since those simultaneous contests come so soon after the first two.

Gas Bags

Politicians, especially democrats, love to beat up on Big Oil these days. Company executives are routinely caricatured as price-manipulating, environment-hating villains who are enriching themselves obscenely at the country's and the world's expense.

Yet for all the hand-wringing over our overseas oil dependence--this essential commodity is disproportionately found in the world's toughest neighborhoods--Washington's responses have been bizarre, almost comic. Meaningful measures are left undone or substantially watered down. And most of the measures actually taken will do little good, if not outright harm.

Look at the chart: 95% of the world's known oil and gas reserves are controlled by national oil companies, not private entities such as Chevron , BP , ConocoPhillips and ExxonMobil . All too many of these government entities are woefully underinvesting in their golden geese. In contrast, stockholder-owned companies have been ramping up capital expenditures. Chevron, for instance, has more than doubled annual outlays, from $8.3 billion three years ago to approximately $19.6 billion this year. True, earnings have soared. But, unlike much of the rest of corporate America today, oil companies are spending heavily to expand instead of clutching their cash or primarily engaging in buybacks of their shares.









1GOCs—A: Saudi Aramco B: NIOC (Iran) C: Qatar Petroleum D: ADNOC (UAE) E: Iraq NOC F: Gazprom (Russia) G: KPC (Kuwait) H: PDVSA (Venezuela) I: NNPC (Nigeria) J: NOC (Libya) K: Sonatrach (Algeria) L: Rosneft (Russia) M: Petronas (Malaysia) O: Lukoil (Russia) P: Pemex (Mexico) Q: Petrochina (China) T: Petrobras (Brazil) Y: ONGC (India) Z: Sinopec (China). 2IOCs—N: ExxonMobil R: BP S: Chevron U: Royal Dutch Shell V: Total W: ConocoPhillips X: ENI. Source: Credit Suisse First Boston.











Yet the leaders of the Democrat-controlled Congress are intent on levying new taxes. They want to bar oil companies from being eligible for the tax reduction enacted to benefit manufacturers: a cut in the corporate profits tax from 35% (just about the world's highest) to 32%. Companies drilling in the Gulf of Mexico are being browbeaten into paying royalties to Washington that weren't part of their original agreements with the feds when the leases were bought in the 1990s. These and other punitive measures blissfully ignore the lessons learned in the 1970s and 1980s, when Washington monetarily harassed the oil industry: Investment plummeted. We are now more dependent on imported oil than ever.

Other boneheaded congressional moves:

It refuses to open up the vast oil- and natural gas-rich Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) for exploration and drilling. Politicos fan fears that offshore drilling will lead to oil spills, desecrating America's shorelines. They ignore the fact that today's technology is eons more advanced than that of the 1960s, when we experienced the notorious Santa Barbara blowout. Companies can now drill 10,000 feet to 11,000 feet underwater with remarkable safety, compared with far riskier drilling at several hundred feet four decades ago. Hurricane Katrina and other storms in 2005 blew away offshore drilling platforms--and there were no spills to speak of. Britain, Norway and the Netherlands permit vigorous offshore drilling programs, and no one would accuse those countries--or the rest of Europe--of being environmentally insensitive. To give states a fair shake, the White House has proposed that they share in the royalties generated by offshore activities; Washington won't hog all the money. Yet Congress has enacted no meaningful steps to remove the ban against most offshore drilling, despite the almost certain prospect in years ahead that the OCS would substantially boost our domestic oil and natural gas output. Even the proposal by Chevron's CEO David J. O'Reilly that the Minerals Management Service conduct a thorough geophysical survey of the OCS--which would tell us which areas are likely to be oil/gas rich and which are not--has been stymied by the Democrats. The Gulf of Mexico--Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama have no offshore drilling hang-ups--has already proved to be a treasure trove. Recent exploration in a new area revealed estimated oil and gas reserves of 3 billion to 15 billion barrels.

And, of course, allowing environmentally sound exploration in the oil/gas-rich Arctic National Wildlife Refuge--as ugly an area, esthetically, as one can find in Alaska and amounting to 2,000 acres in a refuge of 19 million acres--remains a nonstarter.

Washington also refuses to apply the Constitution's interstate commerce clause to the production of gasoline. U.S. refineries were originally built to produce three grades of gasoline. But numerous states today have their own variations on how oil is to be distilled into gasoline, as well as a raft of new requirements for various biofuels. All this micromanaging is highly inefficient, disrupting the production of gasoline (especially in the summer) and substantially raising its price.