Jon Huntsman On Giving Away $1.2 Billion
In 1992 Jon Huntsman Sr. returned from a checkup with a bad diagnosis. He had prostate cancer. On the way to the hospital for treatment he made three stops. First he dropped by a homeless shelter and left a check for $1 million. Then the chemicals mogul stopped at a soup kitchen and handed over another check for $1 million. "The priest almost fainted," he says. And finally, he dropped off a check for $500,000 at the clinic that had found the malignancy.

Call him superstitious, impulsive or just generous--Huntsman has always given more with his heart and less with his head. But given he has. Of the more than 1,200 living billionaires in the world, he's one of only 19 who have donated at least $1 billion.

In early May Huntsman, 73, returned from a meeting in Tucson with Bill Gates, Warren Buffett and others who have pledged in writing to give away at least half of their fortunes. His take was that his peers need to step it up. "It becomes a game to see how much you can accumulate," Huntsman says. "They never have the joy of seeing the thankful tears of a cancer patient or seeing a kid go to college."

Huntsman has so far given away $1.2 billion during his lifetime. Donations to his cancer foundation knocked him off The Forbes 400 list last year. But a run-up in his company stock should put his net worth near $1 billion again this year. He says he plans to give it all away before he dies.

Huntsman had an abusive father and a hardscrabble upbringing in rural Idaho. But his family emphasized giving. When he was a lieutenant in the Navy in 1960 he would take $50 out of his $320 monthly paycheck and give it to Navy Relief to help veterans' families. That was in addition to the $32 he tithed to the Mormon Church. "The time to give away money is when you make it," he says.

As his chemicals company, which pioneered markets for foam packaging, got bigger, Huntsman's capacity for giving did as well. In 1989, when he first made The Forbes 400 with a net worth of $450 million, he says he was donating $30 million to $40 million a year.

After six years of scattershot giving Huntsman decided to focus. Cancer was an obvious cause. He's had four bouts of it, his parents both died of cancer, and the University of Utah was willing to partner with him to create the Huntsman Cancer Institute on its medical campus. So far he's put $400 million into building a hospital there. He even borrowed from Chase to meet the cancer center obligation when soaring energy prices almost put Huntsman's company into bankruptcy in 2001 and 2002. In 2007 Huntsman sold the company, which had recovered, to fellow billionaire Leon Black's Apollo Group for $6.5 billion. When the private equity firm tried to renege, Huntsman sued and recovered $2.7 billion.

Since then the company has grown to $9 billion in revenue. Huntsman branched into education, building a new home for the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, which had given him a scholarship as an undergraduate. In 2007 he gave $26 million to Utah State University's business school. He's also funded 1,500 college scholarships.

Meanwhile, the family's profile grew. Huntsman's eldest son, Jon Huntsman Jr., served as governor of Utah, then U.S. Ambassador to China and is now considering a run for President. In 2009 Warren Buffett invited Huntsman to sign the Giving Pledge. Huntsman replied: "You don't have the formula right. It should be 80%. Why should someone who has $5 billion only give away $2.5 billion? They can't take it with them."

Special Offer: Free Trial Issue of Forbes