International Society for Fluoride Research Inc.
FLUORIDE: Quarterly Journal of the International Society for Fluoride Research Inc. (ISFR)

Information for authors

FLUORIDE IS AVAILABLE FREE ONLINE TO INDIVIDUAL USERS, IN FULL TEXT WITHOUT AN EMBARGO PERIOD. However, the copyright for the articles is held by the ISFR. Authors are allowed to read, download, copy, distribute, print, search, link to the full text, and use them for any other lawful purpose without asking prior permission from the publisher, the ISFR, provided acknowledgement is given that the article was first published in Fluoride.

NO AUTHOR, INSTITUTIONAL, OR ARTICLE PROCESSING CHARGES. The making of multiple copies of articles by institutions is allowed by Reproduction Rights Organizations (RROs) in many countries including New Zealand (Copyright Licensing New Zealand), Australia (Copyright Agency Limited), Canada (Access Canada), France (Centre Francais d'exploitation), Hong Kong (Hong Kong Reproduction Rights), Ireland (Irish Copyright Licensing Agency), Japan (Japan Academic Association for Copyright Clearance), South Africa (DALRO South Africa), United Kingdom (Copyright Licensing Agency), and the United States of America (Copyright Clearance Center). In return for this assignment of copyright to the ISFR and the accompanying income stream from the RROs, NO AUTHOR, INSTITUTIONAL, OR ARTICLE PROCESSING CHARGES ARE MADE. A printer's quality pdf of articles is available for download on the website and five free offprints of articles are supplied to authors. Articles should be written in Word and submitted by E-mail to the nearest Regional Editor. The Regional Editor will arrange for single blind peer review, usually with two reviewers, in which the peer reviewer knows the names of the authors but not vice versa.

SAVING COPIES IN INSTITUTIONAL REPOSITORIES. Institutions can preserve a second copy of articles published by their researchers in an institutional repository. Application has been made for registering Fluoride as a deposit with Sherpa, University of Nottingham, UK.

SCOPE AND FOCUS OF FLUORIDE Fluoride publishes peer-reviewed scientific reports on agricultural, analytical, biochemical, biological, chemical, clinical, dental, ecological, environmental, industrial, medical, metabolic, pharmacological, synergistic, toxicological, and veterinary aspects of inorganic and organic fluorides. The journal does not contain advertising.

PEER REVIEW. Papers are normally reviewed by two peer reviewers on a single blind basis in which the peer reviewer knows the identity of the authors but not vice versa.

SUBMITTING MANUSCRIPTS TO FLUORIDE GUIDELINES FOR AUTHORS REVISED JANUARY-MARCH 2015 Manuscripts, including reports of original research, papers presented at ISFR conferences, research reviews, discussion papers, and letters to the editor, are accepted for publication after appropriate evaluation and recommendation by qualified reviewers. The initial version of the manuscript, double-spaced throughout with wide margins, should be submitted, as a Word attachment by E-mail, to the nearest Regional Editor. The E-mail addresses for these editors are given below and in the masthead of the Table of Contents on page i of each issue. Detailed instructions for preparing papers are at www.fluorideresearch.online and in Fluoride 2013;46(1):40-8. These instructions should be followed meticulously to avoid publication delays. The Editorial Officers of Fluoride strongly support the maintenance of the highest standards of animal care and the control of discomforts to animals in research. Authors must indicate whether their institutional and national guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals were followed. When reporting experiments on human subjects, authors should indicate whether the procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1964, as revised in 2013, available from http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/ 10policies/b3/index.html. Fluoride follows the recommendations of the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE), and their Recommendations for the conduct, reporting, editing, and publication of scholarly work in medical journals, updated December 2016, and the ICMJE form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest are available from: www.icmje.org. The recommendations describe author responsibilities for conflicts of interest, human and animal rights, informed consent, and ethical policies. The ICMJE conflict of interest disclosure form should be downloaded, completed electronically by each author, and then submitted to Fluoride with the manuscript. Authors should state if the ICMJE recommendations have been followed. The Editorial Officers of Fluoride recommend that authors study the information for authors on ethical responsibilities and scientific misconduct published by Elsevier and available at www.elsevier.com/ethics. The material covers the areas of duplicate submission, research fraud including fabrication (making up research data) and falsification (manipulation of existing research data, tables, or images), plagiarism (passing off anothers work or idea as your own), authorship disputes (deliberately misrepresenting a scientists relationship to their work on a published paper), conflict of interest (nondisclosure to the publication that you have a direct or indirect conflict that prevents you from being unbiased in your paper), salami slicing (the slicing of research that would form one meaningful paper into several different papers), and the improper use of humans or animals in research including absent or inadequate informed consent of human subjects, or maltreatment of laboratory animals, with articles available in English, Spanish, Chinese, and Japanese. For observational studies in epidemiology, authors might consider using the guidelines in the STROBE statement available from: http://journals.lww.com/ epidem/pages/ articleviewer.aspx?year=2007&issue=11000&article=00027&type=abstract

Authors should send papers to the nearest regional editor for their area. The regional editors are:

Regional Editor for Africa:

Professor Eli Dahi, Denmark (previously Ngongongare, Tanzania); E-mail: elidahi@hotmail.com

Regional Editor for Eastern Europe:

Professor Dariusz Chlubek, Pomeranian Medical University, Poland. E-mail: dchlubek@sci.pum.edu.pl

Regional Editors for India, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, and Sri Lanka:

For papers on all aspects of fluoride: Dr Shanti Lal Choubisa. Emeritus Professor of Biotechnology, Department of Advanced Science & Technology, Nims University, Rajasthan, Jaipur-303121, India. E-mail: choubisasl@yahoo.com

For public health based papers: Professor Vikas Desai. E-mail: psmvikas@hotmail.com

Regional Editor for Latin America, including Mexico, Central America, and Cuba:

Dr Alfredo Rigalli, Rosario, Argentina; E-mail: arigalli@unr.edu.ar and arigalli@conicet.gov.ar

Regional Editor for the Middle East:

Assistant Professor Amir Hossein Mahvi, Department of Environmental Health Engineering, School of Public Health and Institute for Environmental Research, Tehran University of Medical Sciences (TUMS), Tehran, Iran. E-mail: ahmahvi@yahoo.com

Regional Editor for Pakistan and Afghanistan:

Dr Muhammad Nauman Ahmad, Department of Agricultural Chemistry, The University of Agriculture, Peshawar, Pakistan. E-mail: drnumanahmad@aup.edu.pk

Regional Editors for People's Republic of China

Prof. Yanhui Gao, Director of the Institute for Endemic Fluoride Control, Center for Endemic Disease Control, China CDC. E-mail: gaoyh411@163.com

Professor Zhi-Zhong Guan, Department of Pathology and Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Guiyang Medical University, Guiyang, PR China. E-mail: zhizhongguan@yahoo.com

Searching all the issues of Fluoride since 1968

To search this site, (including PDF documents) for an author or subject enter the key words in the white box on the left below and then click the search button on the right:

Loading

Accessing all the issues of Fluoride since 1968 in full text

Accessing the last thirteen issues of Fluoride: October-December 2016; 49(4 Pt 1) and 49(4 Pt 2), January-March 2017;50(1 Pt1) and 50(1 Pt 2), April-June 2017;50(2), July-September 2017;50(3), October-December 2017;50(4), January-March 2018;51(1), April-June 2018;51(2), July-September 2018;51(3), October-December 2018;51(4), January 2019;52(1), and April 2019;52(2).

Accessing Fluoride from the People's Republic of China. Recently, it appears that it has not been possible to open some links. I have made some adjustments to remedy this problem but if it is not possible to open a particular link please contact me to look into the matter. Bruce Spittle.

Epublications ahead of print

Report on the XXXIVth Conference of the International Society for Fluoride Research, Guiyang, People's Republic of China, October 18-20, 2018

Website for the XXXIVth Conference of the International Society for Fluoride Research, Guiyang, People's Republic of China, October 18-20, 2018

General information on the ISFR and subscribing to Fluoride in hardcopy

The Society is an independent non-profit organization which promotes the sharing of scientific research on all aspects of inorganic and organic fluorides by hosting international conferences on fluoride research and publishing quarterly, online (ISSN2253-4083) and in print (ISSN 0015-4725) , the open access journal Fluoride: Quarterly Journal of the International Society for Fluoride Research Inc.

Click the links below to open the related webpage or PDF file. PDF links open in new page or tab.