Pope Francis, Scientist
The Vatican's reputation with science isn't a good one, due largely to the well-known story of Galileo's prosecution for his views on astronomy. (Also, for his penchant of openly mocking powerful clergy.) That's pretty unfair, though, because for most of its history, the Roman Catholic Church has been an avid supporter of science, and many Catholics priests and monks have also been scientists. Gregor Mendel, the father of Genetics, was an Augstinian Friar. Georges Lemaitre, who developed much of the Big Bang Theory, was a Jesuit priest.

Accordingly, it was interesting to me to the newest Pope, Pope Francis, isn't just a cleric. He's also a scientist.

Or at least, he was. When Jorge Mario Bergoglio was a young man, he graduated from technical school as a Chemical Technician. He then earned his Masters Degree in chemistry from the University of Buenos Aires. It was only after that that he decided to become a priest.

From the numerous profiles that I've read of the new Pope, it doesn't appear that he pursued the sciences after becoming a priest. Still, it's encouraging to know that he has that background. That's because that knowledge of science will help face many of the challenges facing the Church - many of which have to do with the new ethical terrain that has to be traveled in the wake of new technologies and discoveries.

Another aspect of being a scientist that I think is important for the Pope is that one of the great virtues of the sciences is humility. Being a scientist means that you have to embrace the fact that you don't know everything. That you need to be constantly searching for the truth. It's hard to stay humble as Pope in the extravagant confines of the Vatican. But from all accounts, the new Pope has humility in spades. He lived in an apartment rather than the Archbishop's palace. He traveled by bus rather than chauffeured limousine. Humility makes one open to change - and change is something that the Church desperately needs now.

And it's also worth noting that the new Pope took his name in honor of the great Saint Francis of Assisi. Saint Francis of Assisi is the patron saint of animals and the environment. In his life, he was described as being so peaceful that animals would flock to him. Paintings and statues of him show birds and butterflies resting in his arms. So if Pope Francis wishes to honor that Saint's legacy as a friend of nature in an era where risks to the environment are plentiful, a knowledge of chemistry will come in handy.

Correction and update (6/5/2015): I've spent about a week digging into the question of whether Pope Francis has a Master's Degree in Chemistry, something that was widely reported in profiles at the time of his election. The earliest account of the Pope having a Master's dates back to 2005 when he was widely considered to be a frontrunner for Pope to succeed John Paul II. However, after reading through numerous profiles of him before 2005, I have not been able to find any reference to him receiving one. For one, it's an impossibility - the University of Buenos Aires didn't offer one at the time. They did offer a degree that might be considered an equivalent, but it does not appear that Pope Francis pursued it.

As best as I can tell for the moment, Pope Francis' formal scientific education did not proceed beyond his Chemical Technician training. I do think, however, that in the time since writing this article, Pope Francis has shown some of the virtues that come from scientific training highlighted here.