Luxottica Sees Itself As King, Raising Questions About Brand Authenticity
Are we being robbed blind? Whether you plan to worship the sun or can’t find the door without them, you’ll likely need to fork out over $350 for luxury eyewear - a price that’s framed through one lens of an $8.5 billion public company majestically shielded in the mountains of Italy. Eyewear was invented in Italy around 1284. Today more than 80% of major eyewear brands, including the world’s No. 1 seller, Ray-Ban, are designed and retailed (over 7,000 stores US alone) by Luxottica, raising questions about brand authenticity, price and customer choice.

Products exist in the mind and brands live in the heart: Luxury brands conjure up lifestyle interpretations we want to buy into. More than 500 million people don Luxottica’s products and CEO Andrea Guerra insists that “customers have the brand choice for their lifestyle,” and that it’s prevalent in their offering: "Luxottica has been able to deliver eyewear collections faster, enriched with more sophisticated decorations and innovative materials, to stores.” If you owned 80% of the high-end eyewear market and were doing what any CMO desires – achieving brand growth, relevance and revenue--you'd say that too, right?

That may be the "business" of brands, but if the product itself has had zero design input from the name on the frame, what of authenticity and brand promise? Recently the Economist quoted Rodney Collins, a director at advertising agency McCann, saying, “above all else brands must appear to be ‘authentic' if they want to succeed.”

“Appear” is the crux of the issue: Authentic brands truly live and breathe their story; it’s reflected in their core purpose of who they are, what they stand for and why we believe. We trust their story because we experience it through the product and brand narrative. Many of us assume that it’s highly unlikely the name on the frame designed the product - teams of gifted designers design them, but Luxottica have their own designers translating their brand sense into successful eyewear designs.

Eyewear is a fashion purchase that doesn’t bust the bank. If consumers knew, however, would they feel that Luxottica had a monopoly? Their empire straddles house brands--Persol, Ray-Ban and Oakley--and licensed brands including Chanel , Prada and Versace. Given their premium pricing, are these brands presenting who they really are, what they really believe or stand for? If the customer identifies with a luxury lifestyle brand and connects with its values that guide her behaviors and standards, does that make it an authentic luxury brand? Perhaps the principles of luxury marketing can provide guides:

Luxury brands are elevated to a higher standard - that perception is paramount. Protecting

it affords Luxottica a very strong margin, along with the ability to focus on flexibility and efficiency, delivering the products that will reflect positively into future shareholder value.

it affords Luxottica a very strong margin, along with the ability to focus on flexibility and efficiency, delivering the products that will reflect positively into future shareholder value. In luxury, less is more. Brand equity is preserved by controlling unit sales and by owning retail. Luxottica achieves that and simultaneously has decreased time to market for new designs by 44%; its revenues were up 15% this summer.

Brand equity is the metric. Luxottica has played a superlative role enhancing partner brands by extending their franchise into eyewear: a category that’s estimated to be nearly $2 billion in the US, according to ABC News.

Sub-luxury association with the brand dilutes brand equity--clearly making the case for Luxottica being a best-kept secret. As management guru Peter Drucker pointed out in his Power 5 theory, supplier power can deplete standout and competitiveness.

If it’s been done before, don’t do it. Like running a monopoly, but knowing and doing are two different things, and this category has clearly not been tough to have a monopoly on.

Detail is a key differentiator for authentic luxury brands and Luxottica has promised more sophisticated decorations and innovative materials.

Luxury brands are "seen" by the company they keep. If the public acknowledged that virtually all high-end eyewear is designed and manufactured by one firm it would likely destroy franchise value and erode the "authentic" brand message to consumers.

Don’t look where you don’t want to go. Luxury brands align goals and rewards with luxury principles, revealed in Luxottica’s exponential growth and bolstered share price performance.

If these are the hallmarks of authentic luxury brands, theoretically Luxottica accomplished it with a determination, self-confidence and degree of success that deserves bright lights, but is the logo on the side enough?

CMOs know they’re tasked to build lasting relationships, so they must understand and deliver real value to empowered customers. People wear eyewear up to 14 hours a day, representing a tiny piece of terrific real estate for a brand to live! Especially luxury where the brand idea as opposed to the product is the foundation of perceived brand value. At its core, authenticity to most of us is about being legitimate: being true to who we are and our addiction to do what we do best. Alter that incorrectly or allow your rhetoric to step out of alignment with customers’ actual experiences, and you’ll end up in rude financial health.

Luxottica's business model is clearly good for business– it's booming, and so is the trend for luxury, reflected in Luxottica’s increased revenues ($4.8 billion by July). And the multitude of product designs is good for brands and in turn good for fashion-conscious consumers willing to pay the high-brow price. As for whether Luxottica's business is good for the public's interest, the court of public opinion should decide, if only they could see.

1/10/17 Update: A representative of Luxottica says in a statement the following:

“We’re proud to make some of the most beautiful and highest quality eyewear in the world, but we are in no way a monopoly. In reality, the optical industry is very competitive and fragmented. Of the close to 1 billion pairs of glasses sold worldwide last year, only 93 million of them were produced by Luxottica - less than 10%. Also, there are literally thousands of eyewear brands available to consumers today and Luxottica makes eyewear for around 30 different brands, only a few of which we actually own. Even on the retail side, half of all glasses sold in the U.S. are done so by independent opticians. The other half are sold by chains including Costco, Walmart, Solstice and many other non-Luxottica brands. So yes, while we have a fantastic portfolio, it is false to say we control the market.”