Hillary Clinton's Emails: The Missing Point
The New York Times has concluded that Hillary’s server was most likely hacked along with the accounts of her inner circle. The Times does not note, however, that the breach of Clinton’s email would have taken place before the scrubbing of 30,000 emails she deemed “private.” It is this cache of destroyed emails that pose the greatest remaining threat to Mrs. Clinton.

Despite my earlier efforts to explain this simple point, few seem to understand that the 30,000 electronically-scrubbed “private” emails are the Holy Grail of foreign cyber attackers. Hillary Clinton, it appears, will suffer no legal consequences from destroying this massive trove of evidence, but she will pay dearly if it is in the hands of hostile foreign governments, most notably of Vladimir Putin’s Kremlin.

According to the official statement of FBI director, James Comey, agency experts were unable to recover information from Clinton’s wiped-clean server, and Clinton’s legal team claims there are no backups. Thus the contents of the 30,000 deleted “private” emails are not known unless they are in the hands of foreign intelligence hackers, who could deploy them to influence the 2016 election, blackmail a President Clinton once in office, or to embarrass her and the United States.

We do not know the criteria by which Clinton and her staff used to select her “private” emails for destruction. Thanks to Wikileaks, we now have a searchable database of the “non-private” emails the Clinton team delivered to investigators, after much pushing and shoving. A major research effort would be required to find Sherlock Holmes’ “dog who didn’t bark;” namely names and places that should be in the cache but are not. We have to wait until an ambitious researcher undertakes this task. Notably, “Frank Giustra,” the Clinton Foundation’s largest and most controversial donor (notorious for the Russian uranium deal) does not appear anywhere in Clinton’s “non-private” emails. I wonder if the names of key donors activated automatic scrubbing of that email to protect the Clinton Foundation.

Now consider Vladimir Putin with a full inventory of Clinton’s 30,000 “private” emails. Following his KGB training, Putin’s cyber specialists would scour for information ranging from embarrassing to compromising. He could then release incriminating information (not immediately traceable to the Kremlin) to weaken her general election chances. Or Putin may prefer a President Clinton on whom he has kompromat for blackmail. Having observed Clinton’s rigged escape from the U.S. justice system, he might prefer a drip-drip of blackmail.

Remarkably, Putin need not even have Clinton’s emails. Putin’s army of “information technologists” (propagandists) can release professional fabrications through clandestine sources throughout the world. Clinton cannot disprove these narratives. Putin supposedly has the evidence in black and white. She has wiped exculpatory evidence clean. Both Putin and Clinton know that repeated unrebutted narratives become the truth. Even his lies will seem more credible than her denials.

The Times latest Clinton defense is that her private “server” was certainly no more vulnerable than the State Department’s. Had she held an unclassified account in the State Department’s official system, as the rules required, she certainly would have been hacked.” (I guess federal cybersecurity should throw up its hands and make everything public.) No. Hillary’s problem is the potential revelation of personally damaging material, which she concealed on a private server, circumventing established federal government cybersecurity procedures. In Mrs. Clinton’s mind, her business is no one else’s.