Kim Rhode Explains How She Keeps Winning Gold--It's A Lesson For Us All
This Friday Kim Rhode (pronounced row-de) will pick up her Perazzi shotgun to compete for her sixth Olympic medal in as many Olympics. Just after Rhode won gold in skeet in the London Olympics, I had the opportunity to ask how she keeps winning in a sport that requires a person to be so mentally healthy and unshakable they don’t doubt themselves, not one shot in 100. Her answer might just be the greatest self-help advice ever given.

She said carefully, as if turning over each word before she let them pass her lips, “You can’t stop and doubt yourself. You have to move positively forward with your eyes wide open. Once you set your sights on something you have to be dogged about it.”

She paused, but I didn’t interrupt her. I give her space between her words—something that never happens on cable news—to allow her to dig deep and really answer the question. She said, “I don’t mean you need to ignore others or to be an egomaniac or a narcissistic jerk. You don’t have to blindly run over others to succeed. Actually, if you do that you’ll only harm yourself. You should instead be honest and helpful to others around you. This builds a positive spirit and lifts everyone, including yourself. Nice guys don’t necessarily finish last. When you’re really steady in your mind you are good to yourself and to others. You’ll then perform better because you are good and generous. Being arrogant or selfish in competition or life will harm yourself and will impede your goals.”

I was hoping she’d unpack that in a way those of us who haven’t been to Mount Olympus would understand. She did, first, a little background is in order. As this is being written Kim is just 37 years old, yet she has already taken just about every prize in competitive trap and skeet there is to win. She was born in Whittier, Calif. At the age of 10 she enrolled in the NRA’s Junior Shooting Program. She became a “Pro-Marksman” with her .22 rifle. In 1995 she earned the Distinguished Shooter Medal from the U.S. Army at the World Championships in Cyprus. In 1996 she won gold at the Atlanta Olympics in double trap when she was only 17 years old. After the 1996 Olympic she was named one of the Top 10 Sports Phenoms by Time magazine.

Most of her success came from her decisive domination in double trap, but just before she began, the Olympic dreams of women shotgunners were severly curtailed by Olympic gender politics. The International Olympic Committee had added double trap in 1996 as a sport for women; in fact, it was the only shotgun sport for women at the time because the International Olympic Committee had previously eliminated women’s single trap and skeet. What happened was that a woman from China named Zhang Shan had competed against men and won the gold in skeet at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain. Immediately after Shan’s success, the committee made changes to women’s participation in the shotgun sports. Shan was the first woman to earn an Olympic gold in mixed competition. So seemingly in response, the International Olympic Committee eliminated women from the competition and instituted a “men only” rule for the shotgun competitions.

After protests, the International Olympic Committee opened skeet and trap to women again, but kept women separate and gave them fewer targets than the men—this when the “weaker sex” had proven they could compete. So when Rhode made her debut in 1996, she says, “The scores were engineered so that women shot 120 targets while men shot 150. In this way the men’s and women’s scores couldn’t be compared.”

As I said, Rhode won gold at the 1996 Olympics in double trap. At the 2000 Olympics she won the bronze in double trap. At the 2004 Olympics she won gold again in double trap. But then, after the 2004 Olympics, the International Olympic Committee eliminated double trap.