Amazon Hires Ex-White House Spokesman Jay Carney
Amazon has fortified its executive ranks with the addition of Jay Carney, former White House press secretary, who reports to work on Monday as senior vice president for Worldwide Corporate Affairs, including public relations and public policy.

The practice of corporate America hiring elite politicos is not new. But the world of public relations for an e-commerce goliath is a new frontier comprised of consumers growing increasingly skittish about how, when, and with whom the information they innocuously share with retailers for a better shopping experience can be used against them.

Though thoroughly distasteful, most consumers can wrap their heads around the motivation for malevolent hackers to attempt to gain debit and credit card information. By far this is not a problem limited to e-commerce retailers, with Home Depot and Target as cases in point. With each breach, most consumers trust that their favorite retailers will up their security game and avoid future problems. As the alternative to wampum, credit cards are the most practical way to handle most transactions, and many customers are reluctant to sacrifice that convenience. The biggest worry availing itself to all things that touch the digital channel is privacy, which is likely to be high on Carney's to-do list in his new position at Amazon.

Might you shop differently on Amazon if you knew for a fact that the National Security Agency could easily and without any reason see what books you read? What videos you watched? To whom you sent packages and when? What if Amazon’s predictive software could be used not only for the purpose of making helpful suggestions to improve your life, but by a government entity that might have a different motivation? What if all this information could be gleaned without the cooperation of Amazon, by accessing information pipes outside of U.S. borders where such activity is not regulated by the laws of the United States?

It is precisely these privacy matters that are explored by filmmaker Laura Poitras in Citizenfour, which won the Academy Award® for Best Documentary Feature on Sunday and is currently airing on HBO. Although many read about the national security leaks by Edward Snowden, Citizenfour may make that information relevant to the broader population by explaining how and why metadata from commercial sites including Facebook, Google, Yahoo!, Microsoft, AOL, Skype, YouTube, and Apple was (and may continue to be) accessed by the NSA. Neither Citizenfour nor the recent PBS Frontline documentary series United States of Secrets on the same topic included Amazon on the list of nine companies co-opted by the NSA. However, the concerns raised among the general populace are likely to mushroom to all digital transactions.

HBO and PBS may fan the flames of consumer privacy concerns, but the issue is not completely new. In fact, a Chief Privacy Officer has been an important addition to executive teams for the past two years. Amazon added a CPO to its roster in 2012 with the hire of Nuala O’Connor, a former employee of the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Commerce. Amazon’s addition of a CPO closely followed congressional attention over information reportedly collected by the Kindle Fire’s Silk Internet browser and allegations by Rep. Ed Markey, D-Mass., who was the senior Democrat and co-chairman of the Congressional Bipartisan Privacy Caucus, that the device could “spy” on where and when people shop, what they buy, and how much they pay. Ostensibly the Amazon CPO will ultimately report to Carney.

Most recently on CNN as a special correspondent and on the speaking circuit, Jay Carney has kept busy while insiders eagerly watched to see where he would land. He is both lauded and liked. Preceding his tenure as President Obama’s press secretary, he was director of communications for Vice President Joe Biden, but for the bulk of his career Carney has been a hardcore journalist. He was Washington Bureau Chief for Time magazine from 2003 to 2005, on Air Force One with George W. Bush on September 11, 2001, and Time’s Moscow Bureau Chief when the USSR fell apart. Jay Carney is gifted in his ability to be at the vortex of change. Amazon is wise to snap him up in what is likely to be the beginning of an accelerating trend for corporate America to get savvy government insiders who can help translate Patriot Act fallout to maintaining and accelerating optimal online shopping experiences for the masses.