Oklahoma Cops Can Now Seize Money From Prepaid Debit Cards, Without Filing Criminal Charges
Law enforcement agencies in Oklahoma have purchased devices that allow police to seize and freeze funds electronically, which may dramatically expand their power to permanently confiscate property using asset forfeiture. Manufactured by the Texas-based ERAD Group, the devices work on “open loop” prepaid debit cards, like those offered by Visa or American Express. However, “debit cards attached to a valid checking account or valid credit cards cannot be processed” by an ERAD (Electronic Recovery and Access to Data) system.

One contract obtained by Oklahoma Watch states that the Oklahoma Department of Public Safety will pay ERAD Group $5,000 for implementation and $1,500 for training on how to use the devices. In addition, ERAD Group will also receive a “processing fee” of 7.7% of all money seized using the readers. That incentive to seize also mimics Oklahoma law, which allows police and prosecutors to keep up to 100% of the proceeds from forfeited property, even if the owner was never convicted or indicted. Records obtained by the Institute for Justice show that in 2012, 70% of all forfeiture expenditures in Oklahoma funded salaries for law enforcement.

The Oklahoma Department of Public Safety says it installed 16 prepaid card readers last month but has yet to seize cash with them.

ERAD devices originated with a “prime development contract” awarded by the Department of Homeland Security, which claimed drug runners and couriers were increasingly turning to prepaid cards as an alternative to transporting cash. According to ERAD Group:

Even with probable cause, [customs officials] had no way of identifying the card value, freezing the funds or seizing the money at the point of arrest. ERAD-Prepaid™ solved that problem by condensing a process that takes many days, weeks or months into one that takes a few seconds.

Yet prepaid cards are also becoming increasingly popular among ordinary Americans. In 2012, $65 billion was loaded onto these cards, more than double the amount stored in 2009. A 2014 survey by the Pew Charitable Trusts found that about 12 million people use prepaid debit cards at least monthly. Compared to the general population, prepaid cardholders are more likely to be younger, renters, single, African American and earn less than $25,000. One in seven users even received their prepaid cards either from their employers or a government entity.

In fact, over 40% of prepaid card users do not currently have a checking account. As one survey respondent explained, “I don’t want to walk around with my life savings in my pocket to lose it or be robbed.”

In other words, the ERAD devices will most likely disproportionately affect lower-income Americans while further making a mockery of due process. A presentation by ERAD Group President T. Jack Williams even claimed that “individuals do not have privacy rights with magnetic stripe cards” and that a police scan of those cards “does not violate an individual’s fourth amendment rights.”

“It’s scary to know that technology even exists and that government agencies are using it without an arrest, without a warrant,” state Sen. Kyle Loveless told Oklahoma Watch. Loveless had previously introduced a bill that would have required a criminal conviction to forfeit property in most cases. But after facing forceful lobbying from law enforcement groups, his bill failed to receive even a committee hearing.

Making it easier to allow cops to seize even more property is just opening a Pandora’s box. That is especially true in Oklahoma, which has been a breeding ground for forfeiture scandals. One prosecutor used forfeiture funds to pay off his student loans, while another lived rent-free in a seized house. In late March, an Oklahoma grand jury indicted a county sheriff and deputy for extortion and bribery over a cash seizure resulting from a traffic stop.

And in a case that made national headlines, the Muskogee County Sheriff’s Office seized over $50,000 from a Christian rock band that was raising money for a Burmese nonprofit school and a Thai orphanage. Outrageously, the county district attorney indicted Eh Wah, the band’s manager who was transporting the cash, for possessing drug proceeds, a felony in Oklahoma. Yet deputies never found any drugs or any evidence linking Eh Wah to the drug trade. Only after the Institute for Justice announced it was representing Eh Wah and the other innocent owners did the county relent: It returned the cash and dropped the bogus charge.

“Not every civil forfeiture victim is a Christian orphanage or a world-renowned Burmese Christian band,” IJ Attorney Dan Alban said in a statement, “but when even their money isn’t safe, no one’s money is safe from forfeiture abuse.”

If you or anyone you know has been a victim of civil forfeiture, please contact the Institute for Justice. For more information on civil forfeiture, visit endforfeiture.com.