Glenn Beck: Making of the Puppet Master
This is a rush transcript from "Glenn Beck," November 11, 2010. This copy may not be in its final form and may be updated.

GLENN BECK, HOST: Welcome to "The Glenn Beck Program."

Tonight, part three in our three-part series on the puppet master, George Soros.

Last night, you saw the sheer size of this one-man's influence. It is breathtaking. He has brought entire regimes and currencies down to the ground in flames. If you don't understand where America is heading, you will after tonight. And if you think it doesn't matter — well, this is the wrong show for you.

I want you to know and remember this — in the last three episodes, I'm not making claims. I'm not asking questions. I'm not telling you statements of fact. What I'm telling you is watch George Soros in his own words.

Where is the country headed?

George Soros:

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The question is what we need and whether Mr. Soros and his foundations can help to bring more foreign influence into the United States instead of relying on what is essentially a balance between Democrats and conservative Republicans.

GEORGE SOROS, BILLIONAIRE/FINANCIER: I think you put your finger on a very important flaw in the current world order, and that is that only Americans have a vote in Congress. And yet, it is the United States that basically determines policy for the world. That is a flaw in the current set up.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

BECK: It's a problem for him that people in China and France don't get to vote. Find out who sits in Congress. Is it for you?

You need to make a choice. Mr. Soros has made his choice. I have made mine. Tonight you decide.

(MUSIC)

BECK: Hello, America. Happy Veterans Day.

Veterans, and, Marcus Luttrell, I'm thinking about you today. Thank you for everything that you have done. Thank you. All of the spouses that struggle, and struggle hard for our freedom.

For our freedom to be able to say the things that we mean and mean the things we say; for our freedom, to be able to speak against or speak about the most powerful people in the world and not be crushed because you're the little guy. That is what America is about. To have a difference of opinion — and as George Washington said, meet on the battlefield of ideas.

Tonight, part three. Part three on George Soros. I'm going to recap, give you a little new information. I'm going to recap in the next 10 minutes. And then I'm going to ask you for your decision.

These are things that you have to ponder. You have to — you can't just take my word for it. You have to decide: Am I going to look in to this more on my own? Am I going to educate myself or am I just going to put myself, my head back in the sand and say, no, no, it's all fine, it's all fine, it's all fine? Because there is a choice.

Who is George Soros? And is he involved in the changes in our country? And if he is and if he is using his money to greatly influence our country, why don't I know about it? And do I agree with him? Maybe you do.

George Soros had a rough childhood. He was born in Hungary in 1930. Not the place you wanted to be in 1930, especially if you were a Jew. His mother was wildly anti-Semitic.

Again, for anybody who is crying, you know, is this some sort of anti- Semitic attack on George Soros? No, it's not. I'm not calling his mother an anti-Semite. George Soros did. Those are his words, not mine.

Quote, "My mother quite anti-Semitic and ashamed of being Jewish. Given the culture in which we lived, being Jewish was a clear-cut stigma, a disadvantage, a handicap. And therefore, she always had the desire to transcend it, to escape it."

That is pretty powerful in a child's life.

Both of his parents were non-practicing Jews. His real family name was not Soros. It was Schwartz. But what would you do if you lived in Hungary in the 1930s and '40s? Would you keep the name Schwartz?

When George was six years old, the family changed the name from Schwartz to Soros. Now, at first, it just makes sense on the surface because you're like, OK, well, of course, they're trying to stay alive. There were mad men rounding you Jews up.

But when you look at the name Soros, it's an obscure name. What does it mean? Where did it come from? Well, it means to soar.

More importantly, it derives from Esperanto, which is a made-up trans- European language that started I think in the 1880s. And it was promoted by those who dreamt of a world free of nationalities. Get it? A world free of nationalities, an open society.

His father was very much into this. That's how they picked the name Soros.

So when George Soros was 14, his father basically bribed a government official to take his son in and let him pretend to be a Christian. His father was just trying to keep him alive. He even had to go around confiscating property of Jewish people.

Now, imagine you are Jewish and you have to go and confiscate the property of your fellow Jews. And you are pretending to not be a Jew and if anybody finds out, you're dead. He actually had to endure watching people sendoff to their eventual murders, watching people gathering their stuff, sending them off knowing that they were going to go to their death.

What does that do to somebody? How do you deal with that? How many years of therapy would somebody need after something like that?

This is where George — I think this is important — this is where George Soros first learned to pretend to be something other than who he was. He had to.

I am not blaming or questioning a 14-year-old or his parents for trying to keep him alive, trying to keep the family alive. I don't think anyone can understand what it must have been like to be Jewish in that scenario. Can you? Especially 14.

I don't want to question the 14-year-old. I would have, however, like to question the 80-year-old man who has never once said he regretted it. But more than that, he views it as the happiest year of his life — again, not my words, his words. Listen:

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

SOROS: It was actually probably the happiest year of my life, that year of German occupation. For me, it was a very positive experience. It's a strange thing because you see incredible suffering around you and the fact you are in considerable danger yourself. But you're 14 years old and you don't believe that it can actually touch you. You have a belief in yourself. You have a belief in your father. It's a very happy-making exhilarating experience.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

BECK: I don't think I've ever heard anybody describe the Holocaust years like that. Maybe he's the most healthy man you've ever met. Maybe somehow or another he just got through it.

But he also has spoken how his experience in Hungary has effected his psyche. Listen to this.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Did anybody tell you in Hungary why they didn't like Jews at the time?

SOROS: Oh, yes. And that, of course, is something again very, very much part of my psyche, anti-Semitism, and, you know, hatred of Jews. It was quite widespread within Hungary.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

BECK: Even to his own home. I mean, I would love to spend an hour — he's not going to come on this program and spend an hour with me. And we'd have bigger fish to fry than this, but I would love to understand how it affected his psyche having his mother basically agree apparently — I don't mean to judge — with the Germans on the hatred of Jews being anti-Semitic in his own home. How has he navigated that?

I'm not going to spend the time. I had invited George Soros to come on this program. He has declined.

We have bigger fish to fry, like how does he view the world? It sure would be interesting to explore how this affected his feelings on Israel, which he does not support. He donates so much money to organizations that speak out against Israel. Some stick out more than others on the donations. But is there any connection there?

I'm going to concentrate on the fact I think the lesson he learned in the horrific year of 1944 was that if you hide your true identify, you can gain power, you can survive. And those who are seen as disadvantaged or handicapped and don't hide their identity — well, they don't survive.

The next formulative step in Soros' life was college. Now, this is where he attended the London School of Economics. Now, this is the same school that Hayek was from. He wrote "Road to Serfdom." This is freedom fighter.

But it's also the school where the Fabian socialists hung out, a Fabian socialist university. You remember — the Fabian window we told you about. This is the famous English Fabian society. We took this picture — actually, Blair was standing here with it.

Fabian socialist — what are they doing? They're heating the world up in the fire that they, themselves are stoking. Why are they heating it up? Because they are about to hammer it and remold it nearer to the heart's desire.

Fabian socialists are the American progressives. It's the same thing. Heat the world up, cause the problems so the world heats up so you can remold it.

So which part of the London School of Economics does Soros favor? The Hayek side or the Fabian side? Which one?

This is where he learned about an open society — the Open Society Institute which is now his charitable arm. It sounds harmless on the outside. But, I mean, really — I mean, who doesn't want to be open?

But when you listen to him at the top of the hour and the beginning of the hour, we played that. Notice the logo behind him? That was his Open Society Institute. Can your institute bring in more foreign influence here in America?

What is an open society, really? Well, you saw it a moment ago. The world has a vote in Congress, but you also saw it in his father.

Soros — a world free of nationalities. It is a global replacement for our republic, for all the work our Founders did, that's old news. We must progress past it. We must have a new world order. It is a replacement for the republic.

He has donated more than $14 million to a group here in America called the American Constitution Society. Well, that sounds great — except this is a progressive legal group, with an area focus on constitutional interpretation and change.

The Constitution can be changed. But you do it not in the shadows. You do it not being invisible. You don't hide who you are. You change it through the amendment process. But he knows you wouldn't go for it.

So, he leaves school, leaves Hungary, he survives. He goes to school. He finds open society. And then he becomes wealthy.

Now, how did he become wealthy enough to fund his quest to denationalize the world? Hedge funds. He has the estimated fifth largest hedge fund in the world. It's called the Quantum Funds — which, George, sometimes we should talk, we should kibitz about the name, hmm? It's worth about $27 billion.

Now, here is the interesting and funny thing about hedge funds. We hear all the time about the greedy Wall Street brokers. We hear about the greedy speculators, greedy bankers. We hear about greedy executives and their obscene bonuses and their expensive carpets and everything else.

But why don't we hear more about those greedy hedge fund managers? Is it a coincidence that everything on the sun when it comes to capitalism is targeted for regulation by Congress? Except for hedge funds. You should decide on that one.

Now, he's got the wealth. But what did he do with the wealth? He decided to collapse regimes and currencies. He did it in England, in Russia, Malaysia, Georgia. Soros lit the fuse to get it done.

He's known — as we told you last night — the man who broke the Bank of England. The prime minister of Malaysia called Soros "unscrupulous profiteer." In Thailand, he was branded an economic war criminal who sucks the blood from people.

In 1994, he stated, "I just write that the former Soviet Empire is now called the Soros Empire." He started getting so much recognition it fed into his ego. His ego started to grow.

He started to get a god complex — again, not my words, his words. Soros confessed in the "New Yorker" in the 1995 that he had a messianic illusion, a sense of himself being superhuman, quote, "since childhood," end quote. He saw in himself the many attributes of the God of the Old Testament, quote, "God in the Old Testament has a number of attributes, you know, like invisible. I was pretty invisible. Benevolent, I was pretty benevolent. All-seeing, I tried to be all-seeing."

Benevolent, all-seeing — but the one that sticks out here is invisible. You can see his ego on display when he talks about going after regimes. Listen. It's a game.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

SOROS: When you try to improve society, you affect different people and different interest differently. And they're actually commensurate. So, you very often have all kind of unintended adverse consequences. So, I have to experiment and it was a learning process.

The first part was this subversive activity, disrupting the oppressive regimes. That was a lot of fun. That's actually what brought me hope into this whole enterprise.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

BECK: Remember, he believes, so do many in his regime, that Fox News is a repressive regime. America is a repressive regime.

He is turning lives and countries upside down and inside out, and he loves it. He says in his own words he got hooked. He has to feed the addiction. So, he decides to go after the biggest market yet, America. Quote, "The main obstacle to a new world order is America."

You are the main obstacle to what he wants, which is an open society, a replacement for the republic. Well, what does that mean for you?

Well, he's talked about it. First, a manage decline of the U.S. dollar — his words, not mine.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

SOROS: So, an orderly decline of the dollar is actually desirable.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

BECK: Does that sound good to you? Does it sound good to you? How much — how much has the price of sugar gone up? How much has your gasoline gone up? Why? Why? Is there a shortage with sugar?

No. Your dollar is being devalued. It is going down in an orderly way. Prices go up. Is that what you want?

Let me play the clip that we just played one more time at the top of the hour. Listen to this.

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: The question is what we need and whether Mr. Soros and his foundations can help to bring more foreign influence into the United States instead of relying on what is essentially a balance between Democrats and conservative Republicans.

SOROS: I think you put your finger on a very important flaw in the current world order, and that is that only Americans have a vote in Congress. And yet, it is the United States that basically determines policy for the world. That is a flaw in the current set up.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

BECK: OK, worthless dollar, global citizens who are voting on who represents us and what we do. That's what George Soros and an open society looks like. When he's done with America, that's what you will have.

Now, how does he achieve it? How does he achieve it? Well, we showed you these five steps last night. He is collapsing the economy. He's quite good at it, collapsing the economies.

We showed you how he's doing it in America. He's doing it over and over and over again, all of them. He's doing it, in his words, subversively — subversively.

Five steps to control. You form a shadow government, using humanitarian aid as a cover, subversive activities. Well, he's doing that with OSI. We told you that the Shadow Conventions.

The puppet master is putting on a show. We've been an unwitting audience.

Now, the curtains are being lifted. We're exposing the extent of his reach. We see who he is surrounding himself with.

A guy who is running his charitable arm is the founder of SDS, the guy who started SDS, which was responsible for all the riots in the '60s. He's now the charity guy.

You are seeing him build the Shadow Party — again, his words, not mine. He funded the Shadow Party convention.

For three days, this program has begun to lift the curtains. But where is the media?

Most Americans will dismiss that he is not a big threat. This is a conspiracy. Or with the millions of dollars that he spent, Glenn Beck is just lying. The Shadow Party, the Shadow Conventions.

Like God, he's invisible — in his own words. In his own words, he called it subversive activity. This is his addiction. But it moves from there.

— Watch "Glenn Beck" weekdays at 5 p.m. ET on Fox News Channel

Content and Programming Copyright 2010 Fox News Network, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Copyright 2010 Roll Call, Inc. All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of Roll Call. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.