Wife of Jeremy Meeks, 'handsome mug shot' subject, is 'furious' at Internet attention, report says
The wife of the felon behind the "handsome" mug shot that's gone viral is "furious" after thousands of Internet admirers have swooned over his chiseled looks and blue eyes, according to a published report.

Jeremy Weeks, 30, was arrested Wednesday on five weapons charges and one gang charge, the Stockton Police Department said. Since the department posted his mug shot on Facebook earlier this week, it's attracted more than 86,000 "likes" and been shared more than 11,000 times as of late Saturday morning.

But there's at least one woman who isn't impressed with the worldwide lust: Meeks' wife.

"She's furious," Meeks' friend Simone Johnson told CBS 13 at his arraignment on Friday. "Her man is in there and people are taking it as a joke, thinking it’s funny talking about his looks, saying all kinds of crazy things."

Meeks, who is married with two young sons, reportedly spent time in prison for grand theft. The San Joaquin County District Attorney's office was not accepting phone messages on Saturday morning.

He told ABC News10 in Stockton, California that he's "not some kingpin" and that he's trying to clear his name.

"I appreciate (the attention), but I just want them to know that this really is not me," Meeks said.

Meanwhile, his younger brother Bryan Varela said Meeks is a changed man after his last prison stint.

"He's a man who learns from his mistakes," Varela told CBS 13. “With his past history, he got out of being incarcerated and put his mind on focus to his family and started doing what he had to do. Living the dream that he always wanted.”

Meeks was one of four men taken into custody during Operation Ceasefire, a multiagency mission to curb a recent increase in shootings and robberies in the Weston Ranch area of Stockton, a Northern California city of about 300,000 nestled amid the network of waterways that form the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta.

Four firearms were confiscated during a sweep Wednesday involving the Stockton police gang unit, the FBI, the U.S. Marshals Task Force and other agencies.

"Wow. That is one good looking mug shot!" one person wrote.

"Momma, I'm in love with a criminal," another joked.

Silva called Meeks "one of the most violent criminals in the Stockton area," though he declined to provide any details on the crimes that Meeks is believed to have been involved in.

Meeks' bail was raised to $1 million on Friday, CBS 13 reported. His arraignment is scheduled to continue on June 27.

Click here to read more from News10 ABC and CBS 13.

FoxNews.com's Karl de Vries and The Associated Press contributed to this report.