FBI nabs man who sprayed mice poison on grocery food in Ann Arbor
Suspect allegedly hit stores in Ann Arbor

FBI says it has arrested a man suspected of contaminating food at three Ann Arbor grocery stores with spray liquid containing hand cleaner and mice poison. The FBI released this surveillance video of the suspect prior to his arrest on Tuesday, May 3, 2016. (Photo: FBI)

In a potential food poisoning scare, the FBI says it has arrested a man suspected of contaminating produce at open food bars at several Ann Arbor-area grocery stores with a liquid spray containing mice poison, hand cleaner and water.

State health officials say no one has yet reported getting sick from the potentially contaminated food, and it is not yet known if there is any threat to the public. But they are recommending that consumers throw out any salad bar, hot bar and ready-to-eat items that were purchased at potentially affected stores in Ann Arbor, Saline, Midland and Birch Run.

According to the FBI, the suspect is linked to possible contamination at open food bars over the last two weeks at the following three stores:

• Whole Foods Market on 990 W. Eisenhower Parkway.

• Meijer, 3145 Ann Arbor-Saline Road.

• Plum Market, 375 North Maple Road.

Based on the FBI investigation, state health officials say there's the potential that other stores in Michigan may also have been targeted.

These stores include:

Busch's, 2240 S. Main Street, Ann Arbor

Cupcake Station, 116 E. Liberty, Ann Arbor

Family Fare, 2026 N. Saginaw, Midland

Kroger, 3838 Richfield Road, Flint

Meijer, #108, 7300 Eastman Ave, Midland

Meijer, #213, 9515 Birch Run Rd, Birch Run

Millers Mini Mart, 3001 Bay City Road, Midland

Target, 2000 Waters Road, Ann Arbor

Tsai Grocery, 3115 Oak Valley Drive, Ann Arbor

Walmart, 910 Joe Mann Blvd., Midland

Walmart, 7000 E. Michigan Ave., Saline

Whole Foods, 3135 Washtenaw Ave., Ann Arbor

According to Detroit's FBI Chief David P. Gelios, the suspect was identified and taken into custody Tuesday following tips from the public. The FBI has not named the suspect, saying only that he has admitted to using a potentially hazardous material to contaminate food in several Ann Arbor area grocery stores, and that he sprayed the produce within the last two weeks.

The FBI said the suspect visited several other grocery stores in the Ann Arbor area in the last few months and the investigation is ongoing in order to determine if any other stores were targeted.

The U.S. Attorneys office said it is currently reviewing the case. No charges have yet been filed.

The investigation has prompted the the Michigan Department of Agriculture and Rural Development to issue a public advisory, urging consumers to throw away any potentially contaminated food. State health officials said based on what they know about the ingredients in the mixture at this time, they do not anticipate any adverse health effects on individuals who may have eaten the potentially contaminated products.

But additional food samples have been collected for further testing. And until more is known, health officials are urging the public to be careful.

"Out of an abundance of caution and to protect public health and food safety, I encourage consumers to dispose of any foods purchased from salad bars, olive bars and ready-to-eat hot and cold food areas from these stores between mid-March and the end of April," said Jamie Clover Adams, MDARD director. "Although most of these types of foods may have already been eaten or disposed of, some may still be in refrigerators or freezers."

"While the risk for adverse health effects appears to be low, more investigation is being done to determine what level of exposure may have occurred," said Dr. Eden Wells, chief medical executive for the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services.

If you have any health concerns, contact your health care provider or call Michigan Poison Control at 800-222-1222 with questions.

(Photo: FBI)

Tresa Baldas can be contacted at tbaldas@freepress.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/26R8f3J