Emory Students Terrified By Trump 2016 Campus Chalkings
Proving that this generation of college students continues to establish themselves as the biggest pussies in American history, Emory University is offering counseling to students who were offended by "Trump 2016" written in chalk on campus sidewalks.

This is not a made up story. This is real.

true Outkick the Show live from NYC where I'm murdering Emory protesters. Posted by Clay Travis on Wednesday, March 23, 2016

Early this morning Outkick received a forwarded email from the president of the university from several Emory students who read Outkick -- all of whom requested anonymity lest they become the targets of the campus PC bro mobs.

The student government association is OFFERING EMERGENCY COUNSELING FOR STUDENTS TRIGGERED BY THE TRUMP 2016 CAMPUS CHALKINGS. Here is their email:

"That being said, by nature of the fact that for a significant portion of our student population, the messages represent particularly bigoted opinions, policies, and rhetoric directed at populations represented at Emory University, we would like to express our concern regarding the values espoused by the messages displayed, and our sympathy for the pain experienced by members of our community...

It is clear to us that these statements are triggering for many of you. As a result, both College Council and the Student Government Association pledge to stand in solidarity with those communities who feel threatened by this incident and to help navigate the student body through it and the environment of distrust and unease it has created.

To that end, Emergency Funds within the College Council monetary policy were created to provide time-sensitive funds during circumstances involving discrimination based on race, gender, sexual orientation, religion, and such funds are available to any student organization looking to sponsor events in response to this incident."

Hold the fuck up, "Trump 2016" is a bigoted statement now? I swear to god I may end up voting for Donald Trump just because I hate the PC bros who hate Donald Trump infinitely more than I hate Donald Trump.

As if that wasn't enough the university president felt compelled to email the student body after protesters showed up at his office. The email from President Wagner began:

"Yesterday I received a visit from 40 to 50 student protesters upset by the unexpected chalkings on campus sidewalks and some buildings yesterday morning, in this case referencing Donald Trump. The students shared with me their concern that these messages were meant to intimidate rather than merely to advocate for a particular candidate, having appeared outside of the context of a Georgia election or campus campaign activity. During our conversation, they voiced their genuine concern and pain in the face of this perceived intimidation."

Can we just pause here for a minute and think about what total and complete losers these protesters are? They saw statements on campus written in chalk -- ENDORSING THE POTENTIAL REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE WHO WILL RECEIVE SUPPORT FROM TENS OF MILLIONS OF AMERICANS INCLUDING ALL THE ELECTORAL VOTES OF THE STATE OF GEORGIA WHERE THEY GO TO SCHOOL -- and found it unacceptable. All they had to do to remove the images was pour out their bottled water on top of them or, they could have been really brilliant and written NOT in front of TRUMP 2016. Instead they decided to protest.

Seriously, protest.

Look at this picture of the protesters, tell me that these aren't the biggest losers on the entire campus. If you had to walk into a campus bar and point out the people least likely to have sex in the entire place, everyone would pick out the protesters. They're fucking losers. This is what doesn't happen enough on college campus any more, losers are validated instead of ridiculed.

And if you doubt that these kids are total losers these are their actual quotes from the Emory student newspaper:

"Roughly 40 students gathered shortly after 4:30 p.m. in the outdoors space between the Administration Building and Goodrich C. White Hall; many students carried signs featuring slogans such as "Stop Trump" or "Stop Hate" and an antiphonal chant addressed to University administration, led by College sophomore Jonathan Peraza, resounded "You are not listening! Come speak to us, we are in pain!" throughout the Quad. Peraza opened the door to the Administration Building and students moved forward towards the door, shouting "It is our duty to fight for our freedom. It is our duty to win. We must love each other and support each other. We have nothing to lose but our chains."

"WE HAVE NOTHING TO LOSE BUT OUR CHAINS!"

Motherfuckers, you are going to a school that costs $65,000 a year, you are not slaves. The only people in chains here are your parents, who probably should have beaten your spoiled asses with a cat o'nine tails so you didn't grow up to be such huge pussies.

"You are not listening! Come speak to us, we are in pain!"

IN PAIN!

You know who is in pain, billions of people in the world who don't have enough to eat. You know who isn't in pain? People who read something written in chalk on a campus sidewalk. I'm pretty sure Jesus himself said that somewhere in the New Testament.

You know who else was in pain? Your great-grandfathers when they stormed the beaches of Normandy and got riddled with bullets. Your pussy asses will protest chalk on campus, but you'd be too busy bitching about the spotty wifi on the troop carriers and taking selfies of you in front of the German pillboxes to actually storm the beaches and fight Nazis.

Then the student quotes got worse:

"I'm supposed to feel comfortable and safe [here]," one student said. "But this man is being supported by students on our campus and our administration shows that they, by their silence, support it as well ... I don't deserve to feel afraid at my school."

So this student is afraid of chalk opinions? Is this real life? That's the standard of fear now.

And how dare some students on your campus have a different opinion than you? HOW DARE THEY NOT AGREE WITH YOU ON EVERYTHING?

"(Faculty) are supporting this rhetoric by not ending it," said one student, who went on to say that "people of color are struggling academically because they are so focused on trying to have a safe community and focus on these issues [related to having safe spaces on campus]."

So, wait, this student wants the faculty to stop students from having opinions that are different than hers? And if the faculty doesn't stop this speech it means they agree with it? And she also believes that students of color are making bad grades because they're scared of chalk on campus? How can anyone with a brain read this quote and have any opinion other than, I disagree with everything this dingbat says?

Here's the truth, if you're making bad grades on campus two things are at play: 1. either you aren't studying enough or 2. you aren't smart enough to go to the school. Period. That's it.

Would these students have felt the same way if "Feel the Bern" had been written in chalk all over campus instead? Probably not. So what these students are upset by isn't political speech, it's political speech they disagree with. Which, you know, is the entire purpose of the first amendment, to protect unpopular opinion. Hell, if anybody deserves a trigger warning when it comes to political candidates it's me. I'm rich and Bernie Sanders wants to take my money and give to these dumbass pussies so they can go to college for free. I'm triggered as fuck when I hear that. America ain't my safe space, bro.

More students quotes "What I also saw on the steps near Cox [Hall] Bridge was 'Accept the Inevitable: Trump 2016,'" he said. "That was a bit alarming. What exactly is the inevitable? Why does it have to be accepted?"

Come the fuck on. Is this guy for real? It means Trump's supporters think it's inevitable that he's going to win, so you should accept it. I don't know how this could be any easier to understand. It would be just like me walking into the protest meeting and saying, "You're all dying virgins. Accept the inevitable."

Same exact thing.

I'm in New York City with my family now for the rest of the week, but I'm seriously thinking about driving to Atlanta next week -- which is our biggest market in the country -- and having an Outkick campus rally at Emory -- carried live on Periscope and Facebook -- where all we do is insult every student who walks past us. Words hurt, we need to use them liberally.

Somebody has to cure college kids of being PC bro pussies.

And it might just have to be me.