Polish nationalists rail against Brussels in show of strength
Tens of thousands of nationalists marched through Warsaw on Wednesday chanting “Poland for Poles”, in a show of strength by the country’s far-right anti-immigrant movement.

The annual march, organised to commemorate Poland’s independence in 1918, has become increasingly dominated by far-right radical movements, and in recent years has sparked violent clashes with police and arson attacks.

Members of Hungary’s far-right Jobbik movement and Italy’s neo-facist Forza Nuova took part in the march, which saw at least 35,000 flood the city centre, many waving flags, burning flares and chanting xenophobic and anti-EU slogans.

“No Islam, no atheists, a Poland for Catholics,” chanted the crowd, which contained elderly ladies and babies in pushchairs. “Europe is being invaded, and we are the defence against it.”

Marchers threw firecrackers and lit fireworks along the route, as speeches and songs railed against Brussels and warned of “Islamisation” eroding Poland’s “national Catholic heritage”.

At the end of the march, through a thick fog of smoke billowing from hundreds of hand-held red flares, Jobbik MP Laszlo Toroczkai told the crowd to “fear” refugees.

“[Eastern European] countries are now the bastion of the EU. We are defending the whole continent,” he said.

The march took place less than 20 days after Poland ejected its liberal centre-right government after eight years in office, handing the rightwing conservative Law and Justice party the most decisive election victory in the country’s history.

Law and Justice, which is expected to promote more nationalist policies in office and be more robust with Brussels, campaigned strongly against the previous government’s decision to accept around 7,000 refugees under an EU sharing scheme, tapping widespread anti-immigrant feelings among voters.

In depth Europe’s migration crisis The EU is struggling to respond to a surge of desperate migrants



Further reading

Public opinion in Poland is against accepting more migrants from the Middle East, and the country’s new government has said it will resist attempts by Brussels to force Warsaw to agree to resettle additional people.

Organised by radical nationalist organisations, the march also drew thousands of ordinary Poles celebrating the country’s independence, many wearing red and white armbands or scarves in the national colours.

In previous years small groups of rioters have broken off from the march and attacked public art installations representing liberal political views, the Russian embassy and public transport infrastructure.