Boy Scout World Jamboree or Orgy?
Skip to comments.

Boy Scout World Jamboree or Orgy?

Bangkok Post ^ | 01.13.03 | Anucha Charoenpo

Posted on by Coleus

20TH WORLD SCOUT JAMBOREE

Sexual shenanigans spice up camp life

It's nothing unusual, say teenage visitors

Anucha Charoenpo

Young love birds share an intimate moment yesterday during a party for participants in the World Scout Jamboree at Haad Yao beach in Sattahip. _ JETJARAS NA RANONG Scouts from Western countries say having sex and forming relationships is common practice among participants at the 20th World Scout Jamboree in Sattahip.

They say they are well aware of the risk of sexually transmitted disease and take the necessary precautions.

Rob Rolfe, 17, from Britain, said he believed some couples were having sex somewhere in the camp even as he spoke to the Bangkok Post.

It was quite normal for young people in Britain aged 16 or more to have sexual relationships, he said.

``We don't think having sex is a serious issue, as long as we prevent transmission of sexual diseases,'' he said.

Health officials said they had handed out thousands of condoms and other contraceptive devices to foreign scouts since the jamboree started on Dec 28.

Their actions have drawn public criticism, with claims they were promoting sexual activities in the camp rather than scouting.

Noor Staelens, 16, from Belgium, said having sexual relationships with those she loved before marriage was accepted by Western culture. She understood well that Thai culture did not approve of sexual relations between unmarried young people.

Ms Staelens believed only a few couples were indulging in sex. There was nothing wrong with that, but most scouts were more interested in more productive activities.

Michael Cojer, 16, from England, said sex was a very normal thing in Western culture. Every youngster in England knew how to reduce the health risks from sex.

He was not surprised that condoms had been handed out at the jamboree camp.

Thongchai Sakarcheep,15, a scout from Bordindacha 3 school, said if foreign scouts wanted to have sexual relationships that was fine by him, but he felt it was inappropriate inside the camp.

``As for me, I'm too young to think about sex. I came here because I wanted to take part in the scout meeting.

``Sex should come after marriage,'' he said, quoting his parents.



TOPICS:

Chit/Chat

Outdoors

Society

Travel

KEYWORDS:

bangkok

boyscout

boyscouts

bsa

bsalist

camping

coed

condom

cubscout

jamboree

orgy

scouts

sex

std

teensex

tent

thiland

unesco

unicef

who

worldjamboree

You decide



To: *bsa_list

To: Coleus

I don't think this thread will last much longer than a gram of meitnerium.



by 3 posted onby weikel (Mercy to the Guilty is Cruelty to the Innocent)

To: weikel

Is is supposed to last long?



To: Coleus

Its one of those radioactive elements which exist under some circumstances for a few seconds in particle accelarators.



by 5 posted onby weikel (Mercy to the Guilty is Cruelty to the Innocent)

To: weikel

Ha Ha, I'm talking about the post. It was put up as

a fyi, and I gather you disagree with something but you did not state why? Are you familiar with the BSA program?



To: Coleus

Well I do disagree( the boy scouts have been pretty free of child molesting although the jamboree always sounded kinda gay to me). I just kinda assumed the mods would pull it...



by 7 posted onby weikel (Mercy to the Guilty is Cruelty to the Innocent)

To: weikel

Did you click on the link?



Scouting in the World is Co-Ed, females are in most troops. The BSA here in America is male only in Traditional troops where parents enroll their kids in an organization where they promise to be morally straight and reverent among other things.



Those parents who have sent their kids to this world Jamboree are in for quite a shock when they find out that many are handing out condoms to the kids attending and are giving tacit approval for these kids to have sex. I'm sure the parents here in the USA didn't shell out thousands of dollars to send their kid to Thiland only to become grandparents 9 months later.



A Jamboree is just a hugh gathering of Scouts to do Scouting things. It's a great opportuinty to advance in the ranks, learn and try new and different things which aren't offered in traditional camps and to trade patches, etc.



To: weikel

Its one of those radioactive elements which exist under some circumstances for a few seconds in particle accelarators.>>>



Well, at least I learned something today.







To: Coleus

"to send their kid to Thiland"



I wouldn't send one of my kids to Thailand under any circumstances.



Disclaimer: Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.

FreeRepublic , LLC, PO BOX 9771, FRESNO, CA 93794

FreeRepublic.com is powered by software copyright 2000-2008 John Robinson