Bitterroot National Forest
Welcome to the Bitterroot National Forest Leave your stress behind! You will find this spectacular 1.6 million acre forest in southwest Montana and Idaho to be a priceless national heritage. Half of the forest is dedicated to the largest expanse of continuous pristine wilderness in the lower 48 states -- the Selway Bitterroot, Frank Church River of No Return, and the Anaconda Pintler. Much of its beauty can be attributed to the heavily glaciated, rugged peaks of the Bitterroot Range. Drainages carved by glaciers form steep canyons that open into the valley floor. The abundance of natural resources offers a wide range of opportunities for recreation, grazing, wildlife, fisheries, timber, and minerals. Come enjoy the magnificent mountains, the serenity of wilderness, the miracle of spring flowers, majestic big game, and the sounds of birds here in our land of multiple uses.



Areas of Interest Bitterroot Valley Wildfire Response Guide The Forest Service in cooperation with Montana Department of Natural Resources, Bitterroot Resource and Conservation Development, Ravalli County, Florence, Stevensville, and Victor Rural Fire Departments, and homeowners are working together to create the Bitterroot Valley Wildfire Response Guide. The pilot project area lies on the west side of the valley from Big Creek north to the Ravalli/Missoula county line. The guide will focus on two areas of concern – hazardous fuel management and wildfire response. It will provide detailed information on past fuel treatment activities, current vegetative conditions, and potential areas in need of further hazardous fuels reduction both on public and private lands. It will identify locations of existing water sources, helibases, staging areas, etc. relevant to wildfire management. It will also address operating protocols for all emergency responders to follow during a wildfire event. A blog site has been established through a partnership with the University of Montana to generate public interest, comments, questions and concerns for this project. For more information visit the blog site at http://bitterrootfireguide.com. If the pilot project is a success, the guide will address and include the entire area of the Bitterroot Valley in future work . Forest Service Prescribed Burn Season to Begin March 1st marks the first day of open burning for Bitterroot Valley residents as well as for local Forest Service fire managers who will be looking for favorable weather and fuel conditions to conduct prescribed burning around the Bitterroot National Forest. To view a map of the proposed prescribed burns by district - click on Stevensville Ranger District, Darby Ranger District, Sula Ranger District, or West Fork Ranger District. Travel Management Planning Project Draft EIS August 5, 2009 - The Bitterroot National Forest Travel Management Planning Project Draft EIS is now available for review. Click here to view the document. Bitterroot National Forest Recreation Site Facility Master Planning Many of the Bitterroot National Forest’s developed recreation facilities were built 30+ years ago. Since then, visitor preferences and demographics have changed. Some sites no longer serve projected demand, some facilities are in poor shape and do not meet visitor’s expectations. To respond to these conditions and national direction, the forest is implementing the Recreation Site Facility Master Planning (RSFMP) process for developed recreation sites. The result of RSFMP is a program of work with a list of prioritized actions to more effectively manage these recreation sites . Environmental Management System (EMS) In order to address priority environmental issues and continually improve environmental performance we are establishing an Environmental Management System . Forest Service Mission, Motto,Vision and Guiding Principles The mission of the USDA Forest Service is to sustain the health, diversity, and productivity of the Nation’s forests and grasslands to meet the needs of present and future generations . Special Events