Satanic Temple to counter Ted Cruz nativity in Lansing
The Snaketivity scene put up by the Satanic Temple of Detroit on the grounds of the Capitol in downtown Lansing is seen in December 2014 LSJ file photo. (Photo: Rod Sanford/The Lansing State Journal)

LANSING — The Satanic Temple of Detroit has announced plans to re-erect its Snaketivity display on the Capitol lawn to counter a live Nativity scene planned by U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz's presidential campaign.

The Cruz Nativity is planned for the evenings of Dec. 12 and 13. Jex Blackmore, director of the Detroit Satanist group, said at a religious liberty rally Wednesday at the Capitol that they were waiting for approval from the Michigan State Capitol Commission to perform a live display of their own on Dec. 19. That would be the same day state Sen. Rick Jones, R-Grand Ledge, plans to sponsor a Nativity display.

“The overriding message in our holiday display, and many of the Satanic Temple’s public activities, is one of plurality and religious liberty," Blackmore said in a written statement. "We have no interest in proselytizing Satanism to the public. However, we refuse to allow one religious perspective (to) dominate the discourse."

The Satanic Temple, a loosely organized national group, doesn't actually worship the Christian devil. It is a secular organization closely aligned with atheist groups in protesting religious displays on public grounds.

"Freedom of speech may be inconvenient, messy, and at times offensive, but that is the cost of living in a free country," Wendy Day, Michigan state director for the Cruz campaign, said in an e-mailed statement. "America was founded on the principles of free speech and freedom of religion ... We don't have to agree on religious principles to stand together for the right of free speech."

At Wednesday's Rally for Religious Liberty, sponsored by the Christian group Salt & Light Global, Blackmore and a handful of her fellow Satanists stood quietly at the back of the crowd on the east lawn with a large banner reading, "The Satanic Temple supports religious liberty," in white letters on a black background. Speakers railed against what they deemed governmental intrusion into religious life, including the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling legalizing gay marriage.

State Sen. Patrick Colbeck, R-Canton, walked to the Satanists and shook their hands and thanked them for coming.

"Beautiful sign," he told them. "I would've probably chosen a different color."

Sean Bertolino, the capital area chairman for the Cruz campaign, also spoke with the group, giving them a Cruz campaign Christmas card that said, "One unplanned pregnancy changed the world." Bertolino told the LSJ he was pleased to find a common interest in religious liberty.

"It's a common issue, which is kind of cool," he said.

The event was decidedly Christian, with signs such as "Vote Biblically" spread throughout the crowd.

"We have radical Islam; we need radical Christianity," the Rev. Ellis Smith of Detroit's Jubilee City Church said from the Capitol steps.

State Rep. Lee Chatfield, R-Levering, said that the nation's "greatest security" was that liberty was a gift from God.

And "what God gives, the government cannot take away," he said.

The Satanic Temple first brought its Snaketivity display — which depicts a snake wrapped around the Satanic cross, presenting a book as a holiday gift — to the Capitol last December, in response to a planned Nativity scene that was later called off. But the Satanists' announcement spawned a response from Lansing-area churches and from Sen. Jones, who helped pull together a Nativity scene to counter the Snaketivity last year.

In addition to Jones' Nativity on Dec. 19, state Rep. Mike Callton, R-Nashville, is sponsoring a Hanukkah display on Monday.

John Truscott, vice chairman of the Capitol Commission that regulates the statehouse facility and grounds, said Wednesday morning the Satanic Temple hadn't yet submitted an official request for their display, but had sent e-mails checking dates around Dec. 18 or 19. Truscott said there was still time for the display to be approved.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1QeySYt