Freewood Blog
Understanding One Another

Relationships can be difficult even if you do get along with your partner, but there are some things that you can do to change the situation. All relationships are going to require you to listen to your partner. If you do not take the time to listen to what your partner is saying it can be very difficult to sustain a relationship.

The following presents some tips for handling those hard relationships and the things that make the relationships difficult.

Arguing Over Money

One of the things that tends to make any relationship hard is arguments about money. When couples have arguments about money it becomes difficult for them to see what the other person values. If one person is interested in material possessions, and someone else does not value these things it can cause a huge strain on the relationship. In order to get a better feel on how you can improve your relationship and minimize your arguments you should have open discussions about what you think you should spend as a couple. It does you no good to fight on these issues.

Outside Temptations

Another thing that tends to come up quite often and relationships is the outside

temptations of someone else that you may be attracted to. This can be a difficult one, and it will make some people question if they even want to be in a relationship. What you have to do in these situations is have a talk and make a decision. You must know that there are rules. Some people allow flirting with someone as long as it does not going overboard. There are others that may not tolerate it any type of flirting or communication with anyone else. You must establish what you will not accept. If you never get to this point where you talk about it this is always going to be a barrier for growing together as a couple.

There are some couples that have open relationships, but this is not the majority of relationships that exist. In most cases people that get into a relationship are looking for something that is monogamous. It is up to you to decide if this is the road that you would like to travel. If these are things that you consider to be problems you should make arrangements to end the relationship because it can only cause more hurt and pain as your relationship progresses. You do not want to be in a place where you are struggling or trying to build a better relationship with a partner that cannot be faithful.

Opposites Attract and Annoy

It has been said that opposites attract. What no one may have told these couples is that opposite personalities can also annoy. There are tons of cases where people become attracted to someone that is different from them, and that may work for a while. When they become closer, however, they will discover that it is easy to become annoyed with this type of partner.

If you are someone that is not seeing eye to eye with your partner it may have something to do with your upbringing. You may be a college graduate that is with a blue collar worker. There are a variety of things that can result in a gap in your relationship and the way that you see the world. For problems like this you should take time to work on the areas that you have in common. You should explore new things and consider new things that may become common interest that you have together.

Outside Friends

At times you may find yourself in situations where your outside friends can interfere with your relationship. They may be giving you advice on what to do when it comes to your relationship. You may also find yourself in a predicament where you want to spend time going to different functions and events with your friends. If you have a partner that is very clingy this may become a problem.

If this is something that has arisen in your relationship you must discuss boundaries and ways that you can spend more time together. No spouse wants to be neglected. By the same token, no one wants to feel like they are a prisoner that cannot leave the home. Couples must take time to talk about this and engage in conversations where they come to a compromise. You may not go out all the time, but it is good to spend some time together.

Continue Reading