Galaxy Evolution Explorer
Feature: 'Frankenstein' Galaxy Surprises Astronomers The galaxy UGC 1382 has been revealed to be far larger and stranger than previously thought. Astronomers relied on a combination of ground-based and space telescopes to uncover the true nature of this "Frankenstein galaxy." Full Story

Feature: Funky Light Signal From Colliding Black Holes Explained Entangled by gravity and destined to merge, two candidate black holes in a distant galaxy appear to be locked in an intricate dance. Researchers using data from NASA's Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX) and NASA's Hubble Space Telescope have come up with the most compelling confirmation yet for the existence of these merging black holes and have found new details about their odd, cyclical light signal. Full Story

Press Release: NASA Decommissions Its Galaxy Hunter Spacecraft NASA has turned off its Galaxy Evolution Explorer after a decade of operations in which the venerable space telescope used its ultraviolet vision to study hundreds of millions of galaxies across 10 billion years of cosmic time. Full Story

From National Astronomical Observatory of Japan: Discovery of a Blue Supergiant Star Born in the Wild A duo of astronomers, Dr. Youichi Ohyama (Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Academia Sinica or ASIAA, Taiwan) and Dr. Ananda Hota (UM-DAE Centre for Excellence in the Basic Sciences or CBS, India), has discovered a Blue Supergiant star located far beyond our Milky Way Galaxy in the constellation Virgo. Full Story

Feature: Gravity-Bending Find Leads to Kepler Meeting Einstein The light of a red star is warped and magnified by its dead-star companion, as detected by NASA's Kepler space telescope. Full Story

Press Release: NASA's Galex Reveals the Largest-Known Spiral Galaxy The spectacular barred spiral galaxy NGC 6872 has ranked among the biggest stellar systems for decades. Now a team of astronomers from the United States, Chile and Brazil have crowned it the largest-known spiral based on archival data from NASA's Galaxy Evolution Explorer mission. Full Story

Feature Story: The Helix Nebula: Bigger in Death than Life What was once a fairly average star, not much different than our sun, can be seen unraveling at the seams in this new image from the Spitzer and GALEX space telescopes. Full Story

Press Release: NASA Lends Galaxy Evolution Explorer to Caltech NASA is lending the Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX) to the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in Pasadena, where the spacecraft will continue its exploration of the cosmos. Full Story