Coral bleaching
Updated: 29 March 2017

On 10 March 2017 the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority confirmed mass coral bleaching is occurring on the Great Barrier Reef for the second consecutive year.

Mass coral bleaching is moderate to severe bleaching over a large spatial scale — the bleaching is part of an ongoing global event affecting the world’s coral reefs since 2014.

How this event unfolds on the Great Barrier Reef depends on local weather conditions over the next few weeks and, as updates become available, information will be released on this webpage and through our current conditions report.

Reported bleaching is consistent with the accumulated build-up of thermal stress across the Reef shown in the Bureau of Meteorology’s thermal stress mapping tools. Thermal stress has been accumulating Reef-wide, with accumulation greatest in the central region of the Reef between Townsville and Port Douglas.

Based on heat stress maps and reports to date, bleaching is likely to be more moderate south of Townsville with patches of severe bleaching. We've received reports of bleaching in the Keppels and as far south as Lady Elliot Island.

There are still many reefs throughout the Marine Park that have abundant living coral, and the Great Barrier Reef remains an iconic natural wonder.

As we saw last year bleaching and mortality can be highly variable across the 344,000 square kilometre Marine Park — an area bigger than Italy.

2017 bleaching timeline — to date

In January 2017 the Marine Park Authority began receiving increased reports of bleaching from marine park rangers, commercial operators and reef visitors submitting their observations through the Eye on the Reef monitoring program and from science partners.

On 21 and 22 February 2017 the Marine Park Authority conducted spot checks on reefs between Cairns and Townsville and this revealed moderate to severe coral bleaching at some reefs. A total of 54 in-water spot surveys of six reefs took place, with all six reefs surveyed showing signs of thermal stress.

Marine Park rangers from Queensland Parks and Wildlife Service and Marine Park Authority have been conducting further spot checks on reefs between Lizard Island and Townsville. Divers from the Association of Marine Park Tourism Operators have also been conducting reef health and impact surveys.

On 9 March 2017 experts from the Marine Park Authority spent six hours flying over the Reef between Townsville and Cairns, alongside researchers from the Australian Institute of Marine Science. The first aerial survey of the Reef for 2017 found severe bleaching in offshore reefs from north of Ingham to the northern extent of the survey near Cairns. This year more bleaching is being observed in this central part of the Reef, which last year escaped widespread severe bleaching.

On 16 March 2017 Marine Park Authority staff participated in the first of a series of comprehensive Reef-wide aerial surveys being conducted by the ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies. Preliminary information from the first survey indicated all reefs surveyed between Cairns and Lockhart River (the northern extent of the survey) showed bleaching to some extent, varying from mild to severe.

Severe bleaching has also been confirmed between Cairns and Ingham, with hotspots of severe bleaching inshore between Townsville and Mackay.

By the end of this week, the ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies would have completed aerial surveys of 1150 reefs across the Great Barrier Reef. GBRMPA is also conducting selective in-water surveys and working with the tourism industry to confirm the situation.

More detailed information will be available next week when information from the surveys can be entered in their computer database and analysed.

We will continue working with our partners to gather information on reef health to build a Reef-wide picture of how the Great Barrier Reef is faring this summer.

On 28 March 2017 category four cyclone Debbie crossed the Queensland coast at Airlie Beach. At this stage, the first priority is public safety and checking moorings, jetties, pontoons and island infrastructure. A cyclone like Debbie — large, intense and slow moving — can damage islands, coral reefs, mangroves, seagrass and other marine systems. The damage is not yet known. Cyclone Debbie was the tenth severe category cyclone to affect the Great Barrier Reef since 2005. The cyclone did not extend far enough north to alleviate hot conditions in the worst bleached areas between Townsville and Port Douglas.

Along with the tourism industry we're urging Reef visitors and those working in the Marine Park to closely monitor coral condition and encourage reports through our Eye on the Reef app.

This bleaching highlights the importance of global action on climate change. It’s vital the world acts to implement the Paris Agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

It also highlights the critical importance of the work being done under the Reef 2050 Plan and the Authority’s ongoing management to build Reef resilience — such as zoning and controlling coral-eating crown-of-thorns starfish.

Anyone out on the water can help protect the Reef by following the zoning rules and responsible reef practices and leaving plant-eating fish to help control seaweed and enable coral larvae to settle and create new colonies.

Subscribe to our e-newsletter for further updates on Reef health and management.