NFL commissioner Roger Goodell mishandled Ray Rice situation
'Goodell mishandled this situation from start to finish'

Social worker, petition founder and fan wants NFL commissioner to resign

But here's my question: What part of "rendered her unconscious" didn't the NFL commissioner and the owner of the Ravens understand seven months ago?

They'll linger for a while, and it will be interesting to see how much more coverage CBS gives this sordid story after giving NFL commissioner Roger Goodell ample air time to explain himself Tuesday, and in light of a report Wednesday that a New Jersey law enforcement official sent the now-infamous elevator tape to the NFL in April.

And it's all still true, except for the clouds left by the Ray Rice storm.

This should have been a totally tall week for Baltimore — tall ships and Blue Angels for War of 1812 commemorations; the Orioles, ever closer to a division title, back home to play the Yankees; Derek Jeter bidding farewell to Camden Yards; the Ravens at M&T; Bank Stadium to face their biggest rivals, the Pittsburgh Steelers, Thursday night on national television.

Those are words from the original police report on the incident: "striking her with his hand, rendering her unconscious."

These words are pretty clear to me and, imagine this: They have impact, they have real meaning, even without supporting video.

Of course, in this case, there was supporting video — 50 seconds of Rice callously dragging his future wife, Janay Palmer, now Janay Rice, out of the elevator of the Revel Casino Hotel. That video, along with the police report, became public five days after Rice and Palmer were arrested.

Anyone with common sense would have concluded that Rice had punched his fiancee hard enough to knock her out. No second video needed.

Anyone with common sense would have dismissed as lawyer talk Rice's attorney's claim that the incident was a "very minor physical altercation."

And anyone would have wondered why Palmer, clearly the victim, had been implicated and arrested, and why, after the charge against her was dropped, she appeared at a news conference with Rice and offered an apology for "the role that I played in the incident that night."

That is, if you had any understanding of domestic violence.

And clearly, that's where the macho and obtuse culture of the NFL got it wrong.

Gretchen Tome is a Baltimore social worker, formerly with the House of Ruth. She's also a feminist and a football fan. She has organized online petition drives to get the NFL to require counseling of players who commit acts of violence against their intimate partners.

She thinks Goodell should resign. "He mishandled this situation from start to finish," she says.

For one thing, Tome says, Goodell should never have interviewed Rice and his fiancee together, as he did in New York in mid-June.

That point is supported by Christine Murray of the American Counseling Association, an associate professor of counseling and education at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro.

"In general, when violence is present in a couple's relationship, couple therapy is not recommended," Murray says. "Couple therapy can be dangerous if there is violence in a relationship because the therapy can stir up conflict that could escalate to violence, especially after the client leaves the session and returns to the privacy of their home.

"In addition, treating the violence as a relationship issue can imply that the victim is to blame for it, when the responsibility for the abuse always lies squarely with the perpetrator."

Tome started her online drive in 2012, following a murder-suicide committed by a Kansas City Chiefs player, Jovan Belcher. She revived the petition in July, after Goodell suspended Rice for only two games.