5 books that will help you succeed this school year
When your classmates are passing notes, the teacher is talking as fast as can be and the material is going way over your head, it can be hard to grasp every detail on every subject from every class. What’s even harder is studying for a test on a topic that you don’t completely understand. If this is the case for you, it might be smart to seek out a few books that aren't on your syllabi. Adding more books to your bag is probably the last thing you want to do, but if you need help studying it's wise to get out and grab these guides.

1. Barron's AP Calculus

School is back in session, which means so are AP classes—yuck! If you feel that you need a bit more help outside of your classic AP Calc textbook, get a review book. You’ll find all of the practice problems and tests super helpful as you progress into the school year. Plus, using this from the start will give you a leg up on your classmates who only buy it to study for the rest.

2. Test Success!: How to Be Calm, Confident and Focused on Any Test

Test anxiety is a real thing. Not only can it be isolating and frustrating to deal with, it also hinders your ability demonstrate your knowledge of the material at hand. However, this book will give you tips on how to keep calm while studying as well as provide ways to stay totally chill during your next big test-taking experience.

3. Big Fat Notebook series

Whether you need help in American history, math or chemistry, these books have it all! Filled with a variety of questions and readings, the series will give you a crash course in any subject and is sure make you more comfortable with the material you learn in class.

4. For Dummies series

This series breaks down the parts of a subject that are difficult to understand by using easier terminology. Having trouble in Spanish class? This Spanish audio set will help you learn Spanish in an easier and simpler manner, and you don't even have to read!

5. Soar Study Skills; A Simple and Efficient System for Getting Better Grades in Less Time

Not sure how to study? This book is full of useful strategies to get you started. From goal setting to reading skills, there are tons of tips to assist you in acing your algebra exam or completing your timed english essay with ease.

Are there any other books (outside of those assigned in class, obvs) you use to help you in school? Share in the comments!