About Westboro Baptist Church
The Westboro Baptist Church (WBC) of Topeka, Kansas, is an Old School Baptist Church. We adhere to the teachings of the Bible, preach against all forms of sin (e.g., fornication, adultery [including divorce and remarriage], sodomy), preach repentance and remission of sins in Christ’s name, and insist that the sovereignty of God and the doctrines of grace be taught and expounded publicly to all men. We are not ‘Calvinists’ per se; we reject many unscriptural notions of Calvinist theology (such as infant baptism). We do, however, believe that the sovereignty of God with regard to grace, election and reprobation is framed appropriately in what is commonly known as the “Five points of Calvinism” (or TULIP Doctrine, as a mnemonic device for remembering them): Total Depravity, Unconditional Election, Limited Atonement, Irresistible Grace, and Perseverance of the Saints. Although these doctrines are almost universally hated today, they were once loved and believed. Even though the awful, destructive, sin-encouraging lies that "God loves everyone" and "Jesus died for everyone" are being taught from nearly every pulpit in this generation, with no focus on the wrath, holiness, and judgment of God, this hasn't always been the case. If you are in a church that supposedly believes the Bible, and you are hearing these lies, then your church doesn't teach what the Bible teaches. If you care about your never-dying soul, you will carefully read the entire Bible, and every word of this web site.

WBC engages in daily peaceful religious demonstrations opposing all manner of sin. We have conducted 64,256 such demonstrations since June, 1991, in 1038 citiesThese demonstrations are in obedient service unto our God and out of love for our neighbors. Consider the scripture:

Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. – Isaiah 58:1 (which means it is the duty of men who believe in God to preach against sin).

Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him. Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the LORD. – Leviticus 19:17-18 (which means that a main expression of love toward your neighbor is to tell them the truth - most notably about God’s view of sin and disobedience – rather than to allow them to think that their sin is not sin, or to encourage them to continue in it – which is an expression of hatred toward your neighbor).

At these religious demonstrations, we display large, colorful signs containing Bible words and sentiments ***(link to ‘signs’ page). We also play and sing songs that have appropriate, Bible sentiments expressed by the lyrics. In addition to this, we vocally preach at these demonstrations. Again, out of obedience to our God, we are non-violent, and we obey the laws of God and man.

For more information about WBC, feel free to attend one of our weekly church meetings. We are located at 3701 W. 12th Street in Topeka, KS. Our regular service time is 11:30 a.m. CST (please arrive 15 minutes early). On occasion, our meeting time may vary due to our street preaching schedule. If you wish to attend, we encourage you to email us the day before to confirm the time.