Body Language Expert Analyzes Chip and Joanna Gaines' Relationship with Their Kids
As we've already pointed out, Chip and Joanna Gaines are the definition of relationship goals. If there's one thing that elevates them to the next level (if there is such a thing), it's their undying love for their four (almost five!) children. The best part? Their kids — Drake, Ella, Duke, and Emmie — reciprocate this love straight back to the Fixer Upper stars.

Unlike some celebrities, Chip and Joanna don't shy away from showing their kids on their show or personal social media accounts. We know about Ella's green thumb, Duke's pickle obsession, and so on. Time and time again, Chip and Joanna gush about about parenthood — and their body language reveals that they know exactly what they're doing.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

"More than anything, we know that giving and receiving affection is normal in the Gaines' home," body language expert and author of SNAP: Making the Most of First Impressions, Body Language, and Charisma, told GoodHousekeeping.com. As some of us know, not all families are overly — or even mildly — affectionate but the photos prove that they are pros in the hugging, snuggling, and hand holding departments.

Most Popular

The children are relaxed around their parents — even when there's a camera close by. When cuddling on the couch after a hard day at work (remember they don't have cell phones or TV!), Chip and his son fit together like spoons, proving they're a close unit. "When they're on the couch together, Chip's son is also modeling his mother's typical hand holding behavior," she says. "He latches on to Chip's arm as a means of stability." Like mother, like son.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Even though they have their hands full running a number of of businesses, Chip and Joanna work hard to give their children a simple (and balanced) life. While we see their kids on their show, it's apparent that they also keep their kids on set away from the camera lens. "Joanna is clearly in sync with her daughter," says Wood. "Her daughter's heels are inside of her mom's feet, which symbolizes her sense of closeness and connection."

The duo also encourage their children to be curious and playful. They live on a farm without technology, so creativity is paramount. "When their daughter is reaching for the camera, you can see that Chip and Joanna want her to explore and are happy that she is doing so," she says. The kids aren't acting out as a response to their parent's lack of attention but rather because they know their parents always keep an eye on them, no matter how busy they might be.