Nuanced immigration stance riles Perry’s foes
This year, Perry rejected Arizona’s harsh immigration law, saying it “would not be the right direction for Texas,’’ because it would turn police officers into immigration agents, distracting them from their existing law enforcement duties. He opposed plans to build a wall on the US-Mexico border, calling it “idiocy’’ that will “not work.’’ And he has said E-Verify, a federal program that allows employers to check the immigration status of workers, “would not make a hill-of-beans difference’’ in stopping illegal immigration.

It is the tough talk of the chief executive of a border state, a state with a long history of cultural and commercial exchange with Mexico, where the Latino vote is vital.

But now that Perry is running for the Republican presidential nomination, his long record on the issue, amassed over 11 years as governor, is offering fodder for critics on the right as well as political rivals, who see immigration as one way to drive a wedge between the Texas governor and the conservative voters who hold considerable sway in the primary. His record may also broaden the view of voters just now coming to know Perry and who may have thought of him as an unalloyed conservative on this as on other issues.

But the contrast between his record, and those of his rivals, remains stark.

Although jobs, the economy, and Social Security are center stage in the race, Mitt Romney has begun highlighting his own record on immigration, including his opposition to in-state tuition, which he calls a “magnet’’ for illegal immigrants. Some of Perry’s allies in the Tea Party movement have also criticized him as dangerously soft on illegal immigration.

At the same time, Perry’s decision to occasionally break with conservative orthodoxy on immigration could help him follow in the footsteps of his Texas predecessor, George W. Bush, whose moderate stances on the issue helped him capture an estimated 40 percent of the Latino vote in the 2004 presidential election.