US to House 250,000 Syrian Refugees at Navajo Indian Reservation
WINDOW ROCK, Az. – The U.S. Department of State announced today that it will grant upwards of two-hundred and fifty thousand Syrian refugees temporary amnesty in the United States. Over the next four months, State Department officials working in conjunction with FEMA will begin processing and transporting the refugees to sparsely populated parts of Arizona and North Dakota.

“Due to the increasingly dire humanitarian situation in the Middle East, the United States has agreed to facilitate the transfer of a number of Syrian refugees to the Navajo and Standing Rock reservations where they will be provided with food, shelter, and medical treatment,” Cathy Pieper, a spokesperson for the Department of State, said Friday.

Pieper said the tribal leadership of the Navajo and Standing Rock territories respectively, will hold sole responsibility for the safety and wellbeing of the refugees. “Due in part to shared experiences, we believe Syrian refugees will find it relatively easy to assimilate themselves into the native culture,” Pieper said.

Ahmed Alsouki, who, along with his wife and two children, was one of the first Syrians to be granted temporary amnesty by the United States, told Vice News he feels very fortunate about the situation. “Before the war I was an entrepreneur,” Alsouki said. “I traveled many times to New Delhi on business, so I am very familiar with the Indian way of life.”

The Obama administration’s decision to accept the refugees comes amid concerns that ISIS could use the refugee crisis as a means to infiltrate the West. White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest dispelled such fears yesterday, saying the refugees will spend “very little time on American soil” prior to being placed on the reservations. “These tribal habitats are very remote,” said Earnest, who added that federal authorities are stepping up efforts to monitor all reservations within the United States for suspicious activity.