Text of H.R. 5394 (108th): To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to modify the taxation of ... (Passed Congress version)
Because you are a member of panel, your positions on legislation and notes below will be shared with the panel administrators. ( More Info )

Add a note about this bill. Your note is for you and will not be shared with anyone.

You are reading a bill enacted 4,979 days ago. In the intervening time subsequent legislation may have amended or repealed the provisions below.

The text of the bill below is as of Dec 8, 2004 (Passed Congress).

H.R.5394

One Hundred Eighth Congress

of the

United States of America

AT THE SECOND SESSION

Begun and held at the City of Washington on Tuesday,

the twentieth day of January, two thousand and four

An Act

To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to modify the taxation of arrow components.

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. EXCISE TAX ON ARROWS.

(a) Repeal- Subsection (b) of section 332 of the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, and the amendments made by such subsection, are hereby repealed; and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be applied as if such subsection and amendments had never been enacted. (b) Tax on Arrow Shafts- Paragraph (2) of section 4161(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to arrows) is amended to read as follows: ‘(2) ARROWS- ‘(A) IN GENERAL- There is hereby imposed on the first sale by the manufacturer, producer, or importer of any shaft (whether sold separately or incorporated as part of a finished or unfinished product) of a type used in the manufacture of any arrow which after its assembly-- ‘(i) measures 18 inches overall or more in length, or ‘(ii) measures less than 18 inches overall in length but is suitable for use with a bow described in paragraph (1)(A), a tax equal to 39 cents per shaft. ‘(B) ADJUSTMENT FOR INFLATION- ‘(i) IN GENERAL- In the case of any calendar year beginning after 2005, the 39-cent amount specified in subparagraph (A) shall be increased by an amount equal to the product of-- ‘(I) such amount, multiplied by ‘(II) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for such calendar year, determined by substituting ‘2004’ for ‘1992’ in subparagraph (B) thereof. ‘(ii) ROUNDING- If any increase determined under clause (i) is not a multiple of 1 cent, such increase shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of 1 cent.’. (c) Arrow Points- Clause (ii) of section 4161(b)(1)(B) (relating to archery equipment) of such Code is amended by striking ‘quiver or broadhead’ and inserting ‘quiver, broadhead, or point’. (d) Effective Date- The amendments made by subsections (b) and (c) shall apply to articles sold by the manufacturer, producer, or importer after March 31, 2005.

Speaker of the House of Representatives.

Vice President of the United States and

President of the Senate.