Patent US1471168 - Headrest for automobile seats and the like
B. KATZ HEADREST FOR AUTOMOBILE SEATS AND THE LIKE Filed Feb. 24. 1921 Oct. 16,1923. 1,471, 68

.54 a 4 3/56 22 /6 7 a 26 M INVENTOR :i' Z v BENJAMIN zmrz ATTORNEY 7 seats, particularly the drivers seat. V f

Patented Oct. i1 6, 1923,. i 7

' J I ma PATENT 71F d term nant,oaamm mmm; I

.Anbject of the inventionis to provid a head rest which is yieldablein' theparticw' lar directions that the, head of the-occupant" of a moving vehicle, usually moveswhensubjected to the jolts and iriregularmover,

'ments of the vehicle. v r

- Another, object of the inventionis to provide a head rest which may be adjustedto accommodate occupants of various statures Afurther object. is to provide the seat with which the rest is associated, with means for removably supporting the rest, -which will be practically invisible or at least very inconspicuous when the rest is removed.

p The invention possesses other objects and;

- features of advantage, some of which with the foregoing, will be set forth in the following;description of the preferred form of my invention which' is illustrated in the drawings accompanying and formingpart. ofthe specification. It is to be understood that I do" not limit myself to the'showing made by the saiddrawings anddescription,v

as Imay adopt variations ofthe preferred formwithin the" scope of my nvention; as

being showniin section to disclose thehid set forth in theclaims. l V :Referringto said-drawingsu den mechanism more clearly.

Figure 2 is a plan viewof ftheresti v Figure 3 is arfragmentaryside elevation of a modified-form of support for the rest on the seat. 7 l1- Almost invariably when a motorist drives his car continuously on a'trip of any great length, the muscles of his neck tire due to theflunrelaxed' position i necessarily maintained by the headJfBy providinga props--- erly positioned head rest in connection with the drivers seat, he may 'rest hishead, relax the tiredneck muscles, andstill maintain his alert vigil. Furthermore since as in the Figure lis a side elevatipn 'ofthe headi rest ofnny invention gshowlngi it" attached n to the backof aseat, parts of the device;

nnennnsrg non AUTOMO I snAr' s' AND THE IKE,

li neauonniea February MQleZ I. Serial No. 447,868

is readily. yieldable in the directions 'i-n whichthe drive'rs bodyvand head-usually 'move during thejolting of the-vehicle,--the presentform of the invention the head rest jarring and-bumping of the head against the rest will be eliminated and the driver wlll'be permitted to maintain aiposition of comparative .-ease and comfort.

Briefly summarized thehead rest as here: shown comprises, a vertically adjustablestandard removably supported on rthe back of the seat, a forwardly and rearwardly; adjustable member-carried by the standard,

a spindlev reciprocatively mounted *in said member, anupholstered rest-pivoted tothespindle for movement about ahorizontal axis,lrneans for resiliently holding the rest" against rotati've movement about its axis,

'andimeansfor resiliently holding'the spindle'iand the rest extendedforwardly.

A detailed 1 description follows:

The device comprises a substantially Vertical'standard 2 which is removably and slidablyl supported in a guideway "3 which as shownrtin Figure 1 is in'theformrof; a-

flanged {retaining plate 1 t i. conveniently attached to the rear side of vthe back-6 of the seat 7. .l'lhe standard; is. adjustable vertically and to this; end it is; preferably provided with spaced notches 8 which are arranged to be pawl 9.1

. 'Formed the upper end of thestandard 2 is? an eye12 in which engages .a transengagedby a spring pressed versely movable casing or hollow member extends into ithe-interiorof the member.

Theftube l 8is; preferably prevented from. 1 e rotating with respect to the casing member by means got-a key .19 which is formed on the tube and-i5 arranged toengage the re cess 21 provided at the open end 16 ofthe l3 -One end 14 3!? the member13 is closed" 7 j whereas-the otherend16 isg-open and is en-, gaged by a shoulder 17 of atube 18 which casingif In: this manner the tube andcasf ingv may bei either. readily disengaged from each other or quickly secured in lockedengagement. Reciprocatively mounted in the tube '18 is a spindle 22fwl1ich is provided with a transversely disposed pin 23 that engagesin a slot 24' formed in the tube so 7 that rotative movement of the spindle with in the tubeis prevented and the forward and re'arward movement of the spindle limited; A portion of the enclosed section of the spindle ispreferably reduced in area and is encircled by a coil-spring 26 one end of which. abuts against the shoulder 27 ot' the spindle and the other end abuts against.

I of the spindle by 'means of ears .31 which engage a pivot stud 32 is a head resting member. or body 33 preferably upholstered infa suitable manner on its: forward side 3a..

' The ax-isiof the stud. 32 is horizontally dis posed so that the rest 33 may be swung in avertical plane. The rest is normally held in the extended substantially horizontal position shown in Figure I, through the agency of a spring 36 which preferably encircles the pivot-stud 32 and presses. against the rest in a manner to resiliently resist the;

downward movement thereof, positive limitation to the downward movement o'I the rest being preferably effected when the base plate of, the ear bracket abuts against the nose 37 formed at the end 29 of 1 rec-iprocative element.

the spindle.

"From the foregoing it will be readily understood the head rest is yieldingly mounted both r'or -horizontal"and vertical" 'movement'. In this manner the head rest with comparatively small resistance will move with the head of' the occupant during the usual jolting ofthe moving vehicle, and

- at the same time prove normally sufficiently rigid to comfortablysupport the head. I

The head rest, and the spindle, tube, and

casing, which latter members may bebroadly termed an arm, arelm'ovablea's a whole for wardly or rearwa-rdly with respect to the i ,the device to be adjusted toj aocommodate occupant, and are preferably held 'in' 40 adjusted position by means of aspring pressed pawl 39 supported by the standard 2- and adapted to engage in notches ll; formed in the plate tQkfixe-d to the casing.

It will thus be noted-thatthe head rest is" adjustable both forward and rearward and upward anddownward, thereby permitting apparent that the complete head; rest may be readily removed if desired,'an1d*when this is done, the inobtrusive guide plate 4: is"

5 pralticauy ly element remai on the seat] v In Figure 3 is shown a modified form of" supporting the standard upon the back of extends through the back. The foregoing construction is particularly advantageous since no supporting means for the head rest is visible on the back or seat when the former is removed. I

. Iclaimz '1'; A' head rest for'automobile seatsand the like," comprising a vertically adjustable standard, a transversely adjustable member mounted in said standard, a springpressed reciprocative element supported by" said member, and a rest carried by said element.

2. Ahead rest for automobile seats'and the like, comprising a standard, a forwardly and rearwardly"adjustablemember mounted in said standard, a reciprocative element supported by said member, a. spring adapted to'hold said'element in' a forward'position', and an upholstered rest carried by said 3..A head rest for automobile seats or the like, comprising a vertically adjustable against'movement about its axis of'rotation'.

4. A head rest for automobile seatsor the like, comprising a vertically adjustable standard adapted to be removably' carried on the back of the seat, a forwardly and rearwardly adjustable hollow member mounted in said standard, a" spindle having one end reciprocatively engaging in said hollow member, an, upholstered rest 'pivoted to the other end of said spindle for movement about a horizontal axis, a spring arranged in said hollow member arranged to" normally hold said spindle in extended relation, and a springfor holding said restagainst mo-vementabout its axis of rotation. I

In testimony whereof I have hereunto set myhand at Oakland, 'Calitorniaf'this 116th day of February, 1921; I V

" BENJA MIN KATZf p