Music minister fondled us, claim youths in Gaffney church
Chad Sevearance, 22, of Bessemer City, N.C., is charged with three counts of lewd act on a minor, but will go to trial on only one of the cases today. The other two cases will be tried separately. The names of all three victims are being withheld because of the nature of the charges. Assistant solicitor Tommy Wall called one of the boys to the stand to testify. The boy, now 16, was 14 when he said Sevearance fondled him in July 1998. He and the other alleged victims are members of New Harvest Church of God in Gaffney, where Sevearance was the music minister. The 16-year-old said Sevearance invited him to his Bessemer City home to spend the night, and he agreed. He testified that during the visit, Sevearance asked him how he'd feel about a man performing oral sex on him. "I thought he was joking," the youth said. He said Sevearance frequently asked him about sexual acts between men and women, which upset him because of the man's position in the church. He said following a revival meeting, he and Sevearance stayed overnight at the home of one of the other alleged victims. The three slept in the same bed, and during the night the boy said he woke up to find Sevearance fondling him. But he didn't immediately report it, he said. "I was ashamed," the boy said. "I thought there was something bad about me. " The second boy, now 17, said he was 15 when Sevearance invited him to his home, where he showed him a pornographic video of a man and a woman having sex. He said later that night, after he and Sevearance went to sleep in the same bed, he woke up to find the man fondling him. "He told me if I ever told the pastor, he'd make me look like a fool and a liar," the youth said. Defense attorney Thomas Shealy questioned why, if the boys were all fondled in July 1998, no one found out about the incidents until September. He asked whether Sevearance had done something to make the second boy mad. The boy said he got angry after the pastor announced Sevearance was getting a raise and praised him during a church service. "He gave a speech talking about how good a person Chad was, and Chad wasn't a good person at all," he said. The third alleged victim, also 17, said Sevearance had made the same advances to him over a three-week period he stayed in the boy's home. The boy said Sevearance fondled him several times. Shealy argued that none of the alleged victims reported the incident until the second boy got mad. "This is a group of young men who got together and developed their stories because of their anger at Chad Sevearance," he said. "Then and only then do they go to the authorities. We submit there's been collusion here. It's like a Salem witch hunt." The trial is scheduled to begin today.

Julie Woodcock can be reached at julie.woodcock@shj.com or (864) 487-7146.