Dwayne Johnson for president
In the wonderful world of professional wrestling, competitors are divided into two categories: they are either a "face", or a "heel". A face is a good guy, a hero. He plays by the rules (mostly). He gets the cheers (inevitably). And if, sorry, when (there is always a when) he is called upon to open up a fresh can of whup-ass, it is always justified. That's because a heel will undoubtedly have provoked the face's ire. A heel is a bad guy, the pantomime villain of the piece. He breaks all the rules (gleefully). He gets the boos (sometimes ironically). And when he fights (he always does, eventually), he fights dirty.

In the wrestling ring, Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson played both those roles with aplomb. He has also had a pretty decent crack at both in life. Today, the 44-year-old, who was named the biggest international box office star of 2015 (generating just shy of $1.5 billion worldwide thanks to movies such as San Andreas and Furious 7) and has over 50 million followers hanging on his every Instagram post, seems like a fully-fledged, 100 per cent, grade-A good guy. After an afternoon spent in his company, GQ can confirm he is charming and courteous, open and honest, self-deprecating but not self-obsessed and that he is both foul-mouthed and funny as hell. Unsurprisingly for a man who used to wear leatherette (or pleather) budgie smugglers every night, he has absolutely nothing to hide. But as he freely admits now, back in the day, when he was good, he was very, very good, but when he was bad... "Man," he says with the biggest pizza-eating grin in Hollywood, "I could be a complete asshole!"

Advertisement

And he's right. After this "big, brown, handsome, tattooed, talented 250lbs of brown-eyed savage manliness" - his words - has spent the afternoon looking pumped and prison-yard pretty for the camera, we meet outside the Georgia State Railroad Museum in the warm Savannah sunshine and Johnson reveals everything. He will tell stories of the good, the bad and even the very ugly - like the time he tried to pull a guy's tongue out ("It was very slippery and luckily I couldn't get a grip on it," but more of that later) - and each one reveals a little more about the man he has become. But for every admission and heartfelt acknowledgement of his own failings, he will point to the lesson he learned from it and how it made him a better person.

With his back catalogue of hard-life experiences, Johnson should be a therapist's dream. Take your pick from only child, dysfunctional family, severe poverty, adolescent arrests, bouts of depression - Johnson has been there, seen it, done it and emerged on the other side as mentally strong as the body he has honed over years spent in what he calls the "iron paradise"; a lifetime of "4am clangin' and bangin' sessions" that he describes as his anchor. And make no mistake, in the flesh he is colossal. At 6ft 4in he isn't ludicrously tall, but his chest has the dimensions of an American fridge, and his arms look like giant boa constrictors halfway through digesting a pair of piglets. He smells pretty good too. He has been filming Baywatch and Johnson always picks a signature scent for his character. In the case of Mitch Buchannon (the character made famous by David Hasselhoff), that is Blue Kenzo. He is the picture of health, happiness and contentment.

But ask him to explain how he has become so successful? How he went from juvenile delinquent and failed NFL athlete to the biggest name in the WWE and then to a well-respected A-list movie star? That's when he starts to struggle...

Read next How to spot the Fitstagrammer How to spot the Fitstagrammer No one should be this happy, especially not about Tenderstem broccoli and coconut oil

"The honest answer is I don't know," he says earnestly. "I get asked that every once in a while and I don't have an answer. I feel like I got lucky and that I have some very good people around me. But I think everything I have achieved comes down to wrestling. What you have to remember is that my grandfather was a wrestler and my father was a wrestler, and I grew up at a time when wrestling was a subculture, it was small scale and the wrestlers lived like gypsies and they didn't make much money. But what you had to do, every night, was find a way to connect with people, to make them like you. Back then, you had to connect. Wrestling isn't real, it is scripted; people know all this, so to make them care about you and your character, you have to connect with them somehow."

Advertisement

In terms of connecting with people, the best example of what he is talking about is probably Samuel L Jackson. A global star with almost universal international appeal, Jackson has that undefinable talent for being, to put it simply, The Man. A few years ago I asked the star of Pulp Fiction, Star Wars and The Avengers to explain, just as I ask Johnson now, how is it that he just seems to be so... cool? Jackson fixed me with that nonchalant stare of his and told me, "Man, I just feel comfortable in my own skin. And I always have."

When I tell Johnson this he laughs hard. "Wow! I knew Sam would know. I love that answer, by the way. Thank you so much, because that is going to be my answer from now on. I do feel comfortable in my skin. I feel comfortable in who I am. But it took a lot of time to get there."

As a child, Dwayne Johnson had to learn two things: how to make friends quickly and how to cope when he was alone. His mother, Ata Maivia, was Samoan and worshipped the ground her son walked on, while his father, Rocky, was a Canadian pro-wrestler who worked the circuit and had a parenting style best described as tough love. It was a difficult familial relationship all round, but especially hard on "little Dewey".

Advertisement

For Johnson it was a life of uncertainty and unreliability that stemmed from his father's profession and errant personality. "Growing up we moved around a lot," he says. "I think we lived in 14 different states, including time in New Zealand and Hawaii, and I was always changing schools, adapting to new environments, starting over again and again as we moved with my dad around the country. I didn't know anything else and it was tough, but I look back at it as the start of me learning to connect with people."

Read next How to lose your love handles in three days How to lose your love handles in three days How to lose your love handles in three days

Despite the occasional months when things went well and his dad made decent money, Johnson remembers that things were always tight financially. Sometimes they would be flush with cash, but at other times, when Rocky was on the road away from his family, he lived his life as though Dwayne and Ata didn't exist. For a more reliable paternal role model, Dwayne turned to his maternal grandfather, Peter Maivia, AKA the "High Chief", who appeared as a Bond henchman in You Only Live Twice. Johnson describes him as "a very proud man who was very much loved and respected, and also one of the toughest men ever in pro-wrestling".

However, when the Chief died of cancer, his ten-year-old grandson took it hard and started going off the rails. "Yeah, I was a very angry teenager," Johnson remembers. "I think I was just angry at my life scenario... at not having anything. I didn't like living in an efficiency [a one-person apartment], I didn't like my parents fighting, my dad being on the road, not making much money. It was tough... and I was getting into a lot of fights. I was never disrespectful to adults, though. In the Samoan culture, that is a big no-no. You'd get your ass kicked if ever you disrespected an older person. So it was a funny juxtaposition. I would be getting into fights all the time at school, but all the teachers were saying: 'He's such a good kid, a pleasure to have in class. So why is he getting arrested all the time?'"

Well, the main reason he was getting arrested was that by the age of 14 he weighed in at close to 225lbs, had what he describes affectionately as a "creepy porn star 'stache" and was part of a criminal gang in Hawaii. It was the usual story, he tells me, "Hanging with the wrong crowd, showing off, all the usual macho bullshit. Yup, all me."

And were you any good as a criminal? He laughs out loud, but for the first time with a hint of embarrassment. "I was all right, actually. Something to be proud of," he says thick with irony. "We had a couple of big scores, I suppose, yeah. I was part of a theft ring in Hawaii and our big thing was clothes and some jewellery."

What saved Johnson from a life of crime is a story he has told more than once. How one night he and his mother came home to their tiny $180-a-week home to find an eviction notice and a padlock on the door. His mum burst into tears and it broke Johnson's heart. Looking back, what was the overriding emotion that springs to mind from that night? Was it anger at his father's absence? Sadness at his mother's distress? Shame at the trouble he had been getting in? He shakes his head.

Read next Welcome to the world of strongman swimming Welcome to the world of strongman swimming GQ's resident athlete adventurer Ross Edgley is aiming to front crawl his way into the record books this year by completing a series of long-distance open water swims that will re-write the rules of strength and swimming. Hulk Splash!

"It was fear," he says eventually. "A fear of getting evicted again, a fear of losing a home, of having no place to go. When we got evicted, the only thing I could think to do, to make sure that I never got evicted again, was to build myself, build my body into something. Because in my head, the men I looked up to as being successful - in Hollywood at that time, Sylvester Stallone, Harrison Ford, Clint Eastwood - all had built bodies."

Were you thinking that was a possibility? That you might be an actor and go to Hollywood? "Hell no!" he exclaims. "How I equated it in my head was that I could go out and do something using my own commitment and my own two hands that would enable me to make money somehow, and then we would never get evicted again. That's why I hit the gym, the YMCA. And the thing is, I still wake up in the morning with some deep-seated fear that I have to keep working out so that I don't get evicted tomorrow. Some day I will probably need to dredge up that stuff with a psychiatrist and figure it out. Until then, talking to you is a pretty good alternative."

The other positive that emerged from the eviction was that Johnson and his mother had no choice but to leave Hawaii and move in with Rocky, who was then wrestling out of Memphis. It got Johnson out of the lifestyle that he was acquiring a taste for. It also put him on the road to Bethlehem.

It wasn't exactly the Promised Land, but Bethlehem, Pennsylvania proved to be Dwayne Johnson's salvation. Having moved there from Memphis, Johnson entered the eleventh grade with the same cocksure attitude of the angry young man he had been in Honolulu. He takes up the story...

"It was a new high school and I had gotten myself suspended after about two weeks because I got in a fight - yeah, you can spot the trend, right?" he says with a smile. "That kid's gonna make it! Look out world! So I go back to school and I decided I didn't want to use the boys' bathroom. It was disgusting, smelled of piss and smoke and all that. So I used the teachers' one instead. So I am in there washing my hands and one of the teachers came in and said, 'Hey, you can't be in here.' So I looked over at him and carried on washing my hands and said, 'Yeah, I'll leave in a second.' I know, I was an asshole!

Read next How to stretch yourself leaner at London's most beautiful (and expensive) gym How to stretch yourself leaner at London's most beautiful (and expensive) gym How to stretch yourself leaner at London's most beautiful gym, Bodyism

"And this guy was so angry, the veins were popping on his neck and he screams, 'Hey! Get the f*** out of here now!' And I'm like James Bond, taking my time, whatever. And when I'd finished I walked past him, brushed past him a little bit and headed back to class. But I'll never forget how furious he was. I was much bigger than him, but he didn't back down. And I went home that night and I was thinking about it and I thought, 'Wow! What a dick I was. I didn't even know who the guy was and I treated him like dirt.' So the next day I went looking for him because I wanted to apologise. I found his class and it turned out he was the teacher that looked after all the tough kids, the troublemakers. So already he is expecting the worst. Anyway I talked to him, apologised, explained how sorry I was for my behaviour and offered to shake his hand. He took my hand, held onto it and said, 'Thank you. I want you to play football for me.' Just like that. His name was Jody Cwik and he turned my life around."

Despite having not played much football, Johnson's natural athleticism and his commitment to the weight room and training fast-tracked him in a sport that is all about speed, power and balls of steel. If you've got all that and you have been brought up as a tough, proud Samoan with a badass dad and you are hard-wired never to back down or take a backwards step, you may just have found your calling. Johnson certainly thought he had. High school success led to the No1 football school, the University of Miami, offering him a full-time scholarship, and no sooner had he arrived than his coach told him, "You've got a shot to make it at the NFL."

"So in my head, that was it. I've got my ticket," Johnson says, almost excited at the memory. "I get goosebumps now just thinking about it. I'll make it, make money, my parents can move out of their apartment. This is it. So I worked hard, really hard and for a few years I believed it was within my grasp. Man, I was ballin', as we say. Then it fell away... I got hurt, had injuries, I struggled, and I got depressed. I was angry at the world, lost faith in the universe, in a higher power, in the Big Man upstairs or whatever you want to call it. And when I eventually called it a day, I had to come home, move in with my parents. I was 24, living in a small apartment in Tampa with my folks. I literally did not know what I was going to do."

Johnson remembers that after he flew down from Canada, having been cut from the team, when he looked in his pocket for change to phone his dad to pick him up from the airport he had just $7 in his pocket. It was, if wrestling fans will pardon the expression, a rock-bottom moment. As always, he would eventually turn that negative into a positive (his development business is called Seven Bucks Productions), but at the time it was the bleakest moment of his life.

"I was really f***ing depressed," he tells me. "It never got so bad that I thought I wanted to check out, but I was just so unhappy and frustrated because I had nothing. I remember the OJ Simpson trial was on TV the whole time, and for three or four weeks I remember being in this tiny apartment with an all-purpose cleaner and a rag, just cleaning. I've spoken to a couple of psychiatrists socially over the years and they find that fascinating." He grins.

Read next Anthony Joshua’s boxing gym is the best fight club in Britain Anthony Joshua’s boxing gym is the best fight club in Britain Anthony Joshua’s “passion project” is a boxing gym like no other. GQ spent two months training at BXR, and this is what we learned

But when he says he had no options, he genuinely means it. At university he had studied criminology and he thought about working for the FBI or the CIA, but he quickly realised that to achieve that he would need to further his education and that was financially impossible. So he fell back on the only thing he knew: wrestling. It was a gut instinct. A feeling he had that something good might come of it. Or at least, he says, "I didn't think I would suck, put it like that."

His father did not share his view. "When I first told my dad that I wanted to become a wrestler, we got into a huge fight. At the time we were living in a two-bedroom apartment in Tampa, and he said, 'Look around you. This is what I have. I pay $500 a month, I am 49, and this is my life. And I don't want this for you.' And I understood what he was saying and I didn't have any good reason for thinking wrestling was going to be right for me. I remember him telling me, 'What do you think you have to offer the wrestling business?' And I told him I didn't know, but that I just felt in my gut that there was something in it for me. But I will tell you this: after I had my first wrestling match, in boots and purple shorts that I borrowed, I knew I was in love. I knew that with complete clarity. I didn't know if I would ever make it, but I did know I loved it."

Be in no doubt, wrestling is a tough business. If you've seen Mickey Rourke's portrayal of Randy "The Ram" Robinson in The Wrestler - body battered, living on the fringes, fighting for chump change - you'll understand it isn't all glitz, glamour and WWE millions. Johnson has plenty of stories that illustrate the point that the industry he was entering was full of hardcore characters. There's the one about his grandfather biting British wrestler Billy Robinson's eye out in a street fight in Japan. Another about his Uncle Tonga biting off a man's nose in an airport because the guy had argued that wrestling was full of fakes and phonies. Johnson himself admits to getting in a brawl once in his football days that, "started in the weight room office, spilled out of there on to the weight room floor, and as we were trading shots, it ended when I reached in and tried to grab his tongue."

But behind those shocking stories is a tough grinding reality of a life in wrestling's lower leagues: the small shows in Kentucky, Alabama and Tennessee where you cut your teeth (and lose a few too), learn the ropes (and how to fly off them) and pay your dues (the basic guarantee was $40 a night). That is the reality of wrestling and what Johnson bought into.

"When I started off, I knew there was something bigger," he says. "I knew the WWF as it was back then, WWE now, was the big show. Like the NFL from my football days. So I understood that before I had a shot at the WWE, I had to prove myself. I had to go to those small southern towns and set up rings at the flea markets, fairs, barns, high school sports halls, used-car dealerships... it didn't matter to me. And I think when you come up that way, when you are continually scratching and scratching, trying to get ahead and make a living, you have to constantly think: how can I appeal to the audience? And back then, my audience might only have been 100 people. So you had to connect with all of them - just like I always try to do now, be it through my movies, TV shows or Instagram. The difference back then was that all I had to show for it was a few extra bucks and dinner at the Waffle House every night. But for me, it was all part of the journey that would take me to the WWE. I believed that would happen."

Read next Charlie Hunnam stars in the King Arthur workout video Charlie Hunnam stars in the King Arthur workout video Guy Ritchie's King Arthur is coming soon to a big screen near you. Until then, here's an exclusive preview of how Charlie Hunnam prepared for this medieval royal rumble

Being the first third-generation wrestler in history certainly helped Johnson make it to the big show. His grandfather was a legend, his father had been a star too, but it was wrestling's kingpin, the WWE chairman and CEO Vince McMahon, who has the final say on whether a grappler gets a chance. After that? Well, that's down to the fans. And it was wrestling fans that almost finished Johnson's career before it had even started.

As Rocky Maivia, Johnson made his debut for the WWF in November 1996 and the management made him a rookie sensation. He was pegged as a face, told to smile no matter what, and the advice he was given was to look as if he was just grateful to be there. And he was. The fans, though, not so much. "The thing is, even though the wrestling business is what we a call 'work' - it's fiction, a TV show with a script - the problem comes if the fans feel someone is getting a push and they don't deserve it. And that is how they felt about me at the start. I was wrestling in front of 20,000 people, 30,000, 40,000, whatever, but I wasn't enjoying it because I wasn't being me. And it got to a point where I was smiling and waving, but being unmercifully booed."

But things got better, right?

"No, man... it got worse. I was playing this saccharine, plastic, big-smiling good guy and I was getting f***ing hammered every night. Let me tell you, it is the worst thing that can happen to a wrestler. So then I started getting pushed down the bill to take part in opening matches and then you begin to realise that your career is on the slide. They are not booing me as badly, because now they just don't give a f***. And when that happens, you're done!"

A knee injury took Johnson out of the game for a couple of months and he thought about quitting, taking the money he had made, going back to school, giving up on wrestling. But he couldn't walk away. A week before he was due back, he got a call from McMahon who asked him what he thought about turning heel? Johnson loved it, but made McMahon promise to let him speak to the fans his way. Rocky Maivia was gone. In his place was The Rock, a trash-talking, candy ass-kicking, jabroni-beating son-of-bitch who in three years became the biggest name the wrestling world had ever seen. The Rock was cooking!

Read next Are you fit enough for the America's Cup? Are you fit enough for the America's Cup? On the eve of the first race in Bermuda, Ross Edgley joined the Land Rover BAR team to find out what it takes to win the America's Cup...

"The Rock was - still is in fact - the best role I will ever get to play," he says now. "I was being me, but me turned all the way up to ten. I could say anything, do anything and I would wink and everyone was in on the joke. They got it, I was connecting, it was perfect. But I couldn't help feeling like I had achieved everything I had wanted to in wrestling. By the end of 1998 I was the youngest world champion and making a lot of money, but I wanted to know what was next. I had done a couple of cameos in TV and I thought that maybe I might like to act. I didn't know for sure and back then there was no blueprint for me to follow as a wrestler breaking out into Hollywood and becoming a leading man. When I met Ron Meyer, who is the president of Universal Pictures, he asked me if [the movie business] was something I might like to get into. It was very similar to when I was making the transition to wrestling: I thought I could be good, I had a gut feeling, but I didn't know if I had what it takes. And I asked Ron what I should do, and he said, 'Look, you need to learn the business, understand how it all works, take some acting classes, but you have something. You have the potential to be special.'"

The first role that came along for The Rock, as he was billed then, was The Mummy Returns. Filming in 2001 in Morocco, he had a small part in an action scene, he was suffering from food poisoning, and he only had one line (he shouts "Haku Machente!" if you really want to know). But when studio execs saw the footage, he nailed it so conclusively they asked him to star in the lead role of his own spin-off, The Scorpion King, for a then record-breaking first-time fee of $5.5m. He was on his way.

He signed with Hollywood mega-agency Creative Artists Agency (CAA), made a couple of action movies and he should have been happy. But just as he felt he wasn't being true to himself in the wrestling ring, his movie career didn't feel right. He was having difficulties in his first marriage, he was being advised to turn his back on wrestling and lose The Rock name he had built up so successfully, and worst of all, he was being told that he needed to slim down - to lose the Schwarzenegger/Stallone-style bulk, and conform to the image of a fit and fashionable leading man like Tom Cruise and Brad Pitt. The tipping point came in 2005.

"Back then I only had the opportunity to make two movies," he says. "One was a typical Disney movie called The Pacifier. The other one was Be Cool. And Be Cool had [John] Travolta and [Harvey] Keitel and Uma Thurman. So there was this seeming dead cert commercial hit with Disney or this cool, hip movie full of stars. And then someone on the production told me that Elmore Leonard had actually written my role specifically for me - the character was a Samoan who could move his eyebrow and wanted to be in movies. That was the character. And he was gay. And there were people around me at that time who didn't think playing a gay guy was a good career move. But for me, it seemed a clear choice: making money with Disney or getting opportunities from Be Cool. Vin Diesel ended up doing The Pacifier eventually and it was a commercial success. I went with Be Cool, which was not, but I got great reviews in it, and it raised my stock and opened up some possibilities for me. I trusted my instinct and I realised, just like in wrestling, I had to be me. The only problem was it took me five years to act on it."

He smiles now, but he describes the period from Be Cool right up to the nadir of 2010's Tooth Fairy (one critic called it "as funny as an abscess") as one of the toughest in his life. His career was stalling, he suffered another bout of depression following his divorce and he worried how it would all affect his relationship with his daughter Simone. "It was f***ing terrifying," he says quietly. "And I realised that one of the big reasons I was struggling was because I was so insular and not a great communicator. I was a good friend and I had great buddies, but I wasn't the kind of person to open up and talk to them about how I was feeling and what I was going through. I had that view that a lot of guys do, 'No, I don't need help.' Eventually I started to become a better communicator and then I thought, 'Not only am I getting good at this, I want to be great at it. It's important.' So I applied what I always said I would. I found out about how to communicate, how to listen and understand and empathise. It was great for me because I had never been that way and it really helped me, my career and my relationships."

Read next An Olympic rower reveals 10 things you didn’t know about the Boat Race An Olympic rower reveals 10 things you didn’t know about the Boat Race 10 things you didn’t know about the Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race

He made a decision, he says, to be himself again. He left CAA and joined an agency (WME) that he thought understood what he wanted to achieve, left his home in Los Angeles and relocated to Florida to escape the Hollywood scene, and he made a commitment to change the kind of movies he was making. He also decided that he wasn't going to get smaller physically... he was going to get bigger. Weight-training had been his anchor since the age of 14, it had saved him, defined him and now it was defying everyone who had ever doubted that a former wrestler could become the biggest star in the world. He would be Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson, the hardest working man in the room, and let the chips fall where they may.

"My home gym, the Iron Paradise, is one of the greatest things that has ever happened to me," he says. "It is my therapy and my sanctuary. Every day I roll out of bed, it might be 4am, and it's my time. It's quiet, away from the world and I can do my thing. And then the dog comes over, takes a big shit in the middle of the gym, pisses everywhere and looks at me like there is no problem."

His gym-defiling French bulldog is Hobbs, named after the character he plays in the Fast & Furious movies he joined in 2011 that set him on his path to world domination, and confirmed his status as "franchise Viagra". Instead of avoiding established movie formulas (The Mummy, GI Joe, Fast & Furious), Johnson added his own DNA to the mix and everything he touched turned into box office gold. And when you bring the box office, you can pick and choose your roles. So how does he decide which ones to take?

"My choices are based on two things and they are both equally important," he explains. "The first is: will I enjoy it? Then second: will people enjoy it on a mass scale? And I like that, because it is an opportunity for me to entertain globally. The bottom line, I am in the business of making movies for people, making content for people. And that means people all over the world. Because as soon as you start thinking on a global scale, you are making more people happy, you are making more money, you are making the studios more money, you are making everybody happy. That in turn creates more opportunity. And that's what I am looking for."

In the short-term, his next outing will be in Central Intelligence this summer, a ballsy action comedy co-starring the comedian Kevin Hart. They have been friends for years and recently hosted the MTV Movie Awards together (unless your internet is down, you'll have seen the "Leo got f***ed by a bear" rap by now), and Hart confesses to being a big fan. "He is an absolute pleasure to work with," he says. "I wish I had some good stories to tell you about some bad habits that he has, but his biggest attribute is his authenticity. He just comes across as real and people warm to that. And because he came up the hard way, he had to really work to make it, people see that story and respect it. That wins them over, they can relate to him, and they end up rooting for him."

Read next Daniel Ricciardo: I’m the most ripped guy on the grid, let’s just say that Daniel Ricciardo: I’m the most ripped guy on the grid, let’s just say that How to get fit with Daniel Ricciardo

Through Johnson, Hart was also encouraged to work out for his role in Central Intelligence. "Man, I realised I had to get in shape because I didn't want to look like a child, like a premature baby next to him," he says. "So I made sure I turned up with some arms, and some structure to my body. Plus, I have truly amazing calves. They are my best feature." And Johnson's best feature? There is a pause: "His forehead, definitely. He has the forehead of a dolphin."

Next up for the man Hart playfully calls Chocolate Shrek is voicing a demigod in Disney's Moana later in the year, appearing in Fast 8 and a raunchy R-rated reboot of Baywatch in 2017, plus a monster movie (Rampage), a superhero movie (Shazam!) and another disaster movie (San Andreas 2). Or as he calls them, "Big-ass, loud-ass blockbusters." But in the longer term... well, that might just mean politics.

He smiles when I ask him if he has ambitions in that area. "I'll be honest, I haven't ruled politics out," he says, noticing my expression. "I'm not being coy when I say that, but at the moment I am not sure. I can't deny that the thought of being governor, the thought of being president, is alluring. And beyond that, it would be an opportunity to make a real impact on people's lives on a global scale. But there are a lot of other things I want to do first."

Advertisement

He talks about slowing down, enjoying time with his partner, Lauren Hashian, with whom he recently had a daughter (Jasmine), making big movies and TV shows (including HBO's Ballers and a forthcoming project called Muscle Beach - "a mix between Pain & Gain and Wolf Of Wall Street, based on Venice Beach in the Seventies full of drugs and gangs and bodybuilders"), and even making the odd appearance in a wrestling ring (he turned up at WrestleMania 32 a few months ago and a record-breaking 93,000 people came to see him do it). But if he decides to put voters first, if he decides to connect with the electorate, don't bet against Dwayne Johnson turning the White House into another Iron Paradise.

President Rock... kind of has a ring to it, doesn't it?

Central Intelligence was out on 1 July 2016.

Interview originally published in June 2016