TR principal says American flag has been used to 'taunt' Berea students
CLOSE

Buy Photo Berea takes the field before a game against Travelers Rest on Friday, August 26, 2016. (Photo: LAUREN PETRACCA/Staff)Buy Photo

Tensions are flaring after a Travelers Rest student was blocked from carrying an American flag into a high school football stadium, according to reports on social media..

Several people posted about the incident on social media Saturday, claiming the student wasn’t allowed to carry the flag into Friday night’s Travelers Rest-Berea game because it might offend Berea’s large Hispanic community.

Travelers Rest’s principal, Lou Lavely, responded Saturday. He said the American flag has been used in the past to “taunt” Berea students, leading to confrontations.

“Student safety (and in the case of a football game, safety of all attending) is our primary concern,” Lavely said. “It is the responsibility of the school to provide the safest environment possible, and no object, sign, chants by students, etc. would be permitted if they compromise safety.”

Beth Brotherton, assistant director of communications for Greenville County Schools, said while Travelers Rest doesn’t have a policy banning American flags for any game or event, “student safety and proper respect for the flag are evaluated as the issues arise and are addressed accordingly.”

RELATED: TR police chief disagrees with TR principal's flag decision

Berea High Principal Mike Noel issued a statement in support of Lavely.

"I am in full support of Mr. Lavely's actions at the football game on Friday night. He was protecting the greatest symbol of our nation, the American Flag. His decision was based on the premise that the American flag should not be used in a disrespectful or unsportsmanlike like manner. He made the right decision", Noel said in an email statement from the school district.

"Mr. Lavely should be celebrated for his dedication to supporting our veterans and encouraging student to love and respect our great nation", according to the statement. "We educate our students on how to display good sportsmanship and to show respect to our opponents. Both teams played hard and should be celebrated for their efforts on the field. Both schools and communities need to embrace the spirit of competition in a positive manner, and show respect for each other's achievements."

In a statement released by the school district, Lavely said any decisions made regarding American flags being permitted into the game were “made in the best interests of all attending the game and in the spirit of patriotism and respect for our flag.”

“Just as importantly, using the American flag to display disrespect and unsportsmanlike behavior is in itself improper and disrespectful to our flag,” he said.

“Those in attendance at TRHS events from football and basketball to tennis and baseball know that I, along with our student body and community, have the utmost respect for our flag and strive to display the highest levels of patriotism. The American flag is properly displayed at our sporting stadiums, and our announcers always ask the fans to stand and join in the singing of our national anthem before contests, which was most recently witnessed at last evening’s football game.”

Lavely continued by saying that he has encouraged students to always show respect for their country, flag and military.

“I take my responsibility as an educator to teach our students the proper respect and values associated with our country, which entails supporting our students in the proper display of the flag as well as redirecting our students when they may make a mistake in displaying our flag improperly, very seriously.”

He added: “To be perfectly clear, I am 100 percent in support of the patriotism that our school and community display so well and so often, of our flag, and of our country. The American flag, or any other symbol of our great nation, is welcome to be displayed and honored at our school events as long as it displayed properly and it is not used in any form of parallel taunting or disrespect.”

Brotherton in another statement said, "Greenville County Schools encourages and supports the appropriate display of the United States Flag in accord with the United States Flag Code. We do not condone the use of the Flag to shield unsportsmanlike or inappropriate conduct. To allow such use is disrespectful to the Flag, the principles which it represents and the sacrifices of those who have and are serving to defend it. There is no ban at the school or district level on the appropriate display of the United States Flag but using it in a manner that is disrespectful to it or the principles it represents will be addressed if it occurs."

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/2bOGZgO