I know that many nursery rhymes, such as "Mary, Mary quite contrary", "Little Jack Horner," "The Grand Old Duke of York" had origins based on historical fact. Is there any such explanation for "Sing a
YESTERYEAR



I know that many nursery rhymes, such as "Mary, Mary quite contrary", "Little Jack Horner," "The Grand Old Duke of York" had origins based on historical fact. Is there any such explanation for "Sing a song of sixpence?" Peter Ford, BIRMINGHAM United Kingdom 'Sing a Song of Sixpence' was apparently a coded message used by the legendary pirate captain Blackbeard to recruit pirates. Sixpence and a hipflask of rye whisky was the weekly pirate's wage. The 'blackbirds' were blackbeard's pirates and the 'pie' his ship. The King's ships were the usual targets of Blackbeard's raids, so the pie full of blackbirds was a 'dainty dish' to set before him. The second verse is also easily translated, and many sources on this apparently well verified explanation are easy to find on the internet. Max Wurr, Stanmore UK In Tudor times it was quite common to entertain the royal court by sticking something interesting in a pie crust. In fact if you go to Longleat house you'll see a statue of a dwarf who rose to prominence after jumping out of the king's pie. Mark Blaker, Bristol On a recent visit to Stockport's excellent hat museum (i really recommend a visit), i was informed that a "weasel" in the line "pop goes the weasel" is a tool used in hatting, and that "popping" it refered to exchanging it for money at the pawnbrokers during times when there was a slow-down in work in the hatting industry. I assume that "tuppeny rice" and "treacle" were cheap food items that could be bought with the money. Greg, Stockport Cheshire I'm afraid Max Wurr has been taken in by a joke on the Urban Legends Reference Pages. The explanation posted there was intended to show how urban legends are spread by people who don't check their sources. Plenty of others have fallen for it. See http://www.snopes.com/humor/mediagoofs/sixpence.asp Matthew Francis, Cardiff UK I don't know if there is an actual answer, but the Bluebeard story was a deliberate load of nonsense put out by urban-myth debunking site snopes.com (in a section of their site called The Repository Of Lost Legends, i.e. TROLL) to highlight the ridiculousness of urban legends. Unfortunately, and much to snopes's despair, people believed it and now spout it as fact. Rob K, London UK The rhyme appears in Volume II of Tom Thumb's Pretty Song Book, published around 1744 and in the British Museum. My favourite theory is that the 24 blackbirds baked in a pie represent the hours in a day. Opening the pie and the birds singing represents dawn and the dawn chorus. The King is the sun, the money is sunshine. The Queen represents the moon. Eating bread and honey is the waxing and waning of the moon. The maid in the garden hanging out the clothes may be a reference to clouds. Its a rhyme about the day. Chris Lewis, Manchester United Kingdom I thought that the first part had to do with the custom of baking songbirds. Also I seem to remember a scene in a film (possibly The Devils?) in which one of the french Louis is shooting people dressed as blackbirds; however that is completely irrelevant. Lee , Leeds As it happens, I didn't learn about the supposed pirate connection from Snopes or the internet at all but I have subsequently seen the same explanation in a number of sources and had no reason to disbelieve it myself. If I was wrong, fair enough. What is the song about, then, cleverclogs? Max Wurr, Stanmore United Kingdom It probably is the remnant of an old Celtic tradition, to do with the goddess Rhiannon (the Moon). She was associated with birds. The 'baking in a pie' might be code for 'animal sacrifice', the maid in the garden might have been a virgin. Vinod Moonesinghe, Rajagiriya Sri Lanka The ditty is sarcastic. Pie is a reference to the poet Laureate Henry James Pye (1790-1813) and a particularly awful royal birthday ode he wrote dealing with blackbirds. (Wasn't that a pretty thing to set before the king? ... sarcasm, you see) teneriff, clinton USA I am a bit annoyed that none of the answers so far have proved very conclusive, as it's one I'd always wondered about too. I had thought,perhaps it was a bit Cromwellian - dissolution of parliament etc., but that doesn't help with the maid's nose..(rights being taken from 'the common people'?). As I'm sure you do know the bit about Jenny Wren's reinstatment of said nose is a modern lily-livered addition. Does anyone know of the rhyme's earliest appearance? Paola McClure, Dundee Scotland The rhyme probably means nothing at all, any more than the lyrics of Tutti Frutti or A Whiter Shade of Pale mean anything. Many songs have nonsense words, so don't make the mistake of thinking there must be great meaning in them. Jeremy Benjamin, Croydon, UK I read, sometime in the not too distant past, that the 24 birds baked in pie were actually robed choirboys, who when liberated from the baked-over shell, sprang out and sang for the King - a dainty dish indeed. Had these been real birds, why would have sung? Any bird I know would have made for the nearest open door or window, and they would not have been singing. It's robed choirboys. Take it to the bank, says I. Maestrovoci, California US I've often heard tales of a time when people would impress their guests by cooking pies out of which live animals would be produced. You can find a very interesting old article (circa 1660) describing a recipy for such a pie here: http://www.bl.uk/learning/images/texts/cooks/large852.html so maybe it really is more of a literal translation than originally assumed! Cheryl Levy, Colorado, USA The song is in reference to Henry VIII's penchant for dishes of the like. He would have two pies baked - one real, one just a shell - and would have the shell stuffed with birds. This way, once cut, the birds would fly out and Henry would have a spectacular supper to remember. This was common practice among the Tudorian evenings. King Henry would also practice his musical skills, so I believe the lyrics are attributed to him. He was, after all, an egomaniac who would have enjoyed having a popular song sung about him constantly. Helen Wilson, London, England Hi, I was looking at Tudor children's nursery rhymes when this article came up - I was interested to read the answers already posted - it seems a bit of a hard one this - even Wiki that normally has an answer for everything doesn't give a conclusive outcome. Here's the link http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sing_a_Song_of_Sixpence Good luck everyone - lets hope someone comes up with an answer. Claire Gandy, Manchester, UK



Add your answer