Holocaust survivor and step-sister of Anne Frank says refugee crisis is “history repeating itself”

Eva Schloss is Anne Frank's step-sister © Nigel Sutton email pictures@nigelsuttonphotography.com

The step-sister of wartime diarist Anne Frank who sought refuge in London after fleeing the holocaust has said the refugee crisis engulfing Europe is “history repeating itself”.

Email this article to a friend To send a link to this page you must be logged in.

Anne Frank at school before going into hiding in 1942 Anne Frank at school before going into hiding in 1942

The step-sister of wartime diarist Anne Frank who sought refuge in London after fleeing the holocaust has said the refugee crisis engulfing Europe is “history repeating itself”.

Eva Schloss MBE, 86, from St John’s Wood, spoke candidly of her experience going into hiding with a dutch family in Amsterdam as a 15-year-old Jewish girl during the war and called on British people to “open up their gates” to Syrian refugees at a time of extreme need.

The holocaust education campaigner survived Auschwitz concentration camp and later founded the Anne Frank Trust in memory of her step-sister, whose posthumous diaries are one of the most celebrated testimonies of the life of Jewish people in hiding under Nazi occupation.

Eva Schloss with her brother Heinz & Mother Fritzi at Zanndfoort in 1939 Eva Schloss with her brother Heinz & Mother Fritzi at Zanndfoort in 1939

She said: “Now we are back into the terrible world again- it feels like we are near war.

“These people are sacrificing everything trying to save their lives and the lives of their children. The world has to help. How can we cope with it? There must be a solution.”

Mrs Schloss, whose mother married Anne’s father Otto Frank after the war, first fled her native Austria in 1938 and travelled through Belgium to reach safe haven in the Netherlands before her family was betrayed, arrested by Nazi forces and sent to Auschwitz concentration camp which claimed the life of her father and her brother.

Speaking of the current migration crisis, which has seen hundreds of thousands of families arrive in Europe in the hope of escaping violence in Syria, Ms Schloss urged British people to be as open and welcoming as they were to her when she arrived in London with her mother in 1951.

Eva Schloss with her brother Heinz in 1939 Eva Schloss with her brother Heinz in 1939

Mrs Schloss said: “People should open their gates to these people.

“You must not be selfish and you must share whatever you have and help in a desperate situation. They need help from you.

“These people have had the courage to do a very difficult thing- to take your family and your whole life to another country requires bravery and strength. This is history repeating itself.

“These Syrians are valuable, educated people. These are doctors and nurses who are only too willing to help our society and they will become leaders in the community if you let them.”

Otto Frank published Anne’s diaries, dated from 1942-1944, under the title ‘The Diary of a Young Girl’ after his daughter and her sister Margot died from Typhus in Bergen-Belsen concentration camp.

Ms Schloss will speak about her experiences and call for people to seek peace and stability at a dedicated evening of talks chaired by peace activist and author Arvind Devalia at St Mark’s Church in Hamilton Terrace, St John’s Wood on September 20.

For more information on the evening and to book tickets contact Arvind Devalia via his website: http://bit.ly/1JHCBd4