Uproar continues over Brandon High School band being prevented from playing `How Great Thou Art'
BRANDON, Mississippi -- The uproar continues to grow over a Mississippi high school band that was prevented from performing because its halftime show included a traditional Christian hymn.

The Brandon High School Band had planned to play "How Great Thou Art" as part of its football game performance this season. However, the Rankin County School District told the band it could not play the tune, citing two previous lawsuits that found the school district had violated students' Constitutional rights by holding assemblies that included prayer.

Because of the flap over "How Great Thou Art," band members were informed Friday afternoon they would not be able to perform their halftime show -- just hours before the season-opening game between Brandon and Ocean Springs.

"It's really unfair to just tell them at the last minute you can't perform your halftime show and that the show has been cancelled," Mary Fairchilds told WJTV in Jackson. Fairchilds has two children in the Brandon band.

Director Tim Cagle said the board had been aware the band was working on the song since last year.

The decision to keep the band from taking the field has angered parents and students.

"We have the right to express music, everyone and music cannot be regulated. They didn't sing the words 'How Great Thou Art,' they are playing the music," Brandon High School parent Ken Chapman told WKRN. "I'm saying it's time for Christians and other people to stand up and say were not going to take this anymore, we're going to make a difference. We're going to be heard."

On Monday, Chapman, a captain of the Salvation Army of Alabama, Louisiana and Mississippi Division, was joined by other parents and supporters outside the school. The Salvation Army Band played "How Great Thou Art" and the song title was written on the back of several cars.

Meanwhile, a different form of protest broke out during Friday night's football game. With the band off the field, fans in the stand stood and sang the hymn, which dates back to the 1890s. Video of the singing has emerged on social media and can be seen below.

Mississippi Press Staff Writer Warren Kulo contributed to this report.