Did they really make that Honda advert in one take?
Sorry to taint the wow factor slightly, but the answer is no. The sequence of events in the advert is actually split into two shots - shooting the whole thing in one go would have been too expensive.

"It was a damage limitation idea to snip it into two [parts]," says Rob Steiner, head of television at Wieden & Kennedy, the agency responsible for the advert.

Having said that, the shoot was still a major feat of technical planning. The two minute ad took six months to plan and almost a week to film. The production needed over 600 takes, 20 sets of alloy wheels, 10 bonnets, 15 pots of paint and two handmade pre-production models of the new Honda Accord. One was used for the final shot and the other was taken apart for the bits you see crashing into each other.

The idea is simple - a cog rolls along a table, hits an exhaust pipe, which rotates and hits piston rings, which roll into an engine block. So starts a chain of events until the new car is revealed. The agency describes their idea with the very touchy feely phrase "warm engineering". What this actually means is anyone's guess but the ad is already being hailed as one of the greatest ever.

Setting up the chain reaction was extraordinarily frustrating. "Watching people's faces round the TV monitors during the shoot was like being at a football match," says Tony Davidson, creative director of Wieden & Kennedy. "When something went wrong, it was like your striker blasting a really great chance over the bar."

Once the car had been reduced to parts, the art directors drew sequences they thought would work. Technicians then calculated how to make the ideas real.

For example, the sequence where the tyres roll up a slope looks particularly impressive but is very simple. Steiner says that there is a weight at the bottom of the tyre and when the tyre is knocked, the weight is displaced and in an attempt to rebalance itself, the tyre rolls up the slope.

In another sequence some bolts skim across the surface of a table and drop on to a see-saw. The technicians had to ensure that there was exactly the right amount of oil on the surface. "It was trial and error as to how much oil was put there because it had to slow the pace down for them not to shoot off the edge," says Steiner.

The equipment was so precisely set up that the crew literally had to tip toe around the set for fear of disturbing things, which led to some unexpected problems. "As the day went on, the studio would get hotter," says Steiner. "It meant that wood would expand and the cog or exhaust that spins around would move slightly faster." These tiny changes made big differences to the precision set-up of the equipment.

(Still not found the join? The first section ends and the second one begins at the one minute mark when an exhaust box rolls off to the right of the screen. Some clever editing bridges the two parts.)