Frequently Asked Questions

If you've got a question about our Company, one of our products or the way we make tasty, enjoyable food, you may find the information you're after here.

The Consumer Care team at Heinz has answered some of the most commonly asked questions we receive from you, the people who buy our products. If you're unable to find the answer to your question below please feel free to Talk to Us.

What does '57 Varieties' refer to on Heinz labels?

While riding a train in New York City in 1896, our founder Henry J Heinz saw a sign advertising 21 styles of shoes, which he thought was clever. Although Heinz was manufacturing more than 60 products at the time, Henry thought 57 was a lucky number. So, he began using the slogan "57 Varieties" in all his advertising. Today the Company has more than 5,700 products around the globe, but still uses the magic number of "57". Find out more about Heinz and our History.

How can I find out where to buy my favourite Heinz products?

Because we're a favourite in many food markets, most supermarkets stock our products. If you find the Heinz range is limited in your local store, speak to the Consumer Care Team about stocking your favourite Heinz products.

Who can help with general enquiries about products and label information?

Our Consumer Careline team can help answer your questions. If you have any questions please call the Careline on 0800 528 5757 or via our online form.

Does Heinz ever stop making certain products?

From time to time, we discontinue a product from our range, usually because of a new recipe development or because it was a limited edition. We're always reviewing our product ranges, as well as continually updating and improving our recipes.

Who can answer specific nutritional questions about Heinz products?

Our team of experienced nutritionists are available to answer your specific nutritional questions. Call one of the Careline team with your question on 0800 528 5757 or complete our online form and we'll get back to you. Remember, always refer to the label when you're looking for information on ingredients and nutritional content.

Does Heinz use genetically modified (GM) foods to make its products?

Heinz remains committed to taking every possible step to ensure that Heinz varieties remain free from ingredients derived from genetically modified crops.

Where there is the potential for GM material to be present or where ingredients are derived from soya or maize, we source non-GM, identity preserved ingredients through carefully audited suppliers. In addition, independent testing is carried out.

If I go abroad, will I be able to buy Heinz products in the shops?

As a worldwide Company you will find an international range of Heinz products in many countries. While you're abroad, you may find a limited number of well-known English products, such as Heinz Cream of Tomato Soup or Heinz Salad Cream, available in specialist shops.

Where can I get information on feeding my baby?

Visit heinzbaby.co.uk where you'll find lots of useful information on feeding newborns and weaning them onto solids.

What is lycopene?

Lycopene is the natural red pigment that gives tomatoes their colour. Evidence suggests it is also a powerful antioxidant with potential positive health benefits. Most of the lycopene in our diet comes from tomatoes. To make it easier for your body to absorb lycopene, eat cooked tomatoes.

Which artificial colours, flavours and preservatives are used in Heinz products?

Where possible we do not use artificial colours, flavourings or preservatives in our products. Always refer to the label for full ingredient and nutritional information.

How long can you store an open can of Heinz Beanz? And can I keep them in the opened tin?

You're best off emptying the contents into a clean container with an air-tight lid. Keep the container in the fridge and make sure you eat the beans within two days. Always refer to the label for storage information. Of course you could try the Heinz Beanz Fridge Pack™, our first ever re-sealable beans product.

This exciting innovation allows you to use as many beans as you like before resealing the screw top and popping the remaining beans into the fridge to keep fresh for up to five days. There's also a handy see-through measure on the side, showing if there are enough beans left to put on toast or partner with a spud!

The 1kg Heinz Beanz Fridge Pack™, which has been shaped so that it will fit in a fridge shelf or in the fridge door, contains the equivalent of just under two and a half standard tins of Heinz Beanz.

Is it true that there is lots of salt in some Heinz products?

Heinz has reduced and light versions of a number of our most popular products such as Reduced Sugar and Salt Beanz, Tomato Ketchup and HP Sauce. These recipes contain no artificial sweeteners and at least 25% less salt than standard recipes.

Heinz has long been committed to progressive salt reduction as well as an active partnership with salt awareness campaigns. More recently, Heinz signed up as a Department of Health Responsibility Deal partner on a range of health and well-being measures including salt reduction.

Over recent years, Heinz has continued to reduce the salt levels in its core products, part of a programme that began more than 25 years ago. Whilst still providing all the taste, the salt content of Heinz Tomato Ketchup has been reduced by almost 40%. The salt in Heinz Beanz has been cut by almost 50% in 10 years and in Heinz Cream of Tomato Soup it has been cut by almost 45% - in line with changes in consumer tastes and whilst still providing all the taste that consumers prefer.

Can Tomato Ketchup bottles be recycled?

Yes. Heinz Tomato Ketchup plastic bottles are made from a plastic called PET, which is fully recyclable.

Does Heinz supply schools and colleges with company information for projects?

You'll find plenty of Company information on this site including a full history of the company, brand information and news.

When I fill in a form on the site, my postcode gets rejected. Why?

Please make sure you have a UK postcode. Also make sure that if there is the number "0" in your postcode, you are not typing the letter "O" instead. If you are still having trouble then please contact our Careline team. Make sure you tell us the exact nature of the problem, plus the type of computer and browser version you are using.

What can I do if my supermarket won't take the Internet Coupon you sent me?

If you have problems redeeming your coupon at a particular store, contact us with details of the store and the reasons why. We'll take it from there.

Approximately how many beans are there in a tin?

There are approximately 465 beans per standard 415g can.

How many cans of soup are made every minute of every hour of every day of every week of every month of every year?

Approximately 1600 cans.

Does soup count towards your 5 a day?

One of your 5 a day equals 80g of fruit or vegetables so if a portion of soup contains 80g fruit or vegetables it counts as one of your 5 a day. Heinz Tomato Soup counts as one of your 5 a day.

What are your company registration details?

H.J. Heinz group trading companies (all registered in England and Wales):H.J. Heinz Foods UK Limited (company number 08322668 , VAT no. 645027255), HP Foods Limited (company number 2251694 , VAT no. 645027255 ), Heinz Single Service Limited (company number 1749058 , VAT no. 645 0272 55) and H.J. Heinz Frozen & Chilled Foods Limited (company number 2207650, VAT no. 645 0272 55); all with registered office address at 32 London Bridge Street, London, SE1 9SG

If you've got a question about our Company, one of our products or the way we make tasty, enjoyable food, you may find the information you're after here.

The Consumer Care team at Heinz has answered some of the most commonly asked questions we receive from you, the people who buy our products. If you're unable to find the answer to your question below please feel free to Talk to Us.