Holistic Doctor Death Series 60 Dead
61) November 10, 2016 – Dr. Laura Skellchock passed away very quickly and unexpectedly and there is an ongoing investigation into her case and the toxicology reports will take a few months (late November) until they are complete. Detective Nitsch, with whom I’ve spoken, from BSO Broward County, is handling the case: # 17-1611000583.

62) December 15, 2016 – Silvio Najt MD, a board certified Argentinian Cardiologist, died unexpectedly of allegedy heart failure. He was very fit healthy and this came as a shock to many. Dr Najt had people coming from all over the world to his Buenos Aires clinic as a famed cardiologist. Some called him a miracle worker.

63) February 24, 2017 – Dr. Mark Buller, an active member of Our Lady of Lourdes parish in University City and Habitat for Humanity volunteer, was killed while riding his bike by a Ford Van. He was just 67 years old. The St. Louis University professor and bioterrorism expert was also a member of “multiple national committees and governmental advisory groups, including some that advised the intelligence community on biodefense”. Police said Buller was killed shortly before 6 p.m. on Friday and pronounced dead at the scene.

64) March 3, 2017 – Dr. Juan Gonzalez, aged 59, was murdered inside his holistic clinic and police can now confirm that his death is being treated as a homicide. He was well loved. Detectives were called to the business at 1022 31-W Bypass for a welfare check and found a man dead inside the building upon arrival. (Update: A patient’s wife has been arrested and plead Not Guilty, but a trial has not yet taken place)

65) April 7, 2017 – Ronald Kibert, DC died and was found dead under a large tree limb. Loved ones questioned what he was doing outside during a storm.

66) April 24, 2017 – Glenn Towery, DC was reported missing. A nationwide search continues into its second week as of 4/24/2017. Dr. Towery failed to arrive at his practice, and was last seen early on 4/17/2017 at a convenience store in Victoria, TX. His truck was found on a back country road with few clues. As of date of publishing he’s still missing.

67) May 7, 2017 – Dr. John Greg Hoffmann, who at one point lost his medical license but got it back for his alternative practices as an MD, died from injuries sustained in a single car accident that went off a cliff, as he was returning home from his cabin. Some close to him tell us there were no tire marks and they find it suspicious. We will update you as more information becomes available.

68) May 29, 2017 – Dr. Christopher King, 49, a famous holistic MD, was shot to death on Memorial day, a little after midnight, while eating at a popular organic restaurant in Boulder, Colorado. Louis Joseph Sebastian, whom he’d never met, gunned him down. A woman he’d dated said she accidentally texted him and invited him. Some state there was an argument that ensued before the death over the woman. A representative of the restaurant disputed this account, saying there was no evidence the two guests argued before walking out of the establishment. It was also mentioned that the shooter bragged about mob connections a lot that evening.

69) July 1, 2017 – Holistic Dr. Scott Mieras was killed when the bus he was driving crashed in North Canterbury, New Zealand when his bus crashed through the railings of a bridge, landing in a shallow area of the Waiau River. He was the sole driver of the vehicle. No other vehicles were involved. He is survived by his two daughters.

70) July 15, 2017 – Holistic Healer and Dr. Justine Damond was shot and killed by police. She had called officers to report a possible assault outside her house when she heard a woman screaming. She was shot by an officer as she approached the police vehicle in her pajamas. He shot past his partner in the closed vehicle and killed her, nearly killing others in the process.

71) July 20, 2017 – Holistic MD Ron Schmid was found dead. He campaigned against the use of fermented cod liver oil, which had previously damaged his heart, he claimed.

72) July 28, 2017 – Dr. Glen Scarpelli. Dr. Scarpelli and his wife both allegedly jumped out of window of their holistic clinic (located on Madison Avenue in Manhattan), leaving behind neatly typed and packaged suicide notes in plastic baggies. They jumped off the side street on 33rd street. The husband and wife said in the notes that they had a wonderful life but had some debt so they had to kill themselves. They said the kids were upstairs and to please take care of them. Their own colleagues (fellow doctors) said they don’t believe for a minute they took their own lives.

73) July 29, 2017 – Dr. Andy Cutler part of the autism world and overall health community, died of an apparent heart attack. His friends and loved ones were shocked. We have no news beyond this.

74) August 1, 2017 – Ann Boroch, naturopath committed suicide by alleged hanging. According to the coroner’s report, she was found in her garage. Her family had previously stated it was a sudden natural death. Then the autopsy came out and her entire Facebook page was taken down. Our hearts are broken.

75) August 4, 2017 -Dr. Gabriel Goodwin committed suicide by jumping from an NYC highrise. This happened not long after the similar death of Glen Scarpelli and wife (also in NYC) (#71). Goodwin had a history of mental health problems.

76) August 7, 2017 – John Michael (Dr. Mike) Lonergam died of an apparent heart attack. His girlfriend was out of town, and he was alone at the time of death. His staff reported that he was healthy. He had a shot he gave that allegedly included vitamins called the Jesus shot. We will keep you posted as we receive more information.

77) August 17, 2017 – Holistic Dr. Thomas Fay died of unknown causes and his family has called his death “unexpected and a bit surreal”. We know that Dr. Fay was outspoken about chemtrails, Sandy Hook, gun control and much more. We wish we had more information to share with you.

78) September 13, 2017 – Dr. Achutha Reddy, a self described holistic psychiatrist, was stabbed to death countless times at his clinic and then allegedly outside the clinic as well. A patient was arrested and we’ll keep you updated on a convictions, trial etc.

79) Friday, November 11, 2017 – Self described holistic Dr. Annie Fairbanks, 38, was found shot dead in her home along with her husband Jason Fairbanks, late 30s, and their 3 year old daughter and nine month old son. Police initially told neighbors to go inside and lock their doors (so neighbors reported live on TV). Authorities stated it might take some time to solve, but mere hours later stated it was a murder suicide with Jason Fairbanks murdering his entire family. From what we can see, he has zero criminal background, and friends of Annie write they are in absolute shock. A coworker said there were no cameras or security footage.

80) Sunday, November 26, 2017- Dr. Miguel Crespo, 40, stem cell and cancer researcher, was found dead in the bathroom on the 8th floor at the famous Weill Cornell Medical Center Hospital on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. (This is the SAME Weill Cornell where Dr Lorich #81 worked, who was also found dead in a bathroom just days later). Initially, authorities didn’t say what they thought the cause of death was but then said they were investigating a possible overdose. Even though the doctor didn’t have drugs with him on the scene, says the mainstream media. We have several prominent doctors who were studying stem cells for cancer, one of whom was the head of the entire Stem Cell Clinic of the UK.

81) Saturday, December 3, 2017 – Dr. James Winer, the outspoken, controversial, prominent, self-described holistic doctor (and radio show host in several states) allegedly died on or around December 3rd. He was a well known alternative doctor out of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. We are told Dr Winer was found on the sidewalk unconscious and with no ID or wallet. He was brought in as a John Doe and missing for days to his staff and relatives. His family allegedly doesn’t know if there were others around or not, when he was found. He had no wife and kids. An autopsy was not done we are told so we aren’t certain of the cause of death, but we are told he died of a heart attack. Our heart goes out to his family, friends, and office staff. We have found in the past the best way to be is transparent or else they’ll be inundated for months with calls asking for the full story of this suspicious sudden death.

82) Sunday, December 10, 2017- Dr Dean Lorich (MD) 54, was found dead in his Park Avenue home bathroom by his 11-year-old around 1 PM on Sunday, December 10th on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. His wife and other daughters were out. Police almost immediately called it a suicide. Dr Lorich was one of the most skilled surgeons on the planet, operating on celebrities like Bono of U2, after a severe accident on his bike in Central Park. Despite Dr Lorich’s world-renowned surgical skills, authorities say he missed his heart and instead stabbed himself in the torso (close but not quite close enough). I had no idea when I broke this news that he had been on PBS’ Charlie Rose (before he was fired from his job recently) and penned an Op-Ed piece still on CNN about the “shameful” conditions in Haiti where he’d volunteered. He even wrote a letter that was forwarded to Hillary Clinton, which she did receive, and is on Wikileaks. You can read all about that here.

83) Friday, December 15, 2017- Dr. Barry Sherman 75, was found dead with his wife Honey 70, in their Toronto mansion on Friday, December 15th. Police said they suspect a murder-suicide but the grown children almost immediately released a statement about how shocked they were that the authorities would say something of that nature. They said there was no way it was murder or suicide as their parents were full of life and joy and that their family, friends, and even colleagues do NOT believe it. CBC said that Barry Sherman (who was not holistic but was always battling with “Big Pharma”) was one of the worlds largest generic drug manufacturers though reports say he actually started with nutraceuticals. Even his colleagues stated that pharma didn’t like him so much. You can read that and watch the new CBC tv video here.

84) Saturday, December 16, 2017- Dr. Tony Starr, an Osteopath, aged 52, was found dead at his residence by friends after failing to respond to text and telephone messages. Amongst many other qualifications, Dr Starr earned National Board Certification from the American College of Osteopathic Family Physicians. Coroner Dr. Alan Spencer ordered his autopsy which could take six to eight weeks to receive, hopefully, we will know more then. He leaves behind his wife and children.

85) Thursday, January 11, 2018- Dr. Clive Bridgham, of East Providence, Rhode Island, was found dead in his home. At the time of his death, the police believed he had been murdered but declined to provide any additional information. Bridgham had recently retired due to health reasons. He was a past president of the Chiropractic Society of Rhode Island and selected by the Rio Olympic Sports Medicine Committee to assist the health services team during the 2016 Summer Games.

86) Thursday, February 23, 2018- Holistic Dr. Mark Flanagan, age 62 of Seguin, died after allegedly hanging himself. He was described as fit, healthy and fun loving by his friends who- understandably- appear to be in shock. One mutual friend, a medical doctor whose name will not be shared, said Mark would not do this. It’s just not how Mark would have behaved. Currently, all we know is what the published obituary stated: his date of death and that a full obituary will be coming out next week.

87) Monday, February 12, 2018- Dr. Timothy Cunningham went missing in Georgia on February 12th. According to authorities, he left work early that day saying he wasn’t feeling well and wasn’t seen again. Cunningham reportedly told a neighbor, before he disappeared, to please erase his number from their phone. His parents stated they received a “disturbing” text from him 24 hours before his disappearance (something they reported to the police). There were rumors he said the flu shot wasn’t effective, even though he administered it to his patients. Problem is, as a ScD, (Doctorate in Science) Cunningham wouldn’t have been giving flu shots. His parents stated on CNN he never said that about the flu shot. These behaviors described seem out of character for the doctor.There are more questions than answers with this case. Just like so many before him.

88) Monday, April 2, 2018- Holistic Dr. Norman Valdes Cotten Jr., 54, who lived in Howell, MI and practiced in Fowlerville and Commerce Townships, was found burned in a vehicle in Pontiac, on Monday. While authorities used dental records to confirm Cotten’s identity, “an ID, credit cards and a money clip with a few dollars were found in his back pocket,” as well.

89) Friday, April 20, 2018- Dr. Richard Caskey of Connecticut’s death is still shrouded in mystery. We were contacted by some of his patients who said that office staff told them he (allegedly) had food poisoning at a conference just days before he was found in the bathroom by his sons (who we are told are also chiropractors). That is all the information we have on Dr. Caskey at this time.

90) Thursday, April 19, 2018- World-famous traditional healer and elder Olivia Arévalo Lomas of the Shipibo Konibo Indigenous people of Peru was assassinated with five shots to the heart. “The unknown assailants killed her at her home in the community of Victoria Gracia located 20 minutes from the town of Yarinacocha, in front of her family and in the presence of children.”

91) Sunday, April 29, 2018- Biohacker and CEO of Ascendance Biomedical, Aaron Traywick, 28, was found dead on Sunday. While not many details are known, we do know he was found in a spa in Washington, D.C., face down, doing flotation therapy in very shallow water.

92) Saturday, June 16, 2018- Holistic chiropractor, 38-year-old Dr. Chris Cheung of Walnut Creek, died after his outrigger canoe overturned in the Berkeley Marina. Cheung was reportedly paddling alone. His body was found floating in the water while his vest was in the boat. The manner of death has not yet been determined by a coroner.

93) Friday, June 22, 2018– Dr. Tristan Beaudette, 35, of Irvine, Calif., was bleeding from a chest wound when deputies found him in a tent early Friday at a Malibu Creek State Park campsite. He had been camping with his girls when someone gunned him down, in front of his daughters. (The girls were unharmed.) Beaudette held the Associate Director position at Allergan Pharmaceuticals, and oversaw development of some of their later stage clinical trials, including sustained release combination products and intra-ocular implants for the company. There are no suspects.

94) Tuesday, October 30, 2018- Dr. Christopher Brugger, 52, of Bradenton Florida (near Tampa) died when the gyrocopter he was in crashed. It is still unknown what happened as the pilot and instructor, 45-year-old Chris Lord, had thousands of hours of experience and (reportedly) had licenses to fly over 30 of types of these gyroplanes, as well as his instructor’s license. Brugger was a pilot and chiropractor with a successful practice in Bradenton with many long-term clients turned friends, was described by friends as a great father, husband, grandfather, and friend who “didn’t just leave behind a grieving family — he leaves behind a grieving community of friends.”

95) Wednesday, January 9th- Top Italian immunologist and former centre-right politician, Fernando Aiuti, 83, died due to complications after falling down stairs at a hospital in Rome. Prosecutors in Rome are investigating the death but police are not ruling out suicide.

96) Sunday, January 27th- Dr. Sarah Hawley, 27, beloved by all who knew her, was killed in what appeared to be a domestic related murder-suicide. Her live-in boyfriend, 30-year old Travis Geddes, who she had been with- and happy- for over 4 years, killed her before killing himself.

97 and 98) Friday, March 15th- James Eckert, a 48-year-old chiropractor, and ultramarathon runner and his wife, 50-year-old Lizette Eckert, also a chiropractor, were both killed by a single gunshot to the head. Although officials have arrested an 11-year-old child, it is still unknown if the child has a connection to the couple. Their tiny New Hampshire community is reeling from the tragic loss. The couple is survived by their three children.

99) Monday, March 19th- Dr. Lois Ladd, 68, and her husband Michael were found murdered in their home. Dr. Ladd was an acupuncturist, or as she describes in her online videos a Doctor of Oriental Medicine, and a chiropractor. There are no leads and the Edwardsville Police Department has brought in the Major Case Squad to help. The cause of death has not been disclosed.