Heinz Ketchup Banned (And Why You Should Avoid It)
Israel has recently banned Heinz Ketchup from the country and they say it’s because it doesn’t have high enough amount of tomatoes in it. But there are a couple of more reasons why it was banned.

We know it’s delicious but for your own sake stop consuming Heinz ketchup for good. In recent years people have started turning away from processed food and focusing more on healthy living and eating organic, raw food. This is a result of high toxins and chemical levels in processed food which is extremely unhealthy for our organism.

People have started avoiding processed food but they are unaware that the condiments they still use are considered processed and extremely unhealthy too. Ketchup is one of these unhealthy foods we have forgotten to rule out from our diet. Next time you think about eating ketchup turn the bottle and read the label, you’ll be surprised of its contents. These are the 3 main reasons why you should stop consuming ketchup:

1. It contains high fructose corn syrup

Heinz is loaded with high fructose corn syrup which is extremely unhealthy. The corn syrup is made of GMO corn and this is what makes it so dangerous. It can cause a rapid increase in your blood sugar levels and damage your liver.

If you are a regular user of high fructose corn syrup it can lead to an increased risk of diabetes, heart disease and obesity.

If you’re still not convinced, we’ll share the results of a recent study about high fructose corn syrup which revealed that it’s loaded with mercury – a toxic heavy metal! Doctors are the first to advise you against eating foods which contain this hidden toxin!

2. It contains distilled vinegar and sugar

Another fact about Heinz ketchup which you probably didn’t know is that it contains distilled vinegar and sugar, which is another reason why you should ban in from your meals. Just one tablespoon of this ketchup contains 4 grams of sugar, and by adding it to your meals you’re adding sugars without even knowing it.

Just like corn syrup, distilled vinegar derives from GMO corn. During growth GMO corn is treated with chemicals and pesticides and they end up on your plate through the ketchup. Consuming distilled vinegar and sugar which have GMO background has no benefits and is extremely dangerous for your health.

It’s a fact that excessive sugar consumption without fibers or other beneficial ingredients can lead to decreased blood sugar levels and live and pancreas damages.

3. It has no nutritional value

The third reason why you should stop using Heinz ketchup as a condiment is that there are no beneficial nutrients in it. It doesn’t have fibers, proteins or other nutritive ingredients and the unnoticeable amount of tomato it contains has just slight traces of lycopene.

All that Heinz ketchup contains is sugar, GMOs and chemicals and has no benefit for your organism whatsoever. It’s not just the ketchup, we are constantly using empty condiments which have no nutritional value but only harm our health.

If you truly want to live a healthy life and have a healthy body you need to buy GMO free and organic products. This will improve your health and make you feel better!

Source: mrhealthylife.com