California SB 239: My Take on HIV Transmission Penalties

California Senator Scott Wiener has introduced a new bill, SB 239, which aims to reduce the consequences for those who have not disclosed their HIV-positive status, yet who engage in unprotected sex.

Currently, in the state of California it is a felony punishable by imprisonment for three, five or eight years in the state prison to expose another person to HIV by engaging in unprotected sexual activity when the infected person knows at the time of the unprotected sex that he or she is infected with HIV, has not disclosed his or her HIV-positive status, and acts with the specific intent to infect the other person with HIV.

This new bill aims to reduce the consequence from a felony to a misdemeanor. Which, depending on how you look at this, can be a step in the right direction in regard to eliminating shame and stigma. However, for some, this can be looked at as a pass, given to those who have intentionally aimed to infect others with HIV.

For me, I’m not exactly sure how to feel about this bill. Part of me wants to support this bill, due to the fact that I know that the medical advances and changes that we have seen throughout this epidemic prove that HIV is no longer a death sentence, and that those people who are HIV-positive, on treatment and who maintain an undetectable viral load do not place anyone at risk of contracting HIV.

Undetectable equals un-transmittable. So, if a person has an undetectable viral load and is engaging in casual sex, I see no reason to punish them, period, for not telling their partner(s) about their status, because they aren’t putting them at risk. Now, there is part of me that opposes this bill.

I believe that if a person is positive, chooses not to get on treatment, or for some reason cannot access treatment and has a detectable viral load, they should and must communicate their status with their sexual partners. No one deserves a pass or a lesser charge when they are intentionally aiming to transmit this virus to another human being. I personally know what it is like to be the victim of someone who you have fallen in love with, and have them lie about their status. I was in a relationship for about eight months before it ended. I had fallen head over heels for a man whom I had grown to love and trust with every fiber in my body. Before engaging in unprotected sex, we had discussed our statuses and talked about testing. I believed him when he told me he had just recently gotten tested and that his test came back negative. However, after our relationship ended, I somehow tested positive. Which didn’t make sense to me at first because the only person I had been with was my ex-boyfriend, and he told me that he knew he was negative.

I later found out that my ex did in fact know his status, he just lied about the results. He had found out that he was positive five years prior to meeting me, and, for whatever reason, decided that I was not good enough for him to share that information with me, so he put my life at risk and caused me to contract HIV, which could have been completely avoided had he just told me. After finding out that he knew his status and lied, I grew angry. I wanted to see this man go to prison, or even worse, die.

Even though HIV is not a death sentence, and I knew that I would be okay and able to live a healthy and prosperous life, I felt, and in some ways still feel, that justice should be served. It’s my peace of mind that was stolen. It was the fears of not knowing how people will respond to me or if my family would accept me or not after telling them of my HIV-positive status. It was the mental and emotional trauma that I had to and still have to endure.

No one deserves a pass. It’s one thing to be positive and be in control of your health by engaging in care and maintaining an undetectable viral load. It’s another thing to just not care and intentionally aim to infect others with HIV. Something should be done and justice should always be served. I believe that SB 239 should be revised to note that, a person with a proven undetectable viral load should not be penalized or have to face consequences for having unprotected sex and not disclosing their status. However, a person who is positive and is proven to be intentionally infecting or aiming to infect others should face felony charges and brought to justice.

It’s not shaming or stigmatizing, it’s giving the person or people who are victims of these reckless acts the peace of mind in knowing that something is being done to protect others who could potentially be victims of the people who have done it to them.