Justin Trudeau, Rona Ambrose, Thomas Mulcair Denounce Florida Shooting
ADVERTISEMENT

Each of Canada's three political party leaders have found themselves on the same side of history, condemning the domestic terror attack at a gay nightclub in Florida that left at least 49 people dead.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau wrote of being "deeply shocked and saddened" about the shooting, which many are calling the worst in American history by a lone gunman.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, Interim Conservative Leader Rona Ambrose, and NDP Leader Tom Mulcair stand beside each other as MPs pose on Parliament Hill for a photo to mark the 150th anniversary of parliament on Wednesday. (Photo: Adrian Wyld/CP)

In a statement posted to both his official website and social media platforms, Trudeau said, “While authorities are still investigating and details continue to be confirmed, it is appalling that as many as 50 lives may have been lost to this domestic terror attack targeting the LGBTQ2 community.

"On behalf of the Government of Canada, Sophie and I offer our condolences and prayers to the families and friends of those lost today, and wish a full recovery to all those injured. We stand in solidarity with Orlando and the LGBTQ2 community."

We grieve with our friends in the US & stand in solidarity with the LGBTQ2 community after today's terror attack: https://t.co/nwP2MR2xUm — Justin Trudeau (@JustinTrudeau) June 12, 2016

Rona Ambrose, interim Conservative party leader, shared a similar message of solidarity, noting, "We stand shoulder to shoulder with our American allies and all those who have been impacted by this brutal and unwarranted act of terror."

Horrified by the news this morning in Orlando. My statement: https://t.co/xKxTVfvXjV — Rona Ambrose (@RonaAmbrose) June 12, 2016

Meanwhile, NDP leader Thomas Mulcair shared his reaction with a single tweet:

Terribly shocked to learn of the shooting at a gay nightclub in Florida. We stand with Orlando and the #LGBT community today & always. — Tom Mulcair (@ThomasMulcair) June 12, 2016

The outpouring of support for those affected by the Orlando tragedy extended beyond the political realm. According to LGBTQ publication DailyXtra, candlelight vigils will be held in Toronto, Ottawa, Saskatoon, Winnipeg, Vancouver and several other cities across Canada on Sunday night to honour the memory of the shooting victims, and to show unity within the community.

Please join us tonight at 8pm at the Vancouver Art Gallery for a candlelight vigil in honour of the victims and... https://t.co/v3KxpY9Ox7 — Vancouver Pride (@vancouverpride) June 12, 2016

In addition, Toronto's namesake sign will be lit with rainbow colours as a tribute those who died in the shooting.