Housing & Residence Education
Beaty Towers

Beaty Towers

Area Desk Information

Phone: 352-392-6111

Area Desk Hours

Beaty Towers are across the street from Broward Recreational Center and back up against a wooded ravine with a brook and pedestrian bridge. Beaty apartments have two bedrooms, a private bathroom, and a study-kitchenette. Each kitchenette has a refrigerator, range, oven, and garbage disposal. Beds in Beaty can be bunked or separated, and the dressers, desks, and closets are built in.

The Innovation Academy LLC

The Innovation Academy LLC is housed within Beaty Towers. This program assists incoming Innovation Academy students in making a smooth transition to the University community by promoting involvement through residence hall activities, student organizations, and interactions with faculty, staff, and other students. Programs will explore the dimensions of innovation, creativity and entrepreneurship. Open only to students admitted to the Innovation Academy program. Innovation Acadamey

Towers Area Government (TAG)

The Towers Area Government is a student run organization, dedicated to providing quality services to the residents of Beaty Towers. Membership is open to all residents. To join, simply purchase an activity card. Learn More

Learn More About Beaty Towers Here

Apply to housing here.





Recent Posts Fifth Annual Florida Contemporary Music Festival Mar 31st, 2017 The Fifth Annual Florida Contemporary Music Festival, April 5-8, 2017, is a celebration of the music of our time, featuring international guest performers and composers, with 10 concerts, masterclasses, and […] Visiting Artist Lecture with Mike Calway-Fagen Mar 31st, 2017 The School of Art and Art History at the University of Florida is proud to present visiting artist Mike Calway-Fagen as part of the Spring 2017 Visiting Artists Lecture Series. […] Adam Brown: Spring 2017 Visiting Artists Lecture Series Mar 28th, 2017 The School of Art and Art History at the University of Florida is proud to present visiting artist Adam Brown as part of the Spring 2017 Visiting Artists Lecture Series […]

Residence Hall Amenities