Stances of Faiths on LGBT Issues: Salvation Army | Resources
Stances of Faiths on LGBT Issues: Salvation Army

About

The Salvation Army is an evangelical Christian movement founded in England in 1865. Its mission is “to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ and to meet human needs in His name without discrimination.” The Salvation Army is the second largest charitable organization in the United States and one of the world’s largest providers of social aid, providing services like disaster relief and food and clothing assistance for the poor. The Salvation Army operates according to eleven religious doctrinal statements as well as position statements on a number of controversial social issues.

Position on Homosexuality

Sexual attraction to the same sex is a matter of profound complexity. Whatever the causes may be, attempts to deny its reality or to marginalize those of a same-sex orientation have not been helpful. The Salvation Army does not consider same-sex orientation blameworthy in itself. Homosexual conduct, like heterosexual conduct, requires individual responsibility and must be guided by the light of scriptural teaching.

Scripture forbids sexual intimacy between members of the same sex. The Salvation Army believes, therefore, that Christians whose sexual orientation is primarily or exclusively same-sex are called upon to embrace celibacy as a way of life. There is no scriptural support for same-sex unions as equal to, or as an alternative to, heterosexual marriage. Likewise, there is no scriptural support for demeaning or mistreating anyone for reason of his or her sexual orientation. The Salvation Army opposes any such abuse. In keeping with these convictions, the services of The Salvation Army are available to all who qualify, without regard to sexual orientation. The fellowship of Salvation Army worship is open to all sincere seekers of faith in Christ, and membership in The Salvation Army church body is open to all who confess Christ as Savior and who accept and abide by The Salvation Army's doctrine and discipline.



In 2001, PFLAG and other LGBT groups called for a boycott of the Salvation Army’s holiday donation kettles because of the organization’s failure to provide employee benefits to same-sex domestic partners, a policy which still exists in the organization today.

The Salvation Army National Headquarters:

615 Slaters Lane

P.O. Box 269

Alexandria, VA 22313