'Feminist' Lana 'Aborts Baby Because It's A Boy' And Is Surprised By Backlash
Update: Since the publication of this article, several people have reported that this may be a hoax.

A 'feminist' blog from the US has caused outrage after its author apparently admitted aborting her male fetus based on her negative past experiences of men.

In an article so astounding it is difficult to believe it is actually true, 'Lana' even expresses surprise that "many friends, and several of my own family members have completely cut off communication with me".

The author purports to have fallen pregnant in 2012 and was overjoyed at the thought until she discovered she was to have a boy at which point she decided to have an abortion.

Abortion based on gender is illegal in the UK but just this week religious groups wrote to MPs to support an amendment to the 1967 Abortion Act to clarify the point.

The amendment reads: "Nothing in section 1 of the Abortion Act 1967 can be interpreted as allowing a pregnancy to be terminated on the grounds of the sex of the unborn child."

The practise is said to still happen in the UK particularly in ethnic communities where boys are more valued than girls.

In the blog, Lana details one of the negative experiences that was so terrible she felt she could not "bring another monster into the world".

The story begins aboard a plane on the way to an Occupy Wall Street rally in San Francisco. A man sat next to her upon discovering where she is going says: "B****** like you need to learn their place."

Lana screams "assault" and a male attendant rushes over but refuses to do anything as no physical contact was made.

She then admits considering lying but won't move to one of the only two spare seats as they are "both back in Economy".

She adds: "I was flabbergasted, and then betrayed as they recommended that I move to one of the empty seats. This left me in tears.

"I knew the only way to get away was to move seats so I did so tearfully and having felt as though I had been verbally and emotionally raped."

Lana then goes on how pregnancy made her feel her body had betrayed her so much she experienced "crying, sobbing, uncontrollable weeping, mental anguish the likes of which may only be experienced by those who have had their lives destroyed by war".

Her decision to abort the fetus prompted furious comments.

"I almost threw up after reading this."

"The most disturbing part of this is what if she didn't say yes to finding out the babies gender and had the baby to realize it was a boy, what would she have had done then?"

Fact that people abort kids in western world because of gender is thoroughly sick. "after learning my fetus was male" http://t.co/YZCR0UDfBu — Caleb Bond (@TheCalebBond) February 10, 2015

Misandry means hatred of men. Feminism means equality of genders. "Feminist Has Abortion Because Child Was a Boy" NO. She is a misandrist — Jenni (@lifeofjennibeck) February 9, 2015

Since the backlash, Lana appears to have written another blog to defend her position where she claims to have received death threats as a result of the original post.

Unfortunately she misses the point about why people would be angry at her and instead reiterates her right to choose what happens to her body.

I find it hard to hate anybody, their faults are not their own, but usually rather the product of an environment or social circle they have been exposed to. I beg most of you, for your own good, take a look at yourself and decide right now if you want to spend the rest of your life angry on the internet, or if you want to fight for a woman’s right to do what she wants with her body.