How Trump's Age -- And Health -- Could Play Out During His Presidency
The 45th President of the United States is the oldest incoming president in U.S. history. Taking office at 70 years of age, many expressed their reservations about his ability to deliver. Some continue to see his age as an obstacle that prevents him from upholding his duties.

Conflicting Opinions on the President’s Overall Level of Fitness

Though his physician has published medical reports indicating that President Trump is fit to serve as Commander-in-Chief, this has not stopped speculation that he is physically and perhaps even mentally unfit for duty.

Indeed, the respected British cardiologist, Dr. Patrick Heck, has been quoted as saying that the President may not be healthy enough to survive his term in office. Dr. Heck was speaking at a medical conference and stated that the 70-year-old might crumble under the pressure that accompanies being head of state.

On average, the life expectancy of a healthy man who reaches the age of 70 is 14 more years. However, Dr. Heck does not believe that Trump is healthy. Hence, the doctor is doubtful that this theory applies to Mr. Trump. He went on to say that the president is at a serious risk of experiencing a heart attack. He is 6 feet and 3 inches tall but weighing in at 236 pounds, he is still considered overweight.

Trump’s Dietary Habits

President Trump is not known to be a conscious eater. He is reputed to love Diet Coke, along with ample servings of fried chicken. However, Mr. Trump’s appetites don’t end here as he is also said to have a particular fondness for large, well-done steaks smothered in ketchup, as well as thick juicy hamburgers.

There are even photographs of the President enjoying a second scoop of ice cream with pie as everyone else around him has a single scoop. If you’re wondering how a person with this type of diet can maintain healthy cholesterol levels you’re not alone, which is why his doctor has put him on the prescription medication known as statins. Apparently, this part of his regimen is working as the President’s echocardiograms show normal results.

How Other Factors Might Weigh on Mr. Trump’s Health

Of course, staying fit isn’t just about eating the right foods, it also encompasses regular exercise. But unfortunately, this is another aspect of life that the President has given little thought to at least on a consistent basis; because outside of golfing he doesn’t engage in any other sports or intense physical activities. As such, he is at an even greater health risk than his counterparts who share the same age.

Besides physical health, another area that some senior citizens must contend with is mental health. At his age, he is at a risk of developing Alzheimer’s and other conditions that the elderly suffer from such as dementia. And we’ve already seen signs that his mental stability may be waning.

Considering the Stress Could Have on the Trump Presidency

Running a country as big and powerful as the United States is no small task. It comes with an overwhelming amount of stress and demands. All of which accelerates the aging process since these factors often have an adverse impact on your emotional and physical well-being.

In fact, there’s even a biological term for it ― fight mode. Stress triggers the body’s flight response. Of course, if the situation calls for quick thinking or aggressive action, then great because that’s why your body goes into ‘flight’. However, there are drawbacks ― namely, that it is accompanied by physiological changes that can cause your body to age more rapidly than it should.

In the case of President Trump, anxiety is much more ongoing. As such, one could expect him to age rapidly over the next four years. Just look at how Clinton, Obama, and Bush aged over two terms.

Worry and frustration in the Oval Office is at massive levels daily, and it is uncertain how Trump will handle it in the long term. Keep in mind that he not only deals with official matters of state but must also tend to the demands of his family, and his younger wife, Melania.