FAQs
How many tablets do I give my child? Is the number of tablets age-or weight-dependent?

As with all medications, you should read and follow label instructions. Dissolve 2 to 3 tablets under the tongue or in a teaspoon of water, 4 times per day. If the child is restless or wakeful, give 2 tablets every hour for 6 doses or as recommended by a licensed health care practitioner.

Unlike other medicines, the dosing for Hyland’s teething medications is not dependent on a child’s age or weight. Dosing is the same for babies and children of all ages.

How often can I give the tablets to my child?

In acute cases of teething pain, you can give your child 2 to 3 tablets for up to 6 doses per day or as recommended by a licensed health care practitioner. If you do not see improvement within 24-48 hours, stop giving the tablets and consult a licensed health care professional.

What is the risk of overdosing?

From Dr. Iris Bell, Hyland’s Medical Director: We have added child- resistant caps to Hyland’s Baby Teething Tablets to make it harder for children to accidentally dose themselves. Additionally, with the prior formula, a 10-pound child would need to have ingested at least six bottles of 125 Teething Tablets at once before experiencing the first mild side effect of dry mouth. Today, a child would have to ingest, at the same time, more than a dozen bottles of 135 Teething Tablets before experiencing dry mouth from the product. The body clears Belladonna alkaloids from any dose in a matter of hours (it is unlikely to build up in the system when taken as directed on the package label).

How do I give the tablets to my child?

Hyland’s Baby Teething Tablets are small, “soft” tablets that dissolve instantly in the mouth upon contact with saliva. You just need to put the tablets in your child’s mouth and they will dissolve. If you are uncomfortable with putting the tablets in your child’s mouth, the tablets may first be dissolved in a teaspoonful of water and then given to the child.

Won’t my baby choke on the tablets?

No, Hyland’s Baby Teething Tablets dissolve instantly upon contact with saliva, so there is no choking hazard at all with the tablets. You may wish to give your child a sip of water to assure the mouth is moist before giving them the tablets.

Do the Teething Tablets expire?

No, they don’t expire, and we don’t put expiration dates on the products, as they have been exempted from expiration dating guidelines by the FDA (CFR 211.137). The numbers that are imprinted on the edge of the labels are lot numbers – so we know exactly when the product was produced. We can track any product we made using that number.

Why is there white powder in my bottle of Hyland’s Baby teething tablets?

Because the tablets are soft and quick dissolving, it is normal for them to crumble a little during shipping, resulting in some powder in the bottle. As a precaution, please don’t let your baby turn the bottle into a rattle (contrary to our Shake Shake music video) – this breaks the tablets and creates more powder.

My tablets are discolored with grey or black spots that look like mold.

It appears that the bottle of Hyland’s tablets that you have has become moldy. If the homeopathic tablets have become moldy, it means that moisture and mold spores have somehow entered into the bottle of tablets. DO NOT use that bottle of tablets. In the future, you should not touch the tablets or put them back into bottle once they have been removed. We do not use preservatives in our tablets, so touching them could contaminate them with bacteria, mold or other microorganisms. When administering the tablets, it is best to shake the tablets into the bottle cap, and then tip them directly into your mouth without touching the cap to your mouth in order to avoid introducing saliva into the cap or bottle. Also, the tablets should be stored in a cool, dry place, away from any excessive heat or moisture. A bathroom, because of its moist environment, would not be a good place to store Hyland’s homeopathic tablets. If the tablets are discolored upon the first opening of the bottle, please call Hyland’s customer service at 800-624-9659.