IFSW supported nomination of Irena Sendler for Nobel Peace Prize
IFSW wrote on the first ever World Social Work Day to the Nobel Prize jury in Oslo, Norway, to support the nomination of Irena Sendler. As the Prize for 2007 was awarded to Al Gore and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), IFSW made the following statement:



"IFSW sends congratulations to Al Gore and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) on winning the Nobel Peace Prize 2007. The issue of climate change is affecting all individuals and societies and it is a more than worthy cause to help begin the change in our lifestyle to prevent destruction of our planet. Social workers know from daily experience that this is an immediate and pressing social and personal issue.



'However IFSW is deeply saddened that the life work of Nobel nominee Irena Sendler, social worker, did not receive formal recognition', said David N Jones, IFSW President. 'Irena Sendler and her helpers took personal risks day after day to prevent the destruction of individual lives — the lives of the children of the Warsaw ghetto. This work was done very quietly, without many words and at the risk of their lives. This is so typical of social work, an activity which changes and saves lives but is done out of the glare of publicity and often at personal risk. IFSW recognises her again and at the same time celebrates the commitment and dedication of thousands of social workers around the world who also bring hope and care to people often living on the edge of despair,' David N Jones concluded."



More information about Irena Sendler’s remarkable life at www.irenasendler.org/



The letter sent by IFSW to the Nobel Prize Jury draws attention especially to the dedicated work of Polish social worker Irena Sendler during the Second World War and afterwards and records the fact that IFSW gave to her the award of Most Honoured Social Worker. The letter also highlights the continuing dedication of social workers to support those who are vulnerable and to uphold the human rights of all people.



The letter from David N Jones, IFSW President, states:



“I am writing on behalf of the social workers of the world to commend the nomination of Irena Sendler for a Nobel Peace Prize.



I do not need to repeat the citation which has been submitted to support her nomination. The historical record is clear that her personal dedication, commitment and willingness to take risks resulted in her saving thousands of lives in Poland. She suffered for her bravery but continued to provide care and support in her role as a social worker.



Irena Sendler was honoured with a unique title at the 50th anniversary world social work conference held in Munich in 2006. She was recognised as Most Distinguished Social Worker, a title created originally for her and to be used only in cases of exceptional professionalism and service.



Social workers are involved with some of the most distressed and vulnerable people in our communities every day. They require not only compassion and dedication to help those in need but also intellectual and analytical skills and personal commitment. These are demanding qualities in special people. Irena Sendler exhibited those qualities in abundance.



Social work practice is always challenging and can be dangerous. In many situations the safety of social workers is at risk and there have been recent examples of social workers suffering serious injury and death. Irena Sendler also experienced these challenges.



This letter is being sent on World Social Work Day and we hope that you will weigh this support with other information which you have received. We have no doubt that Irena Sendler is fully deserving of a Nobel Peace Prize.”



Irena Sendler passed away May 12, 2008.



See also



www.irenasendler.org



Irena Sendler - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Article in "Community Care", United Kingdom



Oprah and Gore among 181 peace prize nominees | The Guardian | Guardian Unlimited



I'm no hero, says woman who saved 2,500 ghetto children | The Guardian | Guardian Unlimited



How students in Kansas, USA shared Irena's story



Article by Joachim Wieler





« back