Report Cards
What are District and School Report Cards?

As part of the new state accountability system, reflected in Wisconsin’s approved ESEA Flexibility Request, the Department of Public Instruction (DPI) has produced report cards for every district and school in Wisconsin. These Report Cards provide data on multiple indicators for four Priority Areas:

Student Achievement – performance on the WKCE and WAA-SwD in reading and mathematics

– performance on the WKCE and WAA-SwD in reading and mathematics Student Growth – improvement over time on the WKCE in reading and mathematics

– improvement over time on the WKCE in reading and mathematics Closing Gaps – progress of student subgroups in closing gaps in reading and mathematics performance and/or graduation rates

– progress of student subgroups in closing gaps in reading and mathematics performance and/or graduation rates On-track and Postsecondary Readiness – performance on key indicators of readiness for graduation and postsecondary pursuits, whether college or career

Performance on three Student Engagement Indicators is also reported. These three indicators affect student success and school effectiveness.

Test Participation Rate , with a goal of 95 percent test participation for all students and each subgroup.

, with a goal of 95 percent test participation for all students and each subgroup. Absenteeism Rate , with a goal of 13 percent or less.

, with a goal of 13 percent or less. Dropout Rate, with a goal of six percent or less.

A district's or school’s Overall Accountability Score places the district or school into one of five Overall Accountability Ratings:

Significantly Exceeds Expectations

Exceeds Expectations

Meets Expectations

Meets Few Expectations

Fails to Meet Expectations

For more detailed information about the creation and scoring for the report cards see the resources listed below and additional information available on the about Wisconsin accountability webpage.

What resources are available that explain the School Report Card?