Catherine Bell
Overview (3)

Mini Bio (1)

Catherine was born in London, but moved to California with her Iranian mother at age 2. Her mother still acts as her personal assistant. As a child, she acted in various TV adverts. She went to UCLA to study biology, but dropped out to become a model in Japan. She moved back into acting with a Mexican commercial for Amex and then followed that up by being Isabella Rossellini's nude body double in Death Becomes Her (1992), where she also met her future husband, Adam Beason, who was director Robert Zemeckis's assistant. The couple currently live near L.A. with their daughter Gemma.

- IMDb Mini Biography By: John Sacksteder <jsack@ka.net> and Louis Lee

Spouse (1)

Trivia (20)

Studied for awhile at UCLA, and wanted to be either a surgeon or a biomedical engineer.



Has a heart tattoo with the word "love" inside of it on her right ankle.



She is fluent in the Persian language, as well as English.



Is very physically fit and loves all sports, particularly kick-boxing, skiing, and snowboarding.



When she was in her 20s, she had thyroid cancer and had to have her thyroid removed. She doesn't cover the scar on her neck because she thinks it's kind of cool.





Studies acting at The Beverly Hills Playhouse with Milton Katselas

She was selected #84 in year 2001, #38 in 2002, and #20 in the 2004 list of the FHM magazine's 100 Sexiest Women in the World.





Was a contestant on Match Game (1990) and introduced herself as Cathy Bell, a massage therapist. She won $900, but didn't make it to the final Super Match round. Was also a contestant on To Tell the Truth (1990) and introduced herself (an impostor) in the same manner. She and the other two stumped the entire panel for winnings of $3000.

Correctly predicted the winner and final score of Super Bowl XXXVI, in a survey of 70 celebrities who had nothing to do with football conducted by The Sporting News. Specifically, she correctly predicted that the New England Patriots would beat the St. Louis Rams by a score of 20-17. (She is incorrectly rumored to have made this prediction before the season began; in fact, she made it after after both teams had already won their respective conference championships.).



Gave birth to a daughter, Gemma on 16 April 2003





Signed on for a supporting role in the second half of the first season of Threshold (2005) and shot one episode before the show was canceled.

Named #75 on the Maxim magazine "Hot 100 of 2005" list.



Sprained her ankle while playing golf [June 2, 2008].



Rides a motorcycle.





Friends with comic Kathy Griffin

Gave birth to her second child a son named Ronan who weighed 7lbs 7 0z at birth and was 19 3/4 inches long.



She is of Iranian and Scottish ancestry.



She has a tattoo of each of her children's names. Daughter Gemma is on her left wrist in ancient Persian and son Ronan is on her right inner forearm in an ancient Celtic script called Ogham.



Drove in the Toyota Grand Prix of Long Beach Celebrity Race in 1998 and 1999.



Personal Quotes (27)

Not as much as I used to, but I use the Internet for everything. I use it for information. Like if I'm planning a trip or something, I'll check out the place I'm going to.



It's changing a bit, but the thing in LA is everyone is either in the industry, or knows someone who is in the industry. So, they don't let on that they recognize you, that's what I've found out.



I get letters from kids, teenagers and young girls who just want to be Mac. I've had quite a few people actually say that they're going to become a Marine or a JAG lawyer because of me... the character. I think that's pretty cool!



I think my uncle was probably the biggest influence in my life. We grew up in the same house, and he was just a really great, hard-working, honest, ethical person.



I think it's great that she's not perfect and wasn't perfect. I think that's maybe why so many young girls and different people look up to Mac and respect her even more.



But, people are recognizing me more. Sometimes fans just approach me on the street and say how much they love the show. It's great to get that kind of feedback.



I love England though; I've been back a few times and just love it. My favorite thing to do there is going to museums and all the castles. Oh, and my husband and I went mountain biking across England on our honeymoon!



I'm still one of the guys and I always will be.



Sometimes you work all the way through to 5am, then get a few hours and you're back on set again.



Probably right at the end of JAG, I would love to have a child or two. I ultimately want to have two kids.



JAG is an acronym for the Judge Advocate General, which is the judicial system of the military.



I'm a firm believer in doing things that scare you.



I started when I was in college because I was shy and thought it would be a good way to break out of that.



We're just into toys, whether it's motorcycles or race cars or computers. I've got the Palm Pilot right here with me, I've got the world's smallest phone. Maybe it's just because I'm still a big little kid and I just love toys, you know?



The best part? Probably being able to portray such a respectable, ethical, intelligent, strong woman. That's still pretty rare in our business, unfortunately.



I started acting when I was about 18. I was a model for a couple of years before that.



I understand men much better than most women I know.



The main prank that we play with props is for people's birthdays. The special effects people will put a little explosive in the cake so it blows up in their face - that's always fun to play on a guest star, or one of the trainees or someone who's new.



I love cold, rainy weather.



When I do get time, I like to hike and I take lots of vitamins and powders to keep healthy.



I didn't figure out the makeup or cute hair or clothes until oh, maybe my junior year of high school.



I've always been like that. I was a tomboy when I was a kid, so I was always playing baseball and basketball and football and stuff as a kid with the boys.



Almost every Marine I've met says I portray a Marine dead-on, which is really, really flattering.



I love to go bungee jumping, jump out of planes, ride motorbikes, do kickboxing. I love all that stuff.



I like all the adventure sports but I like to do them in a safe way.



People think I'm crazy and reckless but I'm absolutely not... I'm soooo safe and soooo careful and I won't do anything that feels like I could break something.



When all the girls were getting all made up and getting into all that girl stuff in junior high I was out playing softball or touch football with the guys.