JUDGE EXPANDS STATE FUNDING FOR ABORTIONS
In a decision that could allow thousands of poor women across the state access to abortion services for the first time, a Cook County judge on Friday struck down Illinois' law that limits public aid funding for abortions.

Under the state law, Medicaid payments for abortions have been restricted to instances where the mother's life is endangered. The ruling by Circuit Judge Everette Braden extends benefits to cases where a doctor determines a woman's health would be jeopardized by carrying a pregnancy to term.

Braden's ruling from the bench, his last before moving to the Illinois Appellate Court on Monday, marks another liberalization of the limitations that long have existed on the use of taxpayer funds for abortions.

In July, the Clinton adminstration implemented a federal mandate that added rape and incest to the cases in which women were entitled to Medicaid-funded abortions. That mandate also applies in Illinois.

Colleen Connell, one of the American Civil Liberties Union attorneys who brought the case, said, "What (Braden's) decision does is it makes (it) possible for physicians in Illinois to use their best medical judgment in treating Medicaid-eligible women, to offer and then provide-with Medicaid reimbursement-an abortion if the physician and the woman conclude an abortion is medically necessary to preserve her health."

But state officials warned that the ruling could lead to a liberal reading of what constitutes a medically necessary abortion, and they indicated it could result in the public funding of abortion on demand.

According to Dean Schott, a spokesman for the Illinois Department of Public Aid, about a dozen women have used their Medicaid benefits since July to get abortions as a result of the new federal provisions, and he said he expected a like number might seek abortions out of medical necessity.

State Assistant Atty. Gen. James O'Connell, who represented the Department of Public Aid, said Braden's decision would be appealed within 30 days. Because the ruling challenged the constitutionality of the state's public aid law, it is likely that the case will be appealed directly to the Illinois Supreme Court.

Joseph Scheidler, executive director of the Pro-Life Action League, said, "With the sophisticated medicine we have today, the cases of medically necessary abortions are almost non-existent."

But abortion-rights proponents maintained that allowing a doctor to determine when an abortion was medically necessary would help women with health concerns affiliated with pregnancy ranging from hypertension to kidney failure.

One said that Medicaid funding of such abortions could be particularly significant for women with substance-abuse problems.

Friday's ruling came as a result of a class-action suit filed by the ACLU in 1991 against the Department of Public Aid on behalf of a teenage girl who had been raped.

The suit challenged a 1977 law passed in the wake of the federal Hyde amendment, which restricted federal funding for abortions to instances in which the mother's life was threatened. Then-Gov. James Thompson vetoed the measure, but state lawmakers overrode the veto.

In pressing to overturn the law, the ACLU argued that it was discriminatory for Medicaid to pay for other health services connected with a pregnancy and to pay for care for men, but not fund abortions.

Once the state chooses to establish a medical assistance program for the poor, the ACLU argued, it cannot dispense public funds in such a manner that infringes on certain rights.

But the state argued that there was nothing in the public aid code that guarenteed Medicaid funding for all medically necessary services.

Pam Sutherland, executive director of the Illinois Planned Parenthood Council, said of Friday's ruling, "This is extremely significant because this catches the women who fall through the cracks, since we've already taken care of women whose life is in danger and now instances of rape and incest."

Braden's ruling conflicts with a 1980 decision by the U.S. Supreme Court, which upheld the state's restrictions on Medicaid-funded abortions.

But the ruling follows the pattern in several other states where abortion-rights advocates have overturned abortion restrictions by using the often-wider protections offered by state constitutions.

Braden indicated his decision to overturn the restriction in the public aid code was guided by rulings in other states where constitutional rights to privacy and bars against discrimination on the basis of sex have been used to extend public funding of abortions.

As recently as June, a Minnesota court ruled that the practice of publicly funding medical services associated with childbirth while denying funding for abortions violated a woman's right to privacy and equal protection.

Medicaid funding was liberalized earlier this year by the federal mandate that covered instances in which the woman was a victim of rape or incest.

But last month, an Illinois legislative panel concluded that an emergency order issued by Gov. Jim Edgar to the Department of Public Aid implementing the federal mandate was illegal and stopped the order from taking effect.

The ACLU filed suit in federal court, and U.S. District Judge Charles Kocoras issued an order temporarily allowing the state to continue funding abortions in cases of rape or incest. A hearing on that case is scheduled for Tuesday.

Even with the liberalization of public funding for abortions, however, some abortion-rights activists said Friday they worried that poor women will not necessarily get more access to services.

Toni Bond, executive director of the Chicago Abortion Fund, said, "Even if they are going to expand the law to cover procedures for women whose health would be affected, my first concern is the (same) that we've encountered with rape and incest. There are a lot of clinics that just won't take public aid."