'Crocodile' Dundee II (1988)
When Joan Wilder is abducted while on a trip along the Nile, her boyfriend, Jack Colton, and pal Ralph rush to rescue her and retrieve a fabled jewel.

A mousy romance novelist sets off for Colombia to ransom her kidnapped sister, and soon finds herself in the middle of a dangerous adventure hunting for treasure with a mercenary rogue.

A small-time crook becomes convinced he has become an angel after a traumatic incident and resolves to perform the work of one.

Lightning Jack Kane is an Australian outlaw in the wild west. During a bungled bank robbery he picks up mute Ben Doyle as a hostage. The two become good friends, with Jack teaching Ben how ... See full summary »

Australian Outback adventurer Mick "Crocodile" Dundee travels to Los Angeles with his young son while his longtime companion suspects foul play at a movie studio.

An American reporter goes to the Australian outback to meet an eccentric crocodile poacher and invites him to New York City.

Taglines: The world's favourite adventurer is back for more! much more!

Mick and Sue continue where they left off in "'Crocodile' Dundee". New York City drug lords are pursuing Sue for having solid evidence against them for murder, so for her safety, Mick takes her back to Australia. When the gangsters follow them, Mick demonstrates his outback skills once more. Written by Rob Hartill

Did You Know?

Trivia The actor whom the two Kung-Fu tourists mistake Dundee for in the subway fight scene is Clint Eastwood. The actor whom the two Kung-Fu tourists mistake Dundee for in the subway fight scene is Clint Eastwood. See more

Goofs When Mick prepares the first trap for Rico and his men he tells Sue take her bra off. Later, when Mick goes to make his 'phone call' and has Sue gather up the berries the outline of a bra is visible through her shirt. When Mick prepares the first trap for Rico and his men he tells Sue take her bra off. Later, when Mick goes to make his 'phone call' and has Sue gather up the berries the outline of a bra is visible through her shirt. See more

Crazy Credits At the very end of the credits you can hear "Dundee" say: "Are you ready to go home now" for a second time. At the very end of the credits you can hear "Dundee" say: "Are you ready to go home now" for a second time. See more

Alternate Versions UK cinema and video versions were cut by a second to briefly shorten the scene in Columbia where Rico shoots a man in the head. The footage was restored for the 2003 DVD release. UK cinema and video versions were cut by a second to briefly shorten the scene in Columbia where Rico shoots a man in the head. The footage was restored for the 2003 DVD release. See more