30,000 join March Against Racism in 'defiance and unity' against Brexit and Donald Trump
As many as 30,000 people have turned out for the March Against Racism in London in an expression of unity against a rise in racism, Islamophobia and anti-Semitism.

Organisers said the demonstration would also show support for refugee and migrant rights following the Brexit vote and the election of US President Donald Trump.

Amid an atmosphere of “defiance and unity”, protesters arrived at Portland Place in Central London at midday holding banners with messages including “Hands off EU workers”, “Refugees and migrants welcome here” and “Stand up to Trump”.

We’ll tell you what’s true. You can form your own view. From 15p €0.18 $0.18 USD 0.27 a day, more exclusives, analysis and extras.

It was part of a string of demonstrations taking place across Europe to mark the United Nations International Anti-Racism Day, with cities such as Berlin, Vienna and Athens, as well as UK cities Cardiff and Glasgow, taking part.

Speaking to The Independent Zakariya Cochrane, assistant convener for Stand Up to Racism, which organised the event, said: “It’s the fourth year that we’ve held this demonstration now for UN anti-racism day, but we think this year is more important than ever.

“We’ve had the election of Donald Trump, with his Muslim ban and the wall with Mexico. We’ve had the EU referendum, where we’ve seen the highest increase in reported hate crime in the country, showing that the scapegoating of migrants gave confidence to racists.

“Just this week, the ruling of the Government winning the victory over the Lords on EU nationals means that our Government are prepared to use EU nationals as bargaining chips in the Brexit negotiations. There was also the defeat on Dubs.

“So this year is really about anti-racists uniting and going on the defensive on all the issues: child refugees, defending migrants and refugees, the divisive policies of Donald Trump and Theresa May."

Tottenham MP David Lammy, told the crowds that this week's meeting between former Ukip leader and key Brexit campaigner Nigel Farage and far-right French politician Marie Le Pen was evidence of current ill-feeling towards minorities.

He said: "This week Nigel Farage met Marie Le Pen and we are sending a message that we don't want that kind of fascism and xenophobia across our planet and in our country.

"My parents arrived in this county in the 1950s to signs that said 'no blacks, no Irish, no dogs' and we thought because of so much strife that by the time we got to the 21st century we had turned our backs on racism.

"And then, we get June the 21st. We get a rise in hate crime across the country almost by 50 per cent."

Mr Lammy also criticised a small group of counter-protesters – suspected to be from the English Defence League – who were seen at the march.

He said: “We have smashed the EDL. They are no longer of any consequence. But let’s not pat ourselves on the back too early, because some of their views have become mainstream.”

Newly launched campaign Love Music Hate Racism brought a carnival float to the event, which hosted artists and DJs throughout the day.

The march comes a day after a report by the Trade Union Congress (TUC) found that one in three black and minority ethnic (BAME) Britons have been racially abused since the EU referendum, with protestors concerned that hate crimes could be set to increase again following the triggering of Article 50.

Shape Created with Sketch. In pictures: St. Patrick's Day around the world Show all 24 left Created with Sketch. right Created with Sketch. Shape Created with Sketch. In pictures: St. Patrick's Day around the world 1/24 Participants take part in the St Patrick's Day parade on the streets of Dublin PA 2/24 Police officers pretend to arrest a man dressed in a leprechaun outfit as he poses for a photograph along the parade route during the St. Patrick's Day parade in Dublin, Ireland Getty Images 3/24 The service and pilgrimage to celebrate Saint Patrick's Day takes place at Saul Church in Downpatrick, Northern Ireland Getty Images 4/24 Racegoer during the Cheltenham Festival Reuters 5/24 The Coca-Cola London Eye, on London's South Bank is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 6/24 Prince William, Duke Of Cambridge and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge take a drink of Guinness as they meet with soldiers of the 1st battalion Irish Guards in their canteen following their St Patricks day parade at Cavalry Barracks in London, England Getty Images 7/24 The Coca-Cola London Eye, on London's South Bank is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 8/24 Intu Trafford Centre in Manchester is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 9/24 Intu Trafford Centre in Manchester is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 10/24 The Kelpies in Falkirk, Scotland, is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 11/24 Gateshead Millennium Bridge in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 12/24 4 Times Square, The Bank of America Tower and the Empire State Building have their spires lit green for St. Patrick's day in Manhattan, New York Reuters 13/24 A spectator shows his Irish pride as he watches the annual St. Patrick's Day parade in New York City Getty Images 14/24 Bagpipers march up Fifth Avenue during the St. Patrick's Day Parade in New York AP 15/24 Revellers march up Fifth Avenue during the St. Patrick's Day Parade in New York AP 16/24 The statues of the ducks from the book, 'Make Way For Ducklings,' (R-L) Mrs. Mallard, Jack, Kack, Lack, Mack, Nack, Ouack, Pack, and Quack are decorated for State Patrick's Day in the Boston Public Gardens in Boston, Massachusetts, USA EPA 17/24 Tiernan Irish Dancers put on a show as the Capitol Rotunda is filled with Irish music and a clapping audience during the annual St. Patrick's Day celebration at the State Capitol in Helena, Montana, USA AP 18/24 The Colosseum in Rome, illuminated in green for St. Patrick's Day Getty Images 19/24 The magic fountains of Montjuic have lit up green to celebrate St. Patrick's Day, patron saint of the Irish, in Barcelona, Spain EPA 20/24 The Burgtheater (Imperial Court Teathre) is illuminated with green lights to celebrate St. Patrick's Day in Vienna, Austria Reuters 21/24 The Chain Bridge is illuminated in green in honour of St. Patrick's Day in Budapest, Hungary EPA 22/24 Christ the Redeemer statue is illuminated in green in honor of St. Patrick's Day in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil AP 23/24 Girls perform an Irish dance for customers in the the Mercantile, Australias Longest Running Irish Pub in The Rocks in Sydney on St. Patricks Day Getty Images 24/24 Participants pose for a photo during celebrations of St. Patrick's Day at a hotel in The Rocks in Sydney, Australia EPA 1/24 Participants take part in the St Patrick's Day parade on the streets of Dublin PA 2/24 Police officers pretend to arrest a man dressed in a leprechaun outfit as he poses for a photograph along the parade route during the St. Patrick's Day parade in Dublin, Ireland Getty Images 3/24 The service and pilgrimage to celebrate Saint Patrick's Day takes place at Saul Church in Downpatrick, Northern Ireland Getty Images 4/24 Racegoer during the Cheltenham Festival Reuters 5/24 The Coca-Cola London Eye, on London's South Bank is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 6/24 Prince William, Duke Of Cambridge and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge take a drink of Guinness as they meet with soldiers of the 1st battalion Irish Guards in their canteen following their St Patricks day parade at Cavalry Barracks in London, England Getty Images 7/24 The Coca-Cola London Eye, on London's South Bank is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 8/24 Intu Trafford Centre in Manchester is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 9/24 Intu Trafford Centre in Manchester is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 10/24 The Kelpies in Falkirk, Scotland, is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 11/24 Gateshead Millennium Bridge in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, is lit green by Tourism Ireland to celebrate St Patrick's Day PA wire 12/24 4 Times Square, The Bank of America Tower and the Empire State Building have their spires lit green for St. Patrick's day in Manhattan, New York Reuters 13/24 A spectator shows his Irish pride as he watches the annual St. Patrick's Day parade in New York City Getty Images 14/24 Bagpipers march up Fifth Avenue during the St. Patrick's Day Parade in New York AP 15/24 Revellers march up Fifth Avenue during the St. Patrick's Day Parade in New York AP 16/24 The statues of the ducks from the book, 'Make Way For Ducklings,' (R-L) Mrs. Mallard, Jack, Kack, Lack, Mack, Nack, Ouack, Pack, and Quack are decorated for State Patrick's Day in the Boston Public Gardens in Boston, Massachusetts, USA EPA 17/24 Tiernan Irish Dancers put on a show as the Capitol Rotunda is filled with Irish music and a clapping audience during the annual St. Patrick's Day celebration at the State Capitol in Helena, Montana, USA AP 18/24 The Colosseum in Rome, illuminated in green for St. Patrick's Day Getty Images 19/24 The magic fountains of Montjuic have lit up green to celebrate St. Patrick's Day, patron saint of the Irish, in Barcelona, Spain EPA 20/24 The Burgtheater (Imperial Court Teathre) is illuminated with green lights to celebrate St. Patrick's Day in Vienna, Austria Reuters 21/24 The Chain Bridge is illuminated in green in honour of St. Patrick's Day in Budapest, Hungary EPA 22/24 Christ the Redeemer statue is illuminated in green in honor of St. Patrick's Day in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil AP 23/24 Girls perform an Irish dance for customers in the the Mercantile, Australias Longest Running Irish Pub in The Rocks in Sydney on St. Patricks Day Getty Images 24/24 Participants pose for a photo during celebrations of St. Patrick's Day at a hotel in The Rocks in Sydney, Australia EPA

Making reference to the recent rejection by Dutch voters of a far-right leadership candidate, Claude Moraes MEP said prior to the march: “The people of The Netherlands rejected the racism and Islamophobia of Geert Wilders.

“I congratulate them and Civil Society for all their work to push back against the far right and keep communities together — but there is still a huge amount of work to go to fight populism and the far right in the EU.”​