ABORTION RULE WON'T GET APPEAL
Gov. Jim Edgar swiftly changed the state's policy over public funding for abortion services Tuesday by deciding not to appeal a court ruling that expanded the access to abortions for thousands of poor women in Illinois.

Facing a political quandary that offered him a choice between defending the position the state had taken in the case or adhering to his own stance, Edgar chose to follow his public pronouncements on abortion. Edgar has been an advocate of abortion rights for much of his political career.

"The governor made the decision based on the fact that if the governor had appealed, he would have been before the Supreme Court of Illinois arguing a position that is contrary to the public position he has taken for 20 years and he didn't want to be in that position," said spokesman Mike Lawrence.

"Essentially, he doesn't believe a woman whose doctor has decided an abortion is necessary for her health should be discriminated against because she can't afford to pay for an abortion," Lawrence said.

The announcement came as the deadline expired for the Illinois Department of Public Aid to appeal the Dec. 2 ruling by former Cook County Circuit Judge Everette Braden.

State officials initially indicated an appeal was likely. A spokesman for the Illinois attorney general's office, representing the state, said Tuesday the request not to pursue an appeal came from the Department of Public Aid.

In a sweeping decision that also marked the last one made by Braden before he moved to the appellate court, Braden struck down an Illinois law that restricts public funding for abortions.

Under a 1977 state law enacted in the wake of the restrictions imposed by the federal Hyde amendement, public funding can only be used to pay for abortions in instances where the mother's life is at risk.

But in a 1991 class-action lawsuit brought on behalf of a teenage girl who had been raped, the American Civil Liberties Union argued the practice was discriminatory. It was unfair, they charged, to use Medicaid funds to pay for other services connected to a pregnancy or to care for men, but not to fund abortions.

Paying heed to decisions in a handful of other states, Braden agreed. As a result of the ruling, the Department of Public Aid would have to use Medicaid funds to pay for medically necessary abortions-abortions where a doctor determined that carrying the baby to term would jeopardize the health of the mother.

The December ruling and Edgar's decision not to appeal will mean a further liberalization of the limits on the public funding of abortions. Those constraints were already loosened last year when the Clinton administration lifted the restrictions that prevented states from using Medicaid funds to pay for abortions in instances where the woman was a victim of rape or incest.

New restriction could conceivably be imposed by state lawmakers that would prohibit the state from using Medicaid funds from paying for "medically necessary" abortions. Late last year, a state panel tried to do just that, blocking the Clinton administration's mandate from taking effect in Illinois. That move has been challenged in federal court.

The decisions mark a major victory for abortion-rights advocates who have complained of the difficulties poor women have had gaining access to abortions. Anti-abortion groups have complained it will mean the public funding of abortion on demand.

The Chicago Abortion Fund, which finances abortions for indigent women, says it can only fund a fraction of the demand. And Cook County Hospital has been inundated with inquiries from women ever since it lifted the ban on elective abortions in 1992.

In fact, the county's chief of health services, Ruth Rothstein, said Tuesday that Cook County Hospital has increased the number of abortions it will perform to 40 a week from the limit of 30 in effect for the past two years.

Colleen Connell, one of the ACLU attorneys who brought the case, discounted claims that the decision will be costly to the state. The cost to Medicaid of the abortions, she contended, will certainly be less than the cost of medical care for complications caused by a pregnancy.

"We are pleased the state has made what we believe is a good and compassionate decision that leaves in place the decision of Judge Braden, which allows indigent women access to the medical services they need to protect their health," she said.