Bipartisan Sponsors Unveil Tax-revamp Plan

Proposal Aims To Help Americans Save More

And tameness may be a virtue when it comes to rewriting the nation's complex tax system. The White House is known to be examining the Nunn-Domenici plan and could adopt some elements in the 1996 presidential campaign.

WASHINGTON — Two veteran senators, Democrat Sam Nunn of Georgia and Republican Pete Domenici of New Mexico, have joined forces to propose a tax-overhaul plan that is tamer than its more radical cousins: the flat tax and the value-added tax.

Its bipartisan sponsorship gives it a potentially stronger political appeal. Sens. Bob Kerrey (D-Neb.) and Bob Bennett (R-Utah) have signed on as sponsors, while the other plans tend to draw most of their support from Republicans.

Titled the "USA Tax," for Unlimited Savings Accounts, the plan would exempt from taxation all savings, such as bank accounts and investments in stocks and bonds. It also would allow taxpayers to claim their Social Security payroll taxes as a credit.

Domenici said in an interview Friday that his measure is better than the other tax-reform plans because it retains many features of the current system, including the long-standing progressive tax-rate structure in which tax rates rise according to income.

"I don't believe you can get (political) support for tax reform . . . if you ended up with a plan that does not have progressivity in it," he said.

Rob Shapiro, an economist with the Progressive Policy Institute, a centrist Democratic think tank with ties to President Clinton, said he's working on a tax-reform plan he will submit to the president that draws upon the Nunn-Domenici model.

As with all tax-revision plans, however, there are doubters. Barry Bosworth, an economist at the Brookings Institution, put it bluntly: "These guys are out of their minds."

He said that by preserving many of the elements of the current system, "They are going in the direction of making everybody mad."

Domenici does not think so. The senator said he hopes to persuade the Republican nominee in 1996 to make tax reform a key campaign issue so that the complex tax code can be rewritten after the election.

Meanwhile, he said, he will seek endorsement for his plan by a GOP-designated informal committee headed by Jack Kemp, a former congressman and secretary of Housing and Urban Development.

The plan's chief purpose is to raise the U.S. private savings rate, which at 3.6 percent of personal disposable income is one of the lowest among industrial countries.