Exclusive: Leaked Email Shows Clinton Foundation in Communication With Comedian John Oliver
A leaked email from the personal account of Capricia Penavic Marshall, who worked under Hillary Clinton at the State Department, shows that the Clinton Foundation was in contact with comedian John Oliver as far back as February 2015.

The hacked email, which was unearthed by the DC Leaks outfit, suggests some level of collusion between the Clintons, HBO and the British television host.

As presenter of the popular HBO show Last Week Tonight, Oliver has made a name for himself with a series of anti-Donald Trump monologues, including one that made global headlines when he revealed that the Trump family name was once changed from the ancestral name “Drumpf”.

The email was sent on February 19, 2015 by Greg Propper, an advisor to The Bill, Hillary and Chelsea Clinton Foundation. Its recipients included Sarah Henning, Director of Programs at the Clinton Foundation, and Capricia Marshal, who served as served as chief of protocol from 2009 to 2013 under Secretary Clinton at the State Department.

The email, which was sent to Henning’s ‘clintonfoundation.org’ address, is entitled, “We’ve made contact with John Olivier” and the body of the email reads, “And his team is working on it. Hope to have an answer tomorrow.”

The name “Oliver” is misspelled in the title of the email, although the context makes it clear that the email is in reference to the comedian. There is no ‘John Olivier” on record that the Clinton Foundation would likely have contacted.

Oliver’s show premiered in April 2014. A search of the Last Week Tonight YouTube channel reveals that Oliver first began attacking Trump in February 2016 after the Republican candidate won three primary states.

Many conservatives have questioned why Oliver has failed to deliver even a single monologue attacking Hillary Clinton, who would be easy fodder given the number of scandals that have swirled around her candidacy. Even Oliver’s mentor, John Stewart, would occasionally go after Democrats.

Is the answer to that question because Oliver has been friendly with the Clintons since almost a year before the election campaign even began?

Oliver’s allies claim the email was an invitation from the Clintons to an event in March 2015 hosted by Chelsea Clinton and that Oliver declined to attend.

While this may be true, the email confirms that the Clintons sought to curry favor with the comedian before he went on to become a fierce anti-Trump polemicist.

Coincidence? You be the judge.

SUBSCRIBE on YouTube:

Follow on Twitter: Follow @PrisonPlanet

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/paul.j.watson.71

*********************

Paul Joseph Watson is the editor at large of Infowars.com and Prison Planet.com.