Obama Hears You! He Called Al Sharpton Up To The White House
The White House confirmed that Sharpton was invited to the White House and the reason was to help Obama work with his Republican Congress. Mr. Obama, his aides said, is anxious to speak with “the leaders over the next two years to advance these and other crucial issues facing the country.”

Al Sharpton is certainly the one to advise him how to alienate the Republican Congress. I don’t want to constantly repeat myself and write once again about how revolting Sharpton is so just read about it here. He’s a race-baiting, lying crook and so much more.

This is the person Obama thinks is an advisor. That should tell people a lot about Obama.

Listen to the brilliant analysis of this Obama adviser – Al Sharpton – on election night:

Barack Obama thinks that the message from the election is that Americans want compromise. If that were the case, wouldn’t they have voted for Democrats?

Even Fox News was touting that line and so were some Republican leaders. Chris Wallace was discussing his Sunday News show lineup on Fox today and he said that the people want compromise.

Bill O’Reilly said last night that Americans want the economy improved. He’s right but that’s secondary.

Americans don’t love Republicans but more than 70% in recent polling believe America is going in the wrong direction. Am I the only one who sees the clear connection? They want the direction changed.

Remember when Obama said the vote was a referendum on his policies? The American people heard him and they voted accordingly. This vote is a direct repudiation of his big government welfare state policies because they don’t work.

We have this much-ballyhooed recovery without decent jobs. What kind of recovery is that? People are out of the workforce or they are working part-time jobs where they once were employed full-time.

Americans want the Obama agenda stopped.

Listen to this Obama clip as he speaks from his parallel universe and blames everyone but himself:

His rambling, incoherent, self-serving speech went on for more than an hour.

In 2012, Obama brought Sharpton, radical Rachel Maddow, crazy Ed Schultz and other “influential progressives” to the White House over the extension of the Bush tax cuts (the tax cut was one of his ruse’s to get people to vote for him). He decided to cut taxes on some and levy higher taxes on the rich.

Sharpton as an adviser on tax cuts is like asking a turkey what he wants for Thanksgiving dinner. Al owe[d] the IRS $2.6 million in income tax, and nearly $900,000 in state tax in 2011.

And his personal pride and joy National Action Network owed more than $880,000 in unpaid federal payroll taxes, interest and penalties.

He always owes taxes and often gets away with it.

In 1993, for example, he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor tax crime to avoid two felony charges.

In the years since, the IRS has issued a dozen liens against Sharpton’s groups, including one against him for $538,652 in 2010.

Ironically, Sharpton is one of the rich and he doesn’t pay his taxes.

Sharpton has been to the White House a number of times and he is in regular email contact with the Iranian princess, Valerie Jarrett. So if you want to know where Obama gets his advice, just look at his psycho visitors’ list.

SOURCE: MEDIAITE