House Energy and Commerce Committee Republicans Press Release :: Upton, Stearns Opening Statements on New Bureaucracy Responsible for Granting Widespread Waivers for Massive Health Care Law
WASHINGTON, DC – The House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, chaired by Rep. Cliff Stearns (R-FL), has convened a hearing to examine the new bureaucracy responsible for granting widespread waivers for the massive health care law. The subcommittee will hear from the officials responsible for granting the waivers, Steve Larsen, Deputy Administrator and Director for the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight (CCIIO), and Jay Angoff, Senior Advisor, Office of the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and former Director of the Office for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight (OCCIO).

On January 20, 2011, the committee sent a letter to the CCIIO seeking information about the office’s authority, structure, and recent decisions to grant widespread waivers of the health care law’s requirements.

The opening statements for Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee Chairman Stearns and full Committee Chairman Upton are provided below:

Opening Statement of the Honorable Cliff Stearns (remarks as prepared)

Chairman, House Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

We convene this hearing of the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations today to gather information on the entity responsible for overseeing the Administration’s changes to the private insurance market—The Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight. It has been nearly a year since the health care law was enacted, and this is the first hearing this subcommittee has had since passage of the law devoted exclusively to its effects.

This Center is responsible for the massive changes being made by Obamacare to the private insurance market. It is responsible for new insurance market rules, the temporary high risk pools, new medical loss ratio rules, and will assist states in implementing the massive new regulatory burdens imposed by Obamacare. Our witnesses today are the former Director of the Center and the current one—Mr. Jay Angoff ran the office from its inception after the passage of Obamacare until earlier this year. We know very little about the creation of this office, and I hope this hearing will finally shine some light on how this office was created, how it is organized, and why it was moved from HHS to CMS on literally the day Republicans took the majority in the 112th Congress.

We also know little about how this office is funded—is it paid for out of the health care law signed last year? Is HHS taking money from another program? We know very little, and what we do know has not made a good impression. Last year the New York Times reported: “In Bethesda, Maryland, more than 200 health regulators working on complicated insurance rules have taken over three floors of a suburban office building, paying almost double the market rate for the space in their rush to get started.” I hope Obamacare’s regulators are better at writing regulations than writing leases.

Our other witness is Mr. Steve Larsen, Mr. Larsen was recently promoted to Director of the Center, and had previously served in the Center’s Office of Oversight—the office that was responsible for granting waivers from Obamacare.

I think it is an understatement to say that these waivers have been controversial. Obamacare was sold as all benefit—no downside. So when the public began hearing that while they would have to comply with all of the new regulations and costs, while other individuals would get waivers from the Administration and thus not have to comply and bear the same burdens, they weren’t happy.

After all, they were promised that if they like their coverage, they could keep it. They were promised lower premiums. They were promised lower costs. What did they get? Lost coverage. Higher premiums. Higher costs. And when the damaging effects of Obamacare got so bad that people were starting to notice? Then it was time for waivers.

The promises made by supporters of the law have not come true. The Chief Actuary for the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services recently testified that the law will likely not hold down costs. He went on to say that not everyone will be able to keep their coverage, even if they like it. Meanwhile, the adverse effects of the law on the private sector have been undeniable: companies are considering dropping coverage, insurers are opting to exit from the market, and consumers are left with fewer options—and of those options available, the premiums continue to rise, thanks to the costly mandates and regulations in Obamacare.

It certainly doesn’t get any better when you look at how the government is handling Obamacare. Last month this subcommittee’s hearing on the need for regulatory reform highlighted how numerous regulations in Obamacare have been issued without public comment. If an idea is controversial and lacks popular support, like end of life counseling, then it is simply snuck into a regulation in the hope that nobody will notice.

Today we will hear testimony about why so many companies and insurers need to be excluded from the effects of Obamacare — ironic, considering that if you listened to the Administration for the last two years you’d wonder why anyone would ever need to be protected from this law—yet today we learn that 2.5 million people have been exempted from Obamacare through these waivers. 2.5 million people need to literally be protected from the devastating effects of Obamacare.

Yes, protected. Under the very standards determining whether a waiver will be granted, a company or insurer needed to show that unless a waiver was granted, beneficiaries were either going to face a “significant” premium increase or a “significant” reduction in access to benefits.

We will hear today that these waivers are necessary because the plans they affect offer little coverage. We will likely hear at length today that the reason it is ok to give out these waivers is because in 2014, the exchanges will finally provide low cost, quality health care. Yet, nearly every promise made about Obamacare has been broken.

During the debate on health care, our party offered many solutions to expand access to health care services without raising costs or bankrupting the country. We were ignored then. I am hopeful that as we begin to examine the terrible effects of Obamacare, Americans from all parties will begin to see the value in our ideas—ideas that rely on commonsense and free market solutions, not on decisions made by the federal bureaucracy.

I am very interested in the testimony we will hear today because this Center is responsible for many of the changes Obamacare makes to the private insurance market, and I hope our witnesses will shine some light on the reason for those changes.

I know that this is a busy season for them, especially with the budget being released this week, and I thank them for their time.

Today marks the beginning of what the public voted for in 2010: real and sustained oversight of the federal takeover of the healthcare industry.

I recognize, with pleasure, the Ranking Member, Ms. DeGette.

Opening Statement of the Honorable Fred Upton (remarks as prepared)

Chairman, House Committee on Energy and Commerce

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening our first oversight hearing on the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (“PPACA”).

This oversight hearing is long overdue. The PPACA was enacted almost one year ago, and this is the first time this Committee has held an oversight hearing on the law. I know some may think we are moving too fast, or asking too many questions of the Department of Health and Human Services about the implementation of health care reform. But if you ask me, over the last year, this Committee didn’t ask enough questions.

So today we begin our work. We will start by examining the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight. The Center is part of HHS and is responsible for implementing the PPACA. The current director of the Center, Mr. Steve Larsen, and its former director, Mr. Jay Angoff, are here to testify on behalf of HHS.

I think it is fair to say that this subcommittee has enough questions about the implementation of health care reform that we could keep Mr. Larsen and Mr. Angoff here testifying for the rest of the week. Today I am anxious to hear about the waivers the Center has been busy issuing to various health care plans offered by states, unions, and other employers. These waivers exempt those plans from the PPACA’s requirements, in particular, the requirement that prohibits employers from imposing annual or lifetime limits on benefits. To date, the Center has issued over 900 waivers to health plans, and that number is rising every day.

This Committee has requested a number of documents about the waivers issued by the Center. We have some documents, but not all. The documents we do have show that complying with the PPACA would have forced hundreds of businesses to drop the health insurance plans they provide to their workers because the plans that Obamacare would have forced them to have would have been too expensive, and would have bankrupted those businesses.

What does it say about the feasibility of a law when you need to exempt over 900 health plans (so far) — or 2.5 million people — from complying with it? While I think it is a good thing that HHS recognized the significant problems posed by the PPACA —and exempted these health plans from a requirement that would have resulted in thousands of people losing their health insurance or having reduced benefits — I think it’s a tacit admission that the PPACA is fundamentally flawed.

I also have questions for Mr. Angoff and Mr. Larsen about the Center’s operations and its role, now that it has been moved from the Office of the Secretary of HHS to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (“CMS”). As the entity responsible for the massive changes being made to the private health care industry, I want to know what lessons the Center has learned as we approach the one-year anniversary of the PPACA’s enactment. I hope the witnesses will have some insights to share.



As Chairman of this Committee, I am committed to investigating the implementation of the PPACA. I think it is important that we uncover the facts about how this law is being implemented and what it means for the individuals and employers who have to live with its costly requirements. Only when we understand what worked and what didn’t can this Congress enact meaningful healthcare reform that lets people keep their coverage and doesn’t pass the bill to future generations.

I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.



###