The message is out on eye black in college football and the NFL
Two simple strips of black tape, each slightly smaller than a Band-Aid.

Tim Tebow turned them into spiritual billboards.

For nearly two years, the former Florida quarterback printed Bible verses on the black patches he wore under his eyes. In his final game as a collegian, a 51-21 victory over Cincinnati in the Sugar Bowl on Jan. 1, Tebow chose Ephesians 2:8-10. It means that only through faith in God will you be saved.

That will be the last message he - or any college or professional player - will send via eye black, because NFL and NCAA rules forbid players from marking their uniforms, which includes those small strips, in any way. The NCAA announced its rule change on Thursday. The NFL adopted the rule decades ago.

Read: Draft scenarios: Three ways Tim Tebow could land with the Jaguars

"The NFL is looked upon as the highest level of sport and we want our players to look professional in every aspect of their game, including the uniform," NFL spokesman Brian McCarthy said. "... The players understand the rationale behind it. Where you draw the line would come into play in some instances. A player may feel that, 'I should be able to shout out to my friend or my family,' vs. not allowing some other player to do so. We have this policy and it's widely understood."

The rule covers the helmet, jersey, pants, shoes, tape, wristbands, and headbands. No writing on any part of the body. Before each game uniform reps - former NFL players - prowl the sidelines looking for violators. When the teams go back into the locker room before the game starts, they are given a list of players who are in violation of the rule.

If they come out for the kickoff without removing the writing, they will be fined. According to Johnny Rembert, the uniform rep in Jacksonville and a 10-year NFL veteran, fines start at $5,000.

Tebow said last weekend he was unaware that he wouldn't be allowed to write anything on his eye black next season, but said he'd continue to do it if allowed. He also said he's disappointed with the NCAA's rule change.

"It's very unfortunate that you can't do it in college anymore," he said. "I think it's taking away from people's personality. I think it's taking away from their freedom of speech. It's something that a lot of guys did, a lot of players did to represent something they were proud of. I don't think it was something that was boastful or saying, 'Hey, look at me,' in any way. It was something that [said], 'This is where I'm from,' or, 'This is what I'm believing,' or, 'This is what I'm trying to show.' "

Tebow doesn't have much on his side if he challenges the NFL's rule in court, according to a legal expert.

Prohibiting writing on the eye black does not infringe upon free speech, said Jacksonville attorney Len Magid, who specializes in labor and employment law from an employee's perspective. The First Amendment prohibits the government from restricting free speech. It doesn't apply to an employer-employee relationship.

"The general public confuses the constitutional rights people have with the rights that they have with their employer," Magid said. "Theoretically, Kmart could fire everybody with a bumper sticker that said Obama or Bush. There's no law that prevents them from doing that. The reason they don't do that is it makes no business sense."

Magid said employers can demand whatever they want from their employees regardless of the reason -except if it involves race, gender, national origin, religion, age or disability. That means that an employer can have a rule prohibiting employees from having facial hair or tattoos or wearing green shirts.

The NFL is different because the players have a union and the collective bargaining agreement between the owners and players covers the employment relationship. The CBA includes the rules governing the game and equipment, which means players have agreed to follow those guidelines.

Magid said the NFL should not be allowed to selectively single out Tebow for his religious expression if it allows others to express themselves in a similar way. But because the league's rule prohibits all writing, religious discrimination doesn't apply.

"You can't make a decision against an employee based upon religious beliefs, but I don't think Tebow can claim that putting [eye black with Bible verses on it] under his eyes is a religious belief," Magid said. "He's just announcing to everybody what he believes. It's not a religious requirement for his religion."

Tebow's eye black did carry a religious message, but the trend of writing on the black patches that were designed to cut down on glare began with something a lot more secular. It's hard to trace the first person who wrote anything on their eye black, but running back Reggie Bush, who played at Southern California from 2003-05, is generally credited with popularizing it. Bush wrote "619" on his, the area code of his hometown of Spring Valley, Calif.

Tebow wore his first message against LSU in 2008, writing Phil 4:13 (for Philippians 4:13), and did it the rest of his career. He was criticized by opposing fans and some members of the media for it, but there is no doubt that it has had a profound effect on people. He wore John 3:16 for the BCS National Championship game in January 2009, and the verse was the most-searched item on Google the next morning.

But there won't be any more eye black messages on Saturdays now, either, because the NCAA's Playing Rules Oversight Panel voted on Thursday to prohibit words, numbers, logos or symbols on eye black. It will take effect in the 2010 season.

Naturally, it has been dubbed the Tim Tebow Rule.

Not by the NCAA, however, which denies that Tebow's biblical eye-black messages spurned the change.

"By no means was any one team or student athlete focused on," said Cameron Schuh, the NCAA's associate director of public and media relations. "It was kind of a culmination over the years.

"[Tebow's eye black] did garner a lot of attention but there have been things on eye black well before Tebow was even playing. The committee had talked about it, but I think the amount of student athletes over the last couple of years and the prevalence of seeing it out there with different logos and messages kind of prompted the committee to say, 'Let's just make sure we have a clear statement on what is and what isn't permissible.' "

Schuh denied that the rules committee wanted to ban the eye-black writing because they were worried about the kind of messages some players might try to use, such as someone protesting Tebow's Christian messages with a Muslim phrase, for example.

"The decision wasn't made worrying about what could happen," Schuh said. "The decision was made so that there was no room for interpretation of what could or could not be [put on the eye black]. The intended use of eye black is to shade eyes from the sun and when you're putting something on there, you're taking away from the intended purpose of it.

" ... The committee just decided just to be uniform. We're going to say it's going to be mandated that it's solid black. No words, no numbers, no logos, no symbols."

It turns out Tebow, Bush and others who wrote on their eye black were technically violating one of the NCAA's rules governing illegal equipment. According to the 2009-10 football rules and interpretations manual, no words, numbers or symbols are permitted on a player's person or tape (except game information on a player's wrist or arm).

Punishment for wearing illegal equipment is the loss of a timeout. The fourth infraction in a half is a 5-yard penalty.

Tebow and Florida were never penalized.

"That's one of those situations where the rule was in place but it was kind of left up to the discretion of the officials on the field to make the decision," Schuh said. "The committee coming out with this exact wording kind of alleviates the interpretation the officials had to make. We're going to set the hard and fast rule: no messages of any kind on eye black."

For Tebow, there is one way around the rule in the NFL. The league has no regulations in place regarding tattoos, which means Tebow could mark his body with as many Bible verses as he likes. Including under his eyes.

Tebow might get some weird looks, but he wouldn't be short any cash.

michael.dirocco@jacksonville.com

(904) 705-3878.

Follow him on Twitter @mjdirocco.