The alpha-gal story: Lessons learned from connecting the dots
Jump to Section Cetuximab-induced hypersensitivity reactions Carbohydrate analysis of cetuximab The red meat connection Are tick bites responsible for the induction of IgE antibody to alpha-gal? A broader understanding of alpha-gal Mechanisms of anaphylaxis Nature of alpha-gal IgE development Conclusion References

In 2008, as the specificity of the IgE antibodies to alpha-gal that caused reactions to cetuximab became clearer, the number of reports describing delayed reactions to red meat was also increasing. A relationship between mammalian meat allergy and tick bites had already been suggested in Australia18x18Van Nunen, S.A., O'Connor, K.S., Clarke, L.R., Boyle, R.X., and Fernando, S.L. An association between tick bite reactions and red meat allergy in humans. Med J Aust. ; 190: 510–511

PubMed | Google ScholarSee all References; however, the role of alpha-gal was not known, and the tick connection was not yet obvious in the United States. What caught our attention was that both cetuximab reactions and delayed reactions to red meat were being reported from the same region of the country, a group of southeastern states. However, it was not clear why these cases were geographically localized, and the only area that was comparable was the maximum incidence of Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF).

At this time, red meat allergy developed in 3 members of our group, and each one distinctly remembered being bitten by ticks weeks or months before the development of symptoms. Sera from these persons that had been obtained before the tick bite were compared with sera collected after the bite, and it was found that serum levels of IgE to alpha-gal had increased dramatically (4- to 10-fold).

Following up on this connection, we started to ask patients about tick bites and rapidly became aware that most of those with delayed anaphylaxis had experienced recent bites from adult or larval ticks. Examination of US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention maps of the distribution of the tick Amblyomma americanum (lone star tick) revealed an overlap with the region of both cetuximab sensitivity and red meat allergy. Additional indications that tick bites are involved in the development of specific IgE to alpha-gal include histories of bites that have itched for 2 or more weeks, a significant correlation between IgE antibodies to alpha-gal and IgE to lone star tick (Fig 2Fig 2), and prospective data on the increase in IgE levels to alpha-gal after known lone star tick bites.19x19Commins, S.P., James, H.R., Kelly, L.A., Pochan, S.L., Workman, L.J., Perzanowski, M.S. et al. The relevance of tick bites to the production of IgE antibodies to the mammalian oligosaccharide galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose. J Allergy Clin Immunol. ; 127: 1286–1293.e6

Abstract | Full Text | Full Text PDF | PubMed | Scopus (254) | Google ScholarSee all References Allergy to red meat is now being reported in other countries, but the ticks giving rise to this response are not the same species as in the United States. In Europe Ixodes ricinus has been implicated, whereas in Australia the relevant tick is Ixodes holocyclus.18x18Van Nunen, S.A., O'Connor, K.S., Clarke, L.R., Boyle, R.X., and Fernando, S.L. An association between tick bite reactions and red meat allergy in humans. Med J Aust. ; 190: 510–511

PubMed | Google ScholarSee all References, 20x20Hamsten, C., Tran, T.A., Starkhammar, M., Brauner, A., Commins, S.P., Platts-Mills, T.A. et al. Red meat allergy in Sweden: association with tick sensitization and B-negative blood groups. J Allergy Clin Immunol. ; 132: 1431–1434

Abstract | Full Text | Full Text PDF | PubMed | Scopus (9) | Google ScholarSee all References, 21x21Hamsten, C., Starkhammar, M., Tran, T.A., Johansson, M., Bengtsson, U., Ahlen, G. et al. Identification of galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose in the gastrointestinal tract of the tick Ixodes ricinus; possible relationship with red meat allergy. Allergy. ; 68: 549–552

Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (95) | Google ScholarSee all References It appears that Ixodes scapularis, the main vector of Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi infection) in the United States, does not induce IgE to alpha-gal, and unlike bites of the lone star tick, bites of I scapularis that transmit Lyme disease are not associated with itching.22x22Burke, G., Wikel, S.K., Spielman, A., Telford, S.R., McKay, K., and Krause, P.J. Hypersensitivity to ticks and Lyme disease risk. Emerg Infect Dis. ; 11: 36–41

PubMed | Google ScholarSee all References

Given that tick bites represent the most important cause of alpha-gal sensitization in the United States, Sydney, and Stockholm, why has our recognition of this problem increased so dramatically over the past 10 years? The increase in lone star ticks parallels the increase in the deer population, a major carrier of these ticks, throughout the United States over the last 30 to 40 years,23x23Fagerstone, K.A. and Clay, W.H. Overview of USDA animal damage control efforts to manage overabundant deer. Wildlife Soc Bull. ; 25: 413–417

Google ScholarSee all References, 24x24Cote, S.D., Rooney, T.P., Tremblay, J., Dussault, C., and Waller, D.M. Ecological impacts of deer overabundance. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Systematics. ; 35: 113–147

Crossref | Scopus (1045) | Google ScholarSee all References making it more likely that persons who walk in the woods or in long grass will be bitten at some point. The increasing deer population can also be linked to the enactment of leash laws for dogs, a decrease in the number of hunters, and movement of deer into suburban areas. This last point is important because the deer provide a means for the ticks to be transported over large geographic areas quickly. Clearly, the increase in tick exposure is one plausible explanation for the increase in the number of cases. However, the data from different countries demonstrate that not all tick bites per se or tick bites from one particular species result in the problem (Table IITable II).

Table II Ticks that commonly bite human subjects in countries where IgE to alpha-gal has been reported Tick Outcome United States Ixodes scapularis (deer tick) Lyme disease Dermacentor variabilis (dog tick) RMSF Amblyomma americanum (lone star tick) IgE to alpha-gal, ehrlichiosis, and RMSF Australia Ixodes holocyclus IgE to alpha-gal and/or tick bite–induced anaphylaxis Europe Ixodes ricinus IgE to alpha-gal and Lyme disease Argas reflexus (pigeon tick) Anaphylactic reactions to tick bite View Table in HTML

The epidemiologic evidence in the United States would suggest that the increase in the deer population has played an important role. However, it is important to remember that there are at least 3 theories about how tick bites give rise to an IgE response:

1. the response is induced by the normal (ie, tick-derived) constituents of their saliva;

2. residual mammalian glycoproteins or glycolipids are present in the tick from a previous blood meal and they are responsible for inducing the response to alpha-gal; and

3. the response is induced by another organism that is present in the tick.

The best recognized organisms present as commensals on ticks are Rickettsia species, such as those that cause RMSF, or bacteria, such as B burgdorferi, which is not found in the lone star tick (A americanum). Other organisms are possible, but none have been recognized.

It might be thought that the IgE response seen with seed ticks would argue against either residual mammalian proteins or other organisms; however, transovarial transmission of RMSF is well recognized. Sorting out these possibilities is the subject of ongoing investigation.