Social Security Plans Leave Much Unanswered

No issue divides the two major party presidential candidates more than the long-term financial health of the 65-year-old retirement system, now scheduled to run out of money in 2037 with millions of Baby Boomers in retirement. Both men have dared to touch an issue called the "third rail of politics."

In either case, no one is sure whether the patient would get better.

The fundamental question on the table for voters: Should the Depression-era retirement plan be converted from a pay-as-you-go system of guaranteed benefits based on lifetime earnings into a hybrid that gives workers a choice of what to do with some of their money?

Both candidates' plans have flaws, but, according to most analysts, one thing is sure: Social Security faces a 21st Century funding crisis as the ratio of workers to retired people dips. Now there are 3.4 workers contributing taxes to the system for every retired person. In 2030, according to so-called intermediate assumptions of the Social Security trustees, there will be only 2.1 workers per retired person.

Without changes, the system's projected surplus of $2.4 trillion in 2010 would be exhausted by 2037, according to trustees. After the surplus runs dry, revenues from payroll taxes at first would be sufficient to pay only about three-quarters of promised benefits, the trustees said. This revenue gap would grow to an estimated two-thirds of Social Security's obligations by 2075.

Gore's plan would simply shore up the current system with general revenue until 2054. Bush would introduce a privatization concept, allowing workers to put perhaps 2 percentage points of their Social Security payroll taxes into personal retirement accounts for investment in stocks and bonds. The payroll tax now totals 12.4 percent, with employers paying half.

Bush's forces claim that these accounts would bring higher returns and a better financial deal for workers than they would get by sticking with the current system. His advisers estimate a 7 percent annual gain from personal retirement accounts compared with Social Security's modest 2 percent return in interest earned on its vast government-bond holdings.

Despite these claims, Gore's supporters said the Republican candidate's proposal can't work without a dramatic cut in benefits and without introducing major new uncertainties for workers and their families as they plan for their retirement.

Yet actuaries say both plans are rife with design problems and may fail to close Social Security's projected financial deficit.

"In order to save Social Security, you either have to raise taxes or cut benefits," said Rob Gebhardtsbauer, senior pension fellow at the American Academy of Actuaries. "Privatization alone won't do it."

Workers who opt for Bush's personal retirement accounts also could face huge transaction costs as they buy and sell stock, actuaries say, a fact that would lower their returns. "The cost of administration will be humongous," said New York actuary David Langer.

The back-and-forth contentions over Social Security make it hard to judge these competing claims. The claims hinge on the assumptions of those making them and, to some extent, on a profound faith in the marketplace. As economic experts like Gebhardtsbauer point out, it is increasingly clear that if Americans cast their vote based on the Social Security issue alone, they will become prisoners of economic assumptions that may or may not pan out over the next 75 years.