Ballot Access
September 10 update: Our petitioning drive in all states has ended. Americans in 48 states (including DC) are able to cast a vote for Stein/Baraka on November 8.

We're on the ballot in 45 states (including the District of Columbia) and are qualified for write-in status in another 3 states, for a total of 48 states in which a vote for our campaign will count.



You can help cover the cost of our ballot-access drive by donating. Please also sign up to volunteer to spread the word about our campaign.

Results of ballot drives this cycle:

Alabama (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Alaska (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Connecticut (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Delaware (Registration drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Georgia (Georgia voters can write in Jill Stein for president)

Idaho (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Illinois (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Indiana (Indiana voters can write in Jill Stein for president.)

Iowa (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Kansas (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Kentucky (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Minnesota (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!))

Missouri (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Montana (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Nebraska (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Nevada (No ballot access. NV does not allow official write-in.)

New Hampshire (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

New Jersey (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

North Carolina (North Carolina voters can write in Jill Stein for president.)

North Dakota (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Oklahoma (No ballot access. OK does not allow official write-in.)

Pennsylvania (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Rhode Island (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

South Dakota (No ballot access. SD does not allow official write-in.)

Tennessee (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Utah (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Vermont (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Virginia (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Washington state (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)

Wyoming (Petition drive successful! We're on the ballot!)