Troubleshoot Keurig Not Working
What is the difference between the new Keurig® Classic and Plus Series brewing systems?

Keurig® Classic Series brewers are our original K-Cup® brewers, and can brew a single cup at a time. They are only compatible with K-Cup® pods, and feature three K-Cup® pod brew sizes: 6, 8, and 10oz. Keurig® Classic Series brewers make single cup brewing fast, convenient, and simple.



Alternately, Keurig® Plus Series and Keurig®2.0 brewers are compatible with K-Cup®, K-Mug®, and K-Carafe® pods, so brew size options range from a 4oz cup to a 30oz carafe . They have customizable settings, touch screens and an option for strength control to brew a bolder cup. These brewers also feature interactive technology that recognizes the lid on each pod to deliver the perfect cup every time.

What are Keurig® Classic Series brewers?

® Classic Series brewers are our original K-Cup® pod brewers. They make single cup brewing fast, convenient, and simple. Brew your favorite beverages, in 6, 8, and 10 oz. sizes, using K-Cup® pods.



The Keurig® Classic Series includes the Keurig® K15, a personal, compact brewer and the Keurig® K55, our classic single cup brewer. Functionally, these are comparable to our original K10 MINI Plus brewer and K45 Elite brewers.



Keurig® Classic Series brewers are also compatible with the



Note that Keurig® Classic Series brewers are not compatible with K-Mug® or K-Carafe® pods, nor with the Keurig® Carafe. KeurigClassic Series brewers are our original K-Cuppod brewers. They make single cup brewing fast, convenient, and simple. Brew your favorite beverages, in 6, 8, and 10 oz. sizes, using K-Cuppods.The KeurigClassic Series includes the KeurigK15, a personal, compact brewer and the KeurigK55, our classic single cup brewer. Functionally, these are comparable to our original K10 MINI Plus brewer and K45 Elite brewers.KeurigClassic Series brewers are also compatible with the My K-Cup® Reusable Coffee Filter , which provides added flexibility by giving you the opportunity to brew your own ground coffee.Note that KeurigClassic Series brewers are not compatible with K-Mugor K-Carafepods, nor with the KeurigCarafe.

Can I use a Keurig® Carafe in any Keurig® brewer?

Keurig® Carafes are specially designed to brew K-Carafe® pods in Keurig® 2.0 and Plus Series brewers only. They are not compatible with any other brewer models.



How much power does the brewer use?

Keurig® home brewers use the most power during their initial startup. When heating for the first time after being off, peak usage is 1,500 watts. If the power is kept on, the brewer will keep the internal tank up to temperature using between 200 – 400 watts when heating. While idle and not maintaining heat, the brewer will use the average electricity of a 60 watt light bulb.

How hot is the water in the brewer?

Keurig believes that the optimal temperature for brewing coffee, tea and hot cocoa is 192° F. This is the internal temperature of the water in your brewer. However, once your coffee, tea or hot cocoa is brewed, the dispensed temperature can vary greatly. In-cup temperature depends on the cup temperature and material. When brewing into an insulated container, such as a foam or paper cup, 180-185°F in-cup temperature is typically attained. In addition, dispensing into a cold ceramic mug will cool the coffee significantly. Please note that stream temperature of the first brew after turn-on or after an extended idle period can be a couple degrees cooler.



To maximize initial in-cup temperature at home, we recommend running a small cup cleansing-brew prior to brewing a K-Cup® pod, which warms both the mug and the brewer.

Can I change the internal temperature?

Temperature cannot be adjusted on the K15 and K50/K55 models, part of the Keurig® Classic Series system. For these brewers, the default K-Cup® brew temperature is 192°F.

Can I use a home brewer in my office?

Keurig strongly recommends that our home brewers be used at home and our commercial brewers be placed in commercial/office settings. That is why our home brewers are UL Listed for Household use only and our commercial brewers are UL Listed for Commercial use only. If you would like to purchase a brewer for your home visit our home brewer’s page. If you would like to purchase a brewer for a small to medium office please consider our small-medium office brewers that can be purchased directly at Keurig.com.

How does the water filter work? How do I install it?

The Keurig® Water Filter Starter Kit accessory for the Classic Series is compatible with our original K-Cup® pod brewers, including the Keurig® K40/K45 Elite brewers, K60/K65 Special Edition & Signature brewers, and K70/K75 Platinum brewers. It is also compatible with the Keurig® Classic Series K50/K55 brewers.



Keurig® water filters are charcoal filters that help ensure your beverages taste their best by helping to removing impurities like chlorine from your water.



For optimum brewer performance, we still recommend descaling your brewer every 3-6 months



To use the Water Filter, soak and insert the filter cartridge in the bottom of the handle assembly. Simply grasp the handle and insert it into your empty, removable water reservoir. Be sure to push down firmly all the way down to correctly attach the Water Filter to the inside of your removable water reservoir.

How do I drain and store my Keurig® Classic Series brewer or original K-Cup® pod brewer?

With the exception of the Keurig® K15 and Keurig® MINI Plus brewers, once your Keurig® home brewer has been primed, you cannot empty the water from the inside.



The internal tank of the brewer cannot be drained. If you need to store your brewer, empty the removable water reservoir and store your brewer in a safe and frost-free environment. Please be sure to store your brewer in its upright position to avoid water leakage from the inner tank. If you store the brewer in a cold environment, you run the risk of water freezing inside the brewer and causing damage. When you prepare to use it after storage, we recommend rinsing the removable water reservoir with fresh water and running three cleansing brews without a portion pod. If you plan to move your brewer to a different location, turn the brewer off, unplug it and empty the removable water reservoir. If your brewer has been in an environment below freezing, please be sure to let it warm to room temperature for two hours before brewing.

How do I empty the internal Hot Water Tank of the MINI Plus and K15 brewers?

The Keurig K15 and MINI Plus brewers are small, compact, and portable – great for traveling. If you plan to travel with your K15 or MINI Plus brewer, we recommend emptying the internal hot water tank.



Instructions

• Brewer must be powered off but plugged in.

• Lower the Cold Water Reservoir Lid.

• Place a mug on the Drip Tray.

• Press and hold down the BREW Button and continue to hold until all the water is dispensed into the mug.

• There will be a 3 to 5 second delay before water begins to dispense.

Where do I find the serial number for the K10 MINI Plus and Keurig® 15 brewers?

This can be found on the bottom of the brewer. Take care when turning over your brewer, especially if you have already added water to it.

How hot is the water in the MINI Plus & Keurig ®K15 brewer?

The optimal temperature for brewing beverages in your Keurig brewing system is 192° F. This is the internal temperature of the water in your brewer. However, once your beverage is brewed, the temperature of the water that is in your cup can vary greatly.



In-cup temperature depends on the material the cup is made from, as well as the temperature of the cup. When brewing into an insulated container, such as a foam or paper cup, 180-185°F in-cup temperature is typically attained. In addition, dispensing into a cold ceramic mug will cool the beverage significantly.

How much water can I add at a time to the MINI Plus and/or the Keurig® K15 brewer?

You cannot add more than 10oz, which is the maximum amount that you can brew at one time with these brewers.

How do I clean the Cold Water Reservoir of the MINI Plus and/or Keurig® K15 brewer?

To access the Cold Water Reservoir, lift the lid. Remove the Water Level Guide and then clean inside the reservoir with a damp, non-abrasive lint-free cloth as necessary Replace the Water Level Guide and lower the lid when finished.

How do I descale the K15® and/or MINI Plus Brewers?

Before you begin, you will need a large ceramic mug, fresh water, descale solution and access to a sink. Do not use a paper cup.



STEP 1: FIRST DESCALING SOLUTION RINSE

• Turn on your brewer.

• Pour one third (4.6 oz.) of the Keurig™ Descaling Solution into the cold Water Reservoir then add fresh water to the 10 oz. fill level.

• Place a large ceramic mug on the Drip Tray Plate. Do not use a paper cup.

• Lift the Handle but do not add a K-Cup® pod. After 5 seconds, lower Handle and press the BREW button.

• Once solution is dispensed, discard hot contents into sink.



STEP 2: SECOND DESCALING SOLUTION RINSE

• Repeat above process up until you press the BREW button.

• When BREW button turns solid red, power off as it starts to dispense.

• Let brewer stand for at least 30 minutes.

• Power on the brewer, lift and lower Handle, then press BREW button.

• Discard the hot contents into sink.



STEP 3: FRESH WATER RINSE

• Repeat Step 1 (3 times) – using 10 oz. of fresh water each time.

• You may need to perform additional Fresh Water Rinse cycles if you notice any residual taste.

Why are there two My K-Cup® filter accessories?

® filter accessory. Our brewer systems are different, so at this time, the only way to ensure compatibility and deliver the best user experience was to create two different My K-Cup® filter accessories. Note that these two products are distinct and are only compatible with their respective brewing system. Learn more about how to choose the right reusable coffee filter Delivering a safe and optimal user experience is our primary objective with the My K-Cupfilter accessory. Our brewer systems are different, so at this time, the only way to ensure compatibility and deliver the best user experience was to create two different My K-Cupfilter accessories. Note that these two products are distinct and are only compatible with their respective brewing system. Learn more about how to choose the right reusable coffee filter here

Which brewer models are compatible with each of the My K-Cup® filter accessories?

The original My K-Cup® filter accessory is compatible with our Keurig® Classic Series brewers, including the Keurig® K15, and the K50/K55. It is also compatible with our original Keurig® K-Cup® brewers, including the K10 MINI Plus brewer, K40/K45 Elite brewers, K60/K65 Special Edition & Signature brewers, and K70/K75 Platinum brewers.



The My K-Cup® 2.0 Plus Series filter is compatible with our Keurig® Plus Series and Keurig® 2.0 brewers, including the K200/K250 brewers, K300/K350 brewers, K400/K450 brewers, K425/K475 brewers, K500/K550, and K525/K575 brewers.

How do I clean the My K-Cup® filter accessory?

Both My K-Cup® accessories are top-rack dishwasher safe. They can also be cleaned by hand with warm soapy water, and rinsed.

How much coffee can each of the My K-Cup® filter accessories brew?

Both My K-Cup® accessories are optimized to brew all of the K-Cup® brew sizes available with your brewer – from 4oz. to 12oz., depending upon the specific brewer you have.

What is the optimal grind for the My K-Cup® filter accessory?

If you grind your own beans, you should start with a coarser grind similar to a French press. Avoid a fine espresso grind setting, as that may clog the screen or result in poor extraction. Fine or espresso grinds, tea leaves, cocoa, and other powdered beverages are not recommended.

Can I brew more than once using the same coffee grounds?

For optimal flavor and taste, brewing more than once with the same grounds is not recommended.