Sherman opens up about 'Black Lives Matter' after impostor's post
Seahawks cornerback Richard Sherman talks to reporters, Sept. 16, 2015. (Photo: KING 5 News)

SEATTLE – Seahawks cornerback Richard Sherman said Wednesday he did not write the widely-reported response to a blog post by a black activist who has called for the killing of white people and police officers. But it prompted him to give thoughts on the recent shootings involving police officers and on black-on-black crime.

Before reporters could even ask him a question at his weekly press conference, Sherman brought up the issue.

"I did not write that article," said Sherman, who said some people had sent it to him over the weekend.

It all started with a blog post purportedly by Atlanta-based activist "King Noble," who in a recent video called for an "open season on killing white people and cops." The blog post purportedly showed a meme of Sherman with his arm around running back Marshawn Lynch with the caption, "When we gon Kill These KKKrakas Bro."

That blog post led to the response by someone claiming to be "R Sherman" and included a picture of Sherman as the avatar.

Sherman said the impostor's response was poorly written, but did have some points he agreed with.

"I don't think anytime's a time to call an all-out war against police or any race of people. I thought that was an ignorant statement but as a black man, I do understand that black lives matter. I stand for that. I believe in that wholeheartedly but I also think there's a way to go about things and there's a way to do things," said Sherman.

Sherman grew up in Compton, Calif., and talked about crimes he has seen committed by blacks against other blacks.

"Dealt with a best friend getting killed and it was two 35-year-old black men. Wasn't no police officers involved. Wasn't anybody else involved and I didn't hear anyone shouting ‘Black Lives Matter' then. And I think that's the point we need to get to is that we need to deal with our own internal issues before we move forward and start pointing fingers and start attacking other people we need to solidify ourselves as a people and deal with our issues. Because I think as long as we have black-on-black crime and one black man killing another -- if black lives matter, then they should matter all the time," said Sherman, who appeared at times to get choked up.

"I don't think all cops are bad. I think there are some great cops out there who do everything in their power to uphold the badge and uphold the honor and protect the people out in society. But there are bad cops and I think that also needs to be addressed," said Sherman.

Sherman said, as long as people are listening to him, he thinks it's important to use his position to get the message out that we're all human regardless of ethnicity.

"You're categorized and people are racially profiling people. At the end of the day, when we die and our skin decays, our bones look the same. You can't tell if somebody was black, white, Asian, Latino. We don't know what they were so I think this is a time to end that," said Sherman.