MEC for Health : Dr (Brig Gen) Sibongiseni Maxwell Dhlomo
Dr Sibongiseni Maxwell Dhlomo was born in a serene part of KwaZulu- Natal, UMbumbulu, south of Durban.

He began his illustrious career at Dlangezwa High School and later enrolled at the University of Natal, Durban (1980 – 1985) where he excelled in the field of Medicine.

He later pursued studies and graduated for the Bachelor of Arts Degree, majoring in psychology and sociology. In order to spearhead a holistic treatment and management of diseases, he then attained Master’s Degree in Public Health from MEDUNSA.

His passion for raising the quality of lives of ordinary people and his concern for addressing the pandemic of HIV and Aids and TB motivated him to extend his professional understanding by equipping himself with a Postgraduate diploma in HIV and Aids Management. This equipped him to successfully manage the HIV program in the South African National Defence Force in 2004 which saw many soldiers coming out of their death beds and started on ARV long before the whole country embraced the treatment programme.

A keen scholar with an insatiable appetite for acquiring knowledge, today he holds the following qualifications:

MBCHB from the University of Natal;

BA Degree from UNISA that he acquired whilst being incarcerated in Robben Island;

Master's in Public Health (MPH) from Medunsa;

Diploma in Tropical Medicine and Hygiene from Wits University;

Diploma in Project Management from Damelin College;

Diploma in HIV Management from College of Medicines SA;

Diploma in Palliative Care from UCT;

Post Graduate Diploma in Business Management from the University of KwaZulu Natal, and, most recently

Diploma in Forensic Pathology from College of Medicine of South Africa.

His humble contribution to the emancipation of the people of South Africa saw him joining the Military Wing of the then banned ANC, Umkhonto Wesizwe [MK], at a very early age. His activities in MK led to his incarceration in Robben Island in the 1980’s.

On his return, he served the people of Newcastle both as a Mayor and as a Medical Practitioner, running his own practice.

He has also worked as an Academic at the University of KwaZulu-Natal lecturing in Public Health and advising the Vice Chancellor.

Dr Dhlomo has also served in the South Africa National Defence where he was bestowed a rank of a Brigadier General.

From the Army just before he was elected to the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature, Dr Dhlomo joined the EThekwini Metro Municipality where he served as a Deputy City manager responsible for Health and Social Services.

Dr Dhlomo, an intellectual; a Freedom Fighter; a Medical Practitioner; a former KZN Provincial Executive Member of the ANC; a former Chairperson of the EThekwini ANC Region and a former Regional Treasurer of Emalahleni ANC Region for two terms.

He is the current Provincial chairperson of the Men's forum and is also a proud dad to three beautiful children.