On the Trail of the Nephilim
What you are about to read is not the stuff of science fiction. It’s not a fantastic fable or the musings of an overzealous archaeologist. It’s straight out of the pages of the Bible. The 120+ pictures displayed in On the Trail of the Nephilim have not been altered in any way... Read More Below





What you are about to see is truly a ground-breaking revelation. An unparalleled discovery that may leave you in stunned silence It left our own Gary Stearman almost speechless. But not before he said in an visibly excited voice “Does L.A. realize what he has here? This has never been done before. He’s exposed the whole evolution cover-up for all to see. This is amazing!”

This book is the culmination of a lengthy search for the physical evidence of the Nephilim, the Giants of Old Testament lore. A significant cover-up has taken place over the years, reducing these double-digit, gigantic hybrids to the dustbins of history. You’re going to read about the organizations behind this Darwinian-flavored scheme and why they hate the bones and skulls of the Nephilm so much. They’ll go to incredible lengths to make this evidence disappear! But make no mistake about—the Nephilim were here. Hundreds of excavated graves scattered throughout the world provide evidence of their genetic abomination—the product of the breeding of heavenly angels with the women of Earth during the days of Noah. These ancient builders left behind evidence of their supernatural strength and technological know-how. Their massive, megalithic structures are legendary and evidence of Nephilim architecture abounds worldwide.

Marzulli and a team of scientists, archaeologists and scholars traveled to the jungles of a foreign land, perhaps the only place where they could gain access to the unspoiled evidence of this genetic manipulation—PERU—toppling perhaps the greatest cover-up in mankind’s bizarre history. Crawling through caves deep in the Peruvian jungle, accompanied by a private native guide, they discovered the remains of an ancient civilization, a shocking find that left the team in awe. As they held these strange, ancient skulls in their hands, the team knew that this was a story that must be be told. The world must know the truth about “The Days of Noah.” See the skulls for yourself in On the Trail of the Nephilim—elongated, distorted skulls with massive eye sockets, bizarre jaw lines, and red hair! Simply put, these skulls are not human! DNA testing is pending!

The story doesn’t end with jungles, caves and ancient skulls. While in Peru, they had an epiphany. What if these “fallen angels” were using their superior knowledge of technology to seek world domination, reducing mankind to mere slaves in their sordid scheme? Was it their desire to be worshipped as gods, like their leader, the fallen archangel Lucifer? Were these angels building a network of worldwide power centers in hopes of seeking complete control of God’s Creation? Was there a sophisticated power grid that provided an incredible source of energy? Did these fallen angels know and understand the secrets of heaven? Were they willingly worshipped by the people of Earth? Did they have some sort of device that enabled them to manipulate enormous 120 ton stones like they were marshmallows and shape them and move them to and fro like they were children’s building blocks? Did they leave evidence of this super device behind?

L.A. Marzulli may have connected the dots in a story far bigger than the world could ever imagine. Here’s the whole story of his team’s trip to the land that time has forgotten—PERU. This one-of-a-kind travelogue, complete wth shocking pictures of things you have NEVER SEEN BEFORE, straight from the author’s camera, is accompanied by interviews from noted archaeologists Fritz Zimmerman, Aaron Judkins, and Watchers director, Richard Shaw, who accompanied L.A. on the trip. He has also included a doctor’s medical opinion about what they have discovered. The truth is now in your hands. The cover-up must end. This may be the most unusual book offered in the history of Prophecy in the News! Ground breaking!

Table of Contents

The Nephilim Mounds Darwinism: The Holy Grail is Sacrosanct Robert Mirabal- Stilt Walker My Trip to the Chicago Field Museum Ales Hrdlicka & the Smithsonian Cover-Up! The Theory Interview with Archaeologist Fritz Zimmerman America’s Stonehenge Interview with Archaeologist Dr. Aaron Judkins PERU! The Church at Huaytara Wayqui Ollantaytambo A Theory Emerges Summation

Appendix 1: A Doctor’s Analysis of the Elongated Paracas Skull

The Second On the Trail of the Nephilim

If you haven't yet bought it, take a look at On the Trail of the Nephilim II

Excerpt From On the Trail of the Nephilim

FORWARD

I first learned about the Nephilim when I read Dr. I.D.E. Thomas' The Omega Conspiracy that has now become a classic work in the field. This one book changed my life forever and started me on a road that I never imagined I would travel.

Dr. Thomas' book had many footnotes pointing to other books that either referenced the Nephilim, or discussed them directly, like those of the first century historian, Josephus. This study led to my crafting my first novel, Nephilim, which in turn led to the publishing of two other novels with Zondervan Publishing House in what has become known as the Nephilim Trilogy.

While these books are a work of fiction, they are based on years of research and interviews with people who have witnessed what is commonly referred to as the UFO phenomena.

Since the publication of the last book in the series, The Revealing, I have written three other books that deal either directly or indirectly with the Nephilim, fallen angels, UFOs, or the supernatural. I also collaborated with my friend and partner Richard Shaw to create The Watchers Series that delves into these same subjects but uses video as the medium.

I reached the point in my research in 2012 where I thought I had covered most of what was known about the Nephilim. I thought I had reached the end of my writing about the Nephilim. Boy, was I wrong! Here's how my world was once again rocked and the path I was on diverted.

I was going out to Newark, Ohio, to speak at a conference there. The day before I was to board my plane I received a call from my friend and colleague, Russ Dizdar. The conversation went something like this:

"Hey, L.A., do you know where you're going tomorrow?” Russ asked, punctuated by a mischievous bout of laughter.

"Yea," I replied, “I'm going to Newark, Ohio."

Russ laughed again, "No, do you really know where you are going?"

"Newark, why?"

"Are you near your computer?"

"Yea."

"Google this: Nephilim Chronicles."

I opened a window on my trusty Apple G5 and typed in Nephilim Chronicles.

xi

I watched as the search engine began its work and in about 3 seconds there was a link that I clicked on. I found myself staring at the cover of a book entitled, The Nephilim Chronicles, Fallen Angles in the Ohio Valley.

I almost fell out my chair as I exhaled a long "whaaaaat?" into the receiver. Russ laughed again, and then he began to explain about the book.

Needless to say, I listened with the combination of shock at not knowing about the book and fascination as Russ told me that, according to the author, Fritz Zimmerman, the Nephilim left the Levant, the Promised Land, and traveled to what is now the Ohio Valley, where they created enormous mound works and designs in the earth that still stand today. Thus, began anew my research into this enigmatic and mysterious subject of the fallen angels and the Nephilim.

This book will be an attempt to $nd the identity of the mysterious mound builders who constructed elaborate earth works all over North America, reaching from New England’s east coast to Santa Rosa Island, which I can see from my deck high up in the Santa Monica Mountains that overlook the Paci$c Ocean.

...

Chapter 6: The Theory

Page 63

We are told in the Bible that Joshua went into the Promised Land in what was the conquest of Canaan, or the Levant, as it is sometimes referred to. There is, however, an event which happened decades before this conquest began. I wrote about this in The Cosmic Chess Match and will include a portion of it here, as it is germane to our discussion. The important point to remember is that the text plainly states the Nephilim were in the Promised Land. The spies who return tell us that they were like grasshoppers in their sight. We also learn there is a mandate to slaughter the inhabitants of the land. This begs the question: why does a loving God resort to genocide?Do we serve a maniacal, homicidal God who is at best capricious and at worst a racist because He destroys one group of people and favors another? On what basis?

I believe the answer lies in the text itself and the idea that the Nephilim were settled in the Promised Land. This is a portion taken from my book The Cosmic Chess Match:

The Giants in the Promised Land? Why are they there?

What we will see in this chapter is that the Fallen One continues to try to outmaneuver the Most High God. Here is a quick thumbnail sketch of what happens:

Moses has led the children of Israel for a while and now they are at the borders of the Promised Land. He sends 12 spies into the land to check it out and when they return they report that they saw the Nephilim there! You may remember that these are the same creatures we see in the Genesis 6 passage. In other words it would seem that there is, in fact, a second incursion of the unthinkable; the fallen angels have once again procreated with the women of earth and the result is a demonic/human hybrid known as the Nephilim. There are those who tell us that this could not have happened; however, we have the written word of the Torah that tells us that the Nephilim were in the land. We also have the writing of the $rst century Jewish historian, Flavius Josephus, who tells us that the bones of these creatures were openly on display in Jerusalem at the time of his writing, which was thousands of years later!

Is it coincidence that when the spies are sent into the land they encounter the same entities that we see in Genesis 6? I think not, and would submit to you that the presence of the fallen angels creating these unholy hybrids, or Nephilim, is once again a deliberate attempt by the Fallen One to thwart the plans of the Most High God. I want to let you examine the text for yourself:

25 At the end of forty days they returned from spying out the land.

26 And they came to Moses and Aaron and to all the congregation of the people of Israel in the wilderness of Paran, at Kadesh. They brought back word to them and to the entire congregation, and showed them the fruit of the land.

27 And they told him, “We came to the land to which you sent us. It flows with milk and honey, and this is its fruit.

28 However, the people who dwell in the land are strong, and the cities are forti#ed and very large. And besides, we saw the descendants of Anak there.

Page 64

29 The Amalekites dwell in the land of the Negeb. The Hittites, the Jebusites, and the Amorites dwell in the hill country. And the Canaanites dwell by the sea, and along the Jordan.”

30 But Caleb quieted the people before Moses and said, “Let us go up at once and occupy it, for we are well able to overcome it.”

31 Then the men who had gone up with him said, “We are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than we are.”

32 So they brought to the people of Israel a bad report of the land that they had spied out, saying, “The land, through which we have gone to spy it out, is a land that devours its inhabitants, and all the people that we saw in it are of great height.

33 And there we saw the Nephilim (the sons of Anak, who come from the Nephilim), and we seemed to ourselves like grasshoppers, and so we seemed to them.” (Numbers 13:25-33)

...

Page 69

Is it possible these names of the tribes that are listed above are Nephilim tribes and each has a differentiation, perhaps a trait that de$nes them one from another?

While Joshua succeeds in wiping out some of the tribes, he is not successful in destroying all of them. The proof of this is when we read about David and Goliath. Most of us know the story, so I won’t belabor it.

Suffice it to say Goliath was a giant and he had four brothers. However, I believe Goliath was a Nephilim and this was the reason why no man would go up against him. There is also another dynamic at work here and it is this: When David attacks Goliath, he picks up five stones. As Chuck Missler points out, David knew about Goliath and also knew about his four brothers.22 Missler believes as I do that David gathered one stone for each one of the Nephilim giants. We also see David striking Goliath in the center of his forehead and then, taking Goliath's sword, he beheads the giant. There may be more than what meets the eye here as Goliath may have been able to recover from wounds because of the Nephilim blood-line. However, by decapitating him there was no chance for that to happen, thus, David put an end to him.

We also read in 1 Chronicles 20:6 that there is a son of a giant. This also leads me to think these Nephilim were able to reproduce. I realize this is a theory, but it is one that appears to have Biblical authority.

And yet again there was war at Gath, where was a man of [great] stature, whose fingers and toes [were] four and twenty, six [on each hand], and six [on each foot]: and he also was the son of the giant [emphasis added]. (Chronicles 20:6)

I want to spend some time here looking at this scripture.First we see that there was war at Gath. Gath was a Philistine stronghold and was not conquered by Joshua when the conquest of Canaan was underway. It is now years later and because the mandate to annihilate the Nephilim has not been carried out by Joshua, the Israelites are being oppressed.

Next we see some interesting physical anomalies with this giant. He has six fingers on each hand as well as six toes on each foot. This is important for us to grasp, as this will figure into our discussion later.

...

22 Chuck Missler -http://wiki.answers.com/Q/What_are_the_meaning_of_the_five_smooth_stones

Page 70

create a direct link between the Nephilim that inhabited the Promised Land and what we find in North and South America, we can at least draw a comparison between the two.

Next we see that he was the son of the giant. The word used here is Rephiam, which means giant and is used 24 times in the KJV. I want to include the other Biblical references here as they bolster the fact there was a war between these different tribes of giants or Nephilim and the children of Israel. I will comment as necessary.

And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that [were] with him, and smote the Rephaims7497 in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emims in Shaveh Kiriathaim, (Genesis 14:5)

This is well before the conquest of Canaan and what is troubling about it is the Nephilim have already returned to the area after the flood. The Zuzims and Emims are, in my opinion, Nephilim tribes.

And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims7497 ....(Genesis 15:20)

Again we see more tribes listed. We must ask the question, why are these people selected by God for annihilation? If they are normal humans, then this is an act of genocide by God. However, as I discussed earlier, if these beings are Nephilim, and I believe these are Nephilim tribes, then we are dealing with a demonic hybrid or the offspring of fallen angels and earthly women.

The Nephilim are an abomination as they are the result of the seed of the serpent. There has been some controversy regarding the so-called second incursion and it has caused a lot of confusion. However I would point out that unless these are Nephilim that are discussed in these passages, then we are left with only one choice and that is we serve a capricious, genocidal God who favors one group of people over another.

Another point to consider is this: When Jonah is told to go to Nineveh and preach to the people about repenting of their evil deeds, he does so. We see the people repent and God spares them. This is grace and mercy being applied to a group of people who engaged in some horrific, barbarous acts. Yet God offers them a way out, and thus they have a chance to turn from their evil deeds. They do so and they find favor with the Most High God.

Chapter 7: Fritz Zimmerman

As I mentioned in the Forward to this book, I first became aware of Fritz Zimmerman through Russ Dizdar. When I first saw the title to his book, The Nephilim Chronicles - Fallen Angels in the Ohio Valley, I was immediately taken aback. What could he be talking about? Why did he believe the seemingly implausible idea of the offspring of fallen angels somehow showing up in the Ohio Valley? What, if any proof did he have that would make his case believable?

It took me several days to track him down and in order to do it I had to reopen my Facebook account, which immediately led to a deluge of unwanted “friends.”

However, I was able to locate him and we began to correspond. I also purchased his book and read it in several sittings.

I believe Fritz has done his homework, in that he spent months in the archives looking at old newspaper clippings and tracking down any story that discussed giant skeletons being exhumed. What he found, in my opinion, was startling in regard to the discovery of giant skeletons throughout the Ohio Valley.

I can only wonder why academia isn’t more interested in these accounts and for that matter, why modern scholars are not able to view the artifacts and skeletons that came out of this region more than a hundred years ago.

Fritz and I agreed to meet at the Nephilim Mounds conference in late September of 2012.

This conference was a direct result of my attending the first conference in March where I also met Deborah and “Buck” C. who gave me my $rst tour of the Great Circle Mound.

What amazed me at the time was that I had no idea these mounds existed. Here I was, thinking I had researched all there was about the Nephilim, and to my amazement found I had just scratched the surface.... humbling!

Deborah, Buck and I toured several of the mounds.More speci$cally the Great Circle Mound, which is a henge.

...

Page 83 and 84

Theere is also another interesting dynamic with this henge. The circle mound is made up of different soils.

Archaeological excavations conducted in 1992 revealed that the Great Circle is composed of different colored soils. The outer portion of the wall is made of dark brown earth, while the inner portion is made from bright, yellow-brown earth. These different colors may have had special symbolic meanings to the people who built the walls.

Here’s another article which discusses the use of different soils in the construction of the mound:

At most mound sites, the builders gathered earth from nearby sources. But sometimes there was a need for a specific material that was not readily available, and certain soils had to be quarried from several feet beneath the surface or hundreds of feet from the mound.

At Newark's Great Circle, for example, dark brown earth from the uppermost soil layers forms the outer portion of the circle, while bright yellow-brown earth from deep beneath the surface forms the inner portion.

My question is this: Where did the dirt come from? Was it 100 yards away, 400 yards away, a mile, or maybe even farther from the site? If the dirt is being transported from a great distance, let’s say a mile away, it poses many difficulties, as the Native American cultures did not have wheel barrows or other means of transporting dirt. Have you ever picked up even a shovel-full of dirt and tried to carry it? It’s heavy and tiring work.

Here is my interview with Fritz Zimmerman!

L. A.: In your book, The Nephilim Chronicles: Fallen Angels in the Ohio Valley, you make the case that the Nephilim came through Europe into the New World. What evidence do you have that support this theory?

F. Z.: The historical threads that weave the Nephilim-Amorites together and provide the template of characteristics that we can identify across the three regions of the ancient Levant, the British Isles and North America, is found in the Book of Enoch. The Book of Enoch elaborates on Genesis 6:4, and describes who the Nephilim were, where they went and what they knew. The Book of Enoch tells the story of the angels descending onto Mt. Herman, where they swore an oath to mate with women. The result of this unholy union was the “giant” or “Nephilim” race of men. The Angels also taught the Nephilm secrets of science, astronomy, numerology, and mathematics. Wikipedia, “Genesis 6:4

37 Great Circle Earthworks - Ohio History Central - A product of the Ohio Historical Society 38 Ohio's mounds are works of art | The Columbus Dispatch implies that the Nephilim have inhabited the earth in at least two different time periods – in antediluvian times “and afterward.” If the Nephilim were supernatural beings themselves, or at least the progeny of supernatural beings, there is a theory that the “giants of Canaan” in Numbers 13:33 were the direct descendants of the antediluvian Nephilim, or were fathered by the same supernatural parents. An interesting parallel of the occurrence of the number 333 is that using the Paris Meridian, Mt. Hermon lies exactly at 33.33 degrees north and 33.33 degrees east.

Enoch 8:1-3: “And Azazel taught men to make swords, and knives, and shields, and breastplates, and made known to them the metals of the earth and the art of working them, and bracelets, and ornaments, and the use of antimony, and the beautifying of the eyelids and all kinds of costly stones, and all (2) coloring tinctures. And there arose much godlessness, and they committed fornication, and they were led astray, and became corrupt in their ways. Semarang taught enchantments, and root cuttings, Armoras the resolving of enchantments, Baraqijal taught astrology, Kokabel the constellations, Ezwqeel the knowledge of the clouds, Araqiel the signs of the earth, Shamsiel the signs of the sun, and Sariel the course of the moon.”

The Amorites were masters of the sea in search of resources of copper and tin to make bronze. Their sea captains and trading companies became rich. By 1900 B.C. their influence had spread west across the Mediterranean. According to the Archeology of the Bible, 1916: “The Aryans (Amorites) separated into an eastern and western branch; the latter we can trace from Asia to Europe. They founded colonies in the Delta of the Danube, and spread westward along the Danube into Germany and the valleys of the Rhine, the Loire and Seine, and still pushing westward established themselves into Brittany and Great Britain.” The Bell Beaker people took advantage of and improved transportation routes by sea and rivers to mine and trade mineral resources. They introduced the use of copper and bronze weapons as they expanded into new lands.

Tin mines were being exploited in Britain according to the book Phoenician Origin of the Britons & Scots, 1925. The mysterious race that erected these cyclopean monuments [Stonehenge], wholly forgotten and unknown, now appears from the new evidence to have been the earlier wave of immigrant mining merchant Phoenician Barats, or “Catti” Phoenicians of the Mur, Mer or Martu clan – “The Amorite Giants” of the Old Testament tradition. And from whom it would seem that Albion obtained its earliest name (according to the First Welsh Triad) of Clas Myrd-in (or Merddin)” or “Diggings of the Myrd.” As the Amorites pushed into Northern Europe, they began trading with the people known today as the Maritime Archaic. It is documented in The Nephilim Chronicles: Fallen Angels in the Ohio Valley, that the material culture, burial types and large skeletons of the Maritime Archaic stretched the extent of the northern latitudes across the globe. It is from this Amorite and Maritime Archaic intercourse that the knowledge of the vast resources of copper in the Lake Superior region was attained. The overwhelming evidence of the Amorites in the Upper Great Lakes is best documented by the weapons that have been tagged by archaeologists as the “Copper Culture.” “State of the Art,” Early and Middle Bronze Age type weapons of tanged daggers and sockets mysteriously materialize out of nowhere in the region where the copper mines are located in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan and northern Wisconsin.