Bank to end high-risk lending

The Charlotte-based company said it decided to exit that business--called EquiCredit--and its auto leasing operation because they were no longer sufficiently profitable. As a result of the closings, the country's third-largest banking company expects to take a $1.25 billion after-tax charge in the third quarter.

Bank of America Corp.'s announcement Wednesday that it plans to stop offering real estate loans to people with poor credit pleased community activists who blame the company for what they consider unnecessary foreclosures.

"Both of these businesses have very volatile earnings streams, have become unattractive from a risk-reward standpoint and have not produced required rates of return," said Kenneth Lewis, chairman and chief executive officer of Bank of America.

The decision was financial, officials said, and not influenced by accusations that EquiCredit was involved in so-called "predatory lending" techniques, including charging interest rates and fees that lead borrowers into foreclosure. Last year, a Chicago ordinance passed to combat the practice prompted EquiCredit to scale back its operations here, although officials deny the company engaged or engages in predatory lending.

Lenders who cater to people with spotty credit records typically charge more for loans because they are assuming greater risks than with traditional borrowers. Some lenders' techniques, activists say, cross the line into predatory lending.

Bank of America has been accused of predatory lending techniques by activists including Dan Immergluck, an official at the Woodstock Institute, an economic development think tank in Chicago.

The decision to close EquiCredit "shows the Wild West nature of this business, and that it finally caught up with them," Immergluck said. "Meanwhile, there have been thousands of foreclosures across the country due to this lender."

But increased regulation of non-traditional lending caused costs to rise for EquiCredit and played a small part in its elimination, said Bank of America spokeswoman Eloise Hale.

Last November, Bank of America decided after months of internal debate to sign a pledge to the City of Chicago not to make loans that a new city ordinance defined as predatory. Those loans represented about 25 percent of the loans EquiCredit made in Chicago, a spokeswoman said at the time.

If it had not signed the pledge, the bank would have been unable to do business with the city.

The company said Wednesday it plans to liquidate its $26.3 billion EquiCredit portfolio over the next seven to nine months, and sell its 96 EquiCredit branches to Aegis Mortgage Corp. in Houston and Resources Bancshares in Columbia, S.C.

Bank of America will stop originating auto leases immediately but continue to manage its existing $9.7 billion portfolio. Like others in the industry, including Chicago-based Bank One Corp., the bank saw margins in that business drop dramatically, due primarily to reductions in used-car values.

Other firms have experienced trouble in the non-traditional lending arena as well. Chicago-based Superior Bank FSB, which had specialized in lending to people with poor credit, was taken over by federal regulators last month in what could prove to be one of the costliest bank failures in recent history.