Bogus letters could sway Miller County voters - KSLA News 12 Shreveport, Louisiana News Weather & Sports
Bogus letter circulating to Miller County residents (Source: Origin unknown, several KSLA News 12 viewers emailed it to us)

Voter turnout appears to be low in the run-off election for Miller County judge. However, the talk is running high after what authorities say is a bogus letter that has resurfaced from 8 years ago. The letter alleges former County Judge and now candidate Roy McNatt of racism.

"That is a very untrue letter. I am not a racist person, there is no truth to it," explained McNatt.

But, the letter seems to always surface at election time.

Back in 2008, the Arkansas State Police and the Miller County Prosecutor's Office conducted an investigation into the origin of the letter.

Carlton Jones was a deputy prosecutor at the time and told KSLA News 12 the letter turned out to be bogus. McNatt was eventually cleared of all accusations.

Now, someone is apparently trying to mislead voters by resurfacing the letter.

While no one has been directly named as spreading the rumors, McNatt says he has several ideas of who could be behind it.

"I have a lot of ideas, nothing for sure so I'm just going to go on that letter is false," said McNatt.

McNatt is once again running for Miller County judge and his opponent in Tuesday's election is Danny Lewis.

Lewis also says he doesn't know whose idea it was to distribute the letter with his campaign cards.

"You know, yesterday I was appalled by the letter. That is not something that my campaign released or had anything to do with at all. You know, I know that letter has been used in previous elections," said Lewis.

This time around, the Miller County Prosecuting Attorney's Office, the Election Commission and Roy McNatt do not plan to push the issue any further. But, how the bogus letter has affected the community could be determined when the final vote is counted.

"Political, some people don't want me back in office and that is what they do," explained McNatt.

"I think the voters, I think they are smart enough to realize that letter was put out by someone other than us," said Lewis.

The polls in Miller County will close at 7:30 p.m. Tuesday.

Copyright 2016 KSLA. All rights reserved.