Sean Combs finds a $39-million spot to display his Grammys
Sean John Combs, a.k.a. Puff Daddy, P. Diddy or just plain Diddy, has bought a newly built mansion on the Westside for $39 million.

Completed this year, the European-style villa has about 17,000 square feet of living space in a two-story main house with a 35-seat theater, a gym and a wine room. There's a 3,000-square-foot guesthouse.

The 1.3-acre property includes a lagoon-style swimming pool with a grotto and an underwater swimming tunnel.

The diversified hip-hop mogul paved the way to his fortune, pegged at north of $700 million by Forbes, by producing hit records and developing other talent such as Mary J. Blige and the Notorious B.I.G. He then founded Bad Boy Records, started releasing his own albums as rapper Puff Daddy with "No Way Out" in 1997 and launched his Sean John clothing line. Combs, 44, has also worked as a television producer and an actor.

The Grammy winner's new neighbors in the Holmby Hills area include the Playboy Mansion and Formula One heiress Petra Eccelstone Stunt.

The purchase took place outside the Multiple Listing Service. However, area real estate agents identified Drew Fenton of Hilton & Hyland/Christie's International Real Estate as having represented the seller and Kurt Rappaport of Westside Estate Agency as Combs' agent.

Photos Kanye West and Kim Kardashian bought a three-acre estate in Hidden Hills. (Realtor.com)

'Keeping Up' with Kanye and Kim

Rapper and producer Kanye West and his wife, television personality Kim Kardashian, recently bought an estate behind gates in Hidden Hills that had been listed at $21.25 million.

The couple purchased the French countryside-inspired compound through a trust and the sale price has not yet appeared in the public record. Multiple media reports have pegged it at about $20 million.

Photos January Jones of "Mad Men" had listed the house in Los Feliz at $1.495 million. (Realtor.com)

They own another nearly 9,000-square-foot house on the Westside that they ended up not moving into and are now quietly marketing at about $11 million.

Wooden gates at their new house open to a stone-clad house, which sits on three acres with vineyards, fountains, mature trees and expansive lawns.

Inside, the 15,667 square feet of living space includes living and dining rooms, a home theater, a game room with a wet bar, a paneled library, a gym, eight fireplaces, eight bedrooms and 10 bathrooms.

The kitchen, with three islands, opens to a family room. There's a separate office and guesthouse.

Two swimming pools, two spas, two barbecue centers and a 1,050-square-foot entertainment pavilion complete the grounds.

West, 37, is among the most-awarded recording artists of all time with 21 Grammys. He headlined the Made in America event in downtown Los Angeles before heading to Australia for his "Yeezus" tour. He and Kardashian, 33, were married in May.

She stars on the reality show "Keeping Up With the Kardashians" (2007-present).

Marc Shevin of Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices and Tomer Fridman of Ewing Sotheby's International Realty handled the deal, according to agents not authorized to comment on the off-market transaction.

'Mad' woman sells in Los Feliz

January Jones of "Mad Men" has sold her house in Los Feliz for $1.37 million.

The gated Mediterranean, built in 1923, has been updated with a remodeled and expanded kitchen featuring an eat-at island, marble counters and stainless-steel appliances.

The two-story, 2,200-square-foot home has hardwood floors, a wood-burning living room fireplace, French doors, a breakfast area, three bedrooms and three bathrooms.

Views take in the Griffith Observatory and the surrounding hillsides.

Jones, 36, has been a staple on "Mad Men" since it first aired in 2007. Her films include this year's thriller "Good Kill" as well as "Sweetwater" (2013) and "Unknown" (2011).

The actress/model bought the property in 2009 for $1.02 million, public records show. She bought another home in Topanga this year for $1.7 million.

Adam Sires and Michael Nourmand of Nourmand & Associates were the listing agents. Ronda Doyal and Tracy B. Do of John Aaroe Group represented the buyer.

Pyramid home is a trove of history

One of L.A.'s most unusual houses, the landmark Sowden Residence in Los Feliz, is up for sale at $4.875 million.

Set up from the street and behind gates, the Lloyd Wright-designed residence was built in 1926-27 with a distinct Mayan pyramid-inspired facade. Stepped patterned concrete blocks, a technique also used by the architect's father, Frank Lloyd Wright, depict symbols for water, earth, crops and clouds.

The renovated five-bedroom, six-bathroom house is in the shape of a large rectangle and looks in on a long center courtyard with a swimming pool, which was a later addition.

Venetian plaster, industrial-vibe bathrooms and a koi pond off the master bathroom are among other features.

The 5,600-square-foot house has often been used in photo shoots and for films and TV shows, including "Ruby Sparks" and "Californication." Suspicions that the house might hold the key to the so-called Black Dahlia murder case from 1947 have brought reality shows such as "Paranormal America" and "Ghost Hunters."

There's a detached two-car garage with additional office and bonus space.

The property, which last sold in 2011 for $3.85 million, is a Los Angeles historic-cultural monument and qualifies for Mills Act property tax savings.

Troy Gregory of Sotheby's International Realty is the listing agent.

'Blue Collar' worker's luxurious digs

Stand-up comedian Ron White has his Montecito spread listed for sale at $4.475 million.