One year later, how Harvey Weinstein went from power player to pariah and sparked a national movement
Has there ever been a faster fall than that of independent film kingpin Harvey Weinstein? For years, rumors of sexual impropriety and harassment dogged him but his power in Hollywood appeared to render him unassailable. Through Miramax Films and Weinstein Co. he won countless awards while turning actors like Gwyneth Paltrow and Ben Affleck and filmmakers such as Michael Moore and Quentin Tarantino into household names. At the Oscars, he was thanked more often than God.

Then in one fell swoop the “open secret” of his abuses became secret no longer. The New York Times and the New Yorker broke stories in which more than a dozen women detailed behavior that ranged from harassment to rape. Dozens of actresses and other Hollywood insiders quickly joined the chorus of allegationswhile numerous celebrities and politicians reacted to the scandal. Here’s a complete rundown of the developments:

Read The Times' full coverage of the Harvey Weinstein sexual harassment scandal »

Unnamed model accuses Weinstein of sexual assault

A sexual assault complaint is filed against Weinstein in New York City. The alleged victim is a 22-year-old Italian model, whose name was not given at the time but was later revealed to be Ambra Battilana Gutierrez. The claim alleges that Weinstein groped her at the Tribeca Film Center after they had been in a meeting.

Ashley Judd accuses an unnamed mogul of sexual harassment

The actress reveals that at the time she was making the 1997 film “Kiss the Girls” she was sexually harassed by someone she calls one of the industry’s “most famous, admired-slash-reviled bosses.” Judd alleges that he pressured her to join him in his hotel room and ultimately asked her to watch him take a shower. Two years later, Judd names the mogul.

Ashley Judd at the world premiere of "Divergent" at the Westwood Regency Village Theater in Los Angeles. Jordan Strauss / Invision/AP

Rose McGowan refers to an unnamed film distributor as a ‘rapist’

Responding to a trending hashtag #WhyWomenDontReport, the actress — who appeared in Weinstein projects including “Scream” and “Grindhouse” — makes the accusation without using any names, although it later comes to light that it was intended for Weinstein.

Weinstein lawyers up in anticipation of stories

Word leaks out that the New Yorker and the New York Times are preparing stories about Weinstein’s alleged misconduct when it becomes public that he has hired a virtual army of lawyers and crisis managers to fight the reports. The team includes attorney David Boies, the controversial Lisa Bloom (also the daughter of Gloria Allred), and Charles Harder, who famously won Hulk Hogan’s invasion of privacy trial case against the Gawker website. Weinstein preemptively denies any accusations, telling the Hollywood Reporter, "The story sounds so good, I want to buy the movie rights."

The New York Times publishes its report

Hollywood is shaken when the New York Times report is published, stating that Weinstein has had a long history of sexual misconduct over the last two decades and has settled eight separate alleged sexual harassment cases. Among the numerous actresses and employees involved in the allegations are Judd, who names Weinstein as her attacker, and McGowan.

Weinstein announces a leave of absence

After issuing a statement reading, in part, “I so respect all women and regret what happened,” Weinstein announced he’d be taking a leave of absence from Weinstein Co. effective immediately.

Hollywood begins to respond

Performers, news anchors and creative types, including Lena Dunham, Gretchen Carlson, Jenni Konner, Jake Tapper and others, begin to take to social media to condemn Weinstein, although his most famous collaborators and political allies largely remain silent. McGowan tweets without using his name.

Weinstein Co. orders investigation of allegations

The Weinstein Co. board retains attorney John Kiernan of Debevoise & Plimpton LLP to investigate the allegations, but, for the moment, refrains from firing Weinstein.

Legal advisor Lisa Bloom quits

After being criticized for representing Weinstein, two key members of Weinstein’s crisis team part ways with their client, including Los Angeles attorney Lisa Bloom. “I have resigned as an advisor to Harvey Weinstein,” Bloom wrote on Twitter. “My understanding is that Mr. Weinstein and his board are moving toward an agreement.”

Donald Trump reacts

While being questioned by reporters, President Trump acknowledges he’s known Weinstein for “a long time” and that he’s “not at all surprised” by the allegations against the movie mogul. The quote arrives on the anniversary of the release of the controversial 2005 “Access Hollywood” tape in which Trump uses vulgar terms to brag about sexual assault and how his status as a star means he “can do anything.”

Weinstein is fired from his company

After a review, the board of Weinstein Co. ousts Weinstein from the company he co-founded alongside his brother, Bob. “In light of new information about misconduct by Harvey Weinstein that has emerged in the past few days, the directors of The Weinstein Company ... have determined, and have informed Harvey Weinstein, that his employment with The Weinstein Company is terminated, effective immediately,” the company said in a statement.

A-listers start to respond

Julianne Moore, Meryl Streep, Emmy Rossum, Michael Keaton, Mark Ruffalo, Seth Rogen, Jessica Chastain and other stars begin tweeting their outrage at Weinstein and their support for the women who have come forward. Director Kevin Smith, a longtime Weinstein associate, says he feels “ashamed’ for working with him.

New Yorker report alleges that Weinstein assaulted multiple women

Just five days after the New York Times published the initial allegations, the New Yorker publishes a lengthy investigation by Ronan Farrow that accuses Weinstein of further incidents, some involving actresses such as Rosanna Arquette, Mira Sorvino and Asia Argento. The report also includes an audio recording of Weinstein verbally pressuring Gutierrez to enter his hotel room in 2015.

Gwyneth Paltrow, Angelina Jolie detail 'unacceptable' encounters

In a follow-up piece in the New York Times, Oscar winners Gwyneth Paltrow and Angelina Jolie also accuse Weinstein of sexual misconduct. The latter says, “this behavior towards women in any field, any country is unacceptable.”

Angelina Jolie, left, at the Toronto International Film Festival on Sept. 10, 2017, and Gwyneth Paltrow at the amfAR Inspiration Gala in Los Angeles on Oct. 29, 2015. AP Photo

MORE: A look at 27 newsmakers accused of sexual harassment, assault or related behavior »

Former actress and screenwriter Louisette Geiss accuses

In a news conference held by noted lawyer Gloria Allred, former actress and screenwriter Louisette Geiss alleges Weinstein made unwanted advances toward her at the 2008 Sundance Film Festival.

Georgina Chapman leaves Weinstein

In a statement, Weinstein’s third wife reveals she is leaving him following the allegations, saying, "My heart breaks for all the women who have suffered tremendous pain because of these unforgivable actions. I have chosen to leave my husband.” The two have been married since December 2007 and have two children together, India Pearl and Dashiell Max Robert.

Harvey Weinstein, Uggie the dog and Georgina Chapman attend Weinstein Co.'s Oscar after-party at SkyBar at the Mondrian Los Angeles on Feb. 26, 2012 in West Hollywood. Craig Barritt / Getty Images

USC rejects Weinstein’s $5-million pledge to fund foundation for women filmmakers

The USC School of Cinematic Arts says that it is rejecting a $5-million pledge Weinstein had made to fund a program for female filmmakers. Days earlier, Weinstein had mentioned the pledge in his initial statement of apology.

Hollywood’s elite continues to respond

The floodgates open and condemnations from Hollywood’s biggest names — including some longtime Weinstein collaborators — come pouring in over social media. Jennifer Lawrence, George Clooney, Ben Affleck and others address the scandal with variations on the themes of shock, disgust and outrage. Benedict Cumberbatch, starring in the upcoming Weinstein Co. film “The Current War,” says he is “utterly disgusted.” Jeffrey Katzenberg reveals a scathing email he sent to Weinstein.

Hillary Clinton say she’s 'shocked and appalled' by allegations

After countless reactions from Hollywood players, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton releases a statement on Twitter via communications manager Nick Merrill condemning Weinstein, a former campaign contributor.

Barack Obama condemns Weinstein

Former President Obama responds to the allegations against Weinstein, a longtime Democratic donor, saying in a statement, "Michelle and I have been disgusted by the recent reports about Harvey Weinstein."

Former President Barack Obama speaks during the Goalkeepers Conference in New York on Sept. 20, 2017. Julio Cortez / AP Photo

BAFTA suspends Harvey Weinstein's membership

The British Academy of Film and Television Arts announces that Weinstein has been suspended from the prestigious organization, effective immediately. A statement reads, "Whilst BAFTA has previously been a beneficiary of Mr. Weinstein’s support for its charitable work, it considers the reported alleged behavior completely unacceptable and incompatible with BAFTA’s values.”

Academy sets meeting to discuss Weinstein's membership

The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences announces that it will hold an emergency meeting Saturday, Oct. 14, to discuss the future of Weinstein's membership. As the producer or executive producer of dozens of Oscar-winning films, Weinstein’s career was practically synonymous with award season beginning in the early 1990s.

BaHc485FRVx

LAPD responds to family disturbance call involving Weinstein

LAPD responds to a 911 call from a Los Angeles home around 10:30 a.m., where they speak to Weinstein's daughter for about half an hour, sparking rumors of suicidal threats. The officers determine no one was a danger to themselves.

Seth MacFarlane recalls 2013 joke about Weinstein

When the “Family Guy” creator co-hosted the Oscar nominations announcement in 2013 along with Emma Stone, he peppered his introductions with risque humor and Hollywood insider jokes. When it came time to announce the five supporting actress nominees, MacFarlane added, “Congratulations, you five ladies no longer have to pretend to be attracted to Harvey Weinstein.” MacFarlane recalled the jab on Twitter while addressing the Weinstein controversy.

Numerous film festival officials condemn Harvey Weinstein

Several of the very film festivals that helped elevate the Weinstein brand release official statements condemning his alleged actions. Cannes Film Festival President Pierre Lescure and general delegate Thierry Frémaux say they were "dismayed" to learn of the accusations, while the Venice Film Festival’s statement calls Weinstein's alleged behavior "unacceptable and shameful." A tweet from the official account of the Toronto Film Festival stands by the women who have spoken out against Weinstein.

Hatchette Book Group ends deal with Weinstein

The Hachette Book Group terminates its Weinstein Books imprint, which was initially launched as Miramax Books in 2001.

Potential buyers eye Weinstein Co.

In an exclusive to The Times, several entertainment industry executives reveal that multiple studios, networks and other investors are assessing whether to bid for pieces of the quickly fracturing Weinstein Co., as well as existing film and TV projects. The Weinstein Co. board is reportedly coming under pressure to liquidate the company’s assets. Apple has dropped a planned Weinstein Co. series centering on Elvis Presley, while Amazon.com is reviewing its options on several upcoming projects involving the company.

New York City and London law enforcement open investigations

Police departments in both cities reportedly begin investigations into Weinstein’s past. The NYPD is said to be looking into a 2004 incident in which Weinstein allegedly sexually assaulted an actress. Meanwhile, London law enforcement officers are reportedly pursuing their own case against Weinstein over a sexual assault incident that allegedly occurred in the 1980s.

McGowan names ‘HW’ as her attacker

After being temporarily suspended from Twitter, McGowan returns to the platform with her most blunt allegations yet. Revolting against a non-disclosure agreement, McGowan posts a no-holds-barred thread tagging Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos, in which she clearly states that “HW raped me,” an apparent reference to Harvey Weinstein.

Bob Weinstein dispels rumors of Weinstein Co. turmoil

Weinstein Co. co-founder Bob Weinstein responds to rumors that the company is for sale, saying, "Our banks, partners and shareholders are fully supportive of our company and it is untrue that the company or board is exploring a sale or shutdown of the company...Business is continuing as usual as the company moves ahead.” The statement also contains information about the pending releases from his specialty arm, Dimension Films, including the movies “Polaroid,” “Paddington 2” and “War With Grandpa.” He makes no mention of Weinstein Co.’s main slate of upcoming films, namely “The Current War,” “The Upside” and “Mary Magdalene.”

BaJiAhyn7Y5

Oliver Stone may recuse himself from Weinstein Co.-produced series ‘Guantanamo’

After news broke that the Weinstein Co.'s production credits would be removed from TV projects, including Lifetime's "Project Runway" and Netflix's "Peaky Blinders," director Oliver Stone posted a message to Facebook stating he would "recuse" himself from the Showtime drama series "Guantanamo" if Weinstein Co. remained on the project. Showtime released a statement noting: “The project is in development and has not been greenlit yet. We do not intend to move forward with the current configuration of the project and are exploring our options.”

Amazon Studios cuts ties with the Weinstein Co.

The streamer severs ties with the production company in the wake of the accusations against Weinstein. This includes removing the Weinstein Co. as a producer on its upcoming anthology drama from “Mad Men” creator Matthew Weiner, “The Romanoffs,” and scrapping production altogether on an untitled David O. Russell series starring Robert De Niro and Julianne Moore. The latter had received two-season commitment.

BaMUmN9AJM_

Bob Weinstein breaks silence about allegations

Harvey Weinstein’s brother and longtime collaborator Bob Weinstein talks with the Hollywood Reporter, claiming he had no knowledge of any nonconsensual sexual activity on Harvey’s part and urging the academy to expel him. He also refers to Harvey as "a living nightmare" and a “bully” who subjected him to verbal and physical abuse.

Harvey, left, and Bob Weinstein, at the Peninsula Hotel in Beverly Hills, Calif. in 2012. The hotel was the location of several of Harvey's alleged attacks. Al Seib / Los Angeles Times

Motion picture academy expels Weinstein

As criticism of the embattled mogul mounts, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences holds an emergency meeting where the board votes “well in excess of the required two-thirds majority” to immediately eject Weinstein. As a producer, Weinstein won the best picture Oscar for 1998’s “Shakespeare in Love,” while dozens of other films released under his leadership at Miramax won Oscars throughout the years. The Academy statement reads, “We do so not simply to separate ourselves from someone who does not merit the respect of his colleagues but also to send a message that the era of willful ignorance and shameful complicity in sexually predatory behavior and workplace harassment in our industry is over.”

The beginning of the #MeToo movement

Alyssa Milano seemingly launches the #MeToo movement, which originally stems back to 2006, with a tweet asking for those who have been sexually harassed or assaulted to reply to her with “me too.”

Producers Guild moves to expel Weinstein

Following in the footsteps of the Academy, the Producers Guild of America’s board of directors — a majority of which is female — beginning proceedings to terminate Weinstein’s membership in the organization, pending review. Per the Guild’s constitution, Weinstein is allowed to respond to the decision before a final determination is made on Nov. 6. As part of the announcement, the PGA also revealed a new Anti-Sexual Harassment Task Force. The Guild’s statement says: “Sexual harassment of any type is completely unacceptable. This is a systemic and pervasive problem requiring immediate industry-wide action.”

A lifeline for the Weinstein Co.

As the production company’s name is being removed from several movies and TV series in the wake of the allegations against its co-founder, the private equity firm Colony Capital agrees to provide a cash infusion. As part of the agreement, the companies also enter a negotiation period for a sale of all or part of the Weinstein Co.’s assets.

BaUBLfFFMDb

Weinstein resigns from Weinstein Co. board

With Weinstein Co.’s future still undetermined, Harvey Weinstein formally resigns from the board of directors. Five other board members — Tim Sarnoff, Paul Tudor Jones, Dirk Ziff, Marc Lasry and Richard Koenigsberg — had previously resigned in the wake of the scandal.

Bob Weinstein accused of sexual harassment

After publicly chastising his brother Harvey, Bob Weinstein comes into the spotlight when Variety reports that the Spike network is investigating a sexual harassment claim against him. Amanda Segel, a former executive producer for the Weinstein Co.-produced Spike series “The Mist,” alleges that Bob Weinstein made multiple advances toward her including several unwelcomed invitations to his home and hotel room. Bob Weinstein’s attorney Bert Fields refutes the allegations in a statement, saying the “story is riddled with false and misleading assertions by Miss Segel.”

LAPD investigating Harvey Weinstein after an actress in L.A. accuses him of rape

Joining cases in New York City and London, the LAPD confirms that they’ve met with an Italian model-actress who has alleged that Weinstein sexually assaulted her at a hotel in 2013. She is the sixth woman to accuse Weinstein of rape or forcible sex acts.

Weinstein Co. employees deny knowledge of Weinstein’s alleged behavior

A group of Weinstein Co. staffers issues a release stating that they were unaware that the company’s co-founder was a “serial sexual predator” and that they “knew that our boss could be manipulative. We did not know that he used his power to systematically assault and silence women.” The statement also demands that the signed staffers be released from the nondisclosure agreements in their contracts, which would allow them to “speak openly, and get to the origins of what happened here, and how.”

Actress Lupita Nyong'o photographer in 2016. Kirk McKoy / Los Angeles Times

Lupita Nyong’o details “sinister behavior” in op-ed

The Oscar-winning actress pens an op-ed for the New York Times in which she details being taken to his bedroom and having to give him a massage while she was at Yale School of Drama. Months later, he tried to persuade her to accompany him to a hotel room while they were at a lunch. “I told him I preferred to eat in the restaurant. He told me not to be so naïve. If I wanted to be an actress, then I had to be willing to do this sort of thing.”

Heather Kerr, right, who alleges that she was sexually harassed by Harvey Weinstein, wipes away a tear after addressing the media with her attorney Gloria Allred during a press conference at Allrred's office. Mel Melcon / Los Angeles Times

Sexual misconduct allegations continue to stack up

Former actress Heather Kerr, with Gloria Allred by her side, accuses Weinstein of forcing her to touch his genitals and telling her she had to sleep with him to make it in Hollywood during a 1989 business meeting.

Producer Harvey Weinstein attends the Rachel Zoe Spring 2013 fashion show during Mercedes Benz Fashion Week in 2012 Jason Kempin / Getty Images

Weinstein’s predatory behavior extended beyond Hollywood

The Times looks at how Weinstein used his fashion business as a way to get to close to models. Former model Juliana De Paula details how he groped her and forced her to kiss other models at his loft a decade prior. When she tried to leave, he chased through the apartment naked until she was able to fend him off with a broken glass.

Another model, Samantha Panagrosso, recalls Weinstein touching her legs underwater at a hotel pool during the 2003 Cannes Film Festival. “Sam, don’t be so naïve,” he reportedly told her. “You know Harvey can make you a star.”

Civil rights investigation into Weinstein Co. launches

New York Atty. Gen. Eric Schneiderman opens a civil rights investigation into the Weinstein Co. in the wake of recent allegations. The attorney general issues a subpoena seeking all documents related to sexual harassment allegations and other types of discrimination to assess whether officials at the company violated state civil rights and New York City human rights laws. "No New Yorker should be forced to walk into a workplace ruled by sexual intimidation, harassment, or fear," Scheiderman said in a statement. "If sexual harassment or discrimination is pervasive at a company, we want to know."

Weinstein Co. sued for negligence

Former Weinstein Co. production assistant Mimi Haleyi and actress Dominique Huett accuse Weinstein of sexual assault. The latter also sues the company for negligence — the first civil suit over the former co-chairman’s alleged behavior since the New York Times’ initial report — in which she claims that executives know about Weinstein’s behavior.

Another accuser comes forward

Actress Natassia Malthe, represented by attorney Allred, publicly accuses Weinstein of raping her at the Sanderson hotel in London in February 2008.

Weinstein vs. Weinstein

The fallen producer sues his own company for documents such as e-mail and his personnel file, saying he can use these in court to defend himself against the mounting allegations about inappropriate behavior. Weinstein also says he wants access to documents to support a wrongful termination case against the company after he was fired on Oct. 8. In his paperwork, he also accuses the studio of leaking information from his personnel file to the media.

Annabella Sciorra arrives at the 65th annual Tony Awards in 2011. Charles Sykes / AP

A second New Yorker piece details new allegations

“Kill Bill” star Daryl Hannah, “The Sopranos” alum Annabella Sciorra are among those interviewed in the latest expose. Sciorra alleges he violently raped her in the early ‘90s, forcing intercourse on her and performing oral sex on her. Daryl Hannah says Weinstein tried to force himself into her hotel room on two separate occasions and asked if he could touch her breasts on a third occasion. She alleges her refusal cost her future roles.

Banned for life

For seemingly the first time in its history, the Producers Guild of America board votes unanimously to ban Weinstein for life. "This unprecedented step is a reflection of the seriousness with which the Guild regards the numerous reports of Mr. Weinstein’s decades of reprehensible conduct,” the organization said in a statement.

The London case against Weinstein grows

Scotland Yard releases details of the probe into Weinstein, which now includes 11 allegations of sexual assault across several decades.

Disney is thrown in the mix

An unnamed Canadian actress claims Weinstein sexually assaulted her twice in 2000 in a $14 million lawsuit against Weinstein, his former company Miramax and Miramax’s former owner Disney. Additionally, the actress asks for $2 million in damages from longtime Weinstein associate Barbara Schneeweiss, alleging that Schneeweiss knew about her boss’ inappropriate tendencies but still arranged business meetings for Weinstein.

Paz de la Huerta at the 17th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards in 2011. Jay L. Clendenin / Los Angeles Times

Paz de la Huerta says Weinstein raped her twice

“Boardwalk Empire” actress de la Huerta tells Vanity Fair that Weinstein of raping her twice in 2010 when he forced himself on her in two occasions in her apartment. “I was very traumatized,” she said. “I felt so disgusted by it; with myself ... I became a little self-destructive. It was really hard for me to deal, to cope.” The following day, a New York City police officer calls the allegation “credible” and an investigation is opened to gather evidence.

Special task force assembled

Los Angeles County Dist. Atty. Jackie Lacey announces the formation of a special task force specifically to investigate sexual assault allegations. The task force will consist of veteran sex crimes prosecutors working together to “ensure a uniformed approach to the legal review and possible prosecution of any case that meets both the legal and factual standards for criminal prosecution.”

Sexual assault survivors take to the streets in Hollywood

Sparked by #MeToo campaign, several hundred sexual assault survivors rally and march in Hollywood, gathering in front of the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood to draw attention to their cause. State Sen. Connie Leyva (D-Chino) is among the day’s speakers: “This is 2017; the time is ripe for a reckoning, for a reordering of power.”

Elvira Herrera, center, of Indio, Calif., along with others, shows support for sexual assault survivors at the #MeToo Survivors' March against sexual abuse in Los Angeles, Calif., on Nov. 12, 2017. Gary Coronado / Los Angeles Times

Weinstein stripped of another honorary degree

Weinstein is stripped of an honorary degree from the State University of New York at Buffalo. Trustees from the State University of New York and the SUNY chancellor on Wednesday revoke the degree granted to Weinstein in 2001. He was an English major at the Buffalo campus from 1969 to 1973. In a statement, the University at Buffalo says Weinstein's alleged conduct is "inconsistent" with the values of the university and "contradicts the spirit of the honorary degree" and "undermines the accomplishments" cited in awarding the degree.

The Weinstein Company sued

The studio is hit with a class-action lawsuit by dozens of women accusing its former co-chairman of sexual assault, battery and lewd conduct. The complaint claims that a network of people who worked for Weinstein, including attorney David Voies, enabled his bad behavior and participated in what is deemed the “Weinstein Sexual Enterprise.”

Natasha Henstridge details harassment by Weinstein

The actress appears on “Megyn Kelly Today” to discuss her sexual assault accusation against director Brett Ratner, as first reported by The Times. However, while on the show, she also mentions Weinstein’s repeated advances and alleges he “pleasured himself in front of me.”

In an emotional interview on Megyn Kelly TODAY, actress Natasha Henstridge describes being with friends at director Brett Ratner’s home at age 19 when she fell asleep. When she wok ...

Weinstein resigns from DGA

Weinstein resigns from the Directors Guild of America, weeks after the guild filed disciplinary charges against him after numerous women publicly came forward to accuse him of sexual misconduct, including harassment and rape. He is also hit with two new lawsuits, one which accuses him of engaging in sex trafficking when he brought an actress to the Cannes Film Festival in 2015 on the pretense of business, only to sexually assault her in his hotel room.

Weinstein’s former assistant makes new accusations

Sandeep Rehal, Weinstein's former personal assistant of nearly two years, finally speaks out, saying she plans to sue Weinstein and his company for sexual harassment. She alleges that she provided him with erectile dysfunction medication and stocked an apartment for him with bathrobes, flowers and women's lingerie.

At the same time, Weinstein accusers Louisette Geiss, Katherine Kendall, Zoe Brock, Sarah Ann Masse, Melissa Sagemiller and Nannette Klatt file a federal lawsuit in New York against him and his now-former company and the Weinstein Co., in which they detail an alleged scheme that they say enabled him to rape and sexually assault hundreds of women.

Actress Salma Hayek photographed in 2017. Christina House / Los Angeles Times

Salma Hayek pens powerful essay “Harvey Weinstein is my monster too”

The actress alleges Weinstein once threatened to kill her after she refused his advances in an op-ed for the New York Times. She says she said turned him repeatedly — "no to me taking a shower with him. No to letting him watch me take a shower. No to letting him give me a massage. No to letting a naked friend of his give me a massage. No to letting him give me oral sex. No to my getting naked with another woman,” she writes — and that when she did, he verbally insulted her on set.

Ashley Judd and Mira Sorvino blacklisted?

Director Peter Jackson claims Weinstein blacklisted Ashley Judd and Mira Sorvino when the two were working together on the film adaptation of the “Lord of the Rings” franchise. “I recall Miramax telling us they were a nightmare to work with and we should avoid them at all costs,” Jackson told New Zealand’s Stuff. “At the time, we had no reason to question what these guys were telling us — but in hindsight, I realize that this was very likely the Miramax smear campaign in full swing." The women later attended the Academy Awards together (pictured below.)

HOLLYWOOD, CA - March 4, 2018 Ashley Judd and Mira Sorvino during the arrivals at the 90th Academy Awards on Sunday, March 4, 2018 at the Dolby Theatre at Hollywood & Highland Center in Hollywood, CA. (Jay L. Clendenin / Los Angeles Times) Jay L. Clendenin / Los Angeles Times

Weinstein sued by employee

“Marco Polo” associate producer Alexandra Canosa sues Weinstein for more than $10 million in damages. She claims that Weinstein, whose company produced the Netflix show about the Venetian explorer, made it clear to her that there would be serious consequences for thwarting his advances: “Harvey Weinstein threatened [Canosa] and made it clear that if she did not succumb to his demands or if she exposed his unwanted conduct there would be retaliation, including humiliation, the loss of her job and any ability to work in the entertainment business,” the lawsuit alleges.

Time is officially up

In a full-page ad in the New York Times, Shonda Rhimes, Reese Witherspoon and hundreds of Hollywood women launch the anti-harassment initiative Time’s Up. The initiative includes a legal defense fund to help women protect themselves from sexual misconduct, proposed legislation to penalize negligent companies and to abate the use of nondisclosure agreements, as well as a push for gender parity in Hollywood.

A blackout on the Golden Globes red carpet

After the idea of a boycott is rejected, the women behind Time’s Up still find a way to make a political statement on the normally a-political red carpet by wearing black to the annual awards show. Several A-listers, such as Emma Stone and Meryl Streep, also bring activists and sexual assault survivors as their dates.

Mariah Carey, America Ferrera, Natalie Portman, Emma Stone, and Billie Jean King arriving at the 75th Golden Globes at the Beverly Hilton Hotel on January 7, 2018. Jay L. Clendenin / Los Angeles Times

Women dominate the Screen Actors Guild

Less than 24 hours after the second Women’s March, women descend upon the 2018 Screen Actors Guild Awards. The annual telecast features solely female presenters as well as a female host — the show’s first emcee ever — in Kristen Bell.

Another ex-assistant sues Weinstein

Weinstein’s ex-assistant Sandeep Rehal files a federal suit, alleging that she was forced to work in a hostile work environment for two years catering to Weinstein's sexual appetites and activities. She alleges that during daily rides in his Lexus SUV, Weinstein would touch her on the thigh and that he would rub his belly against her. He also would dictate to her while naked, she said.

Uma Thurman, pictured here in 2014, starred in several key Weinstein productions including "Pulp Fiction" and "Kill Bill." Jennifer S. Altman / For The Times

Uma Thurman finally breaks her silence

A frequent star of Weinstein Co. films, Thurman details two incidents with Weinstein in the New York Times. One when greeted her in just his bathrobe at a Paris hotel room and the other when he physically assaulted her at the Savoy Hotel in London. “He pushed me down. He tried to shove himself on me. He tried to expose himself. He did all kinds of unpleasant things,” she said. “I was doing anything I could to get the train back on the track. My track. Not his track.”

New York attorney general sues Weinstein Co. for civil rights 'violations’

A $500-million deal to sell Harvey Weinstein's troubled former studio to former Obama aide Maria Contreras-Sweet hits a major roadblock after New York Atty. Gen. Eric Schneiderman sues the Weinstein Co. and its co-founders, Harvey Weinstein and Bob Weinstein, for "egregious violations of New York's civil rights, human rights and business laws."

The Weinstein Company COO David Glasser, left, pictured with Harvey Weinstein in 2014. Michael Kovac / WireImage

Weinstein Company president David Glasser fired

Days after Weinstein Co. president David Glasser is accused of failing to respond to human resources complaints by the New York attorney general in his suit, the board of directors votes to fire Glasser in an effort to save the studio’s sale.

Where’s Weinstein?

The Times reports new details about Weinstein’s exile to the Scottsdale, Ariz., area where he’s been spotted at high-end resorts including the Optima Sonoran Village, the Sanctuary on Camelback Mountain Resort & Spa and the Meadows. But with legal bills likely to exceed half a million dollars a month ؙ not to mention his impending divorce and numerous pending lawsuits — speculation intensifies about his finances.

Weinstein accusers band together at the Oscars

After host Jimmy Kimmel mocks Weinstein and other alleged predators in his opening monologue, three of Weinstein’s accusers — Ashley Judd, Anabella Sciorra and Salma Hayek — use the platform to speak to the effects ushered in by the producer’s downfall while highlighting the academy’s recent efforts toward inclusion and diversity.

Ashley Judd, Annabella Sciorra and Selma Hayek Pinault during the telecast of the 90th Academy Awards on Sunday, March 4, 2018 in the Dolby Theatre at Hollywood & Highland Center in Hollywood, CA. Robert Gauthier / Los Angeles Times

Weinstein Co. sale falls through after hidden debts are revealed

A $500-million deal for an investor group to acquire Weinstein's former movie and TV studio implodes after the group, led by former Obama administration official Maria Contreras-Sweet, finds at least $50 million in undisclosed liabilities on the company's books. The surprise debts would have significantly increased the purchase price.

The Weinstein Co. files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy

The embattled Weinstein Co. files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy five months after its co-founder was first accused of sexual harassment and assault. The filing is the culmination of a long struggle to spare the studio from Bankruptcy Court.

New York Times staff writers Megan Twohey, left, and Jodi Kantor address colleagues in the newsroom in New York after the team they led won the 2018 Pulitzer Prize for Public Service on Monday, April 16, 2018. The Times shared the prize with Ronan Farrow of The New Yorker. Hiroko Masuike / AP

Weinstein stories win a Pulitzer Prize

The New York Times and the New Yorker share the Pulitzer Prize for public service for breaking the Weinstein scandal and lending momentum to the #MeToo movement confronting sexual misconduct in Hollywood, D.C. and beyond.

Hotel room meetings adjourned?

In a bid to fight sexual harassment, SAG-AFTRA unveils a new set of guidelines that attempt to stop professional meetings from occurring in private hotel rooms, residences and other “high-risk locations.”

The Savoy Hotel, which was the site of several alleged Weinstein attacks. Richard Woodbury

Alleged victim Ashley Judd sues Weinstein

Judd, one of the first actresses to speak out publicly against Weinstein, sues the disgraced mogul, claiming that he sabotaged her career after she rejected his unwanted sexual advances. Judd alleges in the lawsuit filed in Los Angeles County Superior Court that Weinstein made false statements about her, resulting in the loss of work opportunities in Hollywood projects including the "Lord of the Rings" trilogy.

MAY 8

Weinstein Co.’s sale plan wins approval in Bankruptcy court

The planned sale of Weinstein Co. is OKd in bankruptcy court. At a hearing in Wilmington, Del., Judge Mary F. Walrath approves the sale of the Weinstein Co.'s assets to Dallas-based private equity firm Lantern Capital Partners, which offered $310 million in cash and assumes about $115 million in liabilities related to film and television projects.

Harvey Weinstein and Georgina Chapman during the arrivals at the 89th Academy Awards in 2017. Jay L. Clendenin / Los Angeles Times

Weinstein’s estranged wife breaks her silence

Georgina Chapman gives her first in-depth interview to Vogue, saying she was “humiliated” and “broken” by the flood of accusations against her husband, which she says she knew nothing about before the exposes in the New York Times and the New Yorker. “I’ve never been one of those people who obsesses about where someone is,” she says.

Weinstein the subject of a federal investigation

Federal prosecutors in New York open an investigation into whether Weinstein's alleged acts of sexual abuse violated federal laws. The investigation seeks to examine whether the mogul lured or induced women to travel across state lines for purposes of committing sexual crimes.

Harvey Weinstein is escorted into court, Friday, May 25, 2018, in New York. Weinstein surrendered Friday to face rape and other charges from encounters with two women. Mark Lennihan / AP

Weinstein turns himself in; criminal charges are filed against him

Weinstein turns himself in to New York authorities, and prosecutors file criminal charges against him, including rape. Speaking to reporters after the court appearance, Weinstein's attorney, Benjamin Brafman, says Weinstein continues to "vehemently deny" any criminal acts and that any sexual acts with the women were consensual. "Mr. Weinstein did not invent the casting couch in Hollywood," Brafman adds. "And to the extent that there is bad behavior in that industry that is not what this is about. Bad behavior is not on trial in this case. It's only if you intentionally committed a criminal act, and Mr. Weinstein vigorously denies that."

99324450 Harvey Weinstein surrenders in New York City on charges including rape.

Weinstein’s accusers celebrate his surrender

After Weinstein turns himself in to the New York Police Department, some of his accusers, including Rose McGowan, Mira Sorvino and Asia Argento, take to social media to celebrate the turn of events. However, some alleged victims — including "Pulp Fiction" actress Rosanna Arquette and former fashion model Juliana De Paula — still wonder whether justice will be served.

Grand jury indicts Weinstein on two counts of rape

A New York grand jury indicts Weinstein on two counts of rape and another charge of a criminal sexual act days after he surrendered to authorities. He is charged with rape in the first degree, rape in the third degree and committing a criminal sexual act in the first degree for alleged acts against two women in 2004 and 2013.

Three additional women sue Weinstein for sexual assault

Weinstein is the target of a lawsuit by three women, including technology sales executive Melissa Thompson. The latter accuses the producer of sexual assault and rape and says Brafman’s law firm duped Thompson into thinking the firm would represent her against Weinstein. Caitlin Dulany alleges in the lawsuit that Weinstein first tried to get her into bed at a New York studio apartment and that he later trapped her in a hotel suite at the Cannes Film Festival and forcibly performed oral sex on her. Dancer and actress Larissa Gomes alleges in the suit that in 2000 Weinstein imprisoned her in a penthouse hotel room in Toronto, grabbed her and tried to kiss her on the lips.

Weinstein pleads not guilty

Weinstein pleads not guilty to charges stemming from a pair of alleged sexual assaults in New York City. “As terrible a crime as rape is, it is equally reprehensible to be falsely accused of rape, and since Mr. Weinstein has denied these allegations, that's where we are,” says Brafman.

Weinstein faces a potential life sentence

Weinstein is indicted by a grand jury in New York after he is accused of sexually assaulting a woman and of committing a pattern of sex crimes — charges that could carry a life sentence.

Weinstein pleads not guilty to new charges

Weinstein pleads not guilty to new sexual assault charges Monday. A judge orders that he be released on continued bail.

Weinstein Co. is officially sold for $289 million

Lantern Capital pays $289 million for the assets, including Weinstein Co.’s 277-film library. The Dallas-based private equity firm had previously agreed to pay $310 million but secured a discount after agreeing to make payments on the studio’s contracts with filmmakers and actors.

The Weinstein Co.'s longtime headquarters on Greenwich Street in New York City. After the scandal, the company moved to nearby Hudson Street. The Los Angeles Times

Dallas-based equity firm Lantern Capital buys The Weinstein Co. After the sale, The Weinstein Co. is renamed Lantern Entertainment. The Los Angeles Times

Weinstein's lawyer tries to dismiss Ashley Judd’s lawsuit

Weinstein's lawyers ask a federal judge to dismiss Judd's lawsuit, which charges he ruined her career after she rejected his sexual advances. They argue the producer tried to live up to a "bargain" she proposed to let her touch her if she "won an Academy Award in one of his films."

Weinstein's lawyer claims alleged victim's emails show sex was consensual

Weinstein’s lawyers on Friday file a motion to dismiss his indictment on multiple sex charges, arguing that grand jurors never saw exculpatory evidence, including emails in which a woman he is accused of raping allegedly professed her love for him years later.

One of Weinstein’s accusers accused

Ten months after Asia Argento emerged as one of Weinstein’s first — and most vocal — accusers in Ronan Farrow’s New Yorker expose, the Italian actress becomes the subject of sexual assault allegations. The New York Times reports that in the months after her allegations against Weinstein, Argento quietly paid off her own accusers, former child actor Jimmy Bennet, who claims that she assaulted him in 2013 when he was 17. The Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department opens an investigation into the alleged incident the next day, when Weinstein’s lawyer slams the “hypocrisy” of the settlement.

Harvey Weinstein sued for trafficking and assault

A German actress, whose pseudonym is Emma Loman, sues Harvey Weinstein for allegedly raping her at the Cannes Film Festival in 2006.

Weinstein steps up attack on Judd

Weinstein claims in a new federal court filing that his alleged hotel room encounter with Judd was “neither pervasive nor severe.” He also calls her lawsuit, which claims sexual harassment and defamation, is “inexcusably conclusory, speculative and implausible.”

NBC News comes under fire for Ronan Farrow’s Weinstein report

Ten months after Farrow’s explosive report accusing Weinstein of sexual harassment and rape, NBC News faces heat (again) for passing on the story before it was ultimately printed in the New Yorker. Farrow’s former NBC News producer tells the New York Times that he was ordered by the higher-ups at NBC to “stand down, thus effectively killing the story.” The news division, however, argues that there were not enough on-the-record sources to move forward with the piece. The news division, in particular chief Andy Lack, is forced to do damage control in the coming days

Video shows Weinstein caressing woman before alleged rape

Sky News broadcasts a video of Weinstein fondling Melissa Thompson, who has accused him of rape.

Judd is cleared to move ahead with defamation lawsuit against Weinstein

A federal judge rules that Judd can move ahead with her defamation lawsuit against Weinstein, which claims that Weinstein defamed her to "Lord of the Rings" director Peter Jackson as retaliation after she shut down his sexual advances.

Support our journalism Already a subscriber? Thank you for your support. If you are not, please consider subscribing today. Get full access to our signature journalism for just 99 cents for the first four weeks.

UPDATES:

(This story was originally published on Oct. 19, 2017.)