Viewpoint: California's “Sodomite Suppression Act” - ”Really?”
Initiative 15-0008, the Sodomite Suppression Act, filed on February 26 with the Attorney General, has generated much media attention. However, in spite of this press attention, the initiative deserves detailed analysis like any other piece of legislation.

The initiative amends California Penal Code section 39. The current section 39 describes criminal abuse of office, a form of governmental corruption, and does not amend the sodomy statutes directly. (See principally, Penal Code sections 286(c)(2), (3))

The initiative begins with precatory language regarding the sinfulness of sodomy. The substantive modification of statutes begins with a new Penal Code section 39(b) as follows: “[A]ny person who willingly touches another person of the same gender for purposes of sexual gratification be put to death by bullets to the head or by any other convenient method.” Penal Code section 286(a) currently defines sodomy as “sexual conduct consisting of contact between the penis of one person and the anus of another person,” and the new subdivision (b) could apply to females acting in criminal concert with males.

Subdivision (c) defines “sodomistic propaganda” as “anything aimed at creating an interest in or an acceptance of human sexual relations other than between a man and a woman.” Distributing sodomistic propaganda “directly or indirectly by any means to any person under the age of majority” is a crime punishable by a fine of one million dollars per occurrence, imprisonment up to 10 years, and expulsion from California for up to life.

Subdivision (d) provides that “No person shall serve in any public office, nor serve in public employment, nor enjoy any public benefit, who is a sodomite or who espouses sodomistic propaganda or who belongs to any group that does.”

Subdivision (e) states that the measure “shall not be rendered ineffective nor invalidated by any court, state or federal, until heard by a quorum of the Supreme Court of California consisting only of judges who are neither sodomites nor subject to disqualification hereunder.”

Subdivision (f) requires that if, the state persists in inaction, presumably in the “affirmative duty to defend and enforce this law as written,”:

“[T]he general public is empowered and deputized to execute all the provisions hereunder extra-judicially, immune from any charge and indemnified by the state against any and all liability.”

Subdivision (g) notes that “All laws in conflict with this law are to that extent invalid.”

The initiative is in a preliminary state, having reached the Attorney General under the following constitutional process. Article 2, section 8(a), of the California Constitution defines the initiative as the power of the electors to propose, adopt or reject statutes and amendments to the Constitution. The first step in qualifying an initiative is described in section 10(d). A copy of the initiative is submitted to the Attorney General. She prepares a title and summary of the measure.

The measure is then circulated to the public for supporting signatures. The Secretary of State then certifies that the initiative has been signed by electors equal in number to five percent in the case of a statute and eight percent in the case of an amendment to the Constitution, of the votes for all candidates for Governor at the last gubernatorial election. The initiative is then placed on the ballot for the next election. (Sections 8(b), (c)) Section 10(c) permits the Legislature to amend or repeal referendum statutes.

Legally, the initiative is an appalling mess. Like your Aunt Hattie’s mauve and chartreuse 1959 Caddy, one simply stares at it in disbelief. Subdivision (b) creates a new defense to murder; subdivision (c) creates a category of speech in a manner suspect under the First Amendment and proposes what may seem excessive fines; subdivision (d) seems to effect discrimination under the 14th Amendment and the First Amendment; subdivision (e) disturbs the separation of powers, as the Legislature cannot ex post facto disqualify a judicial officer and certainly not without appropriate due process; and subdivision (f) is void for vagueness, in addition to creating blanket defenses for whatever violations of law are committed in “execut[ing] all the provisions [of the initiative] extra-judicially.”

As a whole, the initiative cannot be regarded as a serious legislative proposal and it could not survive any court review if it ever passed. Moreover, unless the initiative becomes backstopped by a whole lot of money, it will never gain the approximately 365,000 voter signatures required to place it on the ballot. Social conservatives would never put any serious money into this project when they have achieved much greater success using the theme of religious freedom, such as Indiana’s Religious Freedom Restoration Act. And if on the ballot, it would never pass in a state where LGBT residents of San Francisco are 6.2% of the population and 4.6% of the population of Los Angeles.

Following Ockham’s Razor, it appears that the initiative was designed to gain a maximum amount of publicity for very low cost, in this case a filing fee of $200. More speculation might turn to discussion of the initiative as a Swiftian satire of social conservative attitudes towards gay society. This modest proposal for interpretation of the author’s motives is somewhat diminished by the initiative author’s previous failed initiative to use the Bible as a public schools instructional text.

On March 25, the Attorney General, a US Senate candidate, took the unusual step of seeking a declaration from the Sacramento Superior Court that the initiative is “patently unconstitutional on its face”; that any preparation and official issuance of a circulating title and summary “would be inappropriate, waste public resources, generate unnecessary divisions among the public, and tend to mislead the electorate”; and that she is “relieved of any obligation to issue a title and summary” as required by the state Constitution.

Two puzzling features of this strategy are first, the failure to seek a prerogative writ to bar the initiative, possibly achieving an immediate court review, rather than resorting to a civil action which extends the matter over a relatively long time period. The answer would seem to be that the civil action is so weak on the merits that litigating the matter beyond the next elections would have the best return on investment, forestalling the initiative for a year or more. However, this strategy turns on the AG getting some form of preliminary relief from the Court freezing the Constitutional process. This seems unlikely.

But this leads to a discussion of the merits of the AG’s civil action. The large elephant in the room is Schmitz v. Younger, 21 Cal.3d 90 (1978). In that case, the Attorney General refused to go forward with the initiative process because it allegedly dealt with more than one subject. (Cal. Constitution, art. 2, section 8(d)) The initiative author then sought a writ of mandate to compel the AG to prepare a title and summary of a proposed initiative measure.

The California Supreme Court noted that “To preserve the full spirit of the initiative the submission of issues to the voters should not become bogged down by lengthy litigation in the courts.” (Perry v. Jordan (1949) 34 Cal.2d 87 (1949)) Thus, the Supreme Court has “narrowly circumscribed the rights of ministerial officials to impede or delay the initiative process.” Thus, in Farley v. Healey, 67 Cal.2d 325 (1967), the Court held that a registrar could not in advance “determine whether a proposed initiative will be valid if enacted or whether a proposed declaration of policy is one to which the initiative may apply.”

“These questions may involve difficult legal issues that only a court can determine. The right to propose initiative measures cannot properly be impeded by a decision of a ministerial office, , , “

The AG acts in a ministerial capacity when she prepares a title and summary for an initiative and “mandate will lie to compel [her] to act when the proposal is in proper form and complies with statutory and constitutional procedural requirements.” Absent judicial authorization, the AG cannot refuse to execute her Constitutional duties regarding an initiative.

“This does not mean that the Attorney General may not challenge the validity of the proposed measure by timely and appropriate legal action. We hold only that without prior judicial authorization [she] may not delay or impede the initiative process while claims of the measure’s invalidity are determined. Petitioner is entitled to have his proposal titled and summarized so that he may commence seeking signatures to qualify it for the ballot.”

Thus, it is clear that the AG’s civil action to bar the sodomite initiative has very little chance of success, absent a default on the author’s part motivated by his analysis that he has gotten all the publicity that he can get from the initiative and that he will need to spend a great deal of money on a civil action. This, in turn, is unlikely, as further court action and a possible legal victory in the Superior Court would generate more notoriety. Indeed, the author may seek a writ of mandate if the AG takes no further action, civil action or not, arguing that the AG is constructively barring the initiative from the ballot.

The bottom line is that the initiative process, “precious to the people and . . . which the courts are zealous to preserve to the fullest tenable measure of spirit as well as letter” (McFadden v. Jordan, 32 Cal.2d 330 (1948), is being hijacked for a publicity stunt because it actually serves a function in a democratic society as a popular and cheap means of mass participation in the legislative process. Society’s consolation in this instance is that the initiative, like any other media event, is likely to have no lasting consequences.