Florsheim files for Chapter 11 protection

Founder's family seeks assets, 23 retail stores

But a potential buyer for the company's assets was a surprise. Florsheim said it has agreed to sell its wholesale business and assets to a Milwaukee footwear firm that is run by descendants of company founder Milton Florsheim. The price tag: $47.3 million in cash.

The move was hardly unexpected given Florsheim's mountain of debt and rising losses, retail experts say.

Beleaguered shoemaker Florsheim Group Inc. threw in the towel Monday, seeking Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection after failing to make a $1.2 million payment to noteholders last week.

The deal, if approved by the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Chicago, means the end of Florsheim's Chicago headquarters and its retail empire, which once numbered more than 500 stores.

Weyco Group Inc., which is headed by Thomas Florsheim Sr. and Thomas Florsheim Jr.--Milton's grandson and great-grandson--is buying only 23 of Florsheim's remaining 155 domestic stores. The rest will be closed, and the wholesale side of the business, which sells to J.C. Penney Co. and Sears, Roebuck and Co., is moving to Milwaukee.

"The brand has struggled, no question about that, but it has very good name recognition," said Thomas Florsheim Jr., Weyco's CEO. "There's a lot of potential there. We're shoe people. That's all we do."

Weyco, a profitable, public company traded on the Nasdaq, has been talking with Florsheim on and off for years about a possible acquisition, Florsheim said. The talks intensified during the past several months after Florsheim's board decided to solicit offers for the company.

Despite ample foreshadowing, the bankruptcy filing and proposed sale are a blow to Florsheim's 1,100 employees worldwide, including 120 at its corporate headquarters at 200 N. LaSalle St.

The company filed motions Monday with the court seeking permission to continue paying its employees and the cost of their health benefits.

Florsheim listed assets of $156.8 million and debts of $159.7 million as of Sept. 29. One of its largest trade creditors is Florind Shoes Ltd., a third-party contractor in India that produces most of Florsheim's shoes. Florind is owed almost $500,000, according to the filing.

Deere, Black among creditors

Another creditor is Deere & Co., the farm equipment-maker that licenses its name to a line of work boots produced by Florsheim. Deere is owed $216,657 in royalties.

But the biggest loser in the Florsheim bankruptcy is Leon Black, the New York financier whose Apollo Management LP owned 60 percent of Florsheim's equity along with an affiliated company. Most small investors bailed out of Florsheim long ago as its stock steadily declined.

Last Friday, Florsheim's stock closed at 8 cents per share on the OTC bulletin board, where it was trading after being kicked off the Nasdaq small cap market for failing to meet minimum financial requirements.