2.html
sb379_SB_379_PF_2.html

06 LC 34 0466



Senate Bill 379 PRE-FILE

By: Senator Wiles of the 37th

A BILL TO BE ENTITLED

AN ACT

To amend Chapter 8 of Title 7 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, relating to safe use of remote service terminals, so as to require implementation of reverse personal identification number technology; to provide for a fee; to provide for related matters; to provide for an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes.

BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA:

SECTION 1.

Chapter 8 of Title 7 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, relating to safe use of remote service terminals, is amended by adding a new Code section, immediately following Code Section 7-8-4, relating to notices to remote service terminal customers of basic safety precautions, to read as follows:

∀ 7-8-4.1.

(a) The General Assembly hereby finds that remote service terminal withdrawals made under duress are a peculiar danger to the public generally and to the users of remote service terminals in particular.

(b) Any remote service terminal operated in this state shall be designed and programmed so that when a consumer enters his or her personal identification number in reverse order, the remote service terminal automatically sends an alarm to the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the remote service terminal location. No difference between an emergency transaction and a normal transaction shall be detectable from the terminal. The operators of remote service terminals shall be permitted to charge a fee of $1.50 per month to customers who subscribe to this service.

(c) Each remote service terminal where the emergency personal identification number is available shall be prominently marked and reminders on how to use the emergency personal identification number shall be prominently displayed. ∀

SECTION 2.

This Act shall become effective on January 1, 2007, and shall be applied to all transactions conducted on or after that date.

SECTION 3.