Summary of Proposed H-1 Substitutes (3/12/2018)
STATE ID CARDS AND DRIVER’S LICENSES: LIMIT

TERM TO LEGAL PRESENCE IN UNITED STATES

House Bill 5686 (proposed H-1 substitute)

Sponsor: Rep. Pamela Hornberger

House Bill 5687 (proposed H-1 substitute)

Sponsor: Rep. Beth Griffin

Committee: Transportation and Infrastructure

Complete to 3-12-18

SUMMARY:

House Bills 5686 and 5687 would amend Public Act 222 of 1972 and the Michigan Vehicle Code, respectively, to prohibit the Secretary of State from issuing a state personal identification card or a driver’s license for a term that exceeds the duration of an individual’s legal presence in the United States.

Under the acts, an applicant for an official state personal identification card or for a driver’s license who is not a citizen of the United States must provide, and the Department of State must verify, documents demonstrating that he or she is legally present in the United States. A card or license must contain certain information, including a unique, permanently assigned number; the full legal name, date of birth, height, sex, eye color, residential address, photographic image, and signature of the card holder or licensee; and the expiration date of the card or license.

Under the bills , a state personal identification card or driver’s license that is issued to an individual who is not a citizen of the United States would have to expire 4 years after it is issued or on the date the individual is no longer considered to be legally present in the United States, whichever occurs first. The card or license would have to be visually marked to indicate that it is issued to an individual who is not a citizen of the United States.

Each bill would take effect 90 days after its enactment.

MCL 28.291 and 28.292 (HB 5686: state personal identification cards)

MCL 257.307 and 257.310 (HB 5687: driver’s licenses)

FISCAL IMPACT:

The bills would have no fiscal impact on the Secretary of State, state government, or local units of government.

Legislative Analyst: E. Best

Fiscal Analyst: Michael Cnossen

■ This analysis was prepared by nonpartisan House Fiscal Agency staff for use by House members in their deliberations, and does not constitute an official statement of legislative intent.