[WATCH] U.S. House of Representatives LITERALLY Bow to Allah as Muslim Imam Delivers Prayer
Loading the player ...

Plays: 735 (Embed: 0)

BY DOM THE CONSERVATIVE / ON NOVEMBER 15, 2014 AT 2:30 PMAn abomination of sacrilegious proportions was witnessed Friday when the National Cathedral allowed Muslims to hold an Islamic prayer service within its dwelling.Islam has overstepped its boundaries in a Christian nation of 73 percenters, and it’s getting progressively worse. Openly infiltrating our houses of government with blasphemous declarations to a false god, the particular people bowing their heads in reverence will disturb and anger you.With the re-election of Speaker of the House John Boehner and fellow Republicans gaining majority in Senate comes an outrageous display of submission to Islam.The Imam for the Islamic Center of Central Jersey (mosque) Hamad Chebli delivered an Islamic prayer praising Allah from the House floor November 13, while Boehner and other House Republicans bow their heads in agreement and respect.Perhaps the most disturbing line from Chebli’s prayer is his declaration that America recognizes Allah as their god, saying “Thee do WE worship.”Although Obama and the rest of the administration paint Chebli as a moderate, peaceful Muslim, he is anything but moderate. Shoebat.com reveals Chebli’s disturbing background and relation to terrorist Hassan Khaled:Chebli’s mentor, Khaled, who was the Mufti of Lebanon was “martyred” after a bomb was set up which killed him and others. His father went the same way “martyred” by a bombing. Have a look at Khaled, the fiery revolutionist exhorting a crowd to chant, ‘Allahu Akbar.’Prior to Khaled’s fallout with the PLO’s Yasser Arafat, he was a champion and supporter of Palestinian terrorism against Israel to sending terrorist recruits from Lebanon.Khaled, the man’s mentor is even featured prominently on the official Muslim Brotherhood website And in the same footsteps as Khaled, Chelbi also traveled to Egypt to study at Al-Azhar University, the world’s oldest university and center for Brotherhood jurisprudence. It was during this time that Chelbi’s mentor Khaled was chosen as the nation’s foremost Islamic legal scholar in the Sunni Muslim sect.Allowing an Imam to claim America for Islam in the very building in which federal laws are written is an abomination. Housing the most dangerous enemy of Christianity and Western civilization in the archetype of our nation’s faith is unforgivable. Not only are we harboring the enemy, we are exalting and admiring them on a pedestal.