Rosie O'Donnell: “I’d Like to Take My Period Blood and Smear It All Over [Pro-Life People's] Faces”
Today, comedian Rosie O’Donnell said “women’s rights“ are under attack in America and that politicians are undoing all the advances abortion activists have made. The Hill reports that O’Donnell told Jenny Hutt on SiriusXM’s radio program that she believes there is a war on women. She said, “Bigger than any specific people, there is a war on women that is happening in this country. Women fought for equality in this country, and right now, politically, it’s being taken away from us.”

Then, unbelievably, O’Donnell said she would like to do this to pro-lifers: “I’d like to take my period blood I no longer have and write, ‘you’re all assh—s.’ I’d like to smear it all over some people’s faces.”

Additionally, during the interview with Hutt, she said that London Marathoner Kiran Ganhi’s decision to run without a tampon while menstruating is a critical demonstration for women’s rights.

Although O’Donnell didn’t mention the Planned Parenthood scandal specifically, it is likely she is referring to pro-life Senate Republicans who tried to defund the abortion company in light of videos showing their top executives haggling over the price of aborted babies’ body parts. Unfortunately, Senate Democrats defeated the legislation even though the videos expose Planned Parenthood’s complete disregard for human life and countless potential violations of federal law.

As LifeNews previously reported, O’Donnell recently canceled her plans to adopt another child after finding out that he faced health problems. Earlier this year, O’Donnell separated from her wife, Michelle Rounds, and news reports reveal that the pair plans to divorce. In fact, right now they are in the middle of an ugly custody battle for their daughter, Dakota, who was born in 2013.

Dakota’s biological mother, Jami Weaver, had agreed to carry another child for the couple but their arrangement was canceled when O’Donnell learned the child had gastroschisis, which is a birth defect of the abdominal wall that causes the bowl to protrude into the abdomen . According to the Center for Disease Control (CDC), about 1,871 babies are born each year in the United States with gastroschisis. Weaver explained, “Rosie told me she could not handle having a special needs child.”

However, when Weaver delivered Dakota and was planning to have her tubes tied, O’Donnell asked her to wait. She said, “When I was walking around the hospital, trying to induce labor with Dakota, Rosie asked me not to go through with having my tubes tied, which I’d planned to do. They said they wanted me to have another child for them in the future. When I later found out I was carrying a boy, I emailed them to say I needed to know they were on board, because otherwise I would have an abortion.”

O’Donnell responded and said, “Don’t do that!”

Keep up with the latest pro-life news and information on Twitter. Follow @LifeNewsHQ

Unfortunately, after the birth defect was detected, O’Donnell said she did not want to continue with the adoption even though doctors said they could fix it with surgery. Weaver concluded, “Rosie said that she’d had a previous relationship with a girlfriend who had several kids, most of whom had ‘issues’ including autism. Rosie and Michelle weren’t the warm people I thought they were… I just felt like I was a dog breeding puppies for Rosie.”