Harvey Weinstein Remains in Rehab Amid Sexual Harassment Scandal (REPORT)
Your life just got exponentially better and more stylish now you've signed up for our newsletter. Fabulousness awaits!

You seriously need to sign up for our newsletter.

Disgraced Hollywood executive Harvey Weinstein entered a one-week outpatient program in an Arizona rehab. Initially, reports said that the 65-year-old movie producer was leaving the program — which ends tomorrow — but now TMZ reports a change in plans: Harvey will stay for another month to avoid "excessive distractions" marring his progress in the wake of his sexual abuse scandal.

Harvey, who has been threatening suicide since his scandal came to light, was treated for "various psychological issues" and the psychologist who saw him one-on-one says he took his rehabilitation very seriously. The week-long outpatient program Harvey attended involved "intensive therapy." The psychologist helped Harvey focus on "dealing with his anger, his attitude toward others, boundary work, and the beginnings of work on empathy."

Harvey surrounded by Taylor Swift, Este Haim, Jaime King, and Lorde at a 2015 Golden Globes party. (Photo Credit: Getty Images)

The psychologist reveals that Harvey was genuinely "invested in the program." So much so, it seems, that the fallen movie executive's plans have changed. Though he was only going to stay the week in Arizona initially, Harvey has changed his mind and is intending on staying a full month to keep at the program.

"[Harvey] was able to focus on his therapy despite a ton of distractions," his therapist, who had Harvey's permission to contact TMZ, said. "He showed up for all the meetings and was fully engaged."

"There were things that triggered [Harvey's] anger and our job was to help him recognize where it was coming from and how to control it," the psychologist said. "But he was not venting about some conspiracy to get him. It was an appropriate display of anger."

Harvey and his wife Georgina Chapman, who he married in 2007. (Photo Credit: Getty Images)

The scandal is ongoing but keep checking back for more updates. Keep reading to find out more information about the Harvey Weinstein scandal and the inevitable fall-out.

Who are the Harvey Weinstein accusers?

Actresses Gwenyth Paltrow and Angelina Jolie were the first to accuse Harvey Weinstein of sexual assault after The New York Times published an exposé of the filmmaker. Soon after, they came forward to confirm the Times' allegations.

"I had a bad experience with Harvey Weinstein in my youth, and as a result, chose never to work with him again and warn others when they did,” Angelina, 42, wrote in an email. "This behavior towards women in any field, any country is unacceptable."

Rosanna Arquette, Ashley Judd, Cara Delevigne, and Rose McGowan have also come forth with stories of Harvey's abuse. Following suit, stars like Jennifer Lawrence, Reese Witherspoon, James Van Der Beek have come forth to share their experiences with sexual misconduct in Hollywood.

Did the FBI probe Harvey Weinstein?

The Trump Administration has allegedly ordered the FBI to open an investigation against Harvey. The Administration apparently fears Harvey will flee the United States in order to avoid persecution.

Harvey is also accused of forcing a student to perform oral sex on him in 2004, when she was a minor. In addition to breaking the statute of limitations, 30 women have accused Harvey of sexual abuse. He has been accused in multiple states of various crimes, including New York, and even abroad in France and the UK while on business trips.

More from Life & Style

Georgina Chapman and Harvey Weinstein's Marriage Was Simply a "Business Arrangement"

Reese Witherspoon, Jennifer Lawrence Are the Latest Actresses to Share Their #MeToo Stories

James Van Der Beek Speaks out About His Sexual Harassment Experiences in Hollywood