World War II memorabilia from Nazi Germany creates ethical dilemma for sellers
The American military men and women who traveled abroad during World War II brought home items that symbolized their hard-fought victory.

Some of those items are Nazi flags, medals, pins or weapons and armbands Jews under German occupation were forced to wear. Six decades after the war's end, those same items are being bought and sold as World War II memorabilia.

The sale of items from Nazi Germany raises ethical questions for some. eBay, for example, prohibits the sale of “items that bear symbols of the Nazis and the Nazi SS, including authentic German WWII memorabilia.”

Others, including several Lehigh Valley auction houses, are untroubled by the practice.



“There are collectors for everything,” says Jake Frey, a weapons expert who evaluates military memorabilia for Dotta Auction Co. Inc. in Bushkill Township.



He says a knife with the SS insignia on it, brought home from the war by someone's grandfather, would be worth about $500 to a collector.

Kevin Smith, of K.D. Smith Auctions in Allentown, thinks his clients value such memorabilia for its historical rather than philosophical value.

Lambertville's Rago Arts and Auction Center is more selective when it comes to Wolrd War II memorabilia.



"There are some things, like helmets with bullet holes and Nazi items, we just don’t make a policy of handling,” said Miriam Tucker, a partner at the center.



"Especially if it’s a larger setup, there’s always Nazi memorabilia,” he said. “I had any number of relatives murdered by the Nazis. It leaves me uncomfortable.”



Rabbi Allen Juda, of Congregation Brith Sholom in Bethlehem, says he and his wife enjoy antiquing and visit flea markets.Juda said sellers will never know the true reason a buyer is interested in items bearing swastikas and other Nazi insignias.

Some of it may end up in the hands of collectors such as Holland Township resident Heath Campbell, a Holocaust denier who named his children -- Adolf Hitler, JoyceLynn Aryan Nation and Honszlynn Hinler Jeannie Campbell -- for Nazism.

The family made headlines last year when they complained after a grocery store bakery declined to write Adolf Hitler Campbell's name on the boy's birthday cake.