Net Rumor Sparks Frantic Gas Grab
POSTED: 7:46 am EDT August 31, 2005

A bogus e-mail rumor sparked a run on South Florida gas stations Tuesday night that left at least one station dry.

Local 10 News received numerous calls from viewers saying that the e-mail said gas stations would close at midnight and remained closed two to three days. Local 10 News confirmed that the rumor is false.

However, many people beleived the bogus e-mail. Long lines, dozens of cars deep in some cases, were seen in Miami-Dade County at the Hess gas station at 199th St. and Northwest 27th Avenue, the Racetrac gas station at 206th and Northwest 27th Avenue and the BP station at 199th Street and Northwest 37th Avenue. By 1:30 a.m., managers at one of the stations said they had run out of gas. However, they did receive a new shipment this morning at 10 a.m.

If you have any questions about rumors you hear in the wake of Katrina, Miami-Dade County officials have set up a rumor control number. It is (305) 579-1800. Broward County also has a hotline set up. That number is (954) 831-4000.

Officials Have Urged Sensible Use Of Gas

It's not yet known how the rumor started, but it's possible it was an exaggeration of statements made Tuesday regarding possible gas shortages in certain areas of the state.

State officials reminded Floridians that gasoline may be in short supply because of the Gulf of Mexico production lost in Hurricane Katrina. South Florida does get the majority of its gas supply from Gulf Coast refineries.

Officials said that there was plenty of gasoline in the state and companies are making plans to get it from the northeast and overseas.

But Lt. Gov. Toni Jennings said there still could be some areas that run short.

Jennings said people shouldn't cancel travel plans for the Labor Day weekend, but they need to be careful about doing pointless driving around.

Copyright 2005 by Local10.com. The Associated Press contributed to this report. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Jennings added that people don't need to hoard gasoline, but should plan carefully in the next couple weeks because some gas stations may run out of fuel and have a hard time getting it replenished.