Frequently-Asked Questions
Does L’Oréal test on animals?

L'Oréal does not test any of its products or any of its ingredients on animals and has been at the forefront of alternative methods for over 30 years.



What alternative methods to animal testing has L’Oréal developed ?

Since 1979, L'Oréal has been reconstructing human skin models in laboratories to elaborate safety tests in vitro that don’t involve animals. The group has thus been at the forefront of alternative methods for safety evaluation. Since then, L'Oréal has opened Episkin* in Lyon (France) and in Shanghai (China) where reconstructed skins are produced. Besides reconstructed skin models, L’Oréal has a large set of tools as part of its predictive evaluation that does not involve animals, such as molecular modeling, expert toxicology systems, imaging techniques, and many more.

To learn more about predictive evaluation: http://bit.ly/1L8VU38

If you don’t test products on animals, why is L’Oréal still on the PETA list of companies who test?

L’Oréal does not test any its products or any of its ingredients on animals. Nevertheless, because our products are sold in China, L’Oréal still figures on the PETA list. In China, the health authorities still require and carry out animal testing for certain products.



Why don’t L’Oréal products have the “cruelty-free” logo?

Some of our brands that are not present in China have decided to use a “cruelty-free” logo. The brands present in China cannot have a “cruelty-free” logo due to the cosmetics regulation in China.



So why are you still present in China ?

By being present in China, L’Oréal can enable the regulation to evolve. L’Oréal is the most active company working with the Chinese authorities towards a total elimination of animal testing. As a result, the vast majority of products we sell in China are no longer tested on animals.



What actions are being implemented by L’Oréal to put an end to animal testing in China?

L’Oréal has been committed to working alongside the Chinese authorities for more than 10 years and scientists to have alternative testing methods recognized, and enable the cosmetics regulation to evolve towards a total and definite elimination of animal testing. Thus, today the products manufactured and sold in China called “non-functional” such as shampoo, body wash or make-up are already no longer tested on animals. We have opened an Episkin* Centre in Shanghai in 2014 enabling us to produce reconstructed skins. These skins are used for safety tests in vitro that do not involve animals and are made available for the Chinese authorities.



*Episkin is a reconstructed human skin model



Useful links

Bloomberg report about Episkin: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CJkCc0mIULo

AFP video about Episkin: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g0-v5sXn2kM

Episkin: www.episkin.com