Map: Where are the gun permits in your neighborhood?
These maps indicate the locations of all pistol permit holders in Westchester and Rockland counties. Each dot represents an individual permit holder licensed to own a handgun — a pistol or revolver. The data does not include owners of long guns — rifles or shotguns — which can be purchased without a permit. Being included in this map does not mean the individual at a specific location owns a weapon, just that they are licensed to do so.



Data for all permit categories, unrestricted carry, premises, business, employment, target and hunting, is included, but permit information is not available on an individual basis.



To create the map, The Journal News submitted Freedom of Information requests for the names and addresses of all pistol permit holders in Westchester, Rockland and Putnam. By state law, the information is public record.



Putnam County officials could not immediately provide any data. The map will be updated when that data is released.



Read the article here: http://lohud.us/W1Ybx8

Frequently asked questions

Here are answers to some of the most common questions about the maps.

What information is displayed on the online maps?

The maps shows the locations of pistol permit holders licensed by Westchester and Rockland counties. Data for all permit categories — unrestricted carry, premises, business, employment, target and hunting — is included, but the type (or types) of permit issued to each individual was not released to The Journal News. Being included in these maps does not mean the individual at a specific location owns a weapon, just that they are licensed to do so.



Do the maps show everyone in my neighborhood who owns a gun?

No. New York law does not require a permit to own a long gun such as a rifle or shotgun.

How did The Journal News obtain the information?

Through requests to the individual county clerks under New York’s Freedom of Information Law.

Isn’t that private information?

No. There is no right to privacy regarding handgun ownership in New York. State law says that, at a minimum, the names and addresses of all permit holders are public record and must be disclosed.

Why are there two sets of data for Rockland?

Rockland County provided two sets of data: First, “active” permit holders who have purchased a firearm or updated the information on a permit in the past five years. That data also included people whose applications have cleared the approval process and are waiting to be signed by the supervising judge. Second, the county provided a list of “historic” permits — ones with no activity in the past five years. This list may include some outdated information, such as people who have died or moved out of the area without updating the county records. This second list is now mapped separately for clarity.

Why are some of the dots on the maps outside Rockland or Westchester counties?

The dot listed represents a permit to have a gun within the county, but lives elsewhere.

Did The Journal News redact any information/people before publishing the map, including your own employees?

No.

The story says the reporter who wrote it has a pistol permit; is he on the map?

No. He is not licensed to carry his gun by Westchester or Rockland counties, the only counties covered on the map.



WESTCHESTER COUNTY

This map shows pistol permits registered with the Westchester County Clerk's Office. Residents are required to renew the permit every five years.

ROCKLAND COUNTY

This map shows pistol permits registered in Rockland County, which are issued for life and do not need to be renewed. Rockland County splits permit holders into two categories:Permit holders that have purchased a firearm or updated the information on a permit in the past five years. Map includes all permit holders and those whose applications have cleared the approval process and are waiting to be signed by the supervising judge.





Historic: Permit holders with no activity in the past five years. Permit holders who have died or moved out of the area may not have updated their permit records, so some locations marked with a dot on this map may not represent a current permit holder.