Clinton property fire was caused by a bathroom fan: Supervisor
CLOSE Firefighters at the scene of a fire at the home of the Clinton's in Chappaqua. Ricky Flores/lohud

A fire broke out Wednesday in Chappaqua.

Buy Photo Firefighters on the scene of a fire at the home of former President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton on Old House Lane in Chappaqua, Wednesday, Jan. 3, 2018. (Photo: Frank Becerra Jr./The Journal News)Buy Photo

NEW CASTLE - A bathroom fan caused the fire that burned part of a building on the Clintons' property in Chappaqua on Wednesday, New Castle Town Supervisor Robert Greenstein said today.

"Apparently a bathroom fan shorted out," he said in an email on Friday.

The small fire burned a hole in the bathroom ceiling of the facility, which is used by the Secret Service, at 15 Old House Lane, Greenstein said. The Chappaqua Fire Department declined to comment.

CHAPPAQUA: Fire breaks out at Clinton compound

BILL AND HILLARY CLINTON'S HOME: Costs and controversies

RECORDS: Clinton house renovated without permits

AT HOME: Short of White House, Clintons have Chappaqua

Fire extinguishers were used to put out the fire in the second-floor ceiling of the detached structure behind the Clintons' home, the Secret Service said in a statement on Wednesday.

CLOSE A helicopter captured aerial footage of crews on the scene of a fire at Hillary and Bill Clinton's compound in Chappaqua. Jan. 3, 2018. NBC Universal/Submitted

The fire was reported around 2:40 p.m. and was quickly extinguished. Nick Merrill, a spokesman for former presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton, tweeted on Wednesday that the couple was not home at the time.

Former President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton have lived there for almost 20 years after buying the five-bedroom home for $1.7 million in 1999. In August 2016, the couple bought the four-bedroom house next door, at 33 Old House Lane, for $1.16 million.

Buy Photo Firefighters at the scene of a fire at the Chappaqua home of former President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton, Wednesday, Jan. 3, 2018. (Photo: Ricky Flores/The Journal News)

In October, the town building inspector found that the Clintons were missing several permits for work that was being done on a kitchen renovation and in-ground pool on the property.

Twitter: @MattSpillane

Read or Share this story: https://www.lohud.com/story/news/local/westchester/2018/01/05/clinton-property-chappaqua-fire-cause/1007122001/