Classification and Treatment of Burns

What are the classifications of burns?

First-degree (superficial) burns

First-degree burns affect only the epidermis, or outer layer of skin. The burn site is red, painful, dry, and with no blisters. Mild sunburn is an example. Long-term tissue damage is rare and usually consists of an increase or decrease in the skin color.



Second-degree (partial thickness) burns

Second-degree burns involve the epidermis and part of the dermis layer of skin. The burn site appears red, blistered, and may be swollen and painful.



Third-degree (full thickness) burns

Third-degree burns destroy the epidermis and dermis. Third-degree burns may also damage the underlying bones, muscles, and tendons. The burn site appears white or charred. There is no sensation in the area since the nerve endings are destroyed.





Burns are classified as first-, second-, or third-degree, depending on how deep and severe they penetrate the skin's surface.Second and third-degree burns require the immediate attention of a physician or other healthcare provider. Listed below you will find additional information relating to first-, second-, or third-degree burns.If you cannot find the information in which you are interested, please visit the Burns Online Resources page in this Web site for an Internet/World Wide Web address that may contain additional information on that topic.

The information on this Web page is provided for educational purposes. You understand and agree that this information is not intended to be, and should not be used as, a substitute for medical treatment by a health care professional. You agree that Lucile Salter Packard Children's Hospital is not making a diagnosis of your condition or a recommendation about the course of treatment for your particular circumstances through the use of this Web page. You agree to be solely responsible for your use of this Web page and the information contained on this page. Lucile Salter Packard Children's Hospital, its officers, directors, employees, agents, and information providers shall not be liable for any damages you may suffer or cause through your use of this page even if advised of the possibility of such damages.