Medline Industries, Inc.
For Immediate Release



Medline Launches New "Generation Pink™" Exam Glove Featuring Patented 3G Technology with Greater Flexibility and Protection

Company to Donate $1.00 for Every Case Sold in October to the National Breast Cancer Foundation

Monday, September 14, 2009 —

As part of its ongoing campaign to raise breast cancer awareness, Medline Industries, Inc., the nation's largest privately held manufacturer and distributor of medical supplies, today announced the launch of its "Generation Pink™" powder-free synthetic exam glove. To aide the awareness effort, Medline will donate $1.00 to the National Breast Cancer Foundation for each case of the new pink glove purchased during the month of October, national Breast Cancer Awareness Month.

Patented Technology

The new Generation Pink exam glove features Medline's patented third generation technology, an advanced polymer formulation that offers outstanding sensitivity with a unique softness and flexibility.



"The new Generation Pink glove is not only a tangible symbol of our ongoing commitment to breast cancer awareness and research, but our customers will also be showing their support every time they wear them," said Tripp Amdur, president of Medline's Glove Division. "At the same time, Generation Pink's patented third generation synthetic technology provides healthcare workers with the tactile sensitivity, fit and barrier protection that enables facilities to go latex-free."



Medline is the leading provider of exam gloves in the U.S., including a complete line of latex and latex-free products featuring patented 3G and aloe technologies.

Breast Cancer Support

The introduction of the new Generation Pink glove is a continuation of Medline's strong support of breast cancer awareness through the years. This year, the company is also donating $100,000 to the National Breast Cancer Foundation to help fund mammograms for women in need. Over the past five years, Medline has donated more than $450,000 to the National Breast Cancer Foundation as part of its campaign to promote early detection and awareness of breast cancer.



In 2010, Medline will sponsor its fifth annual "Together We Can Save Lives Through Early Detection" breakfast at the Association of PeriOperative Registered Nurses annual conference. More than 1,000 perioperative nurses traditionally gather at the breakfast to hear well-known breast cancer survivors talk about their experiences and help spread the word about the importance of early detection. Past speakers have included award-winning journalist Linda Ellerbee, doctor and journalist Marla Shapiro, actress Rue McClanhan and entertainer Ann Jillian.

For more information on the Generation Pink exam glove and Medline's breast cancer awareness campaign, visit www.medline.com/breast-cancer-awareness.

Medline, the nation's largest privately held manufacturer and distributor of healthcare products, manufactures and distributes more than 100,000 products to hospitals, extended care facilities, surgery centers, home care dealers and agencies and other markets. Headquartered in Mundelein, IL, Medline has more than 800 dedicated sales representatives nationwide to support its broad product line and cost management services.



Over the past five years, Medline has been the fastest growing distributor of medical and surgical supplies in the U.S., serving as the primary distributor to over 250 major hospitals and health care systems. As a leading distributor, Medline offers a comprehensive array of consulting and management services encompassing the supply chain and logistics, utilization and standardization, business tools and enhanced reporting capabilities, and on-staff clinicians.

Medline has a growing network of 34 distribution centers around the country, as well as an expanding, dedicated transportation fleet with over 160 vehicles in a variety of sizes to fit customers' specific delivery needs. The fleet is equipped with the latest navigation devices for enhanced order tracking and communication.