University of Maryland School of Medicine
About Us

Commemorating its 210th Anniversary, the University of Maryland School of Medicine was chartered in 1807 as the first public medical school in the United States.

World Class Research

The School of Medicine is one of the fastest growing, top-tier biomedical research enterprises in the world -- with 43 academic departments, centers, institutes, and programs; and a faculty of more than 3,000 physicians, scientists, and allied health professionals, including members of the National Academy of Medicine, and a distinguished recipient of the Albert E. Lasker Award in Medical Research.

The School of Medicine faculty, which ranks as the 8th-highest public medical school in research productivity, is an innovator in translational medicine with 600 active patents and 24 start-up companies. The School works locally, nationally, and globally, with research and treatment facilities in 36 countries around the world.

Compassionate Patient-Centered Care

With an operating budget of more than $1 billion, the School of Medicine works closely in partnership with the University of Maryland Medical Center and Medical System to provide research-intensive, academic and clinically-based care for more than 1.2 million patients each year. Learn more.

Educational Excellence

The School has over 2,500 students, residents, and fellows, and nearly $450 million in extramural funding, with more than half of its academic departments ranked in the top 20 among all public medical schools in the nation in research funding. As one of the seven professional schools that make up the University of Maryland, Baltimore campus, the School of Medicine has nearly 7,000 total employees.

While our medical students comprise nearly half of the total student enrollment, our student body also includes Allied Health and Physical Therapy students, as well as graduate students and students pursuing combined degrees. We currently have ten joint degree programs: two doctorate programs (MD/PhD and MD/DDS), seven MD/Master’s degree programs, and a DPT/PhD degree program within the Department of Physical Therapy & Rehabilitation Sciences.

To learn more about our medical education program, visit the Office of Admissions, the Office of Medical Education, and the Office of Student Affairs.

Economic Impact

The combined School and Medical System (“University of Maryland Medicine”) has a total budget of $5 billion and an economic impact of nearly $15 billion on the state and local community.