Child Molesters, Domestic Abusers Prioritized for Deportation in DeSantis-Roby Amendment
WASHINGTON, D.C. – Illegal immigrants convicted of sex crimes, child abuse or domestic violence would be prioritized for arrest and deportation under an amendment up for consideration on the House floor Wednesday.

U.S. Representative Martha Roby (R-AL) joined Representative Ron DeSantis to offer an amendment to the Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act that would block funding for any immigration enforcement policy that does not prioritize the arrest and deportation of “any alien convicted of any offense involving domestic violence, sexual abuse, child molestation, or child exploitation.”

The addition is necessary because such egregious offenses were not among those listed in the highest prioritized category for removal by the Department of Homeland Security after President Obama unilaterally ordered a change in policy of the apprehension and detention of illegal immigrants. Terrorism suspects, violent criminals and over-16 year old gang members are spelled out as top priorities for deportation, as are those convicted of felonies. However, certain domestic, sex and child offenses aren’t always felonies, and suspects could potentially plead down.

“President Obama’s failure to include illegal immigrant child molesters, sex offenders, and domestic abusers among the highest priority for deportation shows exactly why unilateral attempts to circumvent Congress to rewrite immigration policy are a bad idea. "This week the House will vote on a strong plan to block President Obama’s unconstitutional actions on immigration. I’m proud to join Ron DeSantis in offering this common sense amendment that will ensure violent and abusive illegal immigrants are not allowed to stay in the country. I appreciate my colleague’s work on this language, and I’m confident we can successfully add it to the bill by amendment. "Our immigration system is broken. I believe we begin to fix it by enforcing our laws, not by backing down and allowing lawlessness. The Constitution sets up checks and balances so that no one branch of government can become too powerful. Glaring oversights like this one are a perfect example of the mistakes made when unelected bureaucrats make decisions meant to be deliberated and enacted by Congress. Getting it wrong on immigration can have serious consequences, including for those at risk for abuse by domestic and sexual perpetrators."

Rep. Roby, a Member of the House Appropriations Committee, is a strong supporter of efforts to block President Obama’s recent attempts to go around Congress and grant defacto amnesty to millions of illegal immigrants. She plans to speak on the floor in support of the DeSantis-Roby Amendment as well as the underlying bill on Wednesday when it is expected up for debate.