Carbonyl Compounds Generated from Electronic Cigarettes
An electronic cigarette (e-cigarette) is a battery-powered device designed to deliver nicotine to a smoker. It was first developed by Herbert A. Gilbert, who patented a device described as “a smokeless non-tobacco cigarette” that involved “replacing burning tobacco and paper with heated, moist, flavored air” in 1963 [ 1 ]. However, the invention of the e-cigarette in 2003 is attributed to Hon Lik, a Chinese pharmacist, and e-cigarettes were introduced to the Chinese market as a smoking cessation device in 2004 [ 2 ]. There are several types of e-cigarettes, which include nicotine or are nicotine-free liquid-holding cartridges. E-cigarettes are presented as low-risk products, with a realistic look, feel, and taste when compared with traditional cigarettes [ 3 ]. Among major carcinogens and toxic compounds such as nitrosamines and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in traditional cigarette smoke, several combustion products are included in the e-cigarette aerosol, too. Nitrosamines are present at levels almost similar to nicotine replacement therapies (NRTs) [ 4 ], and PAHs are completely absent from e-cigarettes. E-cigarette vendors have marketed their products as a cheaper and safer smokeless alternative to traditional cigarettes and a possible smoking cessation tool. Consequently, many cigarette smokers have turned to e-cigarettes, and the number of e-cigarette smokers is increasing [ 5 7 ]. According to a report by UBS Securities LLC (Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich, Switzerland), e-cigarette market sales doubled from $250–$500 million between 2011 and 2012 and are expected to quadruple by 2014 [ 8 ]. In recent years, on the international market, e-cigarettes have been widely advertised via television, radio, magazines, newspapers, and the Internet. This mass marketing and commercialization of e-cigarettes is estimated to increase consumer awareness and the future use of e-cigarettes [ 9 ]. Additionally, the legal situation may be contributing to the widespread use of e-cigarettes. The World Health Organization (WHO) raised the alarm with regard to e-cigarettes that include nicotine and issued a Technical Report Series 955 in 2009 which states the following: the safety of e-cigarettes is not confirmed, and e-cigarettes are not an appropriate tool for smoking cessation therapy [ 10 ]. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) reported that e-cigarettes contain carcinogens and toxic chemicals, such as nitrosamines and diethylene glycol, which have potentially harmful effects on humans [ 11 ]. Furthermore, the FDA found that nicotine was detected in the e-cigarette cartridges labeled as nicotine-free [ 10 12 ], and carcinogens and toxic chemicals, such as carbonyl compounds, were detected in the aerosols from e-cigarettes [ 7 14 ]. Evaluating the source and amount of carbonyl compounds released is crucial for regulators as well as consumers and manufacturers, and ways to reduce such emissions need to be investigated. This paper presents an overview of our research in this field, as well as a comparison with other relevant studies.