Stephen Curry says he ‘wouldn’t’ visit White House, if invited
OAKLAND — In exit interviews on Wednesday afternoon, available Warriors reiterated that the team hasn’t had an official discussion about whether or not they will go to the White House, if invited, as is custom for championship-winning sports teams.

But perhaps the face of the franchise, Stephen Curry, made it pretty clear that he doesn’t have an interest in visiting Donald Trump.

“Somebody asked me about it a couple months ago, a hypothetical, if a championship were to happen: ‘What would I do?'” Curry said. “I think I answered that I wouldn’t go. I still feel like that today.” Related Articles Kurtenbach: Andre Iguodala’s play highlights the massive advantage the Warriors have over the Rockets

Warriors-Rockets power rankings: KD remains on fire, Harden’s night a blur

Kurtenbach: The Warriors beat the Rockets at their own game — now they have to find theirs

Draymond Green sets the tone in Warriors’ Game 1 win over Rockets

Kurtenbach: The four big questions the Warriors must answer against the Rockets

The Warriors’ coach, Steve Kerr, has been the organization’s loudest opponent of Trump’s political rhetoric and presidency, continually criticizing him on various issues and for various statements before he was elected and even more after.

Some of Kerr’s players have also publicly condemned Trump, including forward David West, who said the day after the election that “This whole fairy tale about a post-racial utopia that (Barack) Obama supposedly created? It’s all bull. That’s the bottom line when you look at what the results say from last night. This nation has not moved a thread.”

After Under Armour CEO Kevin Plank called Trump an “asset” for the country, Curry, the biggest endorser for the apparel company, told Bay Area News Group columnist Marcus Thompson that he agreed “if you remove the ‘-et’ from asset.”

So it’s no surprise that the sense around the Warriors is that they would decline an invitation to the White House, if invited. But still in celebratory glow of Monday night’s title, the available Warriors on Wednesday — Kevin Durant, Curry, Shaun Livingston and Klay Thompson — reiterated that there has been no official team discussion or decision.

“We just won the championship and I guarantee that wasn’t on anyone’s mind,” Durant said. “We haven’t even talked about it. I hadn’t thought about it until I heard yesterday. That’s a long ways away. I have a take, but I’m going to leave that to myself right now.” Warriors newsletter Subscribe to DubsDaily, our best Warriors news sent to your inbox. Sign UpIt’s free!

In a post-title conversation with USA Today, Warrior forward Andre Iguodala, another public opponent of Trump, laid out a possible path both sides could avoid the uncomfortable situation, delivered in a very Iguodala way.

“Maybe he doesn’t (invite us) and we don’t go, or we don’t say anything and make a big deal of it and he doesn’t make a big deal of it and we go our separate ways,” Iguodala told the paper. “Y’all might write about it. I might call him and say, ‘If they ask, just say our schedules conflicted.’ And then if y’all write something, we’ll say, ‘Fake News.'”

Both Livingston and Curry mentioned the team discussion that is to come on the subject. Related Articles Warriors’ conservative regular-season workload prepared them for post-season run

Draymond Green on rescinded technical: ‘It helps me a lot’

Warriors have encouraging news on Steph Curry’s finger injury

Kurtenbach: Andre Iguodala’s play highlights the massive advantage the Warriors have over the Rockets

Another day on the Durant-a-whirl, guess what the rumor is now

“It’s a panel,” Livingston said. “Our captains lead the panel. Other guys weigh in. Everyone has a voice. I’ve stated my opinions before.”

Curry said a few of the players have had “side conversations” before on the subject, but “you don’t plan anything until you win the championship.” Now they brace for the parade on Thursday. And NBA title teams don’t typically visit the White House until the next season, usually when they play the Washington Wizards.

“Nothing is going to distract from what we were able to accomplish together and the different kind of ceremonies and traditions that have happened around championship teams, we don’t want that to taint what we accomplished this year,” Curry said. “So we’ll handle that accordingly and responsibly and do the right thing…I’ll personally do the right thing for me and I know the team will have a conversation about what’s going on. Probably more to come on that.”