Coleman says Robertson comments help fuel paranoia
Sen. Norm Coleman, returning from a trip to South America, said religious broadcaster Pat Robertson's suggestion that American agents assassinate Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez helped fuel suspicions about U.S. intentions in the region.

"When I was with Chavez a number of months ago, he was telling me that he was convinced that we were trying to assassinate him, that we were going invade him," Coleman said in a telephone interview Tuesday. "I told him that simply wasn't a reality, that's not the policy of this government.

"These comments feed into Chavez' paranoia."

Coleman, a Minnesota Republican who chairs the Senate Foreign Relations Western Hemisphere subcommittee, was in the midst of four-country visit to South America last week when Robertson said of Chavez, "if he thinks we're trying to assassinate him, I think that we really ought to go ahead and do it." Robertson later apologized.

Coleman said the remark tapped into suspicions held not just by Chavez but by people throughout Latin America.

"We were in Brazil, and it was articulated to us by a number of folks, that many Brazilians believe we will invade the Amazon and take it over," said Coleman, who traveled to the region with Sen. Mel Martinez and Rep. Jeff Miller, both Florida Republicans.

"They think we went into Iraq for oil, and if we're going to go into Iraq for oil, then why not take over the most resource-rich region in Latin America? This view is held even among academicians, among thoughtful individuals. We're already facing some challenges in terms of the perception of America and what our intentions are, and those kinds of comments only fuel the paranoia that unfortunately exists."

Coleman called Robertson's comments "terribly unhelpful from an American foreign policy perspective. They were foolish."

In addition to Brazil, Coleman visited Uruguay, Chile and Colombia. He said he was impressed with Brazil's use of General Motors-made "flex-fuel" cars, which can run on ethanol, natural gas or gasoline. Coleman has pushed ethanol use in the United States to help Minnesota farmers and to cut down on U.S. reliance on foreign oil.

"I think we haven't even begun to scratch the surface," he said. "We have things to learn. It's American technology fueling commitment to alternative energy."

Coleman said he planned to pursue the issue in his subcommittee.

"I want to bang the drum with renewables," he said.