Nature of Pre-Earthquake Phenomena and their Effects on Living Organisms
1. Introduction

Earthquakes are caused by the build-up of tectonic stresses. When rocks reach a critical limit, catastrophic failure occurs, causing a rupture to propagate, sometimes over distances of hundreds of kilometers, with typical speeds in the range of 2.2–3 km/s—supersonic with respect to the speed of sound in air. The rupture generates shockwaves in the Earth that spread at speeds of about 6 km/s for the compressional (P) waves and about 3.4 km/s for the more destructive shear (S) waves. An earthquake of magnitude 7 releases an energy equivalent to that of more than 2000 Hiroshima-class atomic bombs. The magnitude scale being exponential, the energy released by a magnitude 9 earthquake is equivalent to more than 2,000,000 A-bombs.

Mainstream seismology, as currently practiced, focuses on understanding earthquakes from a mechanistic viewpoint using information collected by the analysis of past earthquakes to predict future earthquakes [1,2,3]. Unfortunately, even if the database for past events is very large, counting thousands, even tens of thousands, the prediction of any single future earthquake is subject to the large uncertainty, which is an inescapable corollary of statistics of small numbers. For this reason seismological prediction models are typically given with uncertainty windows on the order of decades, even centuries. Only in very few cases have predictions been attempted with quoted uncertainty windows of only a few years [3,4]. Seismologists are of course aware of these statistical limitations. This is why their majority believes that earthquakes are inherently unpredictable [5,6].

In view of the enormously large amounts of mechanical energy released by major seismic events, however, it is inconceivable—from a physics perspective—that the Earth would not produce some identifiable non-seismic and non-mechanical signals prior to such large-scale catastrophic events. Whether or not, and to what extent, the precursory signals are reliable is another question.

There have been countless accounts of precursory signals, too many to list here. They span a bewildering diversity of phenomena ranging from stories of unusual animal behavior on land, in the air and in the water, to the emission of electromagnetic radiation over many orders of frequency space, to distinct changes in the electron distribution at the lower edge of the ionosphere some 100–300 km above the surface of the Earth, and many others.

The problem facing earthquake forecasting is not that there has been a lack of reported pre-earthquake (pre-EQ) phenomena. The real problem lies in the lack of understanding what the different types of reported pre-EQ phenomena mean and how they might be generated.

There have also been countless attempts to interpret pre-EQ signals and to assign them to known physical processes that could occur in the Earth crust in response to the build-up of tectonic stresses. The problem is that the reported pre-EQ phenomena are so diverse and fall into the competency range of so many different scientific disciplines that it has not been possible, so far, to reach any consensus.

If such a situation arises, namely that scientists from different disciplines cannot agree on a scientific explanation of a set of naturally occurring phenomena such as pre-EQ phenomena, chances are that the physical underpinning of the processes in the Earth crust during the build-up of tectonic stresses are not yet properly understood. This is particularly relevant to the contentious issue of unusual pre-EQ animal behavior reported in the scientific and non-scientific literature.

1.1. Setting the Stage Earthquakes are usually reported in terms of the location of their epicenter, their magnitude, and their depth. The hypocenter is defined as the point at depth, where the rupture starts. The epicenter is the point on the Earth surface straight above the hypocenter. Most major crustal earthquakes occur in the 7–35 km depth range. At this depth the isostatic overload is substantial, ranging from about 2,000 kg/cm2 to 10,000 kg/cm2, 2–10 metric tons on every square centimeter. Under these conditions it is highly questionable whether two processes, which are widely quoted in the context of pre-EQ signals, can in fact take place: (i) microfracturing and (ii) the electrokinetic effect. Microfracturing had been introduced in the late 1960s as part of the “Dilatancy theory” [7,8], which started with the observation that, when rock cylinders are uniaxially stressed, they bulge out and that their total volume increases [9,10,11,12]. In unconstrained rock cylinders such volume increase is due to internal cracks opening as a result of the applied stress. However, deep in the Earth crust, under the isostatic load of tens of kilometers of rock, the opening of cracks or microfractures is unlikely because the attendant volume increase has to perform work against a very large overload. Rocks in the upper reaches of the Earth crust, from zero to about 5–7 km, have non-zero porosity. The pores are water-filled or brine-filled. They often communicate, allowing the fluids to flow along stress gradients. Such fluid flow leads to separation of charges because cations tend to be retained on the walls of pores and narrow channels, while anions are carried along with the flow. This is the electrokinetic effect. The resulting potential, the “streaming potential”, produces voltage signals, which have been invoked to explain geoelectric and electromagnetic signals recorded prior to major earthquakes [13,14,15,16]. However, streaming potentials can only be produced in the most shallow crust, where rocks are porous but where earthquakes do not typically occur. Nonetheless microfracturing and the electrokinetic effect have been invoked in the context of unusual pre-EQ animal behavior. A third process frequently quoted in the context of pre-EQ phenomena is emanation of radon gas from the ground. Radioactive 222Rn, which has a half-life of 2.8 days and decays via emission of a 507 MeV alpha particle into polonium 218Po, is a product of the uranium-radium decay chain. Changes in pre-EQ radon emanation have long been reported [17,18,19]. Each alpha particle emitted during radon decay creates about 105 electron-ion pairs along its path, forming a narrow plasma channel, about 1 cm long in air. A small fraction of these electron-ion pairs escape recombination and, hence, lead to an increase in air conductivity. This air conductivity increase has been claimed to be responsible for a number of pre-EQ phenomena including animal behavior [20]. The idea is that, if changes in radon emanation are due to microfracturing, animals might possess unusual capabilities to detect the faint vibrations from microfracturing in the near-surface environment. Much of what has been said and written about pre-EQ phenomena can be traced back to the seismology and its reliance on mechanical concepts. Microfracturing, for instance, is based on the assumption that pre-EQ stresses can be transmitted laterally from the hypocenter over long distances defined as “earthquake preparation zone” where the radius r is given by the relation r = 100.43M, M the magnitude and r the distance in kilometers [21]. For a magnitude 7 earthquake r would be 1,000 km. Such large EQ preparation zones and the assumed lateral stress transfer are inconsistent with other reports that pre-EQ stress changes are seldom detected, even with most sensitive strain gauges [22,23,24,25,26]. The electrokinetic effect is likewise based on mechanical concepts, namely that stress gradients provide the driving force for fluid flow through porous rocks, which in turn would generate electric signals. Fluctuations in the flow rate are then expected to lead to low frequency electromagnetic emissions [14]. Many other attempts to find explanations for reported pre-EQ phenomena also rely on mechanical concepts inherited from seismology.