Medline Industries, Inc.
Medline is the number one provider of healthcare supplies and equipment to the long term care market. Medline is also a leader in several categories of products to the hospital marketplace.

Some of Medline's top product categories are highlighted below, with more coming soon. View and search our product catalog for a full view of our product offering. For backorder assistance on non-Medline products, take advantage of our Super 60 Backorder Relief program.

Wound & Skin Care

Medline is a leader in advanced wound care and skin care product development. See our wound care and skin care pages for more information.

Durable Medical Equipment

Medline is the largest provider of wheelchairs to the hospital and long term care industries. We offer an unsurpassed breadth of line including homecare beds, walking aids, bath safety, aids for daily living, and a full line of bariatric products.

Gloves

With over seven million Medline exam gloves being used each day, Medline is one of the world's largest suppliers of exam gloves. Medline also offers surgical gloves, a full line of AloeTouch® gloves and best value gloves.

Incontinence

Medline offers a total program of innovative products designed expressly for continence care, comprehensive clinical support, and significant financial advantages. See our Incontinence care page for more information.

Face Masks

Medline offers a full line of surgical and procedural face masks using the most breathable and fluid-resistant materials.

Housekeeping

Take some time to examine one of Medline's fastest growing product lines, featuring the superior cleaning of our Microfiber mop systems.

Isolation Gowns

Medline, a leading company in Protective Apparel, has a variety of isolation gowns in various levels of protection to meet all of your needs.

Surgery / Central Sterile

Medline offers a full range of products to support the OR. Featured on this site are Complete Delivery System (CDS), Surgical Instruments, Detergents, Sterilization Containers, Wrap, Pouches & Sterilization Monitoring products.

INRatio PT / INR

The INRatio monitor measures Prothrombin Time PT / INR, the critical test performed to maintain the proper "therapeutic range" of oral anticoagulation therapies.

Electrosurgical

Medline offers a full line of electrosurgical products including a wide variety of pencils, active electrodes, grounding pads and generators.

Textiles

A market leader in reusable healthcare textiles, Medline has the broadest selection of linens and apparel to meet your facility’s every need.

Guardian

Medline is proud to announce the addition of Guardian bath safety, walking aids and homecare bed product lines to our already extensive DME offering.