REPORT: Passengers on Delta Flight Disputing Adam Saleh's Story About Phone Call
Someone else on the same Delta flight as YouTube prankster/hoaxer Adam Saleh told a reporter Wednesday that those on the plane say he did not make a phone call to his mother, supposedly the reason Saleh was booted from the flight.

Saleh’s video of the incident went viral Wednesday, along with his claim that he was kicked out “because I spoke Arabic to my mom on the phone.” Shortly afterwards, however, others pointed out that Saleh had a history of making videos about fake anti-Muslim racial profiling incidents and prank videos about planes in particular:

This is the guy who you guys think actually got kicked off a plane for speaking Arabic. #boycottdelta pic.twitter.com/ORqHxla1Kp — Ashley Rae (@Communism_Kills) December 21, 2016

In a “small world” moment, veteran journalist and former CNN host Soledad O’Brien tweeted Wednesday morning that she actually knew someone who was on the flight, who provided her with some background.

Soooo. I have a good friend on this flight right now. Getting additional details on how this went down. Standby https://t.co/ibOv6rguYU — Soledad O’Brien (@soledadobrien) December 21, 2016

O’Brien’s source told her that the Delta flight attendants were made aware that Saleh was a YouTube prankster.

A LOT still unclear. But apparently woman sitting near my friend tipped off flight attendants he was a youtube star known for pranks. — Soledad O’Brien (@soledadobrien) December 21, 2016

Moreover, the source also told O’Brien that those aboard the flight were disputing the claim that he made a phone call to his mother, as Saleh claims in the video.

Also people on plane disputing call to mom — Soledad O’Brien (@soledadobrien) December 21, 2016

[Image via screengrab]

UPDATE 7:11 p.m. EST: Delta has issued a follow-up statement obtained by Mediaite’s sister site LawNewz finding that Saleh was being disruptive:

Based on the information collected to date, it appears the customers who were removed sought to disrupt the cabin with provocative behavior, including shouting. This type of conduct is not welcome on any Delta flight.

UPDATE 9:37 p.m. EST: Saleh responded in a tweet tonight:

Thank you for all your support pic.twitter.com/ukQ4EGVQ6r — Adam Saleh (@omgAdamSaleh) December 22, 2016

—

>>Follow Alex Griswold (@HashtagGriswold) on Twitter

Have a tip we should know? tips@mediaite.com