Robocalls from cruise lines could mean you're entitled to money
How to respond if you receive a robocall Americans received an estimated 29.3 billion unwanted telemarketing calls in 2016, according to a YouMail Robocall Index released in January 2017. The Federal Trade Commission's Kati Daffin explains how to avoid these unwanted calls. Up Next × SHARE COPY LINK Americans received an estimated 29.3 billion unwanted telemarketing calls in 2016, according to a YouMail Robocall Index released in January 2017. The Federal Trade Commission's Kati Daffin explains how to avoid these unwanted calls.

If you received a robocall from Carnival, Norwegian or Royal Caribbean, you might want to enter your phone number on a class-action website.

A class-action lawsuit against those cruise lines and Resort Marketing Group means you might get between $300 to $900 for the calls.

Philip Charvat filed the lawsuit, saying he had received telemarketing calls without his permission after the cruise lines contracted with Resort Marketing Group. Without that consent, Charvat and his attornies claimed the involved companies had violated the Telephone Consumer Protection Act.

“The TCPA imposes substantial penalties on companies that knowingly violate its telemarketing restrictions,” Paul Tassin wrote of the suit on Top Class Actions. “It generally forbids telemarketers from making calls using automated dialing equipment and prerecorded messages, unless the person being called has given the caller prior express written consent to be contacted that way.”

Unlimited Digital Access: Only $0.99 For Your First Month Get full access to Miami Herald content across all your devices. SAVE NOW

Rather than have the case go to trial, the companies decided to settle. A federal judge granted preliminary approval of the settlement in July, which requires the involved companies to create a settlement fund worth between $7 million and $12.5 million, depending on how many claims are filed.

Anyone who received a call between July 2009 and March 2014 could be eligible for payment, according to WESH. Those who qualify as members of the suit are entitled to $300 per call, with a maximum payout of $900 per phone number, according to Top Class Actions.

Click here and enter your phone number to see if you can file a claim; the site checks if your phone number is listed in Resort Marketing Group’s database.