County of Rockland, New York :: Second Hand Smoke
The dangers of second hand smoke are very, very real!

Secondhand smoke, also known as environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), is a mixture of the smoke given off by the burning end of a cigarette, pipe or cigar and the smoke exhaled by a smoker. It is composed of nearly 4,000 different chemicals, some of which cause cancer, and chemical compounds such as benzene, arsenic, carbon monoxide, ammonia and cyanide.



Non-smokers are exposed to toxic chemicals just like smokers are when they breathe in second hand smoke.



According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) secondhand smoke causes heart disease, lung cancer in nonsmoking adults and a number of health conditions, including sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) and respiratory infections, in children.

What you can do to prevent exposure to second hand smoke:

Young Lungs at Play (YLAP) is a program designed to eliminate cigarette smoking at outdoor play areas in Rockland County. We encourage municipalities, schools, faith-based organizations, community-based organizations, camps and childcare facilities, and apartment and condominium complexes in Rockland County to sign up for YLAP and join Rockland County in their efforts to eliminate children's exposure to secondhand smoke.

To learn more about YLAP call us at (845) 364-2501.

Smoke Free Cars: It's the law!

In June 2007, Rockland County passed the Kids in Cars Smoking Safety Act, Local Law #6. This law prohibits smoking in vehicles with children under the age of 18. The law protects children from the toxic chemicals in smoke that put children at increased risk for bronchitis, pneumonia, ear infections, more severe asthma, respiratory symptoms, and slowed lung growth.

To download our smoke free cars flyer, click here.

The Rockland County Multiple Unit Dwelling Smoking Policy Law

On January 1, 2012 this law went into effect. It takes a major step towards protecting Rockland County residents from the harmful effects of second hand smoke in their own homes.

For more information about the law click here.

Protect your pets from second hand smoke

Just as in humans, second hand smoke can be very harmful to your pets. Animals can develop lung damage and certain kinds of cancer just like humans when exposed to second-hand smoke. Learn how to protect your pets from second hand smoke, click here.