About — Merrylin Cryptid Museum
Born in 1782 to a rich aristocratic family. His mother died during childbirth and he was raised by his Father Edward. His father was a General in the Army, but once retired became enamoured with esoteric natural history, investing in profitable companies to fund his travels across the world, seeking out illusive artefacts and hidden species which resided in forgotten continents or darkened places, away from prying human eyes.

They traveled together for many years until his fathers sudden death. This event turned Thomas into a recluse, seeking solace in his work and befriending very few. He tutored himself in the grand Library at Merrylin house, yet also studied at the University College London on Gower street. Even then, he isolated himself from other students.

A bizarre quality of Merrylin was his apparent permanent youthfulness. Even in his 80′s, he still resembled a 40 year old, albeit of odd complexion, and his few bizarre forays into the eyes of the media only furthered his infamy. He was accused of practicing dark arts to prolong his life. Yet, eminent scholars secretly allied themselves with him, encouraging him to share his collection with the world. In 1899, he took a small portion of his specimens on tour across America. Conservative attitudes of the time condemned these creatures, calling them blasphemous. His reaction was severe and the tour was canceled before it reached California.

In the following years, Merrylin extended the collection exponentially. He traveled to the four corners of the Earth and learned of ideologies and sciences which astounded those who corresponded with him. He held within his ranks a legion of colleagues who would benefit from his endless search. In truth, we did not know what he was searching for, until very recently. The collection houses mathematics not dreamt of in his time, of theories that we are only now contemplating. Merrylin posets the possibilities of the multiverse, of time travel, of quantum mechanics - before the terms existed. Merrylin is an enigma.

He fell into obscurity, until 1942.

The Tunbridge Orphanage for boys was contacted by a man purporting to be Thomas Theodore Merrylin, in the spring of that year. He wished to donate a sizeable London town house to the Orphanage for use once the war was over, and children returned. The only proviso was that the basement of the house never be opened and the house never sold. The Orphanage stood by this promise, until absolved in the 60′s and the existence of the cellar forgotten. Sealed behind two brick walls, the door was only found by chance when the foundations were checked prior to demolition. The Thomas Merrylin pictured in a local newspaper, handing over the documents for ownership to the new proprietor was in his forties. By this time, Merrylin would have been over 160 years old. The name sparked interest from those who had followed Merrylin's work, most assuming him long dead. But the man claiming to be Thomas promptly disappeared. Leaving no evidence of his existence. The Merrylin estate was also sold off and money given to charity.