Parkland FL High School shooting: Victims dead and wounded
Portraits of the Douglas school shooting victims These are the victims of the devastating school shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, on Feb. 14, 2018. Up Next × SHARE COPY LINK These are the victims of the devastating school shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, on Feb. 14, 2018.

The Broward County Sheriff’s Office late Thursday released the names of the 17 people killed in the mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on Wednesday. Earlier Thursday, relatives and friends of the victims took to social media to mourn and honor the people they lost. The victims were:

Alyssa Alhadeff, 14

Unlimited Digital Access: Only $0.99 For Your First Month Get full access to Miami Herald content across all your devices. SAVE NOW







Alyssa, a freshman from Parkland, had been reported missing by her grandmother Wednesday after the shooting. Her cousin Ariella Del Quaglio confirmed the student’s death via Facebook on Thursday.







Scott Beigel, 35

Scott Beigel, 35







Beigel was a geography teacher and a cross country coach at the school who unlocked his classroom to allow panicked students to take shelter inside during the shooting. The Coral Springs man was struck and killed by a bullet while closing the door behind them.

Kelsey Friend, one of the students whose lives he saved, told CNN, “When he opened the door, he had to relock it so that we could stay safe, but he didn’t get the chance.”

Directly addressing Beigel’s family, Friend said, “Thank you for bringing and having this amazing person in [my] life and giving him the power to be stronger than I could have ever been.”

Thomas Risley, 15, said he had been in Beigel’s world history class earlier in the day. They were doing assessments and talking about the Glorious Revolution.

Risley said he can’t believe his teacher is gone.

“He cared a lot about his students,” he said. “It’s going to be really sad walking into that classroom and not seeing him. I’m going to miss his colorful personality.”

Martin Duque, 14

Martin, a freshman from Parkland, was at school Wednesday and died in the shooting. His older brother Miguel, who had graduated from Stoneman Douglas High last year, shared the news via an Instagram post early Thursday morning. “Words can not describe my pain,” he wrote. “I love [sic] brother Martin you’ll be missed buddy.”

Nicholas Dworet, 17

Nicholas Dworet, 17







Nicholas, a senior who had just received a swimming scholarship to the University of Indianapolis, was killed. Glenn Greenwald, a journalist with The Intercept, shared the news about the Coral Springs teen on Twitter.

One of yesterday's victims, Nicholas Dworet, was a senior who just received a swimming scholarship to the University of Indianapolis. My niece was friends with him since kindergarten and posted her memories this morning. Such a heartbreaking loss and sickeningly avoidable traged pic.twitter.com/m3EEHjKjOe — Glenn Greenwald (@ggreenwald) February 15, 2018

Aaron Feis, 37

It is with Great sadness that our Football Family has learned about the death of Aaron Feis. He was our Assistant Football Coach and security guard. He selflessly shielded students from the shooter when he was shot. He died a hero and he will forever be in our hearts and memories pic.twitter.com/O181FvuHl3 — MS Douglas Football (@MSDEagles) February 15, 2018

Feis, an assistant football coach, was critically injured after jumping in front of the shooter to protect students. He died from his wounds Wednesday night. The school’s football team announced the news about Feis, of Coral Springs, on its Twitter account.

Jaime Guttenberg, 14

Jaime Guttenberg, 14







Jaime, a student from Parkland, was killed during the rampage. Her father, Fred, shared the tragic news in a Facebook post.

“My heart is broken. Yesterday, Jennifer Bloom Guttenberg and I lost our baby girl to a violent shooting at her school. We lost our daughter and my son Jesse Guttenberg lost his sister. I am broken as I write this trying to figure out how my family gets through this. We appreciate all of the calls and messages and we apologize for not reacting to everyone individually. Jen and I will be figuring things out today and so we ask that you respect our privacy. We will be getting messages out later regarding visitation. Hugs to all and hold your children tight.”

Chris Hixon, 49

Chris Hixon, 49







Hixon, the athletic director at the high school, was confirmed dead by family and friends Thursday. Hixon, of Hollywood, previously served as South Broward’s athletic director.

Luke Hoyer, 15

Luke Hoyer, 15







Family members confirmed on Facebook that Luke, of Parkland, died on the third floor of the school.

“This has devastated our family and we’re all in shock and disbelief. Our hearts are broken. Luke was a beautiful human being and greatly loved,” posted relative Toni Brownlee on Facebook. “Also, pray for the other families whose loved were also murdered so cruelly.”

His aunt, Mary Stroud-Gibbs, also shared her pain: “Our Luke was a precious child, who just went to school yesterday not knowing what was to come.”

Cara Loughran, 14

Cara Loughran, 14







Cara, of Coral Springs, was confirmed dead by a peer counselor at her church.

“RIP Cara, and fly with the angels. You will be greatly missed, and we will always love you and celebrate your beautiful life,” her neighbor wrote on Facebook.

Gina Montalto, 14

Gina Montalto, 14







Gina, a freshman from Parkland, served on the school’s color guard team. She died late Wednesday night, friends and family confirmed on social media. Gina had been missing after the shooting and was not answering her phone.

One of her color guard instructors from middle school, Manuel Miranda, posted about her death Wednesday night.

“My heart is broken into pieces. I will forever remember you, my sweet angel,” Miranda told the Miami Herald. Miranda taught Montalto last year at Westglades Middle School in Broward. “She was the sweetest soul ever. She was kind, caring, always smiling and wanting to help.”

Before the shooting, the Stoneman Douglas color guard group was scheduled to perform at a regional event in Tampa this weekend.

Joaquin Oliver, 17

Joaquin Oliver







Joaquin was born in Venezuela and moved to the U.S. at the age of 3 with his family. He had become a U.S. citizen in January 2017 and lived in Coral Springs.

His Instagram account includes several photos with his mother and sister, with whom he was extremely close. His girlfriend, Victoria González, confirmed he was killed in the massacre.

Alaina Petty, 14

Alaina Petty was one of the victims of the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School shooting on Wednesday, February 14. Contributed to the Herald







Alaina, of Parkland, was mourned by friends and family.

“There are no hashtags for moments like this, only sadness,” said Claudette McMahon Joshi, Petty’s great-aunt. “Our hearts are with them and all the families touched by this tragedy.”

In a statement, her family said Alaina was a member of the JROTC program and volunteered with the “Helping Hands” program of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, including a cleanup of the Keys after Hurricane Irma.

“It is impossible to sum up all that Alaina was, and meant, to her family & friends,” the family wrote. “Alaina was a vibrant and determined young woman, loved by all who knew her.”

Meadow Pollack, 18

Meadow Pollack







Pollack, a senior from Parkland, planned to attend Lynn University​. She was confirmed dead early Thursday.

“Please say a prayer for the family of an amazing girl I got to call my bestfriend growing up,” posted her friend Gii Lovito on Facebook. “Her life was taken way too soon and I have no words to describe how this feels.”

Helena Ramsay, 17







Helena, of Coral Springs, would have started college next year. A family member, in a lengthy Facebook post, called her a “smart, kind hearted and thoughtful person.”

“Though she was some what reserved, she had a relentless motivation towards her academic studies, and her soft warm demeanor brought the best out in all who knew her. She was so brilliant and witty, and I’m still wrestling with the idea that she is actually gone.”

Alex Schachter, 14

Alex, a marching band student from Coral Springs, was confirmed dead by a former instructor as well as by Congregation Beth Am in Longwood.







Carmen Schentrup, 16







Carmen Schentrup, 16







Carmen, a 2017 National Merit Scholar semifinalist from Parkland, was confirmed dead Thursday morning by several friends on social media.

Rest In Peace Carmen Schentrup ❤️ @Schentrump, your family is forever in my thoughts and prayers. I’m so sorry. — Pranati (@pranatiishah) February 15, 2018

Peter Wang, 15

Peter Wang, 15







Peter was in the school’s ROTC program, and he was last seen wearing the gray uniform with black stripes as he held open the door so others could escape, his cousin Aaron Chen told the Miami Herald. Peter, whom Aaron described as brave, was in study hall when the shooting started.

His best friend, Gabriel Ammirata, said Peter, of Parkland, was “funny, nice and a great friend. He’s been my best friend since third grade.”

Gabriel planned to celebrate the Chinese New Year on Thursday with Peter and his family at the Chinese restaurant Peter’s family owned.







El Nuevo Herald Staff Writer Johanna A. Alvarez contributed to this report.

SHARE COPY LINK Seventeen people were killed when suspected gunman Nikolas Cruz opened fire at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida. Students said they heard the fire alarm go off and thought it was a drill.