Could mysterious hexagonal clouds in Bermuda Triangle caused by 170mph 'air bombs' be behind centuries of bizarre disappearances?
The video will start in 8 Cancel

Get the biggest daily news stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

The mystery behind the Bermuda Triangle may have finally been cracked.

The 500,000km square stretch in the North Atlantic Ocean has been blamed for the disappearance of at least 75 planes and hundreds of ships over the centuries.

But scientists claim the truth behind the 'deadly triangle' is all down to hexagonal clouds that create terrifying 170mph winds air bombs.

It is believed these deadly blasts of air can flip over ships and bring planes crashing into the ocean.

Researchers also noted that massive clouds were appearing over the western tip of Bermuda Island – ranging from 20 to 55 miles across.

(Image: Science Channel)

Dr Steve Miller, satellite meteorologist at Colorado State University, told Science Channel’s What on Earth: “You don’t typically see straight edges with clouds.

“Most of the time, clouds are random in their distribution."

Using radar satellites to measure what was happening beneath the clouds, they found that sea level winds were reaching almost 170mph.

(Image: Getty)

(Image: Science Channel)

poll loading Does the Bermuda Triangle exists? 500+ VOTES SO FAR Yes No

These winds are powerful enough to generate waves of more than 45ft high as “air bombs” are forced to come crashing down towards the ocean.

Meteorologist Randy Cerveny added: “These types of hexagonal shapes over the ocean are in essence air bombs.

“They are formed by what are called microbursts and they’re blasts of air that come down out of the bottom of a cloud and then hit the ocean and then create waves that can sometimes be massive in size as they start to interact with each other.”

The Bermuda Triangle is roughly mapped out to the east of The Bahamas and the west of Bermuda Island in the North Atlantic Ocean.

(Image: Daily Mirror)

Some of the most mysterious disappearances blamed on the Bermuda Triangle:

Reports go back all the way to 1492 when Christopher Columbus reported strange lights and strange compass readings in the area.

when Christopher Columbus reported strange lights and strange compass readings in the area. The first logged shipwreck attributed to the triangle came in 1609 when English voyage The Sea Venture was destroyed on the eastern end of Bermuda Island, bringing the first human settlement in the island.

when English voyage The Sea Venture was destroyed on the eastern end of Bermuda Island, bringing the first human settlement in the island. One of the spookier tales comes from The Ellen Austin voyage in 1881. The crew reportedly came across another ship that was sailing without a single soul on board, so transferred some of its crew and attempted to sail with it to New York. The other ship suddenly disappeared - only to then reappear without a person on board before disappearing without trace.

(Image: Getty)

(Image: Getty)

In 1918 the widely debated disappearance of the USS Cyclops and its 309 crew, was also attributed to the phenomenon. It was the single largest loss of life in the history of the US Navy after it went missing without a trace with a crew of 309 after leaving Barbados.

the widely debated disappearance of the USS Cyclops and its 309 crew, was also attributed to the phenomenon. It was the single largest loss of life in the history of the US Navy after it went missing without a trace with a crew of 309 after leaving Barbados. One of the most famous disappearances was in 1945 . Flight 19 vanished when five torpedo bombers lost contact during a US Navy training flight. All 14 airmen were lost, as were all 13 crew members of a flying boat that was on of two search planes sent out.

In 1991 the pilot of a Grumman Cougar jet made a routine radio request to increase altitude. While ascending, the aircraft gradually faded from radar and vanished.

The latest tragedy to be attributed is the cargo ship El Faro disaster in 2015 . The ship was reported missing, with all 33 crew on board, after being caught in a hurricane off the southern coast of the Bahamas in November.