KFC customer is refused hand wipe in halal-only branch because they contain alcohol
Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

A KFC customer was refused a hand-wipe in a halal-only branch of the fast food giant - because it contained alcohol.

Graham Noakes was stunned when staff said they could not provide him with a wipe because they are soaked in alcohol - which is banned in Islam.

The 41-year-old thought he was the victim of a wind-up by staff at the Leicester restaurant - but KFC bosses confirmed the policy was genuine.

He said: "They told me it might offend other customers. I explained that it wouldn't affect me. In fact - I told them I like alcohol, so it wouldn't bother me in the slightest.

"When they wouldn't give me one, I was disgusted. I will never be going to KFC again."

Graham, from Birmingham, was working in Leicester on the construction of new Muslim community centre in the city's Highfields district.

He had visited at St George's retail park branch for lunch when he was refused a hand-wipe at the end of his meal.

"Why shouldn't I be allowed a wipe for my hands?" he added. "They use wipes in hospital, what happens when we start being told we can't have wipes there? I just can't understand it."

Halal is the Arabic word for 'lawful' and relates to what is allowed in the context of Islamic law - but is often used in conjunction with the issue of how meat is dealt with.

A KFC spokesman said the company had been running a halal-only trial since 2010, in "areas where there has been demand from our customers".

He added that as a result "a small number of products from our usual menu are not available" and in addition the Leicester branch had decided not to stock wet wipes that contain alcohol.

It is thought the busy outlet is waiting for its stock of alcohol-based wipes to be replaced with lemon-based wipes.

The spokesman said: "Wherever possible, we have taken steps to ensure that our halal restaurants are close to a non-halal store to cater to all of our customers' needs.

"In this case, customers wanting a non-halal option can visit our nearby restaurant in Braunstone."

(Image: Getty)

Suleman Nagdi, spokesman for the Leicester-based Federation of Muslim Organisations, described the policy as "bizarre".

He said: "I know alcohol is prohibited in the Muslim community, but I don't understand why you can't use hand-wipes - there's nothing wrong with it.

"Using alcohol doesn't mean you're consuming it. It seems like an unusual decision to be made. In fact, it sounds bizarre."

He said such decisions potentially provoked some people to start "lashing out" at the Muslim community.

"I've never come across anything like this before. KFC have made a commercial decision to do this, and now the Muslim community will face backlash," he said.

In a second statement, KFC said: "Our alcohol-based hand wipes are approved for use in all our restaurants, including those who are part of the halal trial.

"There was a misunderstanding at the store in question, but the wipes are now being used again. We're sorry for the customer's experience."