'Sex roulette' parties where one person secretly has HIV are on the rise, doctors warn
Get the biggest daily news stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Extreme ' sex roulette ' parties - where one person secretly has HIV and no one is allowed to wear a condom - are on the rise, doctors have warned.

The risky orgies are usually attended by gay men and offer the so-called 'thrill' of not knowing whether or not you will be infected .

Doctors in Barcelona have seen a rise in the number of such parties, which they claim is a sign that people have "lost respect" for HIV.

Dr Josep Mallolas of Hospital Clinic Barcelona told el Periodico : "There is everything: sex roulette parties, or sex parties you can only attend if you already have HIV."

He added that some of the events are known as 'blue' parties because attendees take anti-viral drugs to reduce the risk of transmitting the virus.

Read more :

(Image: Getty)

Last year, a Serbian stripper called Tijana claimed the parties originated in Serbia – and were named Serbian sex roulette, after Russian roulette, Metro reported.

Speaking last year, she told Serbian newspaper Telegraf: "I can see that everyone is talking about sex parties now, but in fact they have been common for a long time even here in Serbia.

"In fact what really shocked me was this bizarre variation that seems popular for extreme sex.

"People who turn up for the party wear masks, and one of them has HIV.

"The wealthy organise these sex parties for other rich people. The real kick for these people is apparently the risk that they might be the one having sex with the HIV-infected partner."

Read more :

Psychosexual therapist Kate Morley says the lure of sex roulette parties is all about risk, MailOnline reported.

She told HelloU: "Partygoers think the higher the risk, the stronger the thrill.

"In the case of sex parties the intense high is as you combine orgasm with high adrenaline."