Horrifying moment Istanbul suicide bomber set off explosives on busy shopping street killing 5 people
This CCTV footage shows the horrifying moment a suicide bomber detonated his bomb on Istanbul's main shopping street killing five people.

The footage shows dozens of people shopping in the busy Turkish city this morning.

But a huge blast can suddenly be seen outside a shop, leaving victims strewn across the floor.

Confused shoppers run in terror fearing for their lives. At least 36 people were left injured following the blast.

The explosion was in Istiklal Street, a wide boulevard closed to traffic that is lined with international stores and shopping centres.

READ MORE: Istanbul suicide bomb attack kills four and injures twenty

Shoppers run in terror following the explosion

A witness in the area saw police helicopters circling overhead and television footage showed people running from the area.

Gruesome pictures on social media showed a number of bodies strewn on the pavement following the blast.

READ MORE: Moment Fly Dubai plane crashes in Russia killing 62 people in fireball

Video loading Watch next Watch this video again Watch Next Click to play Tap to play The Live Event you are trying to watch is either unavailable or has not started Please refresh this page in your browser to reload this live event video

Video footage shows shoppers and families fleeing the scene in terror as police officers rush towards the blast.

Istanbul has been the location of a number of terror attacks in recent months. It is not yet known who is behind the attack.

A car bomb tore through the capital Ankara earlier this month, killing 37 people.

Twitter The blast happened on one of the city's busiest shopping streets

In January, a suicide bomber killed 10 tourists in the heart of Istanbul.

Nabil Fadli blew himself up among a group of German tourists near the city's most popular attractions at Sultanahmet Square . He had entered Turkey as a refugee from Syria.

VIDEO: Security services rush to the scene of the explosion in #Istanbul #Turkey - @taylieli pic.twitter.com/SpSQgVgVqZ — Conflict News (@Conflicts) March 19, 2016

Twitter At least twenty people have been wounded following the explosion

ISIS militants told Fadli's family he had died during a clash with Kurd fighters before the devastating bomb attack.

"When we heard about the attack, we felt ashamed," said the father Abdullatif Fadlı, who lives in Mumbuc district of Aleppo.