City must abandon Flint River as drinking water source amid lead crisis
The following is an opinion of The Flint Journal Editorial Board.

It's time to abandon the Flint River and go back to Lake Huron for Flint's drinking water.

And it's up to Gov. Rick Snyder to do it.

Flint residents were told they wouldn't notice any difference when officials made the switch April 25, 2014, after nearly 50 years of getting water from the Detroit pipeline.

"The water quality speaks for itself," Flint Mayor Dayne Walling said the day of the switch.

Today, that quality is still speaking and it's sounding worse by the day.

A switch that was made to save the cash-strapped city money has turned into a dangerous waiting game while crews build a new pipeline to Lake Huron.

But with the new pipeline still a year away from completion, Flint residents can no longer be asked to drink water that's safety cannot be guaranteed.

Elevated levels of the chemical TTHM in the water have segued into reports of elevated lead in the water. More Flint infants and children are being found with elevated levels of lead in their blood since the city switched to using the Flint River as its water source, according to a study from a Hurley Children's Hospital doctor.

While scientists debate test results, residents in one of the poorest cities in America are forced to either buy bottled water or take their chances with a system they're no longer confident is even safe.

This switch was made while Flint was under control of a state-appointed emergency manager, and we call upon the governor to make this right for Flint citizens by brokering a return to Detroit water that won't bankrupt the city of Flint.

Flint is in a crisis that was created in no small part by Snyder's hand-picked emergency manager and it is Snyder's job to fix this mess.

Officials have said that returning to Detroit water for the short term is not fiscally sound but that is not enough to justify staying with Flint River water. Flint is in the midst of a full-blown water emergency right now and it is incomprehensible that a solution cannot be found with our fellow Michiganders to deliver healthy water.

There is a lake full of healthy drinking water just an hour away and the pipes already in place to bring it here.

Clean water can be ours again.

Make the switch -- now -- before it's too late.

To read more Flint Journal editorials, click here.