Blue Dog Coalition
Contact: (202) 226-9782 Blue Dogs Release Benchmarks for Fiscal Reform

Coalition members urge Republicans and Democrats to come together to discuss all options for real, sustainable deficit reduction

March 30, 2011



- Today members of the fiscally conservative Democratic Blue Dog Coalition announced the Blue Dog Benchmarks for Fiscal Reform – an aggressive set of targets for long-term fiscal reform and deficit reduction that includes cutting the deficit by $4 trillion over the next 10 years, with the largest deficit cuts in history by 2014. The Blue Dogs also advocated keeping all options on the table in an effort to bring Republicans and Democrats together for a responsible, bipartisan discussion about the long-term fiscal health of the country.



“We are spending all of our time in the House in a debate over 15 percent of the federal budget when the truth is we could eliminate every single non-defense federal program and still run huge annual deficits,” said Congressman Mike Ross (D-Ark.), Blue Dog Co-Chair. “Targeted cuts in spending are an important part of the solution, but we are kidding ourselves – and the American people – if we think cutting a few hundred billion dollars is going to eliminate our deficit and solve our long-term debt crisis. We have to take a comprehensive approach to our nation’s finances, and no one party can do it alone. The Blue Dogs are inviting everyone to the table because until we start having a grown-up conversation, we will continue to mortgage our future on the backs of our children.”



“It's time to have a serious conversation about our nation's fiscal health,” said Congressman Kurt Schrader (D-Ore.), Chair of the Blue Dog Taskforce on Fiscal Responsibility. “To get there both Democrats and Republicans have to get past the overheated political rhetoric that has grinded Washington, D.C. to a halt. This framework is about putting everything on the table and bringing both parties together for a frank conversation about how we forge a fiscally responsible and sustainable path forward. The choices won’t be easy but we have an obligation to our children and grandchildren to get it right.”



“It wasn't just one part of the federal budget that got us in the fix we're in, and we won't get out by focusing on just one part of the federal budget either,” said Congressman John Barrow (D-Ga.), Blue Dog Co-Chair. “Our goal is to put everything on the table - tax reform, spending cuts, new accountability measures - and to start a real conversation with folks on both sides of the aisle about how to get our country back on a fiscally sustainable path.”



Following are the Blue Dog Benchmarks for Fiscal Reform:

Largest deficit cuts in history by 2014

Cut the deficit by $4 trillion over the next 10 years

Stabilize the debt and maintain a debt ratio to 60 percent of GDP by 2024

Return to 2008 spending levels by 2013

Reduce the deficit to 2.3 percent of GDP in 4 years

Reduce the size of government

Achieve deficit reduction with 2/3 spending cuts, 1/3 tax reform

Everything must be on the table:

- Discretionary Spending Cuts – both security and non-security

- Tax Reform

- Entitlement Reform

- Other Mandatory Policies

- Process Reforms Today members of the fiscally conservative Democratic Blue Dog Coalition announced the Blue Dog Benchmarks for Fiscal Reform – an aggressive set of targets for long-term fiscal reform and deficit reduction that includes cutting the deficit by $4 trillion over the next 10 years, with the largest deficit cuts in history by 2014. The Blue Dogs also advocated keeping all options on the table in an effort to bring Republicans and Democrats together for a responsible, bipartisan discussion about the long-term fiscal health of the country.“We are spending all of our time in the House in a debate over 15 percent of the federal budget when the truth is we could eliminate every single non-defense federal program and still run huge annual deficits,” said Congressman Mike Ross (D-Ark.), Blue Dog Co-Chair. “Targeted cuts in spending are an important part of the solution, but we are kidding ourselves – and the American people – if we think cutting a few hundred billion dollars is going to eliminate our deficit and solve our long-term debt crisis. We have to take a comprehensive approach to our nation’s finances, and no one party can do it alone. The Blue Dogs are inviting everyone to the table because until we start having a grown-up conversation, we will continue to mortgage our future on the backs of our children.”“It's time to have a serious conversation about our nation's fiscal health,” said Congressman Kurt Schrader (D-Ore.), Chair of the Blue Dog Taskforce on Fiscal Responsibility. “To get there both Democrats and Republicans have to get past the overheated political rhetoric that has grinded Washington, D.C. to a halt. This framework is about putting everything on the table and bringing both parties together for a frank conversation about how we forge a fiscally responsible and sustainable path forward. The choices won’t be easy but we have an obligation to our children and grandchildren to get it right.”“It wasn't just one part of the federal budget that got us in the fix we're in, and we won't get out by focusing on just one part of the federal budget either,” said Congressman John Barrow (D-Ga.), Blue Dog Co-Chair. “Our goal is to put everything on the table - tax reform, spending cuts, new accountability measures - and to start a real conversation with folks on both sides of the aisle about how to get our country back on a fiscally sustainable path.”Following are the Blue Dog Benchmarks for Fiscal Reform: ### Print version of this document