Big boobs, saggy tummies, stretchmarks... How women really feel about their post-pregnancy bodies
Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Famous mums like Victoria Beckham and Amanda Holden seem to be pregnant one minute, then back to their size 6 shapes just weeks after giving birth.

And those celebrities who don’t manage to follow suit come under huge criticism.

Actress Hilary Duff gave birth to her son, Luca, in March, and she’s been mocked for still carrying a few baby pounds.

Likewise, former-Miss World and Bollywood star Aishwarya Rai Bachchan endured cruel jibes on the red carpet at Cannes last month for her post-baby body, despite only having had daughter, Aaradhya, six months earlier.

So what does a woman actually look like after giving birth and how does she feel about the changes to her body?

'My children are worth the weight': Michelle's story

Michelle Kitching, 34, an assessor, lives in Chorley, Lancs, with husband, Steven, 38, an electrician. The couple have three children, Nathan, three, Aaron, two,and Sophia, one.

Celebrities employ chefs, personal trainers, nannies and probably have a nip and tuck after the birth, yet us mere mortals are made to feel we should look like they do while juggling a baby, house, other family, and a job, too. And all on no sleep!

It’s so demoralising when you’re already at a low ebb. Sometimes it makes you feel you’re not good enough.

The only celebrity I’ve seen who seemed to find it difficult to get back her pre-pregnancy self is the actress Jennifer Ellison. And she was absolutely slammed for it. That’s so sad.

I’ve had three babies in 33 months and my body is unrecognisable in comparison to how it was.

Three years ago, I was 10st and a size 10/12 and now I weigh 12st 3lb and am a 16/18 and it’s been hard to get down to that.

I gained three-and-a-half-stone when I was pregnant with Nathan. I didn’t think I ate for two but I must have done.

I’d only lost a stone doing WeightWatchers after I had him when I discovered I was expecting again.

That time I was more careful and only gained a stone but with Sophia I had a problem with my pelvis and was on crutches then bed rest for a month while pregnant.

Not only was I inactive, I was also unable to stand for long periods so we ate a lot of convenience food. By the time she was born, I weighed 15st 5lb. I hated how I looked.

I’m doing Slimming World at the moment and the weight is slowly coming off but I’ve got another 2st to go before I’m back to my old self.

Until recently, I haven’t felt at all sexy and still won’t let Steven see me naked. Generally, he’s supportive and tells me I look lovely as I am, but sometimes he’ll tell me to stop moaning.

I do like that I have hips since having the children – I like feeling curvy – but I hate my tummy. It’s saggy and covered in stretch marks. My boobs are too big, too.

I hide under baggy clothes because I think I look lumpy. I just want to get rid of the rest of the weight then tone up.

I’d love to go to the gym but I haven’t got time and the children come first.

Even my hair has suffered. It was quite thick in pregnancy but fell out so badly afterwards that I had to change my hairstyle and have some layers put in to make it look fuller.

But all that said, I look at my three children and while I might not like the thin hair, lumps or bumps, they’re worth it. What they give me is far better than a 26in waist.

'Being a mum puts bingo wings into perspective': Clare's story

Clare Philipson, 39, is a consultant for Jenny Craig weight loss programme. She lives in Brighton with partner, Phil Mann, 40, a baker, and their eight-month-old daughter, Charlotte.

Becoming a mum is making me accept who I am. I’ve spent years hating my body.

I even considered surgery – but since having Charlotte I can now look in the mirror and say, “This is me”.

I’m a mum now and my body has enabled me to do this wonderful job so it’s hard to hate it.

Plus, motherhood puts everything into perspective. There are so many more important things than bingo wings or the size of your thighs.

I am still trying to lose weight but for health reasons. And I don’t want to pass my neurosis on to Charlotte – there will be enough pressure on her to look a certain way without me underlining that.

But now I’m losing weight through healthy eating – that can only be a positive message.

Besides, happiness doesn’t come from having a size 10 figure – it comes from being fulfilled. And at last I am.

I’m lighter now than I was when I got pregnant with Charlotte. I weighed about 14st 2lb then and now I’m 13st 1lb.

I had a previous miscarriage so I wanted to look after my body. I did aquanatal swimming and ate healthily.

I had morning sickness, so I ate starchy food, gaining 16lb, but then I only gained another 16lb throughout the rest of my pregnancy.

After she was born, I lost half a stone and have carried on losing weight since.

My tummy and boobs are bigger but my legs are in better shape because of the walking I do with the pushchair.

I walk up to nine miles some days. I had a Caesarean so I have a scar, but when I look at it, it makes me really proud.

I get so angry when I see pictures of celebrity mums looking svelte almost straight away.

In my job, I meet women who want to lose weight after childbirth who say ‘I should be thinner by now’ and I just ask ‘Why?’

It takes nine months to put the weight on, so it should take that to lose it. It’s added pressure when they least need it.

'My whole silhouette is different': Tora's story

Tora Cordara, 35, lives in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, with her husband, Charles, 54, and their eight-month-old daughter, Talitha.

Tora is a stay-at-home mum and Charles works for a supermarket chain.

Before I had Tally, I never considered my body. I’d been 9st and a size 8/10 for ever. I did yoga but never watched what I ate.

Now I’m heavier, bustier and my whole silhouette is different.

This is fine usually but when I leave Tally behind and become Tora again it gets me down a bit.

I went out with my sister recently. I picked a size 10 dress to wear and it wouldn’t fit because my body is a different shape. I’m a 12 now.

Not only have I had to get used to being a mum, I’ve also come to terms with how it’s made me look.

I still want to be sexy but I’m not always sure how to dress to flatter my new shape.

Although I’ll lose at least some of the 2st excess weight I’m carrying once I go to the gym, I don’t think I’ll ever be the same shape.

I stopped breast-feeding three months ago but my boobs haven’t shrunk.

I’m an F now – three cup sizes bigger than I was pre-pregnancy. The tops of my arms are bigger, too.

Part of that is the weight gain – I put on 3st during pregnancy – and part of it comes from carrying Talitha around.

Although I can feel my tummy muscles, there’s a soft fleshy layer that means the skinny jeans I loved now have a little wedge of fat on top.

I haven’t got stretch marks, thankfully, but my waist is thicker and I just feel broader up top.

But this is all part of the process that began when I conceived. My body is settling back into some sense of normality – even if that’s likely to be a different one.

It’s sad that people talk affectionately about your “lovely bump” and say you’re “blooming” as you grow during pregnancy, but as soon as you’ve had the baby, what’s left is deemed horrible.

You feel your body isn’t sorting itself out after doing something remarkable but is “fat” or “ugly”. That’s so negative.

If a celebrity loses weight quickly post-baby, the media say she’s done it unsafely.

If she doesn’t shift it instantly, magazines talk about how fat she is. We’re our own worst enemies and we should support each other.