The Dalai Lama mocks Donald Trump with brilliant impression of the Presidential candidate as Piers Morgan ends interview with selfie
Sister of girl who was kept in a closet for six y

Was Max Branning behind the whole tragic Eastende

Get celebs updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

The Dalai Lama's impression of Donald Trump could be the best thing you'll see today.

In an exclusive interview for Good Morning Britain , Piers Morgan spoke to His Holiness about ISIS, the Syrian refugee crisis, Donald Trump, Brangelina and Kim Kardashian.

When speaking about the US Presidential candidate, the 81-year-old confirmed that he'd "never met" the controversial and often comical character but he didn't waste time mocking him.

Morgan asked the spiritual icon what he thought of Trump, and his reply was brilliant, saying: "I don't know, sometimes when you see him, the way his hair... [puts hand on forehead]... and his mouth is small [mimics Trump's mouth]... that is my impression of him but I don't know."

(Photo: ITV)

Piers asked the leader of the Tibetan people about Donald Trump - who could be the next leader of the free world - and whether he would visit him in the White House if he became President.

In response, he said: "That depends you see on him, if he invite me then I would go."

(Photo: ITV)

(Photo: Getty)

Viewers instantly took to Twitter to say how good the interview was focusing on the Dalai Lama's views on Trump, referring to him as a "lad".

The interview ended with a selfie, which Piers' co-host Susanna Reid thought was 'odd'.

In preparation of the exclusive interview, Piers referred to the Dalai Lama as a "very entertaining" and "enlightening" character.

Piers asked the Dalai Lama what he thought about ISIS, and His Holiness said: "Genuine Muslim practitioner will not create bloodshed."

(Photo: ITV)

When asked what his message was to the ISIS, he said: "I think there is too emotion, they should cool down."

Talking about the refugee crisis around the world, in particular, in Syria, the Dalai Lama said: "Main effort should go to help own country bring peace. In Syria, Libya or even Afghanistan. Generally the people always feel that one day they will return. Should rebuild their own country."

Piers also told the Dalai Lama about celebrity Kim Kardashian and said she had four times as many followers on Twitter than he did. Piers asked whether that worried him.

The Dalai Lama said: “Why? If she have more followers, good, no problem."

“Such famous people. I think, no ability to compete [with] my wisdom.”

(Photo: ITV)

The interview - which has been praised online - started with the GMB presenter asking for help with his man flu.

"You should ask a doctor, some people tell me that they have healing powers... I am very sceptical," said the Dalai Lama.

The elderly spiritual leader then revealed he never uses a computer but watches BBC News "occasionally".

Piers then begged him to stop talking about ITV's main rival.

* Good Morning Britain airs weekdays from 6am on ITV