Opinion: Public assistance bill another shameful attack on Alabama's poor

Stop me if you’ve heard this: There is a Republican-sponsored bill in the Alabama Legislature that will impose additional limits and restrictions on public assistance.

Yes, the gigantic Wheel of Pander that GOP lawmakers spin prior to each session handed “Welfare Reform” to Sen. Arthur Orr, R-Decatur. (Gerald Allen got “Guns,” thus his guns-in-cars bill, Terri Collins got “Abortion,” so another fetal heartbeat bill is floating around, and on it goes.)

Orr’s bill, like all the other welfare reform bills before it, seeks to do the usual things: stiffen work requirements, boot people off welfare rolls faster, recalculate their assets so that fictional welfare queen doesn’t drive away from the grocery store in a Cadillac after paying with food stamps and to put recipients’ pictures on their EBT cards.

So, I guess I have to go through this again. I have to again explain why this is stupid. I have to again explain why it’s heartless. I have to explain why it will save nothing, probably end up costing us money, and only hurt hungry children.

But I’m going to try it a different way this time.

Many of you have children, so you have a basic understanding of what it costs to feed a child and yourself. And with that knowledge, you can understand rather clearly why the premise of Orr’s bill – to end government dependency that discourages work – is so dumb.

Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) is Alabama’s version of “welfare.” And Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is “food stamps.” The overwhelming majority of recipients of both programs are children – either directly or indirectly. In January, 27,000 people in the state received TANF benefits and over 20,000 were children. In 2014, over 900,000 Alabama residents received SNAP benefits, all of it going to homes with children.

Keep that in mind when you consider that, according to a story by the Advertiser’s Brian Lyman, the average monthly benefits for a family of three from TANF is $215. That’s $16 per person per week.

Let me put that another way: at $215 per month, that’s $11,180 per year, or about a third of the monthly salary increases Orr played a role in handing out to just five government employees. According to numbers first compiled by Inside Alabama Politics, a bill co-sponsored by Orr in the 2015 session removed the caps from some state positions, making it easier for Gov. Robert Bentley to pay his cabinet members more than the state cap of $91,000 per year.

The change was made with several specific positions in mind, and since that bill’s passage, just five employees have been given raises that total more than $359,000 annually.

For just the raise money, you could provide 32 needy families of three with a year’s worth of TANF assistance.

Maybe we could also give those needy families access to the pool of state cars several of the state employees enjoy. Because if Orr’s bill passes, they’ll need the cars far more than the government workers will.

Orr’s bill seeks to change the TANF assets calculations to include automobiles – which many TANF recipients use to drive to their 40-hour-per-week job that pays them poverty wages.

That significant change in assets would likely knock thousands off the rolls. For no other reason than Republicans still can’t admit that Ronald Reagan was lying about the “welfare queen,” so they continue to believe these myths of large groups of people buying groceries with food stamps and then driving off in Cadillacs.

At a point, this becomes less of a situation in which you’re misinformed and more of you just straight up lying to people to get votes at the expense of the poor, the hungry and the children.

The fact is the state’s public assistance program is a tremendous success. It moves 60 percent of recipients off the rolls in less than a year. It has aided thousands in finding work and becoming contributing members of society. And when GOP trickle-down economics once again failed to trickle and its de-regulation policies combined to cripple the economy, public assistance programs aided millions of hardworking, good Americans in feeding their families.

These sorts of bills, and the restrictions and requirements they impose, are meant to shame people who dare take a dime of taxpayers’ money in a time when they desperately need it. They make hateful inferences about recipients and cast them in the worst possible light.

But maybe we should keep in mind that these bills are coming from guys who’s pulling down over $42,000 per year – all of it taxpayer money – for working 30 partial days in one of the nation’s worst state legislatures.

The shame is misplaced.

Read or Share this story: http://on.mgmadv.com/1prPEu8