Can someone tell me what's wrong witrh locks of love?
Quote: Originally Posted by annettemarie I get what you're saying. You just seemed so strident (or rabid, in your words! :LOL ) that I wondered if you had some sort of personal bad experience,



The site girlndocs linked to, and now you, is the first place I have ever heard of women and girls being encouraged or pressured to cut off their hair and give it to locks of love. Is this a common occurance? I have hair halfway down my back, and have never felt coerced into cutting it off for locks of love. Is this a common occurance?

Thanks. I admit I do get rabid on this topic.I don't know about everywhere, but in MY area it is quite common to be pressured to cut off hair for LoL. I would not like LoL regardless because of their other practices, but I suppose that this pressure adds to my "rabidity." :-)I have waist-length hair and have frequently been stopped and told "your hair is so beautiful, are you growing it to donate to LoL?" Huh? I couldn't possibly be growing it just because I like my hair long, eh?Or in a salon when getting a 1/2" trim - "You know, we are a partner salon with Locks of Love - if you would like to go shorter and cut 10 inches (!!) we can donate it to them!" With no disclosure brochures from LoL or anything - just a "partnership."I have seen ads from LoL in salons and whatnot where they pretty much come out and say that you *should* cut your long hair off and donate it to a "needy" child. I really abhor that LoL is at worst actively perpetuating and at best not saying anything against, this idea that a woman would only grow long hair to donate it - that growing it for her own "use" and enjoyment is somehow selfish or vain.So between this attitude and their smashingly inadequate business and actual wig-giving practices, yes, that's why I find LoL so abhorrent!And I am just a "fiery" person in general - if I am for or against an issue, I am usually REALLY for or REALLY against it. {{tries to put smiley here, tries and tries she does, but cannot figure them out yet! off to research now!}}