Pokemon Go: Niantic To Develop Harry Potter App Next: More Details Here!
Screengrab taken from Harry Potter clip on Youtube.

Pokemon Go has taken the world by storm but fans from other fandoms are hoping they could get an augmented reality game that doesn’t involve Pokemon.

After Niantic Labs announced their Pokemon Go project, fans of the franchise were anticipating its release. While the success can be counted in the millions of players, fans of another franchise are clamoring for their own version of the AR game.

Read More: Fantastic Beasts Movie Spoilers: Pottermore Sorting Hat Confirms 4 Houses Of Ilvermorny

The Harry Potter franchise spans more than a decade as it started with the books and still continues with the upcoming film trilogy Fantastic Beasts And Where To Find Them. It is no doubt that there would be just as many people interested in an augmented reality game version since there are so many things in the Wizarding World of Harry Potter to put in it.

Most kids who have grown up with the books have secretly hoped they’d get their letter once they turned 11, so if and when the Harry Potter AR version gets released, so many would play the game to live out their childhood dreams.

A petition was even set up to get Niantic Labs to take the idea in consideration since there are so many witches and wizards in the real world craving for some magic in their everyday lives. It was set up by Ashtyn Hannon and requires 8,000 signatures and only needs more than 700 signatures to go before it would get submitted to Warner Brothers and Niantic Labs.

“The possibilities are endless,” it says. “In a Harry Potter augmented reality game, you could cast spells in real life. Accio Firebolt! ”

The petition also explains that the app would be a great way to promote the Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them film and would be a win-win for both sides. This is because fans will get their dose of magic with Harry Potter Go, and Warner Brothers and the developers can make a lot of money from it.

Just imagine: the Harry Potter Go app would have its players on the hunt for Horcuxes, would feature fantastical beasts, could allow players to make potions and even duel with friends. Plus, players could get sorted into their houses and earn points to gain potions and the like. Perhaps having a tie-in with Pottermore would make the experience more immersive?

Pokemon Go may just be the window of opportunity that Harry Potter fans have been waiting for, so fingers are crossed that the petition convinces Niantic Labs that it is worth creating.

Read Also: Pokemon Go: Best Tips On How To Easily Hatch Eggs!

For comments and suggestions, leave a message in the comments section below. Like and Follow our Facebook page for more stories and to stay up-to-date with the latest happenings.

For comments and suggestions, leave a message in the comments section below. Like and Follow our Facebook page for more stories and to stay up-to-date with the latest happenings.