Peppa Pig Cancelled: Show Causes Autism, Psychologists Warn?
Editor’s note: You are viewing Morning News USA’s Debunked section. This section contains news that we have investigated and uncovered to be fake news, satire news, hoaxes and urban legends.

Peppa Pig cancelled? The children’s show is allegedly causing autism. Psychologists have warned that the famous cartoon character is harmful for children. Could this be true?

The children’s television series has become a great success in many countries across the world.

However, many parents are now complaining that they banned the cartoon in their homes due to their kids copying the behavior of Peppa Pig and her brother George, Healthy Tips World reports.

Also Read: The Big Bang Theory Season 10: Melissa Rauch Really Pregnant? Bernadette’s Baby Bump Photo Revealed

According to experts, Peppa is rude. In one particular episode, Peppa and her brother George refused to tidy their room, so their parents made it a game.

When they finished up, the naughty Peppa Pig and her brother trashed the room again. Experts claimed that Peppa suffers from superiority complex, shows inappropriate behavior, is impolite, intolerant, disrespectful, envious, arrogant and proud.

These are not the traits that children should emulate!

They claimed that Peppa Pig is breeding disrespectful behavior among children. Besides, researchers from the University of Harvard published the result of an experiment that they conducted in 2012. It said that watching Peppa Pig was one of the main causes of autism among children.

Marc Wildemberg, an epidemiologist who was the lead researcher said: “children exposed to at least 30 minutes a day of the show have a 56% higher probability of developing autism.”

Also Read: ‘Inside Out 2’ Movie News: Pixar’s Exception To The ‘No Sequels’ Policy?

Should parents now be worried?

It seems like these accusations may be untrue. When a reader searches for “Marc Wildenberg” on Google, one will come across a Facebook and a LinkedIn profile, but none about a Harvard researcher, Medium reports.

It does not seem he is a credible person to claim that watching Peppa Pig can lead to autism.

Read More: Netflix Streams Disney, Marvel, Lucasfilm And Pixar In September: Facts You Need To Know

Want to get updated with the latest news about Peppa Pig? Subscribe to our newsletter or follow us on Twitter and Facebook.