Protect Law Enforcement Officers
Move Over, America

More than 150 U.S. law enforcement officers have been killed since 1999 after being struck by vehicles along America's highways, according to the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund. To lower that deadly toll, a new coalition of traffic safety and law enforcement groups is launching a nationwide public awareness campaign to protect emergency personnel along our nation's roadsides.



"Move Over, America" is a partnership originally founded in 2007 by the National Safety Commission, the National Sheriffs' Association and the National Association of Police Organizations. Most recently, the partnership has also received the full support of the American Association of State Troopers. The campaign is the first nationally coordinated effort to educate Americans about "Move Over" laws and how they help protect the law enforcement officers who risk their lives protecting the public.



According to a national poll by Mason Dixon Polling & Research, sponsored by the National Safety Commission:

71 percent of Americans have not heard of “Move Over” laws;

of Americans have not heard of “Move Over” laws; 86 percent support enacting “Move Over” laws in all 50 states; and

support enacting “Move Over” laws in all 50 states; and 90 percent believe traffic stops and roadside emergencies are dangerous for law enforcement and first responders.

The poll was conducted among 625 registered voters from June 23-25. The margin of error is plus or minus 4 percent.

Forty three states have passed “Move Over” laws, which require motorists to “Move Over” and change lanes to give safe clearance to law enforcement officers on roadsides.

Read more

On August 27th, 2009, the North West Miami-Dade Community Traffic Safety Team hosted a Move Over Education & Enforcement Detail in the cities of Medley, Hialeah, Hialeah Gardens, Doral, Virginia Gardens, and North Miami.

See photos

On June 19, 2008 the St. Pete Beach police officers explain the importance of the move over law to citizens, using the Move Over Guide, which is provided by the National Safety Commission.

See photos

Motorists traveling on Interstate 95 in Palm Beach County should be extra careful to move over or slow down this week when they see an emergency vehicle stopped on the side of the highway.

Read more

Officers will pull over drivers who do not change lanes or lower their speed when they pass them doing their job on the streets.

Read more

New 'pull over' law goes into effect today: Drivers must give emergency, DOT vehicles wide berth

Read more