Parents intentionally exposing kids to measles with "Measles Par - Atlanta News, Weather, Traffic, and Sports | FOX 5
Measles Outbreak More>>

More Americans support vaccines More Americans support vaccines In the wake of the measles outbreak that has generated headlines for months, more Americans now say they have positive feelings toward childhood vaccinations, according to a new HealthDay/Harris Poll. In the wake of the measles outbreak that has generated headlines for months, more Americans now say they have positive feelings toward childhood vaccinations, according to a new HealthDay/Harris Poll.

Amid measles outbreak, few rules on teacher vaccinations Amid measles outbreak, few rules on teacher vaccinations While much of the attention in the ongoing measles outbreak has focused on student vaccination requirements and exemptions, less attention has been paid to another group in the nation's classrooms: Teachers and staff members, who, by and large, are not required to be vaccinated. While much of the attention in the ongoing measles outbreak has focused on student vaccination requirements and exemptions, less attention has been paid to another group in the nation's classrooms: Teachers and staff members, who, by and large, are not required to be vaccinated.

Arizona official: Measles outbreak apparently winding down Arizona official: Measles outbreak apparently winding down A health official says Arizona's measles outbreak apparently is winding down. Director Will Humble says so far, no additional cases have been reported and it will likely be over if none are reported by this weekend. A health official says Arizona's measles outbreak apparently is winding down. Director Will Humble says so far, no additional cases have been reported and it will likely be over if none are reported by this weekend.

Parents intentionally exposing kids to measles with "Measles Parties" Parents intentionally exposing kids to measles with "Measles Parties" Measles has been in the news a lot lately, but I bet you haven't heard of this before. Parents in California are hosting “Measles Parties” and purposely exposing their kids to the disease. They are holding gatherings where un-vaccinated kids hang out with kids already infected with measles with the intention of the healthy kids catching it. Some parents are all for it, while others are strongly against it."When I had my daughter who is now 21, when she was younger, I found out someone had the... Measles has been in the news a lot lately, but I bet you haven't heard of this before. Parents in California are hosting “Measles Parties” and purposely exposing their kids to the disease. They are holding gatherings where un-vaccinated kids hang out with kids already infected with measles with the intention of the healthy kids catching it. Some parents are all for it, while others are strongly against it."When I had my daughter who is now 21, when she was younger, I found out someone had the...

Why you should, and shouldn't, worry about measles Why you should, and shouldn't, worry about measles Measles has become relatively rare in the United States, thanks to very effective vaccine, but there are some questions and answers about a still-dangerous disease that's re-emerged as a leading public health concern. Measles has become relatively rare in the United States, thanks to very effective vaccine, but there are some questions and answers about a still-dangerous disease that's re-emerged as a leading public health concern.

Health officials investigating possible measles case at Scottsdale school Health officials investigating possible measles case at Scottsdale school It all started in December when some visitors to Disneyland were exposed to someone with the measles virus.Many of them were not vaccinated and health experts say containing the outbreak will depend upon how many un-vaccinated people get the measles shot.Now FOX 10 has learned of a possible measles case at a Scottsdale elementary school through a letter sent home to parents. It all started in December when some visitors to Disneyland were exposed to someone with the measles virus.Many of them were not vaccinated and health experts say containing the outbreak will depend upon how many un-vaccinated people get the measles shot.Now FOX 10 has learned of a possible measles case at a Scottsdale elementary school through a letter sent home to parents.