Zooh Corner Rabbit Rescue
Got Bunnies?



We are a non-profit, no-kill rabbit rescue. Get information about our organization, find out how to become a volunteer, and learn about other ways to help bunnies. Want to stay up to date with Zooh News? Then subscribe to one of our news feeds!

What’s New at Zooh Corner?

Rabbit News Around the World

Friends Helping Friends

Zooh Corner is but one of many animal rescues who strive to make a difference in animals’ lives. By helping each other, we all can do our very best. Each month, we will feature a rescue, shelter, or rabbit-related group.

See all Rabbit News Around the World…

Explore Zooh Corner

About Zooh Corner Rabbit Rescue

We are a non-profit, no-kill rabbit rescue, operating in the San Gabriel Valley in California. Read about who we are and how we help rabbits.

Adopting Rabbits

We have many wonderful, healthy rabbits that are waiting for a loving home. Information hosted by Petfinder.

Happy New Beginnings

Read about some of our recent rescues and their happy (hoppy?) endings.

Supporting Zooh Corner Rabbit Rescue

There are many ways you can show your support. From donations to volunteering, fostering to adopting, Zooh Corner would not be what it is today without your help!

News and Recent Events

We are always busy rescuing rabbits and providing services to the rabbit community. Stay in touch!

Upcoming Events

Have a look at what’s on the agenda for future activities. Event information and tickets hosted by Eventbrite.

Rabbit Health and Care

A pet rabbit requires time, patience and knowledge. Learn about some of the basics of rabbit health and care.

FAQ

Frequently asked questions about Zooh Corner. Have a question that you don’t see here? Contact us and we can add it!

Links

Browse our network of partners and supporters, including rescues, rabbit health advocates, and rabbit supplies.

Galleries

Browse pictures and stories from Zooh Corner. Read about some of our rescues and successful adoptions, as well as our Sanctuary bunnies.

The Zooh Store

Need supplies for your bunny? How about rabbit-themed merchandise? Anything you purchase from the Zooh Store will support Zooh Corner Rabbit Rescue.

E-Mail

Have a question? Want to help? Interested in adopting? Contact Zooh Corner Rabbit Rescue for more information.

Featured Links

Comfy Bunny Bed & Breakfast

Going out of town? Need bunny day care? Grooming? Bonding? The Comfy Bunny Bed & Breakfast is a privately run small business by Zooh Corner Rabbit Rescue founder, Cat Logsdon.

Exotic Animal Care Center

Devoted Exclusively to the veterinary care of rabbits and other exotic pets. Exotic Animal Care Center supports Zooh Corner Rabbit Rescue by:

Fergus the Rabbit and all likenesses there of, the “Got Bunnies?” slogan and all photographs and graphics are copyright and trademarks of Zooh Corner Rabbit Rescue and may not be used without express written permission.

Copyright 1999-2015 Zooh Corner Rabbit Rescue Inc.