African Union Issues Travel Warning For USA
If you plan on coming here, i have some tips that will save your life



Forget about the America they show you on the T.V

They're thousands of homeless people sleeping on the streets Los Angeles, New York and the big cities

There are places in the USA where people still live in the cave, doesn't wear clothes or shoes and no electricity or running water

There are places in New York that are 100 times worse than Ajegunle



USA is the country where you get killed for wearing a Nike or Jordans sneakers worth only $120



In the USA, you can't just walk into some streets or neighborhood you don't know like you do in Nigeria



Do you wanna know how dangerous USA is ?? Come to Compton or Chicago, you will live in Afghanistan for 7 years without being killed, you can't live in America for 2 days without being killed or your friend being killed





20 of my friends were killed last month for nothing, just sitting in their homes and they were gunned down



1. Don't argue with Americans, they're the most ignorant people on earth



2. Don't get in trouble with anyone, buying a gun is very easy, you walk into Walmart, give them $100 and they give you a gun



3. Americans glorify violence, if you go to jail or kill someone, to them you're a God, killing you will make them feel accomplished, so don't try to argue with anyone



4. Don't go to nightclubs



5. Don't go to the ghettos



6. Mind your goddam business



7. When stopped by the police, give them all your information, license, registration, proof of insurance, don't worry about going to jail if your your driving papers ain't up to date, you will spend only 1 hour in jail and you will be bailed with $65



8. American police are trigger happy, do whatever they tell you to do, don't argue, in fact lay on the floor immediately they ask you to



9. Americans talk too much like women, don't waste your precious time talking with them



10. The most dangerous country in the world is USA

I'm from Nigeria and have been living in the USA for 12 years but i go to Nigeria every 6 month.





Let me tell you, the very first day i came to America, i landed in New York city, i was so disappointed and wanted to go home immediately

Those fantasizing about the USA are those who haven't been to America



USA is the most dangerous country in the world

Chicago is just a city in the states of Illinois, they're the murder capital of the world, Detroit is the second, California is the third



I've seen about 200 murders in the USA but i haven't seen any murder when i was in Nigeria, how is Nigeria or Africa dangerous ??



The police will kill innocent people and at the end of the day, no charges, no jail sentence, there will still be in the police force



As for the citizens, A child doesn't know who his father is because his father is in jail and will never get out, the child will have kids before the age of 23 and before the age of 27, he commits a murder and gets a 70 years prison sentence, the cycle continues and never stops

Killing people is nothing to them







The number of murders that occur in Chicago and Los Angeles in a year is greater than the number of murders that happens in every country in this world put together



Always remember, USA belongs to the Indians, these people from the great Britain came into the USA in 1776 uninvited, killed all the Indians, raped their women, took their lands and named it "USA" and you think they give a fucck about your life ??

363 Likes 73 Shares