'Virtual fence' full of holes

After 3 years and $500 million, Boeing gets chance to fix glitchy border system

Scioli then passed a 98-foot-tall tower fitted with cameras, a high-tech extra set of eyes that he and other agents presumably would welcome. "Don't have much to say about that," the agent said tersely.

Along the boundary between Arizona and Mexico recently, Border Patrol agent Michael Scioli weaved his SUV through unforgiving rock formations and hills of desert brush. Illegal immigrants covertly were crossing the border nearby, but Scioli's agency doesn't always have the manpower to know exactly where.

The tower is part of a network of cameras and sensors rolled out with great fanfare by Chicago-based Boeing Co. three years ago but now is largely disowned by Border Patrol agents and lambasted by lawmakers and government watchdogs.

The so-called virtual fence, which has received $500 million from the Department of Homeland Security, should have been fully in place already in southern Arizona. Instead, the department scrapped the first attempt, which cost Boeing at least $40 million in overruns.

Now, Boeing is trying to revive the troubled project after the U.S. government gave the company a second chance this month.

Homeland Security officials say technology is a necessary tool to track not only illegal immigrants but also violent Mexican drug smugglers and even potential terrorist threats.

Boeing has declined interview requests about its work on the project. But at a hearing this month, the company tried to reassure skeptical lawmakers of progress in fixing glitches.

"I am amazed that we have spent [this much] and don't have a system that works," Rep. Sheila Jackson-Lee, D- Texas, told Boeing and government representatives at the hearing. "America is screaming for the right kind of security."

The U.S. government has spent $3.7 billion on border improvements, including fencing and additional personnel, since fiscal 2005.

The government has more than doubled the number of Border Patrol agents, to about 20,000, and built about 600 miles of fencing along the southern border since 2006. But Homeland Security officials say technology is vital -- one leg of a three-legged stool, they call it -- because of the harsh terrain.

Boeing won a contract in 2006 for the Secure Border Initiative and so far has received more than $500 million to implement a network of cameras, sensors and radar that has been plagued by glitches, according to the Government Accountability Office, the investigative arm of Congress.

Flash rainstorms would trip the radar accidentally. Satellite communications -- initially thought to be more efficient in terrain where cell towers are sparse -- took too long to transmit instructions from cameras to control centers to agents in the field. By the time the agents reached locations minutes later where the cameras had registered a hit, the illegal immigrants had moved on.

A prototype with a name out of science fiction, Project 28, went over budget and Boeing had to kick in at least $40 million beyond what the government paid the company.