Donald Trump To Chase Nigerians Out Of US
Nairaland Forum / Nairaland / General / Politics / Donald Trump To Chase Nigerians Out Of US (103680 Views)

Asari Dokubo Laughs At Buhari: "Rat Sent By God To Chase Buhari Like Pharaoh" / Photos Of Igbuya Leading Thugs To Chase Governor Okowa From Sapele / ‘we Need To Get Nigerians Out Of America – Donald Trump (1) (2) (3) (4)

(0) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) ... (12) (Reply) (Go Down)











American Billionaire and Republican Presidential Front-runner, Donald Trump, has shot a subtle warning to the Nigerian Community in the United States, after he said all Nigerians would be made to leave the country “when he becomes President”.



He made the “threat” during a rally at Wichita, Kansas. According to Donald Trump, Nigerians ad Mexicans have taken all the jobs meant for honest hard working Americans.



“To Make America great again, we need to get rid of the Muslims, Mexicans and the Africans, especially the Nigerians. They take all our jobs, jobs meant for honest hard working Americans, and when we don’t give them the jobs, the Muslims blow us up”, Trump said.

Source: BREAKING: DONALD TRUMP WARNS NIGERIANS : “IF I WIN, YOU LEAVE”. NEWS | BY FNN |American Billionaire and Republican Presidential Front-runner, Donald Trump, has shot a subtle warning to the Nigerian Community in the United States, after he said all Nigerians would be made to leave the country “when he becomes President”.He made the “threat” during a rally at Wichita, Kansas. According to Donald Trump, Nigerians ad Mexicans have taken all the jobs meant for honest hard working Americans.“To Make America great again, we need to get rid of the Muslims, Mexicans and the Africans, especially the Nigerians. They take all our jobs, jobs meant for honest hard working Americans, and when we don’t give them the jobs, the Muslims blow us up”, Trump said.Source: http://www./posts/91538 27 Likes 13 Shares

hm, thinking about it. 1 Like 1 Share

FFN= fakes news nigeria. 168 Likes 9 Shares

That's y he will never gonna win...America can't survive without petrol.. 17 Likes 5 Shares

Lol

I support this guy to the very end, all those Africans living in the US should return home to develop their motherland. 248 Likes 18 Shares

Op stop the lies. 21 Likes 2 Shares

kilode100:

FFN= fakes news nigeria.

a lot of people wont notice sha.



although some folks prefer Nigerians stay abroad?



no opportunities at home and all that. a lot of people wont notice sha.although some folks prefer Nigerians stay abroad?no opportunities at home and all that. 3 Likes 2 Shares

this man na Lucifer. 6 Likes 1 Share

divinehand2003:

Lol

I support this guy to the very end, all those Africans living in the US should return home to develop their motherland.

I love trump just because he is STU PID. I love trump just because he is STU PID. 181 Likes 8 Shares

This source get as e be o.



But America is overhyped sef. I wonder why we can't get it right and enjoy our own country.



Given same platform, I will take Naija over Yankee again and again.



But this trump sef na monster. Filled with so much hatred. Hope America can survive on its own whilst alienating every other country. 43 Likes 3 Shares

noeloge82:

BREAKING: DONALD TRUMP WARNS NIGERIANS : “IF I WIN, YOU LEAVE”. NEWS | BY FNN |









American Billionaire and Republican Presidential Front-runner, Donald Trump, has shot a subtle warning to the Nigerian Community in the United States, after he said all Nigerians would be made to leave the country “when he becomes President”.



He made the “threat” during a rally at Wichita, Kansas. According to Donald Trump, Nigerians ad Mexicans have taken all the jobs meant for honest hard working Americans.



“To Make America great again, we need to get rid of the Muslims, Mexicans and the Africans, especially the Nigerians. They take all our jobs, jobs meant for honest hard working Americans, and when we don’t give them the jobs, the Muslims blow us up”, Trump said.



http://m.?u=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.%2Fposts%2F91538%2F&h=vAQEizYnF&s=1



The above post is an absolute crap. This is reason why certain people want Africans out of their domain. In addition to other bad attributes enumerated by those who tend to disdain Africans, Africans are very good at spreading fake news, innuendos and rumors. The above post is an absolute crap. This is reason why certain people want Africans out of their domain. In addition to other bad attributes enumerated by those who tend to disdain Africans, Africans are very good at spreading fake news, innuendos and rumors. 59 Likes 5 Shares

The only jobs Nigerians are doing there is to wipe their asses after using the toilet. If he send them back, who wipe their asses? 11 Likes 2 Shares

Is Donald Trump a South African? They should check his family tree sharperly. Or jor ask him mama who e real papa b...



-Lord 15 Likes

Adonbiliv it....not until channels report this 3 Likes 3 Shares

Honezzzzly, I'm so proud to be a Nigerian. 10 Likes 2 Shares

I actually want this man to win, and lets see how he'll win ww3.



I love his initial grahgrah. In fact he should send all black contributors away....doctors, soldiers, engineers, scientists...



Just like oba of lahgos, hell later come out and say he was high on aba made political vodka when he gave the speech. 28 Likes 3 Shares

This man must be another dullardinhho, most of those nigerians are naturalized american citizens. Even the ones that are not have legitimate jobs. Or does he want to be another hitler. 4 Likes 1 Share

Better. Nigeria as a country is a disgrace that urgently needs to be uprooted. 1 Like

Vulu:

FAKE LINK. BUT AS LONG AS HE KEEPS THE MUSLIMS AT BAY. I'LL KEEP SUPPORTING HIM. THE WORLD NEEDS AN EVEN MORE RADICAL TRUMP TO PROTECT CHRISTIANS FROM THE RAMPAGING TURBANED NUMBSKULLS CALLED MUSLIMS.

Even in Israel, there are Muslims, and in Saudi Arabia's Mecca, there are Christians. Nature is balanced, if you must leave in a balanced society, the contents must be balanced as well. Everyone must be under surveillance. Abi shey na Muslim kill over 20 students and then himself for one of the schools in US last year? Even in Israel, there are Muslims, and in Saudi Arabia's Mecca, there are Christians. Nature is balanced, if you must leave in a balanced society, the contents must be balanced as well. Everyone must be under surveillance. Abi shey na Muslim kill over 20 students and then himself for one of the schools in US last year? 60 Likes 6 Shares



DerideGull:







The above post is an absolute crap. This is reason why certain people want Africans out of their domain. In addition to other bad attributes enumerated by those who tend to disdain Africans, Africans are very good at spreading fake news, innuendos and rumors. I wish its true but trump is found of making lofty statements so this is a childs play compared to others 1 Like

kilode100:

FFN= fakes news nigeria.

I'm not gay so why should I be bothered?



But



Why is it that when he promised to chase Muslims away most of you were hailing him and now he has suddenly become " a useless fool" when he mentioned Nigeria? 33 Likes 1 Share

He's not even won the primary election yet. Because this pig is first on the republican list doesn't mean Ben Carson will not still defeat him before election 9 Likes

[size=13pt] MODS move this to the jokes section please.



this is FAKE [/size] 19 Likes 3 Shares

kilode100:

FFN= fakes news nigeria. It's very true.. It's very true.. 2 Likes 1 Share

IF this is true which i doubt, then wow.



As much as I would like to plant my foot in his groin, yet he kinda tells the harsh truth.



and even though most Americans are lazy and feel entitled, yet I would love ours to come home and let's grow our economy. 3 Likes

divinehand2003:

Lol

I support this guy to the very end, all those Africans living in the US should return home to develop their motherland.

Frustrated man...na we sey make them deny you visa. Frustrated man...na we sey make them deny you visa. 9 Likes 2 Shares

Nothing for republicans...

Ioannes:

IF this is true which i doubt, then wow.



As much as I would like to plant my foot in his groin, yet he kinda tells the harsh truth.



and even though most Americans are lazy and feel entitled, yet I would love ours to come home and let's grow our economy. what truth?

which oyinbo will do security or nursing for $10 an hour. no be dem go bomb Arabs first. what truth?which oyinbo will do security or nursing for $10 an hour. no be dem go bomb Arabs first. 6 Likes 2 Shares

I seriously dislike Nigerian bloggers.too many fake news.u bloggers are a problem.desperately trying to make money by fake stories. 9 Likes