Orlando shooter killed by police in hail of gunfire as he was trying to escape through hole
Orlando Police John Mina speaks to the media during a press conference near the Pulse night club, Monday, June 13, 2016. (Andrew West/News-Press)

By Arek Sarkissian of the Naples Daily News

ORLANDO — Omar Mateen, the killer who claimed allegiance to ISIS, hid in a bathroom at Pulse, the gay Orlando nightclub where he had slaughtered scores of people. A wall of cinder block separated him from a team of police officers just outside. For three hours early Sunday morning, crisis negotiators tried to end the siege.

Then Mateen — whom police said had acted "cool and calm" during discussions — talked about killing more people. Alarmed police placed an explosive device against the block walls and detonated them. The breach failed, the hole not large enough to allow for a successful rescue.

A cop rammed his Bearcat armored vehicle through the club wall. Hostages poured out. So did Mateen, guns blazing.

With quick efficiency, officers shot him dead.

So ended the worst mass shooting spree in American history, with 49 others killed and 53 wounded.

On Monday, Orlando Police Chief John Mina and other law enforcement officers offered new details about the shooting, including the possibility that some victims may have been killed by officers trying to save them.

"I will say this, that's all part of the investigation," Mina said. "But I will say when our SWAT officers, about eight or nine officers, opened fire, the backdrop was a concrete wall and they were being fired upon."

A law enforcement source close to the investigation who asked not to be named because he wasn't authorized to speak publicly said a crowd of up to 300 people and the complex layout of the dance club may have resulted in some patrons being struck by gunfire from officers.

Mina said his decision to enter the club with such violence was tough.

"It was a hard decision to make but it was the right decision," he said. "Our No. 1 priority is on saving lives and it was the right decision to make."

Local, state and federal investigators continued to process the scene Monday from a collection of law enforcement mobile command units.

So far, authorities have determined Mateen, a 29-year-old security guard from Fort Pierce, walked up to the club at 2:02 a.m. Sunday armed with an AR-15 rifle and a Glock handgun.

An off-duty Orlando police officer working at the club was investigating an underage drinker outside when he heard gunshots inside, according to the law enforcement source. The off-duty officer ran inside the club and traded gunfire with Mateen, backed up soon by three other Orlando police officers, the source said.

Together, the officers fired at Mateen, who retreated into a bathroom toward the rear of the club.

"Those additional officers made entry while the suspect was shooting," Mina said. "They forced him to stop shooting and retreat to the bathroom where we believe he had several hostages."

Mateen called 911 three times from a bathroom he shared with hostages and pledged his allegiance to ISIS, a radical Islamic terrorist group. He called dispatchers twice and hung up before they called him back, the source said.

"He was in one bathroom fortified with hostages," Mina said. "There were people in the opposing bathroom, about 15 or 20 people. And the details are unknown, they're part of the investigation."

Orlando police called crisis negotiators to the club to speak to Mateen. They had three conversations with him. He remained calm during the talks, but he made clear that his plan was to kill more people, Minas said.

"Based off statements made by the suspect, and based on information we received by the suspect and from the hostages and the people inside," Mina said, "we believe further loss of life was imminent. I made the decision to commence the rescue operation and do the explosive breach."

A SWAT team summoned by Orlando Police set up three explosive charges controlled by one device, but failed to topple the exterior wall leading to the bathroom that included 15 to 20 people. So Mina made the call to use the Bearcat.

Officers wore combat-grade body armor and helmets as they rammed a bathroom wall of the Pulse nightclub, creating a small hole — big enough for people to crawl through — so the score of captives could escape.

Along with the freed hostages who were hopping out of the jagged portal to freedom was Mateen who was wielding an AR-15 rifle and semi-automatic Glock handgun he bought days earlier from a Port St. Lucie gun shop. He fired at officers, striking one of them in his helmet before he was shot several times and killed.

"There's a hole in the wall about two feet off the ground and three feet wide. We were able to rescue dozens and dozens of people who came out of that wall," Mina said. "The suspect came out of that hole himself with a handgun and a long gun and engaged in a gun battle with officers where he was ultimately killed."

Dozens of bullet holes dot the exterior concrete wall, what's left as evidence of the shootout.

This last exchange of gunfire with Mateen and Orlando police and Orange County sheriff's deputies occurred at 5 a.m. and ended the three hour standoff.

Orlando officers walked into the nightclub and found lifeless patrons strewed about a bar, lounge area and a bathroom.

They heard cellphones continued to ring and saw text messages displaying from anxious friends and relatives of the dead.