Some Comments on the Nancy Genovese Case
There’s been a great deal of response to the Nancy Genovese case, mostly support for Nancy, and a great deal of suspicions and unanswered questions as well. Let’s take a look at some of the most polarizing issues from Nancy’s side of the story (and yes, the story told is clearly Nancy’s version of the events, as we have not yet significantly heard from anyone else), and try to clear up some unanswered questions. If there’s additional issues not addressed, please leave a comment below.

For a review of the Nancy Genovese case, view the original article here:

Comment 1: “What did she expect? She was driving around with $13,000 in cash and an assault weapon, and she stopped at an airport?”

Nancy Genovese was driving home from the range when she stopped to take a photograph, and she did have a rifle in her car. It was not an “assault weapon”. Assault weapons are illegal in New York. Regardless of your personal views on firearms, it is important to remember that it is perfectly legal to drive around with an unloaded rifle in a locked case. Whether it’s “smart” or not doesn’t matter, as I’m sure we can all agree that a police officer cannot arrest you for failing to be “smart”. Yes, she also had a large amount of cash on her. Again, not a crime. Perfectly legal to do so. Keep in mind that the officer did not KNOW that Nancy Genovese had either of these in her car until after she was already illegally detained, and after an illegal search of her car was performed. All the officer knew before detaining nancy was that a woman was taking pictures of a tourist attraction outside of the airport.

Comment 2: “She should know better, taking pictures of an airport.” “I heard it wasn’t an airport, that it was a military base.” “I heard there were signs warning her not to take pictures”.

Gabreski Airport is a general aviation airport owned by Suffolk County and open to the public. It is utilized by private aviation, corporate flights, and air taxi services. It is also home to the 106th Rescue Wing of the Air National Guard. Nancy Genovese was detained and arrested outside the main entrance to the public airport, on Old Riverhead Road, on public property, directly in front of a helicopter shell placed at the airport entrance for the sole purpose of attracting tourists (green arrow pointing to the helicopter display above). There are no signs warning the public from taking pictures, and in fact, why would you set up a helicopter shell by the roadway to attract visitors if you don’t want pictures taken? Another point that is important to remember is that it is perfectly legal to take pictures of an airport or military base from public property. Posting a “no photos” sign does not diminish your constitutional rights.

COMMENT 3: “I heard she was caught snooping around there before, and they told her not to come back”.

Nancy Genovese denies that she was ever previously warned by anyone not to visit the airport, and insists that Undersheriff Caracappa is lying. Even if Undersheriff Caracappa’s version of what happened was 100% true, Nancy still did nothing wrong. When she was arrested, she was on public property. No one in that airport can prevent Nancy Genovese from standing or travelling on public property.

COMMENT 4: “She was held down and given mystery shots in jail? Sounds more like the x files to me.”

While I am unsure of Suffolk County’s exact procedures, it is not uncommon for inmates to receive mandatory flu shots and hepatitis vaccinations to help limit the spread of infectious diseases while behind bars. Given Nancy’s situation, I’m sure it only served to heighten her fear of what was happening to her.

COMMENT 5: “I heard at her arraignment she completely flipped out in court and acted hysterical.”

While Nancy Genovese denies this, I can’t help but think that if anyone was held against their will for several days for doing nothing wrong while suffering the treatment that Nancy had, they just might break down by that point too.

More to come…