SAPD chief: San Antonio police officer thought cellphone was gun before fatally shooting man

An SAPD officer was put on administrative leave after allegedly shooting a man in the upper torso on Friday Feb. 4, 2016 at the Wood Hollow Apartments. An SAPD officer was put on administrative leave after allegedly shooting a man in the upper torso on Friday Feb. 4, 2016 at the Wood Hollow Apartments. Photo: Jacob Beltran Photo: Jacob Beltran Image 1 of / 93 Caption Close SAPD chief: San Antonio police officer thought cellphone was gun before fatally shooting man 1 / 93 Back to Gallery

San Antonio Police Department Chief William McManus said that a 11-year veteran of the department who fatally shot a man Thursday evening on the North Side believed the victim was holding a gun when he pulled the trigger.

McManus, however, confirmed Friday morning that the object in the suspect's hand was actually a cellphone.

Officials said the officer pulled up to the man, identified as 36-year-old Antronie Scott, as he was exiting his vehicle at an apartment complex in the 10300 block of Sahara Street around 6:40 p.m.

RELATED: Man wanted on two felony warrants shot dead by SAPD on North Side

The officer quickly approached and told Scott to "let me see your hands," then almost immediately fired his service weapon, according to McManus.

“It was in the blink of an eye,” McManus said. “I listened to the audio, I watched the tape, and it happened very, very quickly.”

McManus said the officer, identified as John Lee, told investigators that Scott spun around quickly and that, believing Scott was holding a gun, feared for his life.

RELATED: Video reveals details in fatal shooting of Gilbert Flores by deputies in San Antonio

Lee had been called to the scene by a detective with SAPD’s Repeat Offender Program who was tracking Scott because he was wanted on two felony warrants for gun and drug possession.

“(The detective saw) the wanted individual, who was in the parking lot, and requested for him to help stop the individual because ROP detectives are not in uniform, and they wanted a uniformed officer to conduct the stop,” McManus said.

Lee arrived shortly after in a marked SAPD cruiser and pulled up perpendicular to the white Mercedes-Benz Scott was driving. McManus said the cruisers lights were on when he pulled up.

McManus said both Lee and Scott got out of their cars at nearly the same time, and the shooting happened just moments later.

RELATED: Videos show Gilbert Flores' hands raised before deputies opened fire

“There is some concern, but that will all come out in the investigation,” he said.

McManus said police have audio of the shooting but Lee's patrol car dash cam, while rolling, was not directed at where the action was taking place, nor was he wearing a body camera.

The vehicles used by ROP detectives are not equipped with dash cameras, so not footage is available from the detective at the scene either.

“These are unmarked vehicles like any other vehicle you see on the street,” McManus said.

SAPD is expecting a shipment of body cameras this month, which will be distributed first to bike patrol and Park Police, then to officers working on the East Side, McManus said.

Lee has been placed on paid administrative duty pending the outcome of an investigation into the incident. McManus said he plans on having the administrative aspect of the investigation finished quickly, though, he would not give an exact timeline.

mdwilson@express-news.net



Twitter: @MDWilsonSA