Implications for climate sensitivity from the response to individual forcings
The concept of radiative forcing is used to compare the effects of different physical drivers on the Earth’s energy budget. Two forcing agents that produce a similar radiative imbalance might be expected to initiate similar feedbacks and have the same global mean temperature response12. However, there can be variations in the size and type of feedbacks engendered by a specific forcing13, mainly due to geographical variations in the forcing magnitude. These variations can be characterized by an efficacy that scales for the differences in temperature response. Forcings that project more strongly on the Northern Hemisphere, land or polar regions are systematically more effective at changing temperatures than an equivalent amount of CO 2 , whose forcing is more uniformly distributed throughout the globe13,14. The converse is true for forcings localized in the Southern Hemisphere or ocean regions.

Some published constraints on ECS, particularly from the Last Glacial Maximum, have attempted to incorporate forcing efficacies into their assessments15,16, although none of the recently published constraints derived from modern trends have fully done so3,4,5,6. However, ECS does not provide the information on transient, short-term climate impacts that TCR reflects. It therefore remains unclear to what extent efficacies derived for equilibrium results are applicable to transient situations where ocean heat uptake plays an important role17,18,19,20.

An analysis of transient simulations with interactive aerosols21 indicated that the combination of anthropogenic aerosols, ozone, and land-use change affect global temperature trends more efficiently than does CO 2 forcing alone (that is, the efficacy of the combination is greater than unity). However, the specific contributions of individual forcings have thus far remained obscure. In this paper, we use a large suite of single-forcing simulations to estimate the impact of combined forcings in transient simulations for the historical period and show that proper consideration of the resulting efficacies implies that previously derived constraints on ECS and TCR should be revised upwards.

For the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, Phase 5 (CMIP5), the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) modelling group performed ‘historical’ simulations using model version GISS-E2-R spanning 1850–2005, driven by estimates of relevant natural and external forcings22. Multiple simulations over the same time period using single forcings or combinations of forcings were also submitted to the CMIP5 ‘historicalMisc’ archive, including simulations forced by only well-mixed greenhouse gases (GHGs), anthropogenic aerosols (AA), ozone (Oz), solar variations (Sl), volcanoes (Vl), or land-use changes (LU). These unique ensembles allow us to replicate climate sensitivity calculations in a ‘perfect model’ framework, in which we have all the information we need to determine transient and equilibrium sensitivities using previously published methods, which can be compared to the actual TCR (1.4 °C) and ECS (2.3 °C) of the GISS-E2-R model23,24.

TCR depends on the transient changes in global mean temperature ΔT and radiative forcing ΔF. To calculate ECS, we also require estimates of the rate of ocean heat content (OHC) change ΔQ. We use ΔQ here instead of the more conventional TOA imbalances25 to restrict our analysis to observables that have been used in previous analyses. Both ΔQ and ΔT are readily estimated from model output (see Supplementary Methods). However, there are several different definitions of radiative forcing13,25, and we use two methods to capture different aspects of the planetary response to external agents. First, we calculate the annual-mean, global instantaneous radiative forcing (iRF) as the initial radiative flux change, evaluated at the tropopause in an attempt to anticipate the effect of rapid stratospheric adjustments26, for each year 1900–2005 (Supplementary Methods). Second, we calculate the effective radiative forcing (ERF), which incorporates changes in the troposphere and land surface that are rapid compared to the ocean temperature response, using fixed-SST experiments forced with year-2000 values of each forcing (Supplementary Methods).

We first estimate the climate sensitivities using the instantaneous radiative forcings ΔF, combined with the historical annual global mean temperature anomaly ΔT and ocean heat uptake anomaly ΔQ for each non-overlapping ten-year period beginning with 1906–1915 and ending with 1996–2005 (Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Fig. 1).

For each decade, we plot the temperature anomaly versus forcing (for TCR, Fig. 1a) or the difference between forcing and ocean heat uptake anomalies (for ECS, Fig. 1b). Using we calculate λ as the slope of the best-fit line in both cases4. Using only the first and last decades gives comparable results. The TCR and ECS are then given by where F 2 × CO 2 is the model forcing for CO 2 doubling. These linear methods assume that both λ ECS and λ TCR are constant in time, despite evidence27 that this may result in an underestimate of the ‘true’ values.

Figure 1: Model historical and single-forcing transient and equilibrium sensitivities. a, Non-overlapping ensemble average decadal mean changes in temperature and instantaneous radiative forcing for GISS-E2-R single-forcing ensembles (filled circles) (defined with respect to 1850–1859). TCR is calculated from the slope of the best-fit line. Also shown are 1996–2005 temperature changes and effective radiative forcing (open circles). In this case, TCR is the quotient of the temperature and ERF estimates. Following ref. 4, straight grey contours show isolines of TCR from 0 to 4 for the iRF case. b, Same, but changes in the rate of ocean heat uptake are subtracted from forcing changes. ECS is calculated from the slope of the best-fit line (for iRF) or from the quotient (for ERF). c, 1996–2005 average ΔT and instantaneous (filled arrows) and effective (white arrows) radiative forcing for each single-forcing experiment. The transient climate response for each experiment in each case is the slope of the line. The vector sum of the single-forcing values does not substantially differ from the historical values (circles) and the TCR of the sum and historical experiments is less than that of the GHG-only experiment. The published GISS-E2-R TCR (1.4 °C) is shown as a dashed black line. d, Same as c, but the x axis shows the difference of 1996–2005 average forcing and estimated ocean heat uptake. The slope of each line is the equilibrium climate sensitivity. The published GISS-E2-R ECS (2.3 °C) is shown as a dashed black line. Full size image

The ratios of single-forcing TCR and ECS to CO 2 -only TCR and ECS define transient and equilibrium efficacies, respectively13. These are measures of the enhancement (or suppression) of the climate response to the forcing relative to the climate response to CO 2 . Supplementary Table 1 lists the transient and equilibrium efficacies calculated from the GISS-E2-R single-forcing runs, along with uncertainties derived from the five-member ensembles for each forcing.

The global mean climate responses to different forcings may differ because of the character of the forcings themselves (such as their geographical or vertical distribution) and because different forcings induce different patterns of surface warming or cooling, thereby affecting the net top-of-atmosphere radiation imbalance, and thus the ocean heat uptake rate ΔQ. The evolving pattern of temperature change may be incorporated into a global mean framework as an ‘ocean heat uptake efficacy’18. Our methodology does not differentiate between these two physical mechanisms, and we note that a substantial portion of what we call ‘forcing efficacy’ may be due to differences between the ocean heat uptake induced by CO 2 forcing and the heat uptake induced by the forcing in question.

In keeping with previous studies13,14,21,28, we find that aerosols have an enhanced transient climate response by roughly 30% and equilibrium response by 50%. Furthermore, the transient and equilibrium efficacies of ozone and volcanic forcing are significantly less than unity in the perfect model framework; other studies29,30 have also found that volcanic forcing has a smaller impact on global temperatures than an equivalent change in greenhouse gas forcing. The efficacies for LU and Sl calculated in this framework are uncertain owing to the small changes in these forcing agents over the historical period, although we do find that the best estimates for LU transient and equilibrium efficacy generally exceed unity, probably owing to hemispheric asymmetry and land bias in this forcing.

Previous work13 found that certain equilibrium efficacies, notably anthropogenic tropospheric aerosols, decrease towards unity when the iRF is replaced by the ERF to incorporate tropospheric adjustments. This raises the possibility that the use of effective, rather than instantaneous radiative forcing, may render the sensitivities from GHG-only and historical simulations more directly comparable. We therefore re-calculate efficacies using the ERFs (open circles in Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). Although aerosol transient and equilibrium efficacies are indeed reduced when using ERF (Supplementary Table 1), TCR and ECS calculated from the combined effective radiative forcings within the ‘historical’ experiment remain biased low compared to the GHG-only values (Fig. 1).

Because the forcings and temperature responses are additive, we can show in a vector plot the relative contributions of each forcing to the discrepancies between sensitivities derived from CO 2 -only simulations and those estimated from historical simulations (Fig. 1c, d). This shows clearly that the low sensitivities of the historical runs (compared to values obtained from CO 2 -only simulations) result from the higher efficacy of aerosols (when calculated using iRF) and land-use change, along with the lower efficacy of ozone and volcanic responses. Figure 1c, d indicates that many of the forcings over the recent historical period are less effective at changing global temperatures than those that cool the surface. We note that aerosol efficacy when calculated with ERF is compatible with unity; implying that differences between the historical sensitivities and CO 2 -only sensitivities are attributable to the other forcings.

Scaling ΔF for each of the single-forcing runs by the relevant efficacy yields sensitivities estimated from the historical runs comparable to those derived from CO 2 -only runs (Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Fig. 2); because the forcings and temperatures add linearly, the resulting calculation with the historical all-forcing run scaled by the historical efficacy will also yield the same sensitivity as in the CO 2 -only runs.

What are the implications of our estimated forcing efficacies for constraints on sensitivity based on historical observations? Using our perfect model analysis, we can combine the model efficacies with historical forcings and the temperature response to estimate the observed climate sensitivity for comparison to existing calculations. Here, we make no attempt to evaluate the quality of existing observations or their suitability for estimating climate sensitivity; rather, we seek to replicate existing estimates and show how they change once efficacies are taken into account.

Assuming that all forcings have the same transient efficacy as greenhouse gases, and following a previous study4, the best estimate (median) for TCR is 1.3 °C (see Supplementary Methods). Scaling each forcing by our estimates of transient efficacy determined from iRF we obtain a best estimate for TCR of 1.7°C (Fig. 2a) (1.6°C if efficacies are detemined from ERF). This scaling simultaneously considers both forcing and ocean heat uptake efficacy. Other estimates of TCR without efficacies3,21, which differ slightly owing to choices of base period and uncertainty estimates and the aerosol forcing used, are similarly revised upwards when using calculated efficacies (Fig. 2a).

Figure 2: Sensitivity estimates from observations. a, TCR and ECS best-guess values (circles) and 95% joint confidence intervals (shaded regions). These are first calculated assuming all efficacies = 1 (darker colours) and then incorporating efficacies calculated using iRF. Arrows indicate the revisions in TCR and ECS when efficacies are taken into account. Estimates from three published works3,4,21 and their revisions are shown. Original (red) and revised (orange) TCR and ECS probability distribution functions calculated using ref. 4 data are shown on the x and y axes, respectively. b, Same, but efficacies are calculated using effective radiative forcing (ERF). Full size image

We apply the same reasoning to estimates of ECS. Using an estimate4 of the rate of recent heat uptake ΔQ = 0.65 ± 0.27 W m−2, we find, assuming all equilibrium efficacies are unity, a best estimate of ECS = 2.0 °C, comparable to the previous result4 of 1.9 °C. However, as with TCR, accounting for differences in equilibrium forcing efficacy revises the estimate upwards; our new best estimate (using efficacies derived from the iRF) is 2.6 °C (Fig. 2a). If efficacies are instead calculated from the ERF, the best estimate of ECS is 3.0 °C (Fig. 2b). As for TCR, alternative estimates of ECS are revised upwards when efficacies are taken into account (Fig. 2b).

Estimates of both ECS and TCR are very sensitive to errors and uncertainties in the observations. Differences in the spread and best estimates for ECS and TCR (Supplementary Table 2) will depend on the base periods used, estimates of ocean heat uptake, and on the aerosol forcing and its uncertainty. It is not the goal of this paper to assess different observational estimates. However, we note that in all cases, incorporating differing transient and equilibrium efficacies results in higher estimates for TCR and ECS.

The calculated efficacies used here are based on a single model. To increase confidence in these values it would be necessary to perform the suite of single-forcing experiments with additional models. These experiments were a low priority in CMIP5, and the historicalMisc archive is sparse. Moreover, very few groups performed comparable calculations of radiative forcings associated with each forcing agent. In cases where forcing is small over the whole historical period (LU, Sl) uncertainty is large. Simulations in which land-use changes or solar forcings are amplified may be necessary to constrain the efficacy of these forcings.

We stress the importance of clearly defining ‘radiative forcing’. Although TCR and ECS estimates are revised upwards regardless of the radiative forcing definition used to calculate efficacies, this is attributable to different factors when effective, rather than instantaneous, radiative forcing is used. The major difference is the calculated efficacy of anthropogenic aerosol forcing, which approaches unity when fast tropospheric adjustments are incorporated. Previous studies involving the GISS model13 found that rapid cloud changes in both hemispheres result from the rapid adjustment to aerosol forcing; effective radiative forcing is thus more hemispherically symmetric than instantaneous aerosol forcing. This increased symmetry may account for the reduced aerosol efficacy when calculated with ERF. However, further study in a multi-model context will be necessary to better constrain the efficacy associated with historical aerosol changes.