OJ CAUGHT STEALING COOKIES IN FORBIDDEN FOOD ORGY
Disgraced O.J. SIMPSON, incarcerated diabetic, defies doc’s orders, gorges on stolen sugar snacks that may kill him!

Yes, O.J. has turned into a cookie monster!

The former grid­iron great was recently caught stealing sweets from the cafeteria of the Nevada prison where he’s serving a 33-year sentence for armed robbery. Guards noticed that the 66-year-old seemed to be hiding some­thing in his clothes after lunch and seized more than a dozen oatmeal cookies from the would-be smug­gler, a close source told The ENQUIRER.

Doctors had previously warned O.J., a severe diabetic, to clean up his diet and start exercising more – or he could be dead within months.

“But the temptation of the cookies in the prison chow line was too much for him,” said the source. “O.J. has been trying to diet since the doctors talked to him, but he loves sweets, and after a few weeks he couldn’t take it anymore.”

O.J. was walking back to his cell from lunch when a guard or­dered him to stop.

“Everyone thought he had smuggled in a cell phone or some other kind of contraband, so when the guard started pulling cookies out of O.J.’s shirt, the other in­mates started laughing so hard they nearly fell over,” said the source. “O.J. just stood there with a goofy grin on his face as the guard kept digging in­side his shirt and throwing the cookies on the floor.”

Prisoners at Nevada’s Love­lock Correctional Center are not allowed to bring food from the cafeteria back to their cells.

“The guard told O.J. that he could be written up for cookies but let him go with a warning not to let it happen again,” the source added.

As The ENQUIRER previously reported, doctors warned O.J. that he might only have three months to live if he didn’t get his health under control. Along with diabetes, he was tipping the scales at 300 pounds and had high blood pressure.

“O.J. was embarrassed about getting caught stealing cookies,” said the source. Although O.J. recently tried to focus on healthy eating, “he told a friend the only enjoy­ment he has left in his life is eating his favorite foods. To tell the truth, he really doesn’t care what happens to him anymore.”