The dangers of microwaves revealed
(NaturalHealth365) When I first thought of writing about the dangers of microwave ovens, I hesitated. By now, most health-conscious individuals are at least somewhat aware of the dangers of microwaves or EMFs (electromagnetic frequencies) in general, I thought. Surely, even more must know about the dangers of microwaving food for human (or pet) consumption?

Then I read some startling statistics. Still today, 90% of American homes have microwave ovens that are used for meal preparation. That’s 9 out of 10 households in the U.S! Based on this fact alone, I was convinced that another review of the dangers of microwaving was certainly worth the effort.

The ugly truth about heating up food with microwaves

Microwaves use electromagnetic energy (similar to radio waves) set to a specific frequency in order to agitate water molecules in food. As these molecules get increasingly agitated, they begin to vibrate atomically and eventually generate heat. The increasing levels of agitation that occur when the microwave is on is why microwaves can heat food so quickly and why they do so from the “inside out.”

Sounds pretty benign so far, right? The problem begins at the very basic level. The friction that heats the food also causes substantial damage to the surrounding molecules, tearing them apart and deforming them. Unfortunately, over time, as a person eats food from a microwave – the consequences can be devastating.

What does science say about the dangers of microwaves?

The former USSR banned use of microwave ovens in their country in 1976 and studies as to the questionable nature of microwave ovens began in the late 1980s. These studies have gone largely unknown and at times they have been suppressed by gag orders and big business lobbying efforts.

One of the most significant studies was conducted in 1991 by Swiss researcher Dr. Hans Ulrich Hertel in partnership with Dr. Bernard H. Blanc of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology and the University Institute of Biochemistry.

Hertel and Blanc gave volunteers various preparations of milk and vegetables, some served raw, some served after being heated conventionally and some after being heated in a microwave oven. Blood samples were taken right before consuming the food and at various points after consumption. Significant changes were discovered in the blood of the individuals who consumed microwaved food, including a decrease in hemoglobin and cholesterol values and higher white blood cell counts (Leukocytosis) – which is often a sign of an inflammatory response caused by infection or other factors.

”Leukocytosis which cannot be accounted for by normal daily deviations is taken very seriously by hematologists,” Hertel said. “Leukocytes are often signs of pathogenic effects on the living system, such as poisoning and cell damage. The increase of leukocytes with the microwaved foods were more pronounced than with all the other variants. It appears that these marked increases were caused entirely by ingesting the microwaved substances.”

Eating food from a microwave increases your risk of cancer

Other reports have discovered that microwaving fatty foods leads to the release of dioxins (known carcinogens) as well as polyethylene terpthalate (PET). Dishes made specifically for microwave oven use have been found to leak BPA, or biphenol A, a xenoestrogen that has been linked to breast cancer.

A 2010 study conducted by Trent University concluded with “unequivocal evidence” that “microwave frequency radiation effects the heart at non-thermal levels that are well below federal safety guidelines.”

If all this science isn’t evidence enough as to the harmful effects of microwaving, common sense might do the trick. Have you ever tasted an egg after it has been “nuked?” What about some broccoli or a cup of coffee?

You have to admit, food just doesn’t smell (nor taste) right when it comes out of the microwave.

Raum and Zelt, in their “Comparative Study of Food Prepared Conventionally and in the Microwave Oven,” sum it up nicely in terms that are in alignment with “The 7 Essentials System ™” for healing (and feeding) the body naturally:

“A basic hypothesis of natural medicine states that the introduction into the human body of molecules and energies to which it is not accustomed is much more likely to cause harm than good. Microwaved food contains both molecules and energies not present in food cooked in the way humans have been cooking food since the discovery of fire. Microwaves, including those in ovens, are produced from alternating current and force a billion or more polarity reversals per second in every food molecule they hit. Production of unnatural molecules is inevitable.”

So, play it safe, not sorry. Ditch your microwave today and go back to cooking the way nature intended. Your body – and the planet – will thank you.

About the Author: Dr. Veronique Desaulniers (“Dr. V”) is a best-selling author and specialist in Chiropractic, Bio-Energetics, Meridian Stress Analysis, Homeopathy and Digital Thermography. After 30 years in active practice, she decided to “retire” and devote her time to sharing her personal, non-toxic Breast Cancer healing journey with others. Her years of experience and research have culminated in “The 7 Essentials™ “, a step-by-step coaching program that unravels the mystery of healing the body. Her website and personal healing journey have touched the lives of thousands of women around the globe. To get your F.R.E.E. 7-day mini e-course and to receive her weekly inspiring articles on the power of natural medicine – visit: BreastCancerConqueror.com

References:

https://articles.mercola.com/sites/articles/archive/2010/05/18/microwave-hazards.aspx

https://scitech.web.cern.ch/scitech/TopTech/01/MicrowaveOven/microwave_2.shtml

https://www.health-science.com/microwave_hazards.html

https://m.huffpost.com/us/entry/684662