PETA: “We do not advocate ‘right to life’ for animals” – Nathan J Winograd
PETA: “We do not advocate ‘right to life’ for animals”

In the last 11 years, PETA has killed 29,426 companion animals. Apologists for PETA’s killing have argued that all of the animals they kill are “unadoptable.” But this claim is a lie for numerous reasons. It is a lie because rescue groups and individuals have come forward stating that the animals they gave PETA were healthy and adoptable and PETA insiders have admitted as much, one former intern reporting that he quit in disgust after witnessing perfectly healthy puppies and kittens in the kill room. It is a lie because PETA refuses to provide its criteria for making the determination as to whether or not an animal is “unadoptable.” It is a lie because according to a state inspector, the PETA facility where the animals are impounded was designed to house animals for no more than 24 hours. It is a lie because Newkirk herself admitted as much during a 2008 television interview: when asked whether or not PETA kills healthy animals, she responded, “Absolutely.” It is a lie because PETA staff have described the animals they have killed as “healthy,” “adoptable,” “adorable” and “perfect.” It is a lie because PETA itself admits it does not believe in “right to life for animals.” And it is a lie because when asked what sort of effort PETA routinely makes to find adoptive homes for animals in its care, PETA responded that it had “no comment.”

Yet despite PETA’s own admissions, there are those who simply refuse to believe it, who claim it never happened (which even PETA does not deny). Here’s your proof:

For the 2012 data, as reported by PETA, to the Virginia Department of Agriculture, click here. For an Op Ed piece written by Ingrid Newkirk where she writes that PETA supports an automatic destruction policy for all dogs who look like “pit bulls” in shelters, click here. For a postcard written by Newkirk where she admits PETA does not advocate “right to life for animals,” click here. For evidence that PETA employees were rounding up animals, killing them within minutes in the back of a van, and dumping their bodies in trash bins, click here. PETA gave a No Kill shelter a basket of cookies to celebrate an announcement that they would start killing again after four years. To learn more, click here. Rainbow Rescue on giving animals to PETA: “I thought it was the answer from heaven. We just thought ‘PETA is the godfather for animals.'” They were told that the animals they transferred to PETA “would be prepared for potential adoption.” They were lied to and ended up dead. Click here for the story. Click here to read Ingrid Newkirk admitting she would go to work early to kill animals – “I must have killed a thousand of them, sometimes dozens per day.” Over the objections of feral cat advocates pushing for a TNR program, the Mayor of Miami Beach pushed a plan to trap and kill feral cats. PETA sent a letter to the Mayor applauding his decision. The Mayor, however, had also decided that kittens would be turned over to a rescue group for socialization and adoption. But PETA took issue with this part of the plan, arguing that all the cats, including the kittens, should be taken to animal control and “euthanized by sodium pentobarbital injection.” Click here for PETA’s letter. For information about PETA killing in the face of alternatives, testimony by a veterinarian that the cat and kittens he gave PETA after they promised to find them homes were healthy but killed within minutes, their defense of neglectful and even abusive killing shelters, their opposition to TNR for healthy feral cats, their claim that cats should be rounded up and killed and so much more (read the articles and follow the internal links), click here.

There are dozens of articles and internal links, my book Friendly Fire documents even more, and I have even more beyond the book, all leading to the same conclusion:

You either love animals or you love PETA, but you can’t love both because the two are mutually exclusive.

—————-

Have a comment? Join the discussion by clicking here.

My Facebook page is facebook.com/nathanwinograd. The Facebook page of my organization is facebook.com/nokilladvocacycenter. Many people mistakenly believe that the Facebook pages at No Kill Nation and No Kill Revolution are my pages. They are not.