Assessing recent trends in high-latitude Southern Hemisphere surface climate
To place these recent observed trends into a longer-term context, we compiled observational records of SAT longer than 55 years as well as proxy records for SAT, SST and sea ice, extracted from annually to multi-annually resolved ice and marine sediment cores, spanning the past 200 years (see Supplementary Table 1 for details of the datasets used, and Supplementary Methods for data compilation). Datasets were grouped into four different sectors, which were designed to group observational and proxy records with similar patterns of variability while also working within the constraints of data availability. Our regions comprised three near-coastal zones: (1) the Antarctic Peninsula region including the Bellingshausen and Scotia Seas, (2) the WAIS and the Ross Sea region, and (3) a broad region spanning coastal East Antarctica and incorporating the adjacent oceans and the Weddell Sea. The final region (4) is defined over the inland East Antarctic Plateau above 2,000 m elevation. The separation of coastal from inland regions reflects known differences in atmospheric transport dynamics pathways for weather events that impact inland versus coastal sites in Antarctica53. Figure 2 shows these sectors and the data available for this synthesis, and highlights the paucity of climate information currently available for many parts of Antarctica.

Antarctic Peninsula sector. Of the four sectors, the Antarctic Peninsula has the longest observed SAT record (1903 to present); prior to the late 1940s, SAT is only available from the single Orcadas station, located northeast of the Peninsula itself. Instrumental data, proxy palaeotemperature records (ice cores and a moss bank core) and borehole temperature inversions show that the Antarctic Peninsula warming trend (Fig. 1) is part of a longer-term regional warming trend (Fig. 2a). The correspondence between instrumental and proxy data and between multiple proxy data sources may be stronger here than for any other region, suggesting that this is a robust context for the late twentieth-century temperature trend. The James Ross Island (JRI) ice core suggests that local warming began in the 1920s and has been statistically significant (p < 0.1) since the 1940s54. Ice cores from the Gomez and Ferrigno sites and a moss bank core demonstrate that the twentieth-century rise in SAT on the northern Peninsula also extends south to the southwest Antarctic Peninsula55,56 and was accompanied by increases in snow accumulation57,58 and increased biological productivity, suggesting that temperature changes were likely to be year-round. Antarctic Peninsula warming has been related to intensification of the circumpolar westerlies in austral summer and autumn19, to associated deepening of the ASL, and to central tropical Pacific warming in austral autumn, winter and spring11.

Figure 2: Antarctic climate variability and trends over the past 200 years from long observational and proxy-derived indicators. a–d, Records were regionally compiled for the Antarctic Peninsula (a), West Antarctica (b), coastal East Antarctica (c) and the Antarctic Plateau (d) (see Methods). Central map shows the location of records according to environmental indicator (colours) and record type (symbols), as well as the boundaries of the four geographic regions (black lines), the 2,000-m elevation contour (grey curve), and the trend in sea-ice concentration over the 1979–2014 interval (shading). Within each region (a–d), records were compiled as 5-year averages (dark lines) according to the environmental parameter that they represent: observed surface air temperature (SAT) (red); proxy for SAT (orange); borehole inversion reconstruction of surface temperatures (greens); proxy for sea surface temperature (blue); and proxy for sea-ice conditions (cyan). Shadings (and thin vertical lines) denote ranges of estimates across records within each 5-year bin. The borehole temperature records are shown individually with uncertainty bounds (see Supplementary Fig. 4 for additional details). All records are expressed as temperature anomalies (°C units) or normalized data (σ-units) relative to 1960–1990. Details of datasets used in this figure are provided in Supplementary Table 1. Full size image

None of the most recent 36-year trends in the proxy SAT records is unprecedented relative to trends of the same length from earlier portions of the palaeoclimate archives (Supplementary Methods; Supplementary Fig. 3a). The most recent 100-year trends do exceed the upper 95% level of all earlier 100-year trends in three of the Antarctic Peninsula ice-core isotope records (JRI, Gomez and Ferrigno; Supplementary Fig. 3c); for the JRI core the most recent 100-year warming trend falls within the upper 0.3% of the distribution of all 100-year trends over the past 2,000 years54,59.

Two marine SST proxy records from the northern Antarctic Peninsula show a warming trend over the twentieth century that was most prominent over roughly the 1920s to 1950s (Fig. 2a). A cooling trend in the most recent decades of the proxy stack appears to be of similar magnitude to earlier episodes of decadal-scale variability. In this sector, sea-ice information is derived from one historical record, three ice-core chemical records60 and two marine diatom records spanning the Bellingshausen Sea and Scotia Sea/northern Weddell Sea. They depict a regionally coherent sea-ice decrease from the 1920s to the 1950s, coincident with proxy evidence for SST increases. The proxy composite does not clearly capture the Bellingshausen sea-ice decline observed by satellites since 1979, although individual studies have demonstrated that this recent observed decline is embedded within a longer-term decreasing trend that persisted through the twentieth century and was strongest at mid-century61,62.

West Antarctica. In West Antarctica, SAT observations28,30, a borehole temperature profile63,64 and ice-core water stable isotope records65 all depict a consistent, statistically significant warming trend beginning in the 1950s. These trends are greatest in winter and spring, and closely associated with the rapid decline in sea ice observed in the Amundsen–Bellingshausen Seas40,65,66. The annual mean SAT trend over West Antarctica may be among the most rapid warming trends of the past few decades anywhere on Earth (2.2 ± 1.3 °C increase during 1958–2010 at Byrd Station, mostly owing to changes in austral winter and spring)30,67. Nevertheless, the natural decadal variability in this region is also large, owing to the strong variability of the ASL68, amplified by teleconnections with the tropical Pacific also during winter and spring11,29,69. This differs markedly from the situation on the Antarctic Peninsula, where the summertime trends occur against a background of relatively small interannual variability31. As a consequence, the large recent trends cannot yet be demonstrated to be outside the range of natural variability (see, for example, 100-year trend analysis in Supplementary Fig. 3c). An analysis of more than 20 ice-core records from West Antarctica65 concluded that the most recent decades were probably the warmest in the past 200 years, but with low confidence because of a similar-magnitude warming event during the 1940s associated with the major 1939–1942 El Niño event70.

At present, no high-resolution reconstructions of SST or SIE are available for the Amundsen–Ross Sea sector to give context to the observed satellite-era trends there.

Coastal East Antarctica. No recent multi-decadal trend emerges from the compilation of SAT observations and proxy records in coastal East Antarctica. Recent fluctuations lie within the decadal variability documented from ice-core water isotope records, and recent 36-year and 100-year trends remain within the 5–95% range of earlier trends within each record (Supplementary Fig. 3a,c). The only available long-term borehole temperature reconstruction suggests a recent warming trend. This apparent contradiction may arise from spatial gradients and differences in recent temperature trends (for example Fig. 1) across this geographically extensive but data-sparse sector. Indeed, only seven meteorological stations, two ice-core water isotope records of sufficient resolution (see Supplementary Methods) and one 100-year borehole profile occupy a longitudinal region spanning 150° E to 40° W (Fig. 2a). Networks of isotope records from shallow ice cores (not compiled in this study owing to their limited temporal coverage) do provide evidence for a statistically significant increasing SAT trend in the past 30–60 years over the Fimbul Ice Shelf, East Antarctica71 and over Dronning Maud Land72, despite no observed warming at the nearby Neumayer station71,72.

The single SST proxy record available from off the coast of Adélie Land73 (Fig. 2) shows a strong increase post-1975, and, despite considerable decadal variability, the final 36-year trend exceeds the 95% range of trends in the full record (Supplementary Fig. 3a,c). Satellite observations, showing a regional SIE increase across this sector since 1979, are not mirrored by proxy records, which suggest an overall sea-ice decline since the 1950s74, overlaid by strong decadal variability (Fig. 2). This also highlights the challenges in interpretation of sea-ice proxies, which can be sensitive to variations in sea-ice thickness, duration or local dynamics. For example, near the Mertz glacier, sea-ice proxy records spanning the past 250 years depict large multi-decadal variations that are attributed to iceberg calving events and are comparable to, or larger than, the most recent 36-year or 100-year trends73 (Supplementary Fig. 3b,c).

East Antarctic Plateau. The stable isotope records for the East Antarctic Plateau do not show statistically significant trends in the final 36 years of their record (Supplementary Fig. 3a), unlike the observed SAT for the region (Fig. 1 inset b). Comparison of Figs 1 and 2 indicates that the stable water isotope records for the East Antarctic Plateau come from locations spanning differing temperature trends in Fig. 1. The Plateau Remote core on the central plateau is characterized by large decadal variability, and the most recent 100-year trend remains well within the 5–95% range of earlier trends. Towards the margins of the East Antarctic Plateau, the EDML and Talos Dome ice cores display recent 100-year warming and cooling trends, respectively, that are significant with respect to earlier 100-year trends in these cores (Supplementary Fig. 3c). Temperature records from borehole inversions75, which cannot resolve decadal variability, also show evidence for modest temperature increases on the Dronning Maud Land side of the East Antarctic Plateau during the late twentieth century, with warming apparently beginning earlier closer to the coast. The differing characteristics of long-term temperature variability and trends at sites across the Antarctic Plateau again highlight the importance of increasing the spatial coverage of proxy records from this data-sparse region.

The Southern Annular Mode. The history of the SAM over the past 200 years has been assessed in a number of previous reconstructions using syntheses of station observations26,76,77 and palaeoclimate networks18,78,79 (not shown). Reconstructions from station data display strong decadal variability and season-specific trends. The summer SAM exhibits the strongest post-1960s trend, which is assessed as unusual compared with trends in the earlier part of the century26. A summer SAM index reconstructed from mid-latitude tree rings also indicates that the recent positive phase of the SAM is unprecedented in the context of at least the past 600 years79. Similarly, an annual average SAM index reconstruction based on a network of temperature-sensitive palaeoclimate records spanning Antarctica and southern South America indicates that the SAM is currently in its most positive state over at least the past 1,000 years18. SAM index reconstructions display a steady79 or declining18 SAM index since the early 1800s, reaching a minimum in the early to mid-twentieth century18,79, before commencement of the positive SAM trend that is seen in observations (Fig. 1).