School Reportedly Creates ‘Safe Space’ for Students Hurt by ‘Tequila Party’
Some students wore sombreros to a tequila-themed birthday party at Bowdoin College — and others were so offended that the school had to provide them with safe spaces and counseling to deal with it.

According to the school’s newspaper, the Bowdoin Orient, the e-mail invitation to the event called it “a ‘tequila’ party” and then added, “we’re not saying it’s a fiesta, but we’re also not not saying that :) (we’re not saying that).”

This phrasing was, presumably, aiming to poke fun at the way the PC police often lose their minds over pretty much any party where tequila is present — which wound up being exactly what happened with this one.

Yep. According to the Orient, one student (1) reported that some of the attendees had been wearing sombreros at the same time as they were drinking tequila at the party, and all hell broke loose.

In an e-mail to National Review Online, sophomore Richard Arms states that there have been “3 school-wide emails from deans and our president, and there have been several ‘safe-space’ opportunities on campus for students to discuss how they were hurt and offended” by the party.

What’s more, the General Assembly of Bowdoin Student Government issued a “Statement of Solidarity to stand by all students who were affected by the ‘tequila’ party that occurred on 20 February 2016.”

“The Assembly, representing the entire student body of Bowdoin, stands by all students who were injured and affected by the incident,” the statement reads.

(Yes — “injured.”)

According to the statement, even though the school offered offended students counseling (!) to help them deal with the fact that their classmates were drinking a kind of booze with a kind of hat on, the response just wasn’t enough for something so serious.

Recommend, that the administration should more immediately acknowledge incidents of this nature, and it must acknowledge not only their occurrence but also the deep hurt that students may be feeling immediately following such acts. Further Recommend, That the administration must make clear to students, well in advance, their commitment to creating a supportive space for students who have been or feel targeted, for as long as students deem necessary. Further Recommend, That the administration must create a space for those students who have been or feel specifically targeted. Further Recommend, That the administration must create a separate space open to other students for discussion, support, and processing of the incident. Further Recommend, That the Office of Academic Affairs mandate an academic or experience in the classroom for those involved in such incidents. Further Recommend, That the College develop processes for punitive measures to be undertaken against those involved in such incidents. Further Recommend, That the College remain cognizant of the time and academics of students of color following such incidents and take appropriate measures to ensure their academic, mental, and social wellbeing.

To avoid this oversight in the future, the document details a list of “recommendations” for the school to better deal with future sombrero/tequila tragedies and what they see as a disturbing trend of “cultural appropriation” on campus:

Yes — safe spaces for people who have been hurt by the very existence of tequila parties and punishment for the people responsible for them.

According to Arms, however, the people involved with the party are already facing plenty of trouble on campus:

I know that the majority of students on campus disagree with what’s going on here, but as soon as anyone disagrees they are declared a bigot and a racist, so this speech is quickly suppressed. There are a lot of people here who want to do something about this, but we have no way of sharing our opinion without being attacked by these PC rats. A few of the girls associated had to leave campus because of all the hate they received.

Yikes.

Watch your hats, kids . . . or maybe just stick to whiskey.

— Katherine Timpf is a reporter at National Review Online.