Cellular senescence: from physiology to pathology
In addition to normal development and physiology, senescent cells have been associated with multiple pathological processes (Fig. 2; Table 2), in which senescence can have both beneficial and detrimental effects. The discussed pathologies are subdivided according to the current understanding of the role of senescence in each disease.

Senescence counteracts cancer progression. It is well established that the intensity of the oncogenic signalling flux progressively increases during the early stages of tumorigenesis until it reaches a threshold that activates the key tumour suppression pathways p16 and p53 (Fig. 1). When this happens, cell cycle inhibitors offset the oncogenic signalling and cells enter into senescence, which prevents the expansion of pre-cancerous cells. Accordingly, at the pathological level, senescence is detectable in the benign stage of tumorigenesis, which depending on the tissue type is known as adenoma, tumour in situ, intraepithelial neoplasia and others4.

Compelling evidence exists that cells that undergo damage-induced senescence can be removed by immune-mediated clearance43,44,52. This is due in part to direct immune recognition of the senescent cells by T helper cells52 and is also due to the recruitment of inflammatory phagocytic cells43, which are probably attracted by SASP factors37,39.

In addition, there is evidence for the therapeutic effect of pro-senescent therapies in already established malignant tumours. In particular, acute activation of p53 in hepatocellular carcinomas and sarcomas induces senescence, which is followed by tumour elimination43,60. Also, as discussed below in further detail, pharmacologic CDK4 inhibitors induce senescence in many cancer cells61,62,63 and are showing promising activity in human clinical trials64,65,66. As a word of caution, however, DNA-damage-induced senescence that is associated with cyclical chemotherapeutic regimes may promote disease progression through SASP components, such as WNT16B67.

Attenuation of liver fibrosis. Liver fibrosis, being a main precursor of cirrhosis, is characterized by the accumulation of fibrotic tissue and the concomitant loss of liver function. It is triggered by chronic liver damage associated with hepatitis virus infection, alcohol abuse or liver steatosis (fatty liver disease). During chronic damage, hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) become activated and abnormally proliferate as myofibroblasts (damage-activated fibroblasts). Eventually, these myofibroblasts become senescent and produce a stable fibrotic scar with abundant collagen and other extracellular matrix components. In human patients, SAβGAL-positive cells accumulate in the periphery of the fibrotic scar68. In rodents, chronic treatment with carbon tetrachloride (a liver-damaging agent) or bile duct ligation produces liver fibrosis, which is characterized by positive SAβGAL staining69,70,71. Histological analyses indicated that these SAβGAL-positive cells derive from activated HSCs that upregulate p53, p21 and p16 (Ref. 69). The acquisition of senescence by the HSCs is associated with the SASP, attraction of immune cells, clearance of the senescent HSCs by NK cells and partial elimination of the fibrotic scars.

The beneficial role of senescence in restricting liver fibrosis is demonstrated by the analysis of senescence-deficient mice. In particular, upon liver damage, mice lacking Trp53 and/or Cdkn2a present senescence-negative fibrotic areas that are larger than those in senescence-competent mice69,73. Similarly, the extracellular matrix protein CCN1 (also known as CYR61; a member of the CCN family (comprising CYR61, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) and protein NOV homologue (NOV))) produced by damaged hepatocytes is a key mediator for the induction of senescence in HSCs. Accordingly, mice with Cyr61-null hepatocytes do not execute HSC senescence and this results in a lower secretion of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and an exacerbated fibrotic response71. Also, production of IL-22 by activated HSCs induces HSC senescence in association with p53 activation through STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3)–SOCS3 (suppressor of cytokine signalling 3) and increased production of MMPs74. In agreement with this, transgenic mice overexpressing IL-22 in the liver show a more efficient and faster resolution of fibrosis74.

Together, the above studies suggest that the induction of HSC senescence could be a possible therapeutic strategy to limit liver fibrosis. There are promising results in mouse models indicating that treatments with recombinant protein CCN1, or with adenoviruses expressing CCN1 or IL-22 are able to revert already established hepatic fibrosis by promoting HSC senescence70,71,74. Moreover, statins also induce senescence in HSCs and thereby attenuate hepatic fibrosis upon bile duct ligation in rats75.

Reduction of skin scarring and oral fibrosis. Skin fibrosis is part of the process of wound healing and it shows remarkable similarities to liver fibrosis. In particular, the above-mentioned matricellular protein CCN1 is crucial for the induction of senescence in dermal fibroblasts, the associated expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and antifibrotic MMPs76. As in the case of liver fibrosis, Cyr61-deficient mice do not activate senescence in the dermal fibroblasts that participate in cutaneous healing, which leads to an exacerbated fibrosis76. Moreover, topical treatment with recombinant purified CCN1 protein restricts fibrosis during wound healing76. Mechanistically, CCN1 activates NADPH oxidase 1 (NOX1) through RAC1 and this, in turn, generates ROS that induce the DDR, ERK and p38 MAPK pathways, which results in the upregulation of p53 and p16 (Refs 76,77). These studies have led to a model in which wound-activated fibroblasts (myofibroblasts), characterized by the abundant production of extracellular matrix, are converted by CCN1 into senescent fibroblasts, which are then characterized by their capacity to degrade the extracellular matrix. Therefore, senescence participates in restricting the initial fibrotic wound response77.

Senescence of activated fibroblasts has also been proposed to ameliorate the effect of oral submucous fibrosis, a disease associated with tobacco and areca nut chewing78. In particular, senescent fibroblasts accumulate during oral submucous fibrosis progression by a telomere-independent mechanism involving DDR, ROS and increased p16 expression, and senescence may reduce fibrosis by the increased expression of MMPs78.

Mitigation of renal fibrosis. In the case of the kidney, increased activity of senescence pathways has been observed in multiple renal diseases (reviewed in Ref. 79). In particular, reports in humans, rats and mice have documented high levels of p16 and p21 expression, and SAβGAL activity in association with renal damage and ageing80,81,82,83,84,85,86. Interestingly, renal injury by urethral obstruction results in renal fibrosis associated with SAβGAL activity, whereas, in Cdkn2a-null mice, SAβGAL is absent and renal fibrosis is aggravated72. Conversely, in a model of renal injury by ischaemia, treatment of mice with a CDK4 inhibitor (which can be considered a 'p16 mimetic'; see below) reduces the extent of renal damage87. However, it should be mentioned that in a similar model of ischaemia renal repair was improved in the absence of Cdkn2a encoding p16 and ARF88.

Limitation of cardiac fibrosis upon infarction. Cellular senescence has additionally been shown to play a part in regulating cardiac fibrosis after myocardial infarction89. Myocardial infarction promotes the accumulation of senescent myofibroblasts in the heart and the expression of key senescence regulators, especially p53 but also p16, p21 and ARF, which decrease collagen production and cardiac fibrosis. Importantly, ablation of Trp53 significantly attenuates cardiac fibroblast senescence, inflammation, macrophage infiltration and MMP production, and increases collagen deposition at the fibrotic scar, thereby aggravating cardiac fibrosis89. Based on the above-mentioned findings regarding the reversion of liver and skin fibrosis by pro-senescent treatments71,74,76, it is possible that similar treatments could also revert cardiac fibrosis and improve heart function recovery.

Protection against atherosclerosis. Cellular senescence has been increasingly linked to the development of vascular pathologies, in particular to atherosclerosis, which has been the topic of excellent recent reviews90,91,92,93. Advanced atherogenic plaques consist of a cap, which is formed by vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and collagen, that surrounds a necrotic core comprising lipids, lipid-laden macrophages (foam cells) and debris. Plaque formation involves a series of events initiated by endothelial cell dysfunction, vascular permeability, and the monocyte-and macrophage-mediated release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. These events induce an initial phase of VSMC proliferation that is subsequently followed by the onset of senescence92. The SASP associated with senescent VSMCs amplifies the pro-atherogenic inflammatory environment and spreads senescence in a paracrine manner to other VSMCs, as well as to endothelial cells92. This is in line with the observation that atherosclerotic plaques from human coronary arteries contain endothelial cells and VSMCs that are positive for SAβGAL and express high levels of p15, p16, p21, p53 and ARF (Refs 93,94,95). In addition to hypercholesterolaemia, multiple additional factors contribute to trigger vascular senescence, including mitogens, inflammatory molecules, angiotensin II, oxidants and antioxidants, nitric oxide, high glucose, advanced glycation end products, mitochondrial damage and oxidized low-density lipoprotein90,92.

The beneficial effect of senescence on atherosclerosis has been inferred genetically. In particular, mouse models with deficiencies in ARF96, p53 (Refs 97,98), p21 (Ref. 99) or p27 (Ref. 100) all show increased susceptibility to developing atherosclerosis. Conversely, mice with increased Trp53 gene expression are protected from atherosclerosis101. Together, these results suggest that pro-senescent pathways restrict the formation of atherosclerotic plaques, most probably by limiting the proliferation of the associated VSMCs and macrophages. However, it should also be mentioned that agonists of the nuclear receptor oxysterols receptor LXRβ decrease senescence and protect from atherosclerosis102.

Remarkably, unbiased genetic screens in humans and in mice have also pointed to p16 and ARF as protectors of atherosclerotic diseases. In particular, multiple independent genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have consistently identified polymorphisms in a genomic region near the CDKN2A–CDKN2B locus103,104. Furthermore, in the case of one particular polymorphism, it has been possible to establish that the pro-atherosclerotic allele is associated with reduced expression of the three genes encoded by the CDKN2A–CDKN2B locus105. In mice, deletion of the genomic region that is homologous to the human interval containing atherosclerosis-associated polymorphisms results in decreased Cdkn2a–Cdknb expression and increased mortality upon high cholesterol diets106. Moreover, genetic mapping of an atherosclerosis-prone mouse strain identified a low-expression allele of the Cdkn2a locus (but not Cdkn2b) as responsible for the atherosclerosis susceptibility107. These genetic evidences in human and mice strongly suggests that lower levels of CDKN2A expression result in a higher risk of atherosclerosis, which further supports the concept that pro-senescent pathways protect from atherosclerosis.

Protection against pulmonary hypertension. Pulmonary hypertension has been also proposed to induce senescence in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells from patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)108. Experimental models of mouse pulmonary hypertension have been used to study the effect of pro-senescent pathways. In these models, the absence of Trp53 or Cdkn1a aggravates pulmonary hypertension109,110, whereas p53 stimulation with nutlin 3a ameliorates the disease110. Therefore, pro-senescent therapies, such as nutlin 3a, could provide therapeutic benefit to patients with pulmonary hypertension.