Disrupting proton dynamics and energy metabolism for cancer therapy
Na+/H+ exchangers. Of the nine members of the NHE family, NHE1 has received the most attention in the context of tumour cell-targeted therapy. Although NHE1 inhibition has been linked to cell death in different tumour cell lines39,40,41, dramatic effects on tumour cell survival have not so far been reported for monotherapy with NHE1 inhibitors. This apparent innate resistance is related to the co-expression of other NHE isoforms in epithelial-derived tumour cells42 that are not affected by NHE1 inhibitors43. As NHE1 inhibition formed a promising target in cardiovascular disease owing to its prevention of Na+/Ca2+ exchange following ischaemia, the NHE1 inhibitor cariporide progressed to Phase III clinical trials for the treatment of myocardial infarction15,44. Its clinical development has been abandoned, however, owing to poor response and adverse side effects44,45, which could be attributed to the ubiquitous expression of NHE1 throughout the body45. This has dampened the enthusiasm for NHE1-targeted therapies in other clinical settings. However, as the clinical trials involving NHE1 inhibition have only been carried out in patients with cardiac diseases, and the adverse health effects were also cardiac related, it remains to be investigated whether NHE1 inhibition for cancer patients with otherwise healthy cardiovascular systems could be effective. Furthermore, these findings coupled with recent promising in vitro use of NHE1 inhibitors in combination with Ca2+ exchange inhibitors in glioma cells46 could warrant further study. NHE1 inhibition is also linked to the improvement of the apoptotic effect of chemotherapeutic agents such as paclitaxel47, strengthening the potential synergistic value of targeting NHE1 in treatment development.

The expression and activity of NHE1 is induced by hypoxia in pulmonary myocytes48,49. These findings generated excitement in the area of H+ dynamics and cancer because they indicated that NHE1 could be a hypoxic target in tumour cells. However, only limited data for NHE1 upregulation in tumour cells and hypoxic zones50 have been presented thus far. Recent evidence suggests that NHE1 activity can be upregulated or downregulated depending on cell type and oxygen availability51,52, indicating a need to further understand the role of NHE1 in the hypoxic microenvironment. Furthermore, a point that is often overlooked in the context of the tumour microenvironment is that extracellular acidosis will in fact decrease NHE1 functionality by altering the H+ gradient between the cellular space and its environment53. Therefore, NHE1 activity is perhaps already limited by the physical parameters that exist in the tumour microenvironment, and these conditions should be considered in future studies.

Alkalinization of pH i by NHE1 is linked to malignant transformation23, and NHE1 is also strongly implicated in local pH gradients that are associated with fluid-phase endocytosis54 or macropinocytosis55. Interestingly, treatment with the NHE1 inhibitor EIPA was recently demonstrated to compromise the growth of KRAS-transformed tumour xenografts, an effect that was attributed to inhibition of nutrient uptake by macropinocytosis56. In addition, pH i gradients stimulate cell migration and as such NHE1 is proposed to participate in the development of metastases16,22,57 (discussed below).

Carbonic anhydrases. CAs are a family of 16 proteins distributed throughout the body that catalyse the hydration of CO 2 to generate HCO 3 − (basic) and H+ (acidic) and have essential roles in gas exchange and pH regulation (reviewed in Ref. 58). Following the molecular cloning of CAIX59, which is normally only expressed in limited areas of the gastrointestinal tract, it was found that CAIX is rapidly induced by HIF60, leading to its establishment as a marker of poor prognosis in numerous cancer types (for an extensive list, see Refs 13, 15). Of the members of the CA family, CAIX is a unique target owing to its nearly exclusive expression by tumour cells at the extracellular surface, which is driven by selection pressures in the tumour microenvironment. Whereas Pastorekova et al.61 showed that CAIX acidifies pH e , we and others reported that CAIX is a robust pH i regulator in fibroblasts and hypoxic tumour cells13,17,18,20,21,62 and as such has a key role in tumour growth together with the other extracellular facing isoform CAXII18. Although initial studies revealed that CAIX knockdown (through RNA interference (RNAi)) delayed in vitro tumour cell growth63, effective cell killing was not achieved, which was partly attributed to the concomitant hypoxic induction of CAXII18. Our consideration of the magnitude of pH i changes that are required to affect cell survival could be the reason for reduced efficacy (discussed below), as even combined knockdown of CAIX and CAXII in hypoxic colon adenocarcinoma LS174 cells only reduced pH i to ∼6.9 when pH e was 6.0 (Ref. 16).

More recent work on CAIX disruption has provided encouraging results. Importantly, in the 4T1 mouse model of metastatic breast cancer, knockdown of CAIX (by small hairpin RNA (shRNA)) caused tumours to regress, and consequently 100% of the mice survived with minimal recurrence of the primary tumour (in 20% of the mice)64. One of the most interesting findings in this study was that the CAIX inhibitor CAI17 was effective at stalling the progression of mouse 4T1 tumours, but unfortunately it was not as effective on human MDA-MB-231 xenograft tumours64. Last, almost no metastases were observed when CAIX was knocked down, which could be a vital finding for the development of metastasis therapies. The importance of CAIX inhibition in the prevention of metastases was indicated by showing that CAIX has a role in the expansion of breast cancer stem cell populations in the hypoxic microenvironment65.

Neri and Supuran15 have recently extensively described the development of CAIX inhibition as a clinical target in cancer therapy. Current preclinical studies are combining established clinical applications with CAIX inhibition. In this setting, reduction in CAIX expression has been shown to improve the effect of radiotherapy both in vitro and in vivo in xenograft experiments66,67. Furthermore, CAIX knockdown enhances the effect of the anti-angiogenic therapy bevacizumab in xenografts of HT29 and U87 cells68. Recent analysis of human glioblastoma samples indicated high expression of CAIX as an independent marker of prognosis with Kaplan–Meier analysis, revealing a significant decrease in overall survival time (15.2 months with high CAIX versus 34.1 months with low CAIX)69. Thus CAIX targeting remains an important cancer-specific treatment strategy, and there are five independent clinical trials currently ongoing using CAIX inhibitors15. An interesting note in current clinical trials is that the protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib also inhibits CAI, CAII, CAIX and CAXII at nanomolar concentrations70. Thus, it will be interesting to interpret the positive or negative implications of CA inhibition in imatinib trials. Finally, a monoclonal antibody against CAIX (WX-G250; also known as girentuximab) has recently been shown to increase the median survival time in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma when given in combination with interferon-α (IFNα)71. This antibody does not inhibit CAIX pH-regulating activity, indicating that other potential roles exist for CAIX in tumour survival.