Phytoremediation is a soil and groundwater treatment technology that uses vegetation and its associated microbiota, soil amendments, and agronomic techniques to remove, contain, or reduce the toxicity of environmental contaminants. It is generally used as an in situ technology, but can also be used as an ex situ technology.

Phytoremediation is implemented by establishing a plant or community of plants that have been selected to provide the required remediation mechanisms. The technology exploits the natural hydraulic and metabolic processes of plants, and thus is passive and solar driven. The technology can be used in combination with mechanical treatment methods or as a "stand alone" treatment method.

top of page

Applicability

Phytoremediation can be used to treat a wide range of inorganic and organic contaminants.

Sites contaminated with heavy metals and other inorganic contaminants can be remediated using phytoremediation. Heavy metals are generally best treated using phytoaccumulation/extraction or phytostabilization. Hyperaccumulators are plants that absorb unusually large amounts of metals in comparison to other plants and the ambient metal concentration. For example, metal accumulation can result in 1% Cu and Co and 3% Zn, Ni, and Mn levels on a dry weight basis.

Hyperaccumulators are used to remediate shallow soils. Examples of this type of plant include sunflowers, dandelions, and hops, which are used to remove metals from the environment with the use of phytoaccumulation/extraction. It should be noted that the tendency for hyperaccumulation of inorganics in certain plants can slowly poison wildlife. Therefore, at sites known to be high in inorganics and where wildlife use is likely, plants should be tested for high metals concentrations to control any hazards to wildlife.

Trees with better hydraulic control and dense root systems are the best for phytostabilization, most easily absorbing metals such as lead, cadmium, zinc, arsenic, copper, chromium, selenium and uranium. Phytoremediation has also been effective for the removal of nitrates and ammonium from groundwater. All plants require a nitrogen source to grow. Some nitrogen-containing contaminants can be used by the plants for plant growth.

Phytoremediation may be useful in treating volatile organic compounds (VOCs), chlorinated VOCs (CVOCs), and trinitrotoluene (TNT). These organic compounds can be degraded via enzymes that are produced in the plant’s natural growth cycle. The enzymes can break down complex organic contaminant molecules into simpler molecules, which can aid in tree growth. As the complex compounds are broken down, the simple molecules are added to plant tissue.

In contaminated soils, enzymes and proteins can initiate fast chemical reactions to degrade chlorinated solvents, as well as herbicides and cyanide. Projects that target organic contaminants, such as trichloroethylene (TCE) and TNT in the water phase, have shown some promise; however, more research is needed for the less-mobile contaminants, such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).