Protein kinase C, an elusive therapeutic target?
The protein kinase C (PKC) family comprises a group of highly related protein kinases that have been the focus of drug discovery efforts for the past 20 years1. Much of the interest in PKC began with the discovery that members of this family of isozymes are activated in several diseases, as found by studying human tissue samples and animal models. There is evidence that PKC has a crucial role in many important human diseases, including diabetes2, cancer3, ischaemic heart disease4 and heart failure5, some autoimmune diseases6, Parkinson's disease7,8, Alzheimer's disease9, bipolar disorder10,11 and psoriasis12. However, determining which PKC isozyme contributes to the pathology of a given disease and precisely when it is involved during disease progression, as well as establishing whether the PKC isozyme has a critical pathological role, can only be achieved using PKC isozyme-specific tools.

Much of what we know about the functions of each PKC isozyme in normal and disease states is based on the use of genetic tools. These include manipulation of the level of a given isozyme by its overexpression, small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown and complete elimination (knockout) of the genes encoding specific PKC isozymes, or inhibition of a given isozyme through the expression of the corresponding dominant negative or catalytically 'dead' isozyme. However, such genetic approaches were limited to cells in culture or to in vivo studies that were confined mainly to one species: mice. As mice are often not the appropriate or ideal animal model for many human diseases, additional studies have been limited to using small-molecule pharmacological tools. Unfortunately, developing pharmacological tools that affect the function of only one PKC isozyme has proven to be difficult, in part because of the substantial homology among protein kinases in general and among PKC isozymes in particular.

As selective regulators of PKC isozymes have not been used in many studies, the main questions in the PKC field remain unresolved. Why does each cell have multiple PKC isozymes? Do they have redundant roles? What defines the functional specificity of each isozyme? Finally, and relevant to this Review, what is the role of individual PKC isozymes in human diseases and are there ways to selectively regulate a culprit isozyme for the treatment of a given disease?

It has been more than 25 years since PKC isozymes were first cloned and their role in human diseases was recognized. This Review summarizes the efforts to generate PKC isozyme-selective pharmacological tools and how these were applied to identify the isozyme (or isozymes) to target for drug development. To better discuss the challenges in targeting PKC for therapeutic development, we provide an overview of the biology of the members of the PKC family and their roles in specific diseases, and analyse the classes of PKC regulators that have been developed and how they were applied in preclinical research. We provide a summary of clinical trials in which several of these PKC regulators were tested as therapeutics for human diseases, and conclude with some lessons learned from these drug discovery and development efforts.

The PKC family

There are over 450 protein kinases in the human genome13. Some of these kinases phosphorylate only one or very few protein substrates, whereas others can phosphorylate a large number of substrates and therefore regulate numerous cellular responses. PKC isozymes belong to the latter group of kinases, phosphorylating serine and threonine residues on a large number of proteins.

The PKC enzymes were identified over 30 years ago by Nishizuka and collaborators14 as kinases that are activated by proteolysis. Soon after, it was found that diacylglycerol activates the intact enzyme15, although the means by which diacylglycerol levels are regulated was not known at the time. Five years after the first description of PKC, it was found that PKC could be activated by the tumour promoter phorbol ester1. This discovery opened up the field of PKC as a target for drug development — first in cancer and later in many other diseases. However, the study was further complicated by the finding that there are eight homologous PKC isozymes: PKCα, PKCβΙ, PKCβΙΙ, PKCγ, PKCδ, PKCɛ, PKCθ and PKCη16,17,18,19 — products of seven highly related genes (Fig. 1). Many PKC isozymes are present within the same cell and are activated by the same stimuli. An additional distant subfamily of atypical PKC isozymes — comprising PKCζ and PKCλ/PKCι — exists, but these are not discussed further in this Review as they do not respond to the same second messengers and they share even less sequence homology with the eight other members20,21.

Figure 1: Domain composition of PKC family members shown in a stick representation. a | The crystal structure of protein kinase CβII (PKCβII) (SwissProt number: 3PFQ) is shown (not to scale) with the following domains; the diacylglycerol-binding C1 domain, the phosphatidylserine- and calcium-binding C2 domain and the kinase domain. The secondary structures are: the α-helix (shown in red), β-strands (shown in cyan) and loops (shown in grey); the zinc ions are shown in purple and calcium ions shown in green. b | The percentage homology of different PKC isozymes to PKCδ is provided. The C2 domain is the least conserved among the isozymes compared with the other domains, suggesting that pharmacological tools that focus on the C2 domain are more likely to be isozyme-selective. Full size image

Like many other protein kinases, PKC has a regulatory region and a catalytic region. The catalytic region, or the kinase 'business end' of the enzyme, resides in the carboxy-terminal half of PKC (Fig. 1). It contains a conserved ATP and magnesium-binding site and a binding site for the phosphoacceptor sequence in the substrate proteins. The amino-terminal half of the enzyme is the regulatory region (Fig. 1). In the inactive state, the regulatory region (composed of a conserved C1 and C2 domain) is bound to the catalytic region (Fig. 2) and inhibits the activity of the enzyme. Dissociation of this intramolecular inhibitory interaction results in activation of the enzyme (Fig. 2). Both the catalytic and the regulatory domains can be targeted for generating drugs that modulate PKC activity (causing PKC inhibition or activation), but each domain also presents challenges in achieving selective and safe drugs.

Figure 2: Processes leading to dissociation of the intramolecular inhibitory interaction in PKC and to activation of the enzyme. All protein kinase C (PKC) isozymes require the binding of diacylglycerol (DAG) to the C1 domain of the regulatory region for activation. Conventional PKC isozymes also require the binding of calcium to the C2 domain of the regulatory region. These second messengers are generated following the binding of certain hormones, neurotransmitters or growth factors to their corresponding receptors. The subsequent activation of membrane-associated phospholipase C (PLC) results in hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P 2 ), a membrane phospholipid, to DAG and inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (Ins(1,4,5)P 3 ). Ins(1,4,5)P 3 , in turn, triggers the release of calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), causing a rise in cytosolic calcium concentration. Therefore, a single event (receptor-dependent PLC activation) leads to the generation of the two second messengers that are required to activate both conventional and novel PKC enzymes. The rise in DAG and calcium levels leads to the activation of PKC and its translocation from the cytosol to the plasma membrane as well as to other subcellular locations, where each isozyme interacts with its anchoring protein, receptor of activated C-kinase (RACK). Once it is bound to RACK and the second messenger activator DAG (and calcium for the conventional PKC isozymes), PKC is activated and it phosphorylates several nearby substrates, leading to diverse cellular responses. Full size image

As discussed below, the greatest homology among the PKC isozymes is in the catalytic domain. The PKC isozymes differ more from each other in the C2 region of the regulatory domain, as well as in the intervening (the so-called variable, or 'V') regions, but their catalytic domains are very similar (Fig. 1). Much of the attention in developing drugs initially focused on the catalytic (kinase) domain and the second messenger-binding domain (the C1 domain). However, drugs focusing on the C2 region and the intervening sequences between the domains (the V regions) showed greater isozyme selectivity, as discussed below.

Activation of PKC. PKC isozymes are activated by a variety of hormones (such as adrenaline and angiotensin), growth factors (including epidermal growth factor and insulin) and neurotransmitters (such as dopamine and endorphin); these stimulators, when bound to their respective receptors, activate members of the phospholipase C family, which generates diacylglycerol — a lipid-derived second messenger15 (Fig. 2). Out of the eight members of the PKC family that are discussed here, the four novel isozymes (PKCδ, PKCɛ, PKCθ and PKCη) are activated by diacylglycerol alone, whereas the four conventional PKC isozymes (PKCα, PKCβΙ, PKCβΙΙ and PKCγ) also require calcium for their activation (Fig. 2). Cellular calcium levels are elevated along with diacylglycerol levels, because the latter is often co-produced with inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (Ins(1,4,5)P 3 ), which triggers calcium release into the cytosol from internal stores (Fig. 2).

Further complication in the field arises because PKC activation can also occur in the absence of the above second messengers. High levels of cytosolic calcium can directly activate phospholipase C, thus leading to PKC activation in the absence of receptor activation. Various post-translational modifications of PKC were also found to lead to the activation of selected PKC isozymes in both normal and disease states22. These include activation by proteolysis between the regulatory and catalytic domain, which was noted to occur for PKCδ, for instance23. Phosphorylation of various sites may be required for maturation of the newly synthesized enzyme24, as well as for activation of mature isozymes: for example, H 2 O 2 -induced tyrosine phosphorylation of PKCδ25,26. Other modifications, including oxidation, acetylation and nitration, have also been found to activate PKC22. It has yet to be determined whether PKC that is activated by these modifications can be inhibited specifically and how critical these forms of activation are for a given disease state.

Finally, a hallmark of PKC activation, first described in 1982, is that it is always associated with translocation of the enzyme from the cytosolic (soluble) fraction to the cell particulate fraction, which includes the plasma membrane as well as many other cellular organelles27. It is this feature of isozyme-selective anchoring to different subcellular sites that enabled the generation of a class of more-selective inhibitors and activators of individual PKC isozymes27.

Roles and functions of PKC isozymes. After the cloning of eight different PKC isozymes was first described in the literature16,17,18,19, isozyme-specific gene expression studies led to the surprising finding that most PKC isozymes are ubiquitously expressed in all tissues at all times of development. However, it is quite clear that PKC isozymes have unique and sometimes opposing roles in both normal signalling and in disease states28,29. In fact, the same isozyme can have opposing roles in the same cell, depending on the context of the stimulation30.

Much of the initial work on the role of PKC in cellular responses involved the use of phorbol esters, which irreversibly activate all PKC isozymes and therefore do not effectively represent the transient activation that is induced by diacylglycerol. Nevertheless, using phorbol esters, PKC was found to regulate many cellular functions, including cell proliferation and cell death, increased gene transcription and translation, alteration of cell morphology and cell migration, regulation of ion channels and receptors, regulation of cell–cell contact and secretion, and so on. Because phorbol esters are not isozyme-selective, this early work did not identify which isozymes regulate a given function.

Subsequent studies that aimed to ascertain whether a particular PKC isozyme participates in the cellular event or pathology being studied always included determining whether the isozyme is translocated to the cell particulate fraction; only a subset of the studies also confirmed whether the translocated isozyme is catalytically active, by measuring kinase activity in vitro. Translocation is measured by cell fractionation as well as by microscopy (light and/or electron microscopy). Thus, translocation assays and examination of changes in the levels of particular PKC isozymes were used as markers for the activation of a given isozyme in the measured response.

PKC in diseases

Increased activation of selected PKC isozymes has been observed in cancer3,31, diabetes32, ischaemic heart disease33,34, acute and chronic heart disease35, heart failure34,36, lung37 and kidney38,39 diseases, various dermatological diseases (including psoriasis)12 as well as autoimmune diseases6,40; increased PKC activation has also been implicated in psychiatric diseases, including bipolar disorder10, and in several neurological indications such as stroke41, Parkinson's disease7,8, dementia42, Alzheimer's disease9,43 and pain44. Initially, PKC was implicated in various illnesses owing to abnormal activation or levels of a particular PKC isozyme in the disease state. However, this correlation between PKC activation and a disease could not determine whether the activated isozyme leads to the pathology, prevents it or has no role in it. To investigate a causal role of PKC in a particular disease, both genetic and pharmacological tools have been used. Table 1 lists some of the diseases and the related isozymes that are likely to contribute to these pathologies. Below, some of these diseases and the pathological roles of specific PKC isozymes are discussed in more detail.

Table 1: PKC isozymes that are implicated in human diseases* Full size table

Heart diseases. Substantial efforts have been invested in understanding the role of specific PKC isozymes in cardiac diseases, with much of the initial focus being placed on cardiac ischaemia. After the seminal study45 demonstrating that direct PKC activation before the ischaemic event provides cardiac protection, substantial research in academia and industry examined the role of PKC in this disease. However, the initial use of non-selective pharmacological tools led to conflicting data, leading to the conclusion that PKC is likely to be a 'spectator' rather than a 'player' in this response46. Subsequent studies with transgenic mice expressing dominant negative regulators of specific isozymes, and the use of selective pharmacological tools in various species (including rabbits, mice, rats and pigs), explained the earlier ambiguity: activation of PKCδ and PKCɛ has opposing consequences on the ischaemic myocardium29. Whereas PKCɛ activation has a cardioprotective effect4, PKCδ activation mediates much of the acute injury induced after transient myocardial ischaemia28,47. Part of the molecular basis for the opposing effects of these two isozymes in regulating mitochondrial function is depicted in Fig. 3. The figure also depicts how activation of PKCɛ protects the proteasome from inactivation, which leads to fast and selective degradation of the damaging PKCδ at reperfusion48, thus altering the balance between PKCδ and PKCɛ towards cardioprotection. Protection of the proteasome also improves cardiomyocyte health by enabling the removal of oxidized and damaged proteins (Fig. 3). Box 1 summarizes the role of PKC isozymes in other cardiac diseases, including heart failure, atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction and cardiac arrhythmia.

Figure 3: Role of PKC isozymes in ischaemic heart disease. a | The figure shows how prolonged ischaemia and reperfusion is more likely to result in greater activation of protein kinase Cδ (PKCδ) than of PKCɛ; this leads to translocation of PKCδ into the mitochondria47 and phosphorylation of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK), which in turn phosphorylates pyruvate dehydrogenase47, thereby inhibiting the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and causing a reduction in ATP regeneration225. Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to enhanced reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, whereas lipid peroxidation leads to accumulation of ROS and toxic aldehydes, such as 4-hydroxynonenal (4HNE), that interact with and inactivate macromolecules including proteins, DNA and lipids226. Mitochondrial dysfunction and the increase in ROS production leads to both apoptosis29,227 and necrosis as well as severe cardiac dysfunction225. b | By contrast, ischaemic preconditioning before prolonged ischaemia and reperfusion provides cardioprotection by enhancing the activation of PKCɛ4, which also translocates into the mitochondria92 and prevents mitochondrial dysfunction induced by prolonged ischaemia and reperfusion. PKCɛ-mediated protection occurs, in part, by PKCɛ phosphorylation and activation of aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2)195. Activated ALDH2 metabolizes aldehydes such as 4HNE, thus reducing the aldehydic load as well as mitochondrial and cellular damage. This results in improved mitochondrial functions and faster recovery of ATP levels. The reduced 4HNE levels also prevent direct inactivation of the proteasome and thus enable fast removal of aggregated proteins. The active proteasome also selectively degrades activated PKCδ, thus increasingly shifting the balance in favour of the cardioprotective PKCɛ48. Full size image

Box 1: Box 1 | PKC in cardiac disease Platelet activation at atherosclerotic site. The main isozyme that has been found to be required for platelet aggregation192 is protein kinase Cα (PKCα). Because PKCα knockout does not lead to excessive bleeding, an inhibitor of this isozyme may be safe for reducing thrombus formation at an atherosclerotic plaque. A role for other isozymes has also been described in this setting. Myocardial infarction and acute ischaemia–reperfusion injury. Both PKCδ and PKCɛ are activated in the ischaemic human heart and in several animal models of myocardial infarction (MI)4,118,193,194. Selective activators and inhibitors of PKCɛ and studies in transgenic mice showed that activation of this isozyme has a protective effect when it occurs before the ischaemic event or at reperfusion, mimicking the protection induced by the short ischaemic period before the prolonged ischaemic event (preconditioning) or at reperfusion (post-conditioning). PKCɛ activation protects mitochondrial functions, in part via activation of mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2), which removes toxic aldehydes — products of lipid peroxidation195. By contrast, PKCδ inhibition at reperfusion has a protective effect. PKCδ activation mediates much of the damage by activating mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase47, which inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase and ATP regeneration as well as triggering necrosis. PKCδ activation also induces reperfusion-induced apoptosis196 of both endothelial and cardiac myocytes, thus leading to further tissue injury. The opposing roles of PKCδ and PKCɛ in MI are summarized in Fig. 3. Cardiac arrhythmia. PKCɛ inhibits fatal ventricular arrhythmia197 associated with ischaemia–reperfusion injury, possibly through inhibition of mast cell degranulation and activation of ALDH2 in these cells, inhibition of l-type calcium channel activation in cardiac myocytes, blockade of sodium channels and decreased connexin 43-dependent intermyocyte communication via gap junctions. Notably, PKCδ inhibitors, which — like PKCɛ activators — also reduce infarct size in the MI model, do not inhibit post-MI cardiac arrhythmia, indicating that reduction of infarct size per se is insufficient to prevent cardiac arrhythmia. Compensatory hypertrophy. PKCα, PKCβII, PKCδ and PKCɛ are all activated during compensatory hypertrophy35. However, only sustained inhibition of PKCɛ has a cardioprotective effect during compensatory hypertrophy in hypertensive rats; selective inhibition of the other isozymes shows no benefit198. Overexpression of PKCα decreases contractility, whereas knockout of PKCα enhances contractility199; furthermore, selective activation of PKCδ increases cardiac mass28 but also increases fibroblast proliferation200 and therefore may have a deleterious effect. Heart failure. Studies in transgenic and knockout mice have demonstrated that PKCα mediates heart failure in mice35,201. However, hearts of patients who have suffered from heart failure show — at most — a small increase in PKCα activation. By contrast, a greater than twofold increase in PKCβ activation33,34,202,203 has been observed in two models of heart failure in rats (PKCβII activation)109. Studies in transgenic mice provided conflicting data on the role of PKCβ in heart failure204,205,206,207,208. However, the use of highly selective pharmacological tools has demonstrated that inhibition of PKCβII has a therapeutic effect, at least in part by: preventing proteasomal inactivation and the resulting accumulation of misfolded proteins209; decreasing contractile dysfunction159,206; as well as inhibiting increased cardiac fibrosis and improving calcium handling109,210. Diabetic cardiomyopathy. PKCα, PKCβII, PKCδ and PKCɛ are activated in hyperglycaemia2. PKCδ activation may prevent atherosclerosis. PKCɛ inhibition accelerates diabetes-induced cardiac dysfunction and death in mice. However, it appears that inhibition of PKCβ alone (perhaps PKCβII) is sufficient to protect from endothelial cell dysfunction, insulin resistance and cardiomyopathy. Endothelial dysfunction and vascular restenosis. PKC inhibitors are expected to be therapeutically beneficial for vascular restenosis211. PKCα, PKCβ and PKCδ increase smooth muscle cell migration by promoting actin polymerization and enhancing cell adhesion. Sustained treatment with inhibitors of PKCβ and PKCδ provides some therapeutic benefit in rat and mouse models of vascular restenosis. PKCδ inhibition and PKCɛ activation inhibit vasculopathy after transplantation50 or after balloon injury and stenting212. In addition, acute inhibition of PKCδ greatly reduces MI-induced microvascular dysfunction by inhibiting endothelial cell death196 and by inhibiting re-occlusion of microvessels during reperfusion196.

Organ transplantation. There are two pathologies in which PKC is implicated that need to be addressed in patients after organ transplantation. The first relates to ischaemia–reperfusion injury to the transplanted organ, which — depending on its severity — can lead to both acute and chronic rejection (resulting from irreversible tissue damage)49,50. The second pathology in which PKC also has a role relates to the immune response to the transplanted organ51, leading to organ rejection. The role of PKCδ and PKCɛ in ischaemia–reperfusion injury (the first pathology) has been discussed above. The consequences of reducing this acute injury on the function of the transplanted organ have been demonstrated, for example, in a study of cardiac transplantation; vascular occlusion due to increased inflammatory stimulation (vasculopathy) is inhibited if ischaemia–reperfusion injury is reduced by treatment with a PKCɛ activator and a PKCδ inhibitor minutes before organ harvest and immediately after organ transplantation36,50,52. PKCθ, which is a critical isozyme for T cell activation, has been implicated in immune rejection of the transplanted organ (the second pathology); inhibition of this isozyme can reduce T cell activation, subsequent migration and additional immune responses6,53.

Cancer. It is not surprising that different PKC isozymes are involved in different types of cancer. Given the role of PKC enzymes in both cellular proliferation (PKCα)31 and vasculogenesis (PKCβ)54, two processes that are crucial for cancer growth and metastasis, PKC has been targeted for cancer therapy. Furthermore, genetic and pharmacological studies have shown that other PKC isozymes are also important in this disease. For example, PKCδ activation increases angiogenesis in human prostate cancer cells55, PKCɛ overexpression is observed in stomach, lung, thyroid, colon and breast cancers3, PKCη has been implicated in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in which increased levels of PKCη correlate with tumour aggressiveness and cell proliferation levels56,57, and PKCθ overexpression has been associated with gastrointestinal stromal tumours58.

Diabetic complications. Preclinical research suggests that hyperglycaemia leads to the activation of PKCβ, which may play an important part in mediating the microvascular disease complications of diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy59. Hyperglycaemia leads to chronic activation of PKCβ, causing aberrant signalling and various pathologies such as cytokine activation and inhibition, vascular alterations, cell cycle and transcriptional factor mis-regulation and abnormal angiogenesis2.

Conversely, PKCδ was found to have a major role in β-islet cell function and insulin response60. The authors showed that changes in the level and activity of PKCδ between mice strains correlate with the risk of developing insulin resistance and glucose tolerance. There is also loss of inflammation associated with insulin resistance in PKCδ-deficient mice60. Therefore, inhibiting PKCδ may also provide a treatment for metabolic syndrome.

Bipolar disorders. PKC is highly expressed and heterogeneously present within the brain, where it has important roles in regulating pre- and postsynaptic neurotransmission, coordinating intracellular signalling in response to neurotransmitter stimulation and modulating changes in gene expression and neuronal plasticity11,61,62. The evidence to support a role for PKC signalling in bipolar disorder includes: amphetamine-induced 'manic symptoms' in rodents correlate with PKC activation in the brain63; platelets from patients with mania show increased PKC activity and translocation to serotonin stimulation compared to platelets from control individuals64; post-mortem brain samples of patients with bipolar disorder have revealed increased levels of PKC activation and translocation65; both lithium and valproate, two efficacious drugs used to treat bipolar disorder, indirectly decrease the activity of both PKCα and PKCɛ61.

Other diseases. PKC is a central mediator in many signalling cascades. As described in this Review and many others, the eight members of the PKC family are implicated in disease states based not only on their subcellular location (translocation) but also on their activation or inhibition states and on changes in their levels. There are many other pathologies in which PKC has been implicated, based on the above criteria. These include lung37 and kidney38,39 diseases, dermatological diseases such as psoriasis12,66, autoimmune diseases6,40 as well as neurological indications such as stroke41, Parkinson's disease7,8,67, Alzheimer's disease43 and pain44. Whether activation of PKC is a cause or a consequence of these pathologies remains to be determined using selective pharmacological tools in animal models of these diseases.

PKC regulators in preclinical research

It has long been a goal of academic and industrial researchers to develop PKC-specific inhibitors and activators that are also isozyme-selective. Efforts to identify selective modulators of PKC have taken disparate approaches (Fig. 4). These include: development of ATP-competitive small-molecule inhibitors that bind to the ATP site of the catalytic domain of the kinase; phorbol esters and derivative activators and inhibitors that bind to the C1 domain, mimicking the binding of diacylglycerol; and peptides that disrupt protein–protein interactions between unique regions in each PKC and its corresponding RACK (Fig. 4). Table 2 lists the names, chemical structures and degree of selectivity of some of the inhibitors and activators of PKC that have been generated during the past 20 years, with emphasis on those that have been tested in the clinic.

Figure 4: Inhibitors of PKC. a | Inhibitors of ATP binding to protein kinase C (PKC) prevent the phosphorylation of all the substrates (for example, S1, S2, S3) of that isozyme, and lead to a loss of all cellular responses. b | PKC regulators that target the diacylglycerol (DAG)-binding site can act as activators or inhibitors (not shown). c | The inhibitors can also prevent the anchoring of the enzyme to its receptor of activated C-kinase (RACK), which brings the activated isozyme next to its substrates, thus leading to inhibition of all the physiological responses of that isozyme. Theoretically, the active but non-anchored PKC may phosphorylate new substrates. However, this has not been observed, perhaps because activation in the absence of RACK binding is very transient and/or because the cytosolic phosphatases remove such non-physiological phosphorylations. d | The same isozyme is localized to several subcellular locations following its activation90 and is therefore near a certain subset of substrates and away from others. Furthermore, there are reports on the direct binding of substrates to PKC at sites that are distinct from the phosphodonor and phosphoacceptor sites. Therefore, inhibitors of protein–protein interactions at a specific subcellular location or with a specific substrate may provide unique inhibitors of the phosphorylation of one substrate and not others. Such separation-of-function inhibitors will have great value, as each PKC isozyme phosphorylates specific substrates and not all of these phosphorylation events contribute to the pathological condition. Full size image

Table 2: Main classes of PKC inhibitors used in the clinic Full size table

ATP-competitive small-molecule inhibitors. The highest similarity among PKC isozymes is in their catalytic region (Fig. 1). The high degree of sequence homology and structural similarity of this region among PKC isozymes and the similarity of this region in other protein kinases suggests that generating isozyme-selective inhibitors for the ATP-binding site is extremely challenging68 (Box 2). Typically, inhibitors of kinase active sites have been discovered by high-throughput screening approaches or in silico methods, which use protein structures and computational methods to predict small molecules that best interact with the given site in the protein. Clinical candidates that inhibit PKC isozymes through an ATP-competitive mechanism have been discovered through high-throughput screening and subsequent medicinal chemistry optimization assisted by in silico design69.

Box 2: Box 2 | Potential targets for drug development and challenges associated with these targets ATP-binding site (in the catalytic region). The protein kinase C (PKC) catalytic region within the PKC family is ∼70% homologous, and the ATP-binding site in all protein kinases is highly conserved. Therefore, generating a drug that selectively inhibits one kinase has been a great challenge — if not impossible68. Diacylglycerol-binding site (in the C1 domain). The C1 domain and the diacylglycerol-binding site are highly homologous among isozymes (60–80% identity). Furthermore, other non-PKC proteins have C1 domains that bind diacylglycerol213. Therefore, generating a drug that selectively binds the C1 domain of one isozyme has been a challenge, but the work of Blumberg et al.214 has identified some selective C1-binding molecules, as did some work by Wender and colleagues87. Protein–protein interactions with anchoring proteins (in the C2 domain). Receptor of activated C-kinase (RACK)27 anchor proteins that bind activated PKC, in part through the C2 domain, have not been identified for all the PKC isozymes. The C2 domain is structurally conserved among PKC isozymes, but sequence homology is 8% to 50%. Furthermore, there are other proteins and enzymes with a C2 domain. Protein–protein interactions with other proteins that regulate the subcellular localization of the enzymes. The location of the interaction sites has not always been identified, but is often mediated by sequences that are unique for individual isozymes. At least three families of proteins interact with selected PKC isozymes99. These are: RACKs27, annexins215 and the 14-3-3 protein (also known as YWHAQ)216. Other proteins, including heat shock protein 90 (Ref. 92), actin107, A-kinase anchor proteins (AKAPs)217,218 and importins102, also interact with some PKCs and some show high selectivity. However, critical partner proteins and the interaction site with each partner have not always been identified. Interactions between PKC isozymes and their substrates. Several PKC substrates were found to form stable interactions with the corresponding PKC isozymes. These were termed STICKs (substrates that interact with C-kinase) by Jaken and collaborators219. This kind of PKC–protein substrate interaction can be selectively disrupted (D.M.-R., N. Qvit and M.-H. Disatnik, unpublished observations).

The best characterized ATP-competitive small molecules are the bisindolylmaleimides70. These water-soluble compounds bind to the ATP-binding pocket and limit phosphorylation. The classic example, staurosporine, has pan-PKC activity, binding to all isozymes with a double-digit nanomolar dissociation constant (K d ). Unfortunately, staurosporine binds several other serine/threonine kinases68. Medicinal chemistry efforts to develop a more selective inhibitor led to the discovery of enzastaurin, which is more selective for PKCβ over other isozymes71. However, subsequent studies demonstrated that enzastaurin inhibits other PKC isozymes as well as several other protein kinases at a similar K d . Rottlerin exemplifies the difficulties of developing a PKC-isozyme-selective ATP-competitive small-molecule inhibitor. First described as a PKC inhibitor — with selectivity for PKCδ — in 1994 (Ref. 72), multiple groups went on to characterize its activity both in vitro and in vivo. After much controversy, a paper demonstrating the activity of rottlerin against several other enzymes was published73. Newer generations of inhibitors — for example, the phenylamino-pyrimidine74 and arylamino-pyridinecarbonitrile75 classes — show some specificity for PKCθ, with 10- to 100-fold selectivity over conventional PKC isozymes. Finally, compounds such as balanol76 and riluzole77, which were originally developed as inhibitors of PKA, also inhibit PKC.

Activators and inhibitors that mimic diacylglycerol binding. The second class of PKC modulators targeting the C1 domain (Box 2) are those that mimic the binding of the C1 domain to diacylglycerol — the second messenger activator of the enzyme. A classic example is the tumour promoter phorbol ester78, which mimics diacylglycerol and activates PKC. Based on the seminal work of Blumberg and co-workers79, the diacylglycerol-binding site on the C1 domain was characterized, which led to a better understanding of the diacylglycerol pharmacophore and guided the design of potent PKC activators — for example, diacylglycerol-lactones80. These diacylglycerol-lactones show higher (by three to four orders of magnitude) affinity for PKC isozymes, and a greater specificity for PKCα and PKCδ, compared with natural diacylglycerols81. The C1 binding site is also highly conserved among the isozymes, making it difficult to develop isozyme-selective compounds. The best characterized of these compounds is bryostatin 1, a naturally occurring macrolactone that has pan-PKC activity in the low nanomolar to picomolar range82. Several studies have shown some anticancer properties of bryostatin 1, albeit with limited utility in the clinic83. Protection of PKC from being downregulated by the strong ligand, phorbol ester84, led to a function-oriented synthetic approach towards the design of selective PKC-binding bryostatin analogues85. These molecules show selectivity in binding to the C1 domain86 of various PKC isozymes and may represent a novel class of PKC regulators87,88.

Inhibitors of protein–protein interactions between PKC and cognate proteins. A third class of PKC modulators inhibits protein–protein interactions that have been found to be crucial for the translocation (change in the subcellular localization) of PKC isozymes following their activation. PKC translocation upon activation, which was first described in 1982 by Kraft, Sando and Anderson89, was assumed to reflect the binding of the enzyme to the lipid-derived second messenger diacylglycerol in the plasma membrane. However, microscopy and cell fractionation studies have shown that activated PKC isozymes are present in numerous subcellular locations90. Activated PKC isozymes are found on cytoskeletal elements91, inside the mitochondria92, on the Golgi apparatus93, on the endoplasmic reticulum93, on centrosomes94,95,96, at the nuclear membrane and inside the nucleus90. Because different activated PKC isozymes are localized to distinct subcellular sites within the same cell84,85, in 1988 we proposed and subsequently demonstrated that these isozyme-selective localizations are mediated by unique protein–protein interactions between a given PKC isozyme and an anchoring protein that we termed RACK27,97. Other proteins can selectively interact with PKC isozymes to keep them in an active state, to anchor them next to a particular substrate or to shuttle them from one location to another98,99.

Some of these PKC-binding proteins are highly selective. For example, RACK1 binds to PKCβΙΙ but not PKCβΙ100, even though the isozymes are products of the same gene and differ only in the last 50 of the 750 amino acids encoded by this gene18,101. Other proteins bind more than one isozyme through different sites and for different purposes. For example, heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) binds both PKCδ and PKCɛ. However, binding of PKCɛ to HSP90 is required for shuttling this isozyme into the mitochondria92, whereas binding of PKCδ to HSP90 is required for the shuttling of PKCδ into the nucleus102. What is more surprising is that although PKCδ also enters the mitochondria, this entry is independent of HSP90 (Ref. 92). Furthermore, the interaction sites for PKCɛ and PKCδ with HSP90 are distinct, and a pharmacological tool has been devised to affect the interaction of one isozyme without affecting the other92. A review of proteins that interact with PKC isozymes is not provided here, but a shortlist of interacting proteins is presented in Box 2.

As protein–protein interactions are thought to occur across relatively large, flat surfaces, prevailing wisdom suggests that small molecules that fit 'greasy pockets' are unlikely to inhibit interactions between PKC isozymes and PKC-binding proteins103. However, a rational approach to develop peptide inhibitors of protein–protein interactions has refuted this notion104. In this approach, the respective binding sites of the two interacting proteins are predicted, and short peptides (∼6–10-mer sequences) with sequence homology to one of the interacting regions have been found to effectively inhibit the corresponding protein–protein interaction. Box 3 summarizes the rationale used to generate isozyme-selective inhibitors and activators of PKC, and Table 3 lists some examples of peptides with biological activities.

Box 3: Box 3 | Identifying peptide inhibitors of PKC protein–protein interactions Sequence homology between two unrelated proteins that interact with PKC. A peptide corresponding to a short homologous region between two unrelated protein kinase C (PKC)-binding proteins — annexin I and the 14-3-3 protein (also known as YWHAQ) — inhibits PKC220. The least conserved sequences within a highly conserved region. Peptides corresponding to the least conserved sequences between isozymes within the C2 domain are selective inhibitors of the functions of the corresponding isozyme. For example, the δV1-1 peptide, derived from a PKCδ-unique sequence in the C2 domain (previously termed the V1 domain), is a selective inhibitor of PKCδ function28. The most similar sequences between unrelated proteins that contain a homologous domain. Both PKCβ and phospholipase Cγ (PLCγ) contain C2 domains, and the PKC-derived peptides corresponding to the most homologous regions within the C2 domain of PLCγ are selective inhibitors of PKC and do not affect other C2 domain-containing proteins221. A short homologous sequence between PKC and its partner protein. Often a short homologous sequence between PKC and its partner protein represents an autoinhibitory site that interacts with the binding site for the partner protein when PKC is inactive. The first PKC inhibitor to be identified was the pseudosubstrate peptide corresponding to a sequence in PKC that is homologous to the phosphoacceptor site in the substrate222. The six-amino-acid pseudo-βRACK peptide, representing a short homologous sequence between PKCβII and RACK1, is an activator of PKCβII223. Similarly, the ψɛRACK peptide, corresponding to a sequence in PKCɛ that is homologous to its RACK, is a selective activator of PKCɛ224. A peptide corresponding to a six-amino-acid homologous region between heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) and PKCɛ increases the interaction of PKCɛ with HSP90 as well as PKCɛ function, but it does not increase the interaction of PKCδ with HSP90 (Ref. 92). Finally, separation-of-function inhibitors, representing a stretch of a homologous region between a given isozyme and one of its protein substrates, inhibit the phosphorylation of that substrate and do not affect the phosphorylation of any other substrates of the same isozyme (D.M.-R., N. Qvit and M.-H. Disatnik, unpublished observations). Additional criteria. Other 'filters' that confirm whether the sequences found represent protein–protein interactions between a PKC and its partner proteins include conservation of the sequence in evolution and the existence of at least one charged amino acid within the sequence; if the sequence is found in other proteins in the human genome, it is not conserved in evolution. For further information, see Refs 9,104,106.

Table 3: Peptides derived from unique PKC sequences with isozyme selectivity in animal models Full size table

Much of the work on protein–protein interactions has focused on the C2 domain (initially termed the V1 region in the novel PKC isozymes)99,104,105,106. As indicated in Fig. 1, the C2 domain is the least conserved among the isozymes; furthermore, even among the highly homologous members of the novel PKC isozymes — PKCδ and PKCθ — there is only 52% homology within this region. Yet the domain fold is similar: it is a β-sandwich of four strands, each with an α-helix at one end and loops between the strands (Fig. 1). Mochly-Rosen and colleagues have shown that most of the protein–protein interactions are mapped to unique sequences within the C2 domain, and peptides corresponding to these sequences act as inhibitors of protein–protein interactions105,106.

Other protein–protein interaction sites are found in intervening regions between the common regions C1, C2, C3 and C4, including the V2, V3 and V5 regions and the region between the C1a and C1b subdomains of PKC99. A peptide derived from the region between the C1a and C1b subdomains in PKCɛ inhibits interactions with actin107. A peptide derived from the region between the C2 and C1 domains of PKCɛ inhibits the interaction of this isozyme with HSP90 (Ref. 92). A peptide derived from the V5 region selectively inhibits the interaction between PKCβΙΙ and RACK1 (Refs 94,108) as well as the function of that isozyme — for example, in cancer94 or in rat models of heart failure109.

Post-translational modification of PKC — a future direction for drug development? PKC can also be activated (in the presence or absence of the above-described second messengers) by several post-translational modifications, including tyrosine phosphorylation, oxidation of a cysteine-rich region within the C1 domain, nitrosylation, acetylation, binding of other metabolites (for example, retinol or arachidonic acid) and proteolytic cleavage of the enzyme at the hinge region between the catalytic and the regulatory domains of the enzyme (reviewed in Ref. 22). Although these alternative means of PKC activation may have a role in disease states, no pharmacological agents have yet been developed that are based on second messenger-independent PKC activation.

Clinical applications of PKC regulators

Modulation of PKC activity presents an attractive approach for clinical drug development for several reasons: isozyme-specific perturbations in PKC activity have been identified in numerous human disease states, including congestive heart failure34, bipolar disorder111,112 and diabetes2,59; PKC isozymes play an important part in crucial biological processes — such as cell proliferation and formation of the vasculature — that are important in tumour growth and metastasis113,114,115,116; studies in animal models demonstrate a role for individual isozymes in a particular disease and/or evidence of therapeutic effects when specific isozymes are inhibited or activated62,117,118; and several pharmacological agents that are efficacious in disease states have been shown to modulate the activity of PKC, either directly or indirectly through a signalling cascade10,119.

Despite the apparent promise of PKC modulators in human disease, results in clinical trials have been mixed and largely negative. Clinical trials have been conducted for the treatment of cardiovascular disease, neuropsychiatric disorders, malignancies, organ transplantation and diabetic complications such as nephropathy, neuropathy and retinopathy. Below, we focus on clinical efficacy studies for both novel compounds and previously approved drugs (Table 4).

Table 4: Summary of clinical trials with PKC regulators Full size table

Oncology trials. Although several clinical trials have been conducted in cancer with drugs that are thought to modulate PKC activity, tumour responses have been infrequent and modest at best. Only six agents have been studied in efficacy trials. Bryostatin 1, a macrolide lactone and a non-selective activator of both conventional and novel PKC isozymes, entered clinical trials in 1993 after showing promising results in cancer xenograft models120. The drug has since been tested in several Phase II studies, with largely disappointing results. Bryostatin 1 showed minimal or no antitumour activity when it was tested in patients with advanced melanoma, sarcoma, head and neck cancer, multiple myeloma, colorectal cancer, ovarian cancer, cervical cancer, NSCLC or pancreatic cancer121,122,123,124,125,126,127,128,129,130. Modest effects were observed in advanced renal cell cancer as well as gastric and oesophageal cancer, but the overall response was disappointing and more than half of the patients experienced severe myalgias, which necessitated early termination of one study131,132,133,134. There are currently no open trials of bryostatin 1 on the ClinicalTrials.gov website.

Aprinocarsen, an antisense oligonucleotide that targets PKCα mRNA, has also been studied clinically in various oncology trials. In Phase II studies, aprinocarsen failed to show activity as a single agent against advanced colorectal, ovarian and hormone-refractory prostate cancer135,136,137,138, and showed only modest activity against relapsed, low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma139. In two Phase III trials of NSCLC, aprinocarsen failed to improve the tumour response rate or survival when added to combination chemotherapy; moreover, additional toxicities such as thrombocytopaenia and venous thromboembolism were observed140,141. Further clinical development of aprinocarsen has been discontinued.

Enzastaurin is an orally available small-molecule PKCβ-selective inhibitor that targets the ATP-binding site (Table 2). Single-agent Phase II studies showed inadequate efficacy in patients who were at advanced stages of one of the following malignancies: large B cell lymphoma, mantle cell lymphomas, NSCLC, high-grade gliomas, recurrent ovarian and primary peritoneal malignancies or asymptomatic chemotherapy-naive colorectal cancer142,143,144,145,146,147. In a larger Phase II study, enzastaurin did not enhance the antitumour activity of pemetrexed (Alimta; Lilly) and carboplatin (Paraplatin; Bristol-Myers Squibb) in patients with stage IIIb or stage IV NSCLC148. Clinical studies are underway to assess the addition of enzastaurin to combination chemotherapy for advanced brain malignancies (see the ClinicalTrials.gov website).

Other PKC modulators have undergone limited studies in oncology indications. Tamoxifen (which is a non-selective PKC inhibitor at high doses) provided negligible benefit to patients with malignant gliomas and hormone-refractory prostate cancer149,150,151. Midostaurin, an orally available multitargeted kinase inhibitor, had no effect on malignant melanoma in a small study152. Midostaurin did, however, show ≥50% reduction in blast counts in a substantial proportion of patients with acute myeloid leukaemia and myelodysplastic syndrome; midostaurin is being assessed in clinical trials for haematological malignancies but its effect may be mediated by FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3, which is mutated and constitutively overactive in up to 30% of patients with myeloid leukaemias153. UCN-01 (7-hydroxystaurosporine), a non-selective kinase inhibitor, was ineffective against both progressive renal and ovarian cancers154,155.

Cardiovascular trials. Flosequinan, a non-selective inhibitor of Ins(1,4,5)P 3 and PKC, was compared to placebo in 193 patients with symptomatic heart failure. After 12 weeks, patients in the flosequinan group showed statistically significant improvements in maximal treadmill exercise time (96 versus 47 seconds; P = 0.022), an increase in maximal oxygen consumption (1.7 versus 0.6 ml per kg per minute; P = 0.05) and improvement in symptoms (55% versus 36% improvement; P = 0.018) when compared to patients in the placebo group156. In a larger subsequent study, the Data Monitoring Committee stopped the trial prematurely after an interim analysis revealed an increased risk of death and hospitalizations in the active arm, and so flosequinan was withdrawn from the market157. Recently, ruboxistaurin — a PKCβ inhibitor that was well tolerated in large clinical studies of patients with diabetes158 — was shown to improve cardiac function in a porcine model of heart failure159 and may warrant clinical study in this setting.

Volatile anaesthetics such as isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane are known to activate PKCɛ119; PKCɛ activation is an essential step in ischaemic preconditioning of cardiomyocytes4,160. Clinical trials comparing the use of these anaesthetics to intravenous anaesthetics before coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) showed that the use of volatile anaesthetics led to statistically significant reductions in peak troponin I levels, in the requirement for postoperative inotropic support and in hospitalization exceeding 7 days161,162,163,164. In one study, a volatile anaesthetic reduced mortality within the first year165.

Adenosine, a purine nucleoside, has been shown to activate both PKCδ and PKCɛ. Studies of intravenously administered adenosine before and during heart surgery have been modest in both size and effect166,167,168. Acadesine, a drug that is thought to increase adenosine levels in ischaemic tissues, was compared with placebo in 2,698 patients undergoing CABG. The study missed its primary end point (a reduction in infarct size) as well as its secondary end point (a composite of cardiac death, myocardial infarction or stroke at postoperative day 4)169. In the small subset of patients experiencing postoperative myocardial infarction, acadesine reduced the 2-year mortality rate from 27.8% to 6.5% (P = 0.006)169. A more recent study of acadesine in patients undergoing CABG was stopped prematurely for futility after failing to show an effect on the composite outcome of 28-day mortality, nonfatal stroke and severe left ventricular dysfunction (5.1% in the acadesine group versus 5% in the placebo group)170.

Adenosine was also studied as a myocardial salvage agent during acute myocardial infarction in a large randomized trial. Although there was no difference in the composite clinical end point of death and heart failure, infarct size was significantly reduced in the high-dose group compared to placebo (11% versus 27% of the left ventricle; P = 0.023)171. Delcasertib (δV1-1), a peptide inhibitor of PKCδ that was rationally designed by the Mochly-Rosen laboratory as an effective inhibitor when given at reperfusion28, showed encouraging trends towards reduced infarct size and accelerated resolution of ST elevation when it was administered via intracoronary injection to patients who had suffered from an acute myocardial infarction and had an occluded coronary artery on an initial angiogram172. A larger study of intravenously administered delcasertib for treating acute myocardial infarction, administered before carrying out an angiography in patients with and without reperfusion at the time of drug treatment, failed to show a statistically significant benefit in the primary end point of infarct size, as assessed by the area under the curve (AUC) of CK-MB. Subgroup analysis revealed a trend towards reduced infarct size (∼14% reduction) in patients with an anterior STEMI (ST elevation myocardial infarction) and TIMI (thrombolysis in myocardial infarction) 0/1 flow (a fully occluded artery) on initial angiography173, but this signal was not considered to be adequate to warrant further development by the sponsor of the study.

Trials for diabetic complications. Ruboxistaurin, an orally available PKCβ inhibitor, has been extensively studied in diabetic retinopathy and has been well tolerated158. The PKC-DRS trial, a randomized double-blinded trial, compared three doses (8, 16 and 32 mg per day) of ruboxistaurin versus placebo over a period of 36 months in 252 patients with severe non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy. There was no effect on the study's primary end point: progression of diabetic retinopathy. The secondary end point of sustained moderate visual loss (SMVL), however, was reduced from 25% in the placebo group to 10% in the group receiving the 32 mg per day dose in individuals who had definite diabetic macular oedema at the baseline174. The PKC-DRS2 trial was a 36-month, double-blinded, placebo-controlled study in which 685 patients with non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy were randomized to receive either 32 mg of ruboxistaurin or placebo once daily. The primary end point of SMVL occurred in 9.1% of placebo-treated patients and 5.5% of ruboxistaurin-treated patients (P = 0.034). Initiation of laser treatment for macular oedema was 26% less frequent in the active treatment group (P = 0.008)175. In response to a request by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for data on longer-term outcomes, a 2-year open-label extension study of PKC-DRS2 was conducted in 203 individuals who had been off-treatment for approximately 1 year at the time of re-enrolment. Thus, the study compared outcomes in 100 patients who received ruboxistaurin for the last 2 of the 6 years since initial enrolment and in 103 patients who received ruboxistaurin for 5 out of the 6 total years. The primary end point of SMVL occurred in 26% of the placebo-ruboxistaurin group and in 8% of the ruboxistaurin-only group by the end of the open-label extension study (P < 0.001)176.

Based on these data, ruboxistaurin is currently under regulatory review by the FDA for the treatment of diabetic retinopathy. In a study of diabetic macular oedema, ruboxistaurin failed to show improvement in a composite end point of progression to sight-threatening macular oedema or necessity for focal or grid photocoagulation therapy177. Orally administered midostaurin was shown to reduce diabetic macular oedema but further development was abandoned owing to intolerable gastrointestinal side effects178.

Clinical trials were also conducted to study the effect of ruboxistaurin in delaying diabetic nephropathy. One study compared ruboxistaurin (at a dose of 32 mg per day) versus placebo for 1 year in 123 individuals with diabetes who had persistent albuminuria. Although the albumin–creatinine ratio decreased significantly in the active drug group and the estimated glomerular filtration rate decreased significantly in the placebo group, the intergroup differences were not statistically significant179,180. A subsequent analysis was performed of the 1,157 patients enrolled in the three ruboxistaurin studies for diabetic retinopathy. There was no difference in kidney outcomes in patients receiving placebo versus ruboxistaurin180. Two studies conducted in patients with diabetic neuropathy showed evidence of a reduction in neuropathic symptoms over the 6- and 12-month treatment periods181,182. Longer-term studies are warranted to better define the role of ruboxistaurin in reducing the progression of neuropathy.

Bipolar disorder trials. Tamoxifen citrate, an oestrogen receptor modulator that is commonly used to treat breast cancer, readily crosses the blood–brain barrier and non-selectively inhibits PKC at doses approximately fourfold higher than the standard anti-oestrogen dose62,151. Several small clinical trials have been conducted over the past decade to assess the efficacy of high-dose (40–80 mg daily) tamoxifen in the treatment of acute mania. All studies showed substantial improvement in mania scores compared to placebo183,184,185,186. Patients taking standard doses of tamoxifen have an increased risk of venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, stroke and uterine cancer, and these safety concerns will be more pronounced at the higher doses used for the treatment of mania. A PKC inhibitor that crosses the blood–brain barrier and has an improved safety profile would be a welcome addition for the treatment of bipolar disorder.

Transplantation clinical trials. Sotrastaurin is a non-selective PKC inhibitor with activity against both conventional and novel isozymes. Because it inhibits PKCθ — a critical isozyme for T cell activation — sotrastaurin is being developed as an immunosuppressive agent for organ transplantation187. In two clinical studies of allograft renal transplantation, immunosuppressive regimens including sotrastaurin and mycophenolic acid were compared to standard-of-care regimens. In each case, the groups receiving sotrastaurin showed dramatic increases in acute rejection187,188.

Challenges in developing PKC modulators

Thus far, results of clinical trials of PKC modulators have been disappointing, largely owing to inadequate therapeutic effects and/or unanticipated adverse reactions. Among the many agents tested to date, only ruboxistaurin achieved an adequate therapeutic signal to warrant an FDA review for potential market approval for its use in the treatment of non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy.

Various scientific challenges have contributed to the slow rate of progress in the clinical application of PKC modulators and to the failure of related clinical trials, as discussed below.

Inadequate understanding of disease-specific pathophysiology. Much of the basic research leading to clinical studies has failed to identify the isozyme (or isozymes) of interest or the specific downstream signalling events that lead to disease pathology. For example, many PKC isozymes have been implicated in cancer, and some PKC isozymes may only be crucial for selected forms of the disease. Experiments in xenograft mouse models carrying human tumours may downplay the interaction between the tumour and the normal tissue (for example, endothelial cells) and therefore often only a single isozyme in each tumour type is implicated in the disease pathology. A more robust understanding of the underlying biology of the disease and comparison of pathways identified in humans is essential for therapeutic progress in this field.

Inadequate preclinical studies. Animal models that examine the pathological role of PKC typically exhibit rapid disease induction and therefore do not mimic well the disease progression in humans. For example, pressure overload by aortic constriction is often used to induce heart failure in rodents. This model mimics pressure overload induced by hypertension, which slowly leads to heart failure in humans. However, aortic constriction induces pressure overload very abruptly and therefore may implicate molecular processes in heart failure that do not occur during the natural progression of the disease in humans. In addition, idealized controlled experiments conducted on inbred animals do not capture the full range of heterogeneous conditions encountered in clinical practice. Patients vary in age, underlying health, baseline medications and diet as well as the severity and cause of the disease of interest. Any of these factors might result in decreased efficacy or increased toxicity of the drug being studied. The route of administration is often changed between preclinical efficacy studies (with animal models) and clinical trials. To the extent possible, these potential confounding factors must be replicated in the animal studies. Species differences in PKC expression must also be taken into consideration when conducting preclinical efficacy studies in animal models.

Another factor that needs to be considered is the lack of reproducibility of preclinical findings; unfortunately, many academic studies only include data in a single animal model, use too few animals per group, use inappropriate statistical tools, are carried out in an unblinded fashion and/or report only positive data. A recent publication189 reported that only 11% of 53 papers describing preclinical data in cancer research were independently confirmed by investigators at Amgen; the rest of the studies could not be confirmed even when working with the authors of the original papers189. Numerous reasons can be provided to explain these findings, which are not discussed here. Nevertheless, lack of incentive (and platform) to publish affirmative or negative data in a second species may be contributing to the problem.

Lack of selectivity and unacceptable on-target and off-target effects. As discussed above, many PKC inhibitors also affect other protein kinases72,190 and are therefore less suitable as therapeutics. Second, multiple PKC isozymes are expressed in all cell types throughout the body and have crucial roles in normal physiology. As a result, systemic inhibition of an isozyme (for example, PKCβ) that contributes to a disease process, such as the disordered angiogenesis of proliferative macular degeneration, may result in undesired on-target side effects such as delayed wound healing. Furthermore, each PKC isozyme regulates various intracellular signalling events, each leading to a specific phenotypic response. Therefore, even an isozyme-selective drug may elicit responses that are both positive and negative in the pathophysiology of a particular disease. To address this problem, the Mochly-Rosen laboratory is developing separation-of-function inhibitors (SoF inhibitors) (Fig. 4). SoF inhibitors are peptides that are designed to selectively inhibit the phosphorylation of one particular substrate of an individual PKC isozyme without affecting the phosphorylation of its other substrates. These peptide inhibitors have been developed using the rationale summarized in Box 3 (for example, to selectively inhibit pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase phosphorylation by PKCδ)47. Peptide regulators that affect translocation to a particular site without affecting translocation and resulting activities in other sites can also be developed, such as the peptide that selectively enhances PKCɛ translocation into the mitochondria to provide cardioprotection92. It remains to be determined whether such SoF inhibitors of individual PKC isozymes will be useful therapeutics. In addition, some laboratories have taken an in silico or systems-biology approach to address the selectivity of PKC inhibitors; for example, investigators at Lilly took a chemical proteomics approach to address bisindolylmaleimide selectivity191.

The drug does not reach its target in adequate concentration. PKC modulators must be delivered intracellularly to their target. Optimal clinical dosing regimens are typically extrapolated from efficacious blood concentrations in animal studies. But these blood levels may not correlate — in either magnitude or timing — with intracellular drug concentrations and the target tissue. This is particularly problematic with peptide and oligonucleotide therapies, which are largely impermeable to cell membranes and often require a carrier peptide to allow intracellular access.

Lack of blood biomarkers. As yet, there are no PKC-specific biomarkers to indicate adequacy of dosing or predict phenotypic outcome. As a result, expensive trials measuring clinical outcomes are the only way to identify the optimal dosing regimen. This substantially increases development costs and greatly enhances the probability of a failure to show efficacy.

Confounders in clinical practice. When designing clinical trials, researchers must consider and control for additional factors that might reduce a drug's clinical effect. For example, a PKCɛ-selective activator that is intended to reduce cardiac ischaemic damage during CABG will be less likely to show efficacy versus placebo if volatile anaesthetics are also routinely administered, as they also activate PKCɛ.

Inability to obtain and analyse data from failed clinical trials. With the establishment of the registration of ongoing trials in the ClinicalTrials.gov database, there was hope that all patient-related data will be available for analysis regardless of the outcome of the trials. However, although data on positive trials are provided in a relatively timely fashion, there is a long lag in — or lack of — reporting on failed trials. This may be due to reduced priority for the sponsors to publish and/or a disincentive to improve drug development in competing companies. As most of the studies are conducted with academic principal investigators, it is imperative that this work is published and that a forum for publishing these important data in high-profile journals becomes available. Analysis of such failed trials will provide critical information on how to improve subsequent trials.

Conclusion

Given the crucial roles of PKC in both normal physiology and disease, this family of kinases remains an enticing target for drug development. As our knowledge of PKC biology deepens, it appears that even selectivity at the isozyme level may be insufficient for a drug to have optimal efficacy and minimal unintended on-target adverse effects. Biomarkers that are specific for PKC activity would greatly enhance our ability to monitor the pharmacodynamics of new PKC modulators. As we continue to unravel the biology of PKC, future success in developing drugs for diseases in which PKC is implicated will require a thoughtful combination of cutting-edge basic research with more robust and efficient drug development practices.