The vertical fingerprint of earthquake cycle loading in southern California
Statistical analysis of GPS vertical velocities.

The premise of this study relies on nested models of the form where the data vector, d, is the GPS measured vertical velocity at location (x, y), β m are the least-squares polynomial coefficients to invert for, and ɛ characterizes the data noise about the modelled surface. The model order, l, is the sum of the exponents of the highest-order term. For example, the model ending with the term xy2 is considered to be order l = 3. For increasing model order, cross-terms are added first, then terms with higher powers of x than y, and finally those with higher powers of y than x. The terms for model order l = 2 would thus be arranged β 3 xy + β 4 x2 + β 5 y2 as above.

We begin with the linear equation where G is the design matrix, with columns comprised of the independent terms (x n , y n ) in equation (1), and m is a vector of polynomial coefficients β m . Here, G is N × M, where N is the number of GPS data in d, and M is the number of coefficients being solved for. Before building the design matrix, the latitude and longitude of each data point were converted to UTM zone 11S easting (x) and northing (y) to provide an isotropic Cartesian coordinate system. The coordinate positions then had their mean removed and were scaled to unit variance to ensure stability of the inversion. We repeated this process with a rotation of the design matrix into a coordinate system that minimized areas of the modelled region with no data (white space) to ensure that the results were not affected by artefacts of the grid orientation. After building the design matrix, equation (2) was inverted for the least-squares solution of m

This inversion was performed for K = 2 to 751 (through polynomial orders up to l = 38), where K is the number of parameters used in the model, M, plus one (we independently estimated data noise from the inversion). The criterion for model selection used in this study was the sample-size-corrected Akaike Information Criterion, AICc19,20,30, in which RSS is the residual sum of squared prediction errors. The first term in the AICc penalizes models that fit poorly, as measured by high RSS/N, whereas the second term penalizes model complexity, as measured by high K. Minimizing the AICc then yields the s-model that best fits, but does not overfit, the data; it is the simplest model that explains the correlated velocity field.

The variance of the sampling distribution (signal noise) was estimated using the explained sum of squares31, ESS,

To produce an s-model surface and surface of standard deviation calculated on an evenly spaced UTM grid that spans the region containing the GPS data, we first calculate the covariance matrix, C m , of the posterior distribution of parameters: Here C n is the covariance of the signal noise, ESS I N . We then constructed a 1 km spaced UTM grid that spans the study area to populate a new design matrix, G′, at N′ locations, and calculated the selected model vertical velocities, d′, on the grid, as well as the covariance of the s-model prediction, C d′ , in which C n′ = ESSI N′ .

At every grid location, we computed one standard deviation in the prediction of GPS velocities from the predicted model surface using the prediction covariance. Grid coordinates were fed as x, y pairs into the design matrix, G′, at locations where we predicted the coherent velocity field values, d′. The easting and northing positions were then scaled back to their true mean and variance before being converted to latitude and longitude. Results of this statistical technique for example model orders are provided in Supplementary Fig. 1.

We tested the sensitivity of this method to short-wavelength vertical velocity signals using synthetic data. We interpolated 5 mm yr−1 squares of increasing edge length (10 km–100 km) at the centre of the model domain to the GPS station locations and performed model selection on nested polynomials. The approach consistently selected high-order polynomial models that fit the square vertical velocity anomalies. When modelling the synthetic data using only the long-wavelength polynomial chosen for the GPS data used in this study (15th order), features smaller than the ∼100–200 km wavelength of the model were smeared into broad, low-amplitude signals that would have a negligible effect on the overall solution. For example, a 50 × 50 km square of 5 mm yr−1 is averaged into a ∼150 × 200 km region of uplift with an amplitude of 0.4 mm yr−1.

For independent verification of these modelling results, we also used Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) two-dimensional (2D) Green’s function spline function ‘greenspline’22, as well as the thin-plate splining function ‘tpaps’ in MATLAB 2014b21. Both techniques provided qualitative and quantitative verification of the long-wavelength quadrant pattern revealed by model selection (see Supplementary Fig. 1). GMT’s greenspline tool for continuous curvature splines and MATLAB’s tpaps tool for thin-plate splines produce a smoothed data surface that lies between the two extremes where the model output is equal to the model input and where the model output has zero curvature. Although these functions do not use a robust information criterion, the smoothing value chosen is a relatively good starting guess for the value that optimizes goodness of fit while best penalizing high spline curvature.

3D earthquake cycle deformation model.

We model the North American–Pacific plate boundary as a series of vertical connected faults embedded in an elastic plate overlying a viscoelastic half-space6. The 4D model simulates interseismic strain accumulation, coseismic displacement, and postseismic viscous relaxation of the mantle. The mathematical deformation solution is analytic in the vertical and time dimensions, whereas the solution in the two horizontal dimensions is provided in the Fourier transform domain10,32,33. The solution satisfies the zero-traction surface boundary condition34,35,36,37 and maintains stress and displacement continuity across the base of the plate10. A far-field velocity step across the plate boundary of 45 mm yr−1 is simulated using a cosine transform in the x direction (that is, across the plate boundary). A uniform far-field velocity boundary condition at the top and bottom of the grid is simulated by arranging the fault trace to be cyclic in the y direction (that is, parallel to the plate boundary). The numerical aspects of this approach involve generating a grid of vector force couples that simulate complex fault geometry, taking the 2D horizontal Fourier transform of the grid, multiplying by the appropriate transfer functions and time-dependent relaxation coefficients, and finally inverse Fourier transforming to obtain the desired results10. Fault elements are embedded in an elastic plate and a displacement discontinuity across each fault element is simulated using a finite width force couple embedded in a fine grid10. Because the computational aspects of the model are only 2D, the entire plate boundary (2,048 km by 1,024 km, 1 km cell size) can be simulated very efficiently.

Faults within the elastic plate extend from the surface to a prescribed locking depth. Below this, fully relaxed secular slip (assuming infinite time) takes place down to the base of the elastic plate. Assumed quantities of the homogeneous elastic plate are a Young’s modulus of 70 GPa and a shear modulus of 30 GPa (refs 6,38). Coseismic slip is kinematically prescribed along fault segments with known historical ruptures. Transient deformation follows each earthquake due to viscoelastic flow in the underlying half-space. The duration of the viscoelastic response, characterized by the Maxwell time, depends on the viscosity of the underlying half-space and the elastic plate thickness (see Supplementary Fig. 2 for model parameter comparison). The Maxwell rheology used is consistent with viscoelastic postseismic studies of southern California39,40,41,42. Full details of this model are provided in previous studies6,10.

The model is purely kinematic; slip on faults is prescribed based on geologic, geodetic, and historical seismic data. Deep slip along the plate boundary (below the locking depth) drives the secular interseismic crustal block motions. Long-term slip rates (that is, over many earthquake cycles) are constrained by geologic estimates43 and geodetic velocity measurements11. Small adjustments to local fault geometry to account for fault step-overs7 were adopted in the present-day velocity model (Supplementary Fig. 3). Fault segments were locked from the surface down to a variable locking depth, which was tuned to match the present-day EarthScope PBO GPS measurements11. Note that earthquake cycle effects44,45, as well as a smooth transition from locked to unlocked fault46, are known to complicate estimations of true locking depth. Apparent locking depths range between 0 and 22 km, and are primarily consistent with seismicity depths47,48 and provide a root-mean-square residual velocity model misfit of less than 2 mm yr−1 (ref. 11). The model accounts for recent postseismic vertical motions from the Hector Mine and Landers events, which contribute less than, on average, 0.2 mm yr−1 of localized uplift and subsidence at the ends of each rupture.

Traditionally, this model has been used to investigate 1000-year earthquake cycle viscoelastic deformation of the San Andreas Fault System (SAFS)6,8,10. For a purely elastic model, deep interseismic slip below a locked fault produces narrow regions of uplift along compressional bends and subsidence along tensile regimes. This is a known and intuitive result of elastic half-space deformation models33,49. For example, large mountain ranges north of Los Angeles are recognized to be a result of compressional uplift along the Big Bend of the SAFS. To obtain this same physical behaviour using a viscoelastic layered model that includes the effect of gravity, however, requires an omission of east–west-directed body forces that comprise the deep interseismic slip (below the locking depth) mode of the model. When the SAFS is projected into a pole-of-deformation model space50 (which aligns the fault system in a predominantly north–south direction), only regions with large deviations in orientation from north are impacted by this technique, such as the Big Bend. The end result is a realistic near-field uplifting zone along the Big Bend that simulates geologic uplift in this compressive region6,8,33, in addition to a far-field quadrant pattern of alternating uplift and subsidence zones due to earthquake cycle interactions of adjacent fault segments. Geodetic data, however, largely report motions occurring over earthquake cycle timescales (tens to hundreds of years), not necessarily motions occurring on geologic timescales (over thousands of years), as is evident from the lack of strong uplift (and noticeable subsidence) present in the PBO data straddling the Big Bend of the SAFS. To significantly improve our modelling fit in this region, and to ultimately focus our analysis to deformation expected over realistic earthquake cycle timescales, we restored the deep-seated east–west body forces that act below the locking depth of the fault system. This resulting viscoelastic vertical deformation field yields a dominant far-field quadrant pattern of uplift and subsidence with no localized near-field uplift along the Big Bend, in strong agreement with modern GPS observations.

Code availability.

The source code and documentation for the 3D Fourier Elastic and Viscoelastic Deformation numerical model used in this study to generate the physical model vertical velocity field can be accessed online at http://topex.ucsd.edu/body_force.

Data availability.

The Plate Boundary Observatory GPS vertical velocities used to generate the statistical model vertical velocity field are made publicly available by UNAVCO online at http://pbo.unavco.org/data/gps.