Charles Barkley Takes Stand Against ‘Anti-Discrimination’ Law in North Carolina
As the backlash to North Carolina’s recent “anti-discrimination” law mounts, one of the NBA’s most legendary names — Charles Barkley — is calling on the league to relocate 2017’s All-Star Game in Charlotte in protest.

Last month, Republican Gov. Pat McCrory signed into law a bill that prevents cities and counties from passing their own anti-discrimination rules, and even bars transgender citizens from using the restroom of their preference.

Play Facebook

Twitter

Embed Pressure Mounts Amid North Carolina's New anti-LGBT Law 2:33 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

Several companies, including PayPal and Google Ventures, have signaled that they are cutting ties with the state because of their stance on LGBT rights, and following the NFL’s role in derailing similar legislation in Georgia, there has been pressure on the NBA to reconsider its relationship with the Tarheel State.

"As a black person, I’m against any form of discrimination — against whites, Hispanics, gays, lesbians, however you want to phrase it,” the NBA Hall of Famer and basketball analyst told CNN this week. “It’s my job, with the position of power that I’m in and being able to be on television, I’m supposed to stand up for the people who can’t stand up for themselves.”

Related: North Carolina Starts to See Economic Damage From Anti-Bias Law

Fifty-three-year-old Barkley, despite his infamous ad from the 1990s where he declared “I am not a role model,” has been exemplary on the issue of gay rights for years.

When ex-NBA player Tim Hardaway went on a homophobic rant in a radio interview back in 2007, Barkley quickly condemned him. In 2011, he went further during an interview on Sirius XM Radio.

“If somebody is gay, that’s their own business,” he said. “But it bothers me how people try to say that jocks are not going to like a gay … I think gay people should be allowed to get married and God bless them, that’s their own business. Listen, if a guy can’t play that’s the only time we don’t want to play with him. We don’t care about all that extracurricular stuff.”

Former NBA player and commentator Charles Barkley looks on prior to the 2016 NCAA Men's Final Four National Championship game between the Villanova Wildcats and the North Carolina Tar Heels at NRG Stadium on April 4, 2016 in Houston, Texas. Scott Halleran / Getty Images

That same year, he added: “First of all, every player has played with gay guys. It bothers me when I hear these reporters and jocks get on TV and say: ‘Oh, no guy can come out in a team sport. These guys would go crazy.’ First of all, quit telling me what I think. I’d rather have a gay guy who can play than a straight guy who can’t play.”

When Jason Collins became the first openly gay NBA player in 2013, Barkley said during an appearance on Dan Patrick's radio show that he “probably had three or four gay teammates.”

Related: North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory Calls LGBT Criticism 'Political Theater'

“Everybody did. Everybody played with a gay teammate, Dan. And it’s no big deal. First of all, I think it’s an insult to gay people to think that they’re trying to pick up on their teammates. But everybody has played with a gay teammate," Barkley said, adding, "Until somebody has the courage, and I think it takes great courage to come out, it’s kind of an unspoken word to be honest with you.”

Last year, Barkley also spoke out against Indiana’s controversial “religious freedom” bill, which critics argued permitted discrimination against gays and lesbians, amid the NCAA championship tournament.

“As long as anti-gay legislation exists in any state, I strongly believe big events such as the Final Four and Super Bowl should not be held in those states’ cities,” he said.

Play Facebook

Twitter

Embed Governor McCrory: 'We Are Not Taking Away Any Rights' 2:25 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

Curiously, before committing full-time to being a television personality, Barkley flirted with launching a career in politics — as a Republican. For years, he floated the idea of running for governor of his home state of Alabama. He switched his party affiliation to the Democrats in 2006, telling reporters, “I was a Republican until they lost their minds.”

He endorsed President Barack Obama in 2008 and 2012, but declared he was no longer interested in seeking higher office himself in 2011, telling TMZ that politics is a “bad business right now.”

Meanwhile, the city of Atlanta has expressed interested in substituting as host for next year’s All-Star Game.

This story originally appeared on MSNBC.com.