NAVPERS 15555D, NAVY MILITARY FUNERALS Reference
Enter your search terms Submit search form Web navyit.com

Navy Advancement Tips: Whether you are staying in the Military, or getting out of the Military, developing good study habits now will benefit you for the rest of your professional career. You can find good study tips all over the internet but the first step is always to just study. While you are in the Military you should do your best to attain a college degree or career certifications related to your field. You have many resources to help you to get these at little or no cost to you. Tuition Assistance covers up to 16 semester credit hours per year for up to $250 per credit hour or $4000 a year. That is free money that if you dont use it just goes to waste. Of course you can also use your Montgomery GI Bill to cover all your tuition costs. Tuition Assistance will also reimburse you for career industry certifications. If your looking for a fast way to get certifications you can find training boot camps for whatever your studying for and have the military pick up the bill. By attaining a college degree and/or certifications you will greatly increase your professional knowledge. Which in turn will significantly increase your value in both the military and civilian sector which leads to higher paying jobs. You will also get a leg up on everyone else who is not taking advantage of these programs. So when evaluations come out, a degree or certs could give you the extra push you need to get the top spot which might promote you and get you higher up on the pay scales and pay charts. So lets say you are looking for a job for when you leave the military. If you get out with 5 years experience and no degree or certs and you are going up against a fresh college graduate you will be about equal. Now lets say you have the same 5 years experience, a college degree, and industry level certifications going up against that same college grad. Its a no brainer that you will get the job over the other guy. Now most jobs in the Military also give you a security clearance. The clearance must be maintained by not getting in too much debt, staying out of trouble, and lots of other factors. The government is saying they trust you implicitly. This security clearance can be the extra item you need to land you a high paying DOD job or a GS position that requires you to have a security clearance, it might even end up in a six figure income. In conclusion, your advancement in either the military or civilian sector career rests solely with you. My grandfather told me something that has stuck with me for my whole life. He said "play now and work later or work now and play later" Nothing is more true. In five years I went from an E-2 to an E-6, attained my AA in Information Systems, attained 15 profesional computer certifications, bought my home, had to use a va loan to do it but still did it, and created this website to help as many of you as possible to try to advance, and develop good study habits. My accomplishments have required many sacrifices but they have been worth it and have ensured my future. The only person stopping you from advancing is you.





Contact us | View site map



This is an unofficial web site & shall not claim to be nor should be assumed to be affiliated with the United States government, Department of Defense, or the United States Navy. Information contained herein is unclassified, and documents available for download are for reference only & shall not be considered as official policy or directive. I will make every effort to ensure this is met.