Photographing an Albino Hummingbird
How We Photographed the Albino Ruby-throated Hummingbird, but first...

Kevin and Bethany Shank, along with their six children, are the publishers of Nature Friend magazine. The oldest boys, Marlin, Shaphan, Darren, and Allen, along with Kevin were privileged to photograph an albino ruby-throated hummingbird in Staunton, Virginia, on August 16, 2011.

Nature Friend Magazine...

is published 12 times per year. You will appreciate that each magazine is free of external advertising.

In the Study Guide edition of Nature Friend, we have a monthly nature photography lesson. In the October 2011 Study Guide, the lesson was based on our experiences photographing an albino hummingbird. You may read that lesson below as an example of what a monthly photography lesson may include, but first...

A Special Introductory Offer...

Save $3.00 with coupon code: RTH1213

To subscribe to Nature Friend magazine, click this link.

To upgrade a current subscription of Nature Friend to the Study Guide edition, click this link.

We invite you to join our subscriber family today.





The page above is from the November 2011 Nature Friend magazine.

To see more photos of this albino hummingbird, click this link.

Learn In-Flight Photography

with Nature Friend



You can take in-flight photos of owls, bats, and hummingbirds too. The Shank family have taught these topics in the monthly photography lessons in the Study Guide edition of Nature Friend magazine.

The 2009 hardbound volume of Nature Friend includes the in-flight owl photography lesson where the owl catches prey.

The 2010 hardbound volume of Nature Friend includes the in-flight bat and hummingbird lessons, as well as owls bringing food to a nest.

The 2011 hardbound volume of Nature Friend includes the coverage we gave to the albino hummingbird photographs.

Hardbound editions are limited, and when supplies are gone they are gone. Click here to see what hardbound volumes are still available.

Here are example photographs the Shank family have taken using techniques taught. This is easier than you may think. You can do this too.

Click here to learn more about how these photos were taken.