Harry S. Truman Carrier Strike Group Deployment Delayed

From Harry S. Truman Carrier Strike Group Public Affairs

NORFOLK, Va. (NNS) -- The Secretary of Defense delayed the deployment of USS Harry S. Truman (CVN 75) and USS Gettysburg (CG 64) Feb. 6. The deployment was originally scheduled for Friday, Feb. 8.



The affected ships have begun formally notifying the men and women of the Harry S. Truman Carrier Strike Group (HST CSG) that they will not be deploying.



"Facing budget uncertainty - including a Continuing Resolution and the looming potential for across-the-board sequestration cuts - the U.S. Navy made this request to the Secretary and he approved," said Pentagon Press Secretary George Little in a released statement. "This prudent decision enables the U.S. Navy to maintain these ships to deploy on short notice in the event they are needed to respond to national security contingencies," said Little.



In order to remain ready and capable to deploy, HST CSG will conduct underway evolutions and maintain proficiency until a future deployment date is announced.



"The United States will continue to maintain a robust military presence in the CENTCOM region, including the current carrier presence and a mix of other assets, to fulfill enduring commitments to our partners. The U.S. military continues to stand ready to respond to any contingency and to confront any threat in the region," said Little.



HST CSG consists of approximately 5,000 Sailors and Marines, including coalition Sailors. Deploying units include Commander, Carrier Strike Group 10; USS Harry S. Truman (CVN 75); German frigate FGS Hamburg (F220); guided-missile cruiser USS Gettysburg (CG 64), and 1st Combined Destroyer Squadron.



Carrier Air Wing 3 is embarked on board USS Harry S. Truman with its associated squadrons: Strike Fighter Squadron (VFA) 32 "Swordsmen," VFA-37 "Ragin' Bulls," and VFA-105 "Gunslingers," Marine Fighter Attack Squadron 312 "Checkerboards," Airborne Early Warning Squadron 126 "Seahawks," Electronic Attack Squadron 130 "Zappers," Helicopter Sea Combat Squadron 7 "Dusty Dogs," and Helicopter Maritime Strike Squadron 74 "Swamp Foxes."



USS Harry S. Truman returned from its last deployment December 2010.



Following its last deployment, USS Harry S. Truman conducted a 16-month docking planned incremental availability from March - July 2011 at Norfolk Naval Shipyard.