Navy strike group commander fired for viewing porn at work
The San Diego-based commanding officer of Pacific Fleet's carrier strike group training command has been relieved following allegations that he used his government computer to access pornography.

Rear Adm. Rick Williams was fired by 3rd Fleet boss Vice Adm. Nora Tyson on Friday "based on the initial findings of an ongoing investigation into the alleged misuse of government computer equipment," the Navy said in a release.

During a routine inspection, Williams was found to have looked at pornographic images on his government computer, violating Navy rules, said a Navy source familiar with the incident. The misuse of the computer did not involve any classified material and the investigation is ongoing, the source added.

"They have enough information to say it wasn't just a mistake," the source said. "It was extensive enough that they knew it was not just an error."

Williams, a career surface warfare officer, has been the head of Carrier Strike Group 15 since June. He could not be immediately reached for comment Saturday.

He earned his commission in 1984 after graduating from the Rochester Institute of Technology and served aboard two frigates and a hydrofoil as a junior officer before becoming executive officer of the destroyer O'Bannon, according to his official biography.

He first took command in 2002 of the frigate McInerney, before going on to lead Destroyer Squadron 26 and then a position as deputy 5th Fleet commander, directing maritime operations in support of operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom.

Ashore, Williams has served as a navigation and leadership instructor at the Naval Academy, as executive assistant to the deputy of the Missile Defense Agency, lead campaign planner at OPNAV's N81 assessments/capability analysis office, special assistant to the chief of naval operations and executive assistant to the U.S. Central Command boss.

× Fear of missing out? Sign up for the Navy Times Daily News Roundup to receive the top Navy stories every afternoon. Thanks for signing up. By giving us your email, you are opting in to the Navy Times Daily News Roundup.

Prior to his job at CSG 15, he was the commander of Navy Region Hawaii and Naval Surface Group Middle Pacific.

Capt. Chris Barnes will serve as a temporary replacement at CSG 15 until a permanent relief is named.

Williams is the first one-star fired since 2013, when Stennis strike group commander Rear Adm. Chuck Gaouette was ousted on deployment for misconduct including foul language, flipping off lieutenants, speculation that black admirals were chosen because of their race and sending fellow officers a racially-charged email about a black sailor.

background: Navy source familiar with the incident

misuse of a government computer. not associated with classified information. lewd images or pornography on his computer

routine inspection of computer systems

they just said, routine inspection. the investigation is ongoing, but it's enough for us to relieve him but the investigation is not over