Herbs and Spices in Cancer Prevention and Treatment
17.4. CARAWAY Caraway (Carum carvi), also known as “meridian fennel” or “Persian cumin,” is native to western Asia, Europe, and northern Africa. The principal agents in caraway oil are believed to be carvone or p-mentha-1,8-dien-2-one and limonene or p-mentha-1,8-diene, the precursors of carvone and anethofuran (Zheng, Kenney, and Lam 1992). Although caraway appears to be a potent antioxidant in vitro, it has not been adequately examined in humans. Recently, Kapoor et al. (2010) showed that caraway essential oil and oleoresins were progressively effectively with dose as antioxidants and more effective than commercial butylated hydroxyanisole and butylated hydroxytoluene. Caraway oil and its ethanol oleoresin showed better reductive power than the other oleoresins. The scavenging and reducing power against the diphenylpicrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radicals that caraway oil and oleoresins provide may be associated with their ability to donate hydrogen and the presence of reductones. Mazaki et al. (2006) examined the effect of caraway seed extract on mutagenesis induced by N-methyl- N-nitro-N′-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG) in S. typhimurium strains that are deficient in DNA MGMT. Their results indicated that caraway does not directly inactivate MNNG and O6-methylguanine-DNA MGMT may be involved in the response. Animal models have also been used to explore the anticancer potential of caraway in sites ranging from colon to skin cancers. Schwaireb (1993) examined dietary caraway oil for its effects on skin tumors induced by DMBA and croton oil in female BALB/c mice. Mice fed with a diet containing 3% caraway oil for 23 weeks from the beginning of tumor promotion decreased the number of mice with papillomas (p < .001), the number of papillomas per mouse (p < .0001), and the average papilloma volume (p < .0001). The number of carcinomas in those animals provided with caraway oil were significantly less than in the controls (Schwaireb 1993). Deeptha et al. (2006) examined the effects of oral caraway (30, 60, and 90 mg/kg body weight per day for 15 weeks) on aberrant crypt foci in male Wistar rats treated with the carcinogen 1,2-dimethylhydrazine. Aberrant foci are early morphological events that represent an important step in colon cancer progression. Treatment of rats with 60 mg/kg body weight of caraway decreased carcinogen-induced aberrant crypt foci, indicators of oxidative stress, and fecal bacterial enzyme activity. Induction of GST by anticarcinogenic compounds is an important mechanism by which several spices, including caraway, may promote carcinogen detoxification and thereby lower cancer risk. Zheng, Kenney, and Lam (1992) reported that activity of the detoxifying enzyme GST in the liver increased markedly after gavage treatment with 20 mg carvone or limonene in A/J mice. Carvone was also found to increase the GST activity in the forestomach by about 80% (p < .05), more than double the GST activity in the large intestinal mucosa (p < .05), and more than triple the GST activity in the small intestinal mucosa (p < .005). Carvone also increased glutathione (GSH) in the lung (p < .005) and in the small (p < .05) and large intestinal mucosa (p < .05). Caraway may also influence carcinogen activation by its ability to modify carcinogen bioactivation. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and halogenated aromatic compounds such as 2,3,7,8-tetrodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) are bioactivated by the xenobiotic-metabolizing CYP genes to form reactive metabolites that bind to DNA. Naderi-Kalali et al. (2005) reported that caraway extracts were effective in inhibiting the induction of CYP1A1 and CYP1A1-related RNA in rat hepatoma (H4IIE) cells. Caraway extracts >0.13 μM significantly inhibited CYP1A1 induction, as measured by the 2,3,7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase assay, with roughly a tenfold suppression in enzyme activity observed at concentrations of 1.3 and 13 μM, inhibiting TCDD-dependent induction by 50%-90%, depending on the solvent used (Naderi-Kalali et al. 2005). Overall, changes in both phase I and II enzymes are consistent with the ability of caraway and its active constituent to lower chemically induced cancers. The importance of caraway and its isolated components in drug detoxification mechanisms in humans remains largely unexplored.

17.5. CARDAMOM Cardamom refers to herbs within the Elettaria (green) and Amomum (black) genera of the ginger family Zingiberaceae. Cardamom is a common ingredient used in Indian cooking and in various parts of Europe. As with many spices, cardamom has been demonstrated to have antioxidant properties. Kikuzaki, Kawai, and Nakatani (2001) examined extracts from black cardamom (Amomum subulatum) for their ability to scavenge radicals. The ethyl acetate-soluble fraction, containing several phenolic compounds (protocatechualdehyde, protocatechuic acid, 1,7-bis(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)hepta- 4E,6E-dien-3-one, and 2,3,7-trihydroxy-5-(3,4-dihydroxy-E-styryl)-6,7,8,9-tetrahydro-5H-benzocycloheptene), scavenged about 90% of DPPH radicals when provided at 100 μg/mL. Interestingly, at lower concentrations, its radical scavenging activity was comparable to that of α-tocopherol (Kikuzaki, Kawai, and Nakatani 2001). Feeding male albino Wistar rats with a high-fat diet supplemented with 10% black cardamom seed powder for 90 days was found to lower 2-thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) by 28% (p < .05) in heart tissue (Dhuley 1999). In addition, cardamom caused significant increases (p < .05) in several antioxidant enzymes including catalase, superoxide dismutase, and GST in both liver and heart compared to controls (Dhuley 1999). The ability of cardamom to inhibit chemical carcinogenesis was shown by Banerjee et al. (1994), who observed cardamom oil feeding (10 μL daily for 2 weeks) caused a significant decrease in liver CYP content in Swiss albino mice (p < .05). A 30% increase in GST activity (p < .05) and sulfhydryl levels (p < .05) in the liver also accompanied the cardamom oil treatment. These observations suggest that intake of cardamom oil affects the enzymes associated with xenobiotic metabolism and may therefore have benefits as a deterrent to cancer (Banerjee et al. 1994). Cardamom has also been demonstrated to decrease azoxymethane-induced colon carcinogenesis by virtue of its anti-inflammatory, antiproliferative, and proapoptotic activities. Providing aqueous cardamom suspensions can enhance detoxifying enzyme (GST activity) and decrease lipid peroxidation (Bhattacharjee, Rana, and Sengupta 2007). Recently, cardamom aqueous extracts (1, 10, 50, and 100 mg/mL) were reported to significantly enhance splenocyte proliferation in a dose-dependent manner, especially when combined with black pepper (Majdalawieh and Carr 2010). While the effects of cardamom and black pepper were the opposite on T helper-1 and -2 cytokine release by splenocytes, the presence of both spices significantly enhanced the cytotoxic activity of natural killer cells against YAC-1 lymphoma cells. These findings provide evidence that cardamom may have anticancer benefits by modifying immunocompetence.

17.6. CINNAMON Cinnamon is a spice obtained from the bark of an evergreen tree belonging to the Lauraceae family. Major constituents in cinnamon include cinnamaldehyde, eugenol, terpinene, α-pinene, carvacrol, linalool, safrole, benzyl benzoate, and coumarin (Tabak, Armon, and Neeman 1999). Cinnamon is widely used in traditional Chinese medicine. Several studies have examined its antioxidant properties. When inbred male albino Wistar rats were fed a high-fat diet with 10% cinnamon bark powder (Cinnamomum verum) for 90 days, oxidative stress was substantially decreased, as evident by a reduction in TBARS, a biomarker of free radical production (Dhuley 1999). Providing rats with cinnamon bark powder significantly increased several antioxidant-related enzymes, including catalase, superoxide dismutase, and GST in both liver and heart tissue, compared to controls. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and GPx were also significantly increased (p < .05) in rats fed with cinnamon bark powder. These enzymes help maintain GSH levels, essential for cellular integrity and protection against oxidative damage from free radicals (Dhuley 1999). The ability of cinnamon extracts to suppress the in vitro growth of H. pylori, a recognized risk factor for gastric cancer, gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma, and possibly pancreatic cancer, has stirred considerable interest in the potential use of this spice to suppress human cancers (Farinha and Gascoyne 2005; Eslick 2006). However, a pilot study involving 15 subjects given a cinnamon extract (80 mg/day) for 4 weeks was not effective in those infected with H. pylori (Nir et al. 2000). In this study, the colonization rate of H. pylori was measured by urea breath tests (UBTs). Although a decline in H. pylori counts was observed in six patients with exceptionally high counts according to their first UBT, the study did not demonstrate a decrease in colonization overall, and in some individuals increased colony counts occurred. The lack of success of cinnamon as a single treatment regimen against H. pylori is not terribly surprising given the consistent failure of single-agent antibiotic trials. Additional trials using higher cinnamon amounts and possibly in combination with other agents may be warranted to truly evaluate the effects of this spice (Nir et al. 2000). Tabak et al. (1996) examined several spices for their ability to inhibit H. pylori. Cinnamon and thyme were found to be the most potent inhibitors of H. pylori growth and urease activity. Tabak, Armon, and Neeman (1999) reported cinnamon’s antibacterial activity against seven clinical isolates of H. pylori and the antiurease activity of two different cinnamon extracts (methylene chloride and ethanol) and their chemical constituents. They found that adding 100 μg cinnamon per disk produced an inhibition zone of approximately 80 mm wide, which was greater than the inhibition zones produced by several antibiotics (10 μg ampicillin, 30 μg tetracycline, 15 μg erythromycin, 30 μg nalidixic acid, and 25 μg co-trimoxazole). Although a concentration of 25 μg/mL completely inhibited four H. pylori strains, 50 μg/mL was the minimum inhibitory concentration for all seven strains. In a liquid medium, cinnamon extract began to inhibit H. pylori at a concentration >3 μg/ mL and peaked at a concentration >12 μg/mL, and a similar pattern of inhibition was observed with urease. The efficiency of cinnamon extracts in inhibiting H. pylori in a liquid medium and its resistance to low pH may enhance its effects in an environment like the human stomach. The antibacterial effects of cinnamon extract may be due to cinnamaldehyde. Adding 200 μg cinnamaldehyde per disk produced an inhibition zone >90 mm, while eugenol (2000 μg/disk) produced an inhibition zone of 68 mm, and carvacrol (2000 μg/disk) produced an inhibition zone of 66 mm; Tabak, Armon, and Neeman 1999). Cao, Urban, and Anderson (2008) studied the role of polyphenolic polymers from commercial cinnamon extract in immune regulation using mouse RAW264.7 macrophages. The authors examined whether cinnamon polyphenol extract (CPE) regulated immune function by affecting expression levels of genes that code for tristetraprolin (TTP/zinc finger protein 36), proinflammatory cytokines, and glucose transporter (GLUT) family proteins, and they compared these effects with that of insulin and lipopolysaccharide. Because TTP downregulates proinflammatory cytokines, it has the potential for use in the prevention and treatment of inflammation-related diseases. In this study, CPE rapidly increased TTP mRNA and protein levels in mouse RAW264.7 macrophages after 30 minutes of treatment, and twofold increase in expression was sustained throughout the 4 hours of treatment. CPE also increased the mRNAs coding for proinflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor α, cyclooxygenase-2, and interleukin 6, although the TTP levels were 6- to 3000-fold higher than the proinflammatory cytokine mRNA molecules in the same cells (Cao and Prior 1998). In mammals, glucose is a critically important molecule in the host immune response to injury and infection, which is facilitated by GLUT family proteins, and based on this study, cinnamon increases GLUT expression. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a critical factor in the induction of angiogenesis. Unfortunately, the side effects associated with most anti-VEGF drugs limit their use, and thus, the use of naturally occurring dietary inhibitors derived from diets has great appeal. A water-based extract from cinnamon is a promising effective agent because it directly inhibits kinase activity of purified VEGFR2 as well as mitogen-activated protein kinase- and Stat3-mediated signaling pathway in endothelial cells (ECs; Lu et al. 2010). Impressively, the extract was found to inhibit VEGF-induced EC proliferation, migration and tube formation in vitro, sprout formation from aortic ring ex vivo, and tumor-induced blood vessel formation in vivo. Polyphenols in the extract appear to be responsible for the response; cinnamaldehyde is observed to have little effect on VEGFR2 kinase activity (Lu et al. 2010). While the ability of cinnamon to influence angiogenesis is intriguing, additional studies are warranted.

17.8. CORIANDER Coriander (Coriandrum sativum) is an herb in the family Apiaceae and is native to southern Europe and northern Africa to southwestern Asia. Although all parts of the plant are edible, its fresh leaves and dried seeds are most frequently used in cooking. Coriander is a common ingredient in many foods throughout the world. One of its principal constituents is linalool. Several animal studies provide evidence that coriander seeds can promote the hepatic antioxidant system. Feeding a 10% coriander seed diet to male Wistar rats for 12 weeks decreased the ability of hexachlorocyclo-hexane, an organochlorine insecticide, to promote lipid peroxidation (Aruna and Sivaramakrishnan 1990; Anilakumar, Nagaraj, and Santhanam 2001). Coriander can also influence foreign compound metabolism. Feeding Swiss mice with 160-mg coriander seeds per gram diet resulted in GST induction ranging from 20% to 37%, depending on the tissue examined. In another study, Banerjee et al. (1994) observed roughly a doubling in GST activity in Swiss albino mice that were provided with diets containing coriander oil (10 μL coriander oil daily for 2 weeks). No significant changes were observed in CYP or aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase. Although relatively few studies focus on coriander for its anticancer properties, those that are available suggest coriander may be important (Esiyok, Otles, and Akcicek 2004).

17.10. DILL Dill (Anethum graveolens) is a relatively short-lived perennial spice. Dill is an herb that in effect has two components that are dependent on the seasons. In the early spring, dill is used for its leaves and in the autumn for its seeds. The principal constituents of dill weed oil are anethofuran or 3,6-dimethyl-2,3,3a,4,5,7a-hydroxobenzofuran, and carvone or p-mentha-1,8-dien-2-one (Zheng, Kenney, and Lam 1992). As with other spices, there is evidence that dill promotes drug detoxification mechanisms. Providing 20 mg each of carvone and anethofuran by gavage once every 2 days for a total of three doses increased GST activity in A/J mice (Zheng, Kenney, and Lam 1992). The response depended on the agent and the tissue examined. Anethofuran more than doubled the activity of the detoxifying enzyme GST in the liver (p < .005) and forestomach (p < .005), and carvone increased GST activity 78% in the forestomach (p < .05) and increased GST activity more than twofold in the liver and large intestinal mucosa (p < .05) and more than threefold in the small intestinal mucosa (p < .005; Zheng, Kenney, and Lam 1992). Because GSH helps maintain cellular oxidation-reduction balance and protects cells against free-radical species, the combination of increased GST and GSH levels results may be particularly helpful in detoxifying foreign compounds, including carcinogens.

17.11. GARLIC Garlic (Allium sativum) is a member of the onion family Alliaceae. Garlic has been used throughout history for both its culinary and medicinal properties. Garlic’s distinctive characteristics arise from sulfur, which constitutes almost 1% of its dry weight. The primary sulfur-containing constituents are γ-glutamyl-S-alk(en)yl-L-cysteines and S-alk(en)yl-L-cysteine sulfoxides. Considerable variation in the S-alk(en)ylcysteine sulfoxide content can occur; alliin (S-allylcysteine sulfoxide) is the largest contributor. Alliin concentrations can increase during storage because of the transformation of γ-glutamylcysteines. Although garlic does not typically serve as a major source of essential nutrients, it may contribute to several dietary factors with potential health benefits, including the presence of oligosaccharides, arginine-rich proteins and, depending on soil and growing conditions, selenium and flavonoids. Preclinical models provide rather compelling evidence that garlic and its associated components can lower the incidence of breast, colon, skin, uterine, esophagus, and lung cancers. However, evidence in human investigations is less compelling. Suppression of nitrosamine formation continues to surface as one of the most likely mechanisms by which garlic retards cancer. The ability of S-allyl cysteine (SAC) and its nonallyl analog S-propyl cysteine to retard N-nitroso compounds formation, but not diallyl disulfide (DADS), dipropyl disulfide, and diallyl sulfide (DAS), reveal the critical role that the cysteine residue plays in inhibition (Milner 2001). Some of the most compelling evidence in humans comes from studies by Mei et al. (1989) demonstrating that ingesting 5 g/day of garlic blocked the enhanced urinary excretion of nitrosoproline resulting from exaggerated nitrate and proline intake. More recent evidence suggests as little as 1 g of garlic may be sufficient to suppress nitroproline formation (Cope et al. 2009). The ability of garlic to inhibit tumors due to different cancer-inducing agents and in different tissues indicates that a generalized cellular event is likely responsible for the change in tumor incidence and that the response is highly dependent on environmental or other types of biological insults. Because metabolic activation is required for many of these carcinogens, there is likelihood that either phase I or II enzymes are altered. Interestingly, little change in CYP1A1, 1A2, 2B1, or 3A4 activities has been detected following treatment with garlic or related sulfur compounds. However, this lack of responsiveness may relate to the amount and duration of exposure, the quantity of carcinogen administered, or the methods used to assess the cytochrome content or activity. Wu et al. (2002), using immunoblot assays, found that the protein content of CYP1A1, 2B1, and 3A1 was increased by garlic oil and each of several isolated disulfide compounds. Their data demonstrated that the number of sulfur atoms in the allyl compound is inversely related to the depression in these cytochromes. Several lipid- and water-soluble organosulfur compounds have been examined for their antiproliferative efficacy. Some of the more commonly used lipid-soluble allyl sulfur compounds in tumorigenesis research are ajoene, DAS, DADS, and diallyl trisulfide (DATS). A breakdown of allicin appears to be necessary for achieving maximum tumor inhibition. Earlier studies reported that lipid-soluble DAS, DADS, and DATS (100 μM) were more effective in suppressing canine tumor cell proliferation than isomolar water-soluble SAC, S-ethyl cysteine and S-propyl cysteine (Knowles and Milner 2001). Undeniably, not all allyl sulfur compounds from garlic are equally effective in retarding tumor proliferation. Allyl sulfur compounds preferentially suppress neoplastic over non-neoplastic cells (Sakamoto, Lawson, and Milner 1997). S-allylmercaptocysteine (SAMC), DAS, and DADS have also been reported to increase the percentage of cells blocked within the G 2 /M phase. p34cdc2 kinase is a complex that governs the progression of cells from the G 2 phase into the M phase of the cell cycle (Knowles and Milner 2001). Using LNCaP and HCT-116 human cancer cells, Xiao, Zeng, and Singh (2009) demonstrated that checkpoint kinase 1-mediated mitotic arrest resulting from DATS is the key to apoptosis induction. It is becoming increasingly clear that the response to allyl sulfurs relates to their ability to form free radicals rather than to serve as an antioxidant (Antosiewicz et al. 2008). Allyl sulfurs may bring about changes by influencing the genomic expression by affecting histone homeostasis. Allyl mercaptan is a particularly potent inhibitor of histone deacetylase (HDAC; Nian et al. 2009). HDAC inhibition has the potential to derepress epigenetically silenced genes in cancer cells, leading to cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. Sp3 appears to have a role in driving p21 gene expression after HDAC inhibition by allyl sulfur compounds and coincides with cell-cycle arrest. Alliin has been reported to influence angiogenesis. It causes a dose-dependent inhibition of fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2)-induced human EC tube formation and angiogen- esis in the chick chorioallantoic membrane model (Mousa and Mousa 2005). Xiao et al. (2006) suggested the antiangiogenic characteristics of DATS relate to its ability to downregulate VEGF secretion and VEGF receptor-2 protein level and inactivation of Akt kinase. However, while DATS was effective in decreasing prostate cancer multiplicity in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate model, it did not appear to relate to a change in angiogenesis (Singh et al. 2008).

17.13. ROSEMARY Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) is a woody herb with fragrant needle-like leaves. Rosemary is native to the Mediterranean region and possesses a bitter, astringent taste and highly aromatic characteristics that complement a wide variety of foods. Rosemary is a member of the family Lamiaceae, and it contains a number of potentially biologically active compounds, including antioxidants such as carnosic acid and rosmarinic acid. Other bioactive compounds include camphor (up to 20% in dry rosemary leaves), caffeic acid, ursolic acid, betulinic acid, rosmaridiphenol, and rosmanol. Due to its high antioxidant activity, crude and refined extracts of rosemary are now widely available commercially (Ho et al. 2000). While the data are difficult to interpret, when rosemary is added along with other herbs to a balsamic vinegar preparation used in soups and salads, it appears to provide protection again oxidative stress in humans (Dragan et al. 2007). Considerable evidence also suggests that rosemary extracts, or its isolated components, can retard chemically induced cancers. For example, topical application of a rosemary extract has been reported to block the initiation and promotion phases of B(a)P- and DMBA-mediated skin tumorigenesis (Huang et al. 1994). Likewise, topical application of pure carnosol and ursolic acid also inhibited 12-0-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA)-induced skin tumor promotion in DMBA-initiated mice (Huang et al. 1994). Adding rosemary or carnosol has also been shown to retard DMBA-induced mammary cancer in rats (Singletary, MacDonald, and Wallig 1996). The depression in tumors may occur because of a change in the types and amounts of DMBA adducts bound to DNA (Amagase et al. 1996). Although not extensively studied, such evidence suggests the ability of rosemary to influence drug-metabolizing enzymes. Rosemary extracts and the active compounds carnosic acid and rosmarinic acid have been found to inhibit the proliferation of various human cancer cell lines, including NCI-H82 (human, small cell lung carcinoma), DU145 (human prostate carcinoma), Hep-3B (human [black] liver carcinoma), K-562 (human chronic myeloid leukemia), MCF-7 (human breast adenocarcinoma), PC-3 (human prostate adenocarcinoma), and MDA-MB-231 (human breast adenocarcinoma; Yesil-Celiktas et al. 2010). Part of the antitumorigenic properties associated with rosemary may relate to a decrease in TNF-α-induced ROS generation and NF-κB activation, and thus enhanced TNF-α-induced apoptosis (Moon et al. 2010). Carnosol was the most effective in reducing tumor proliferation. Carnosol is also known to induce apoptotic cell death in high-risk pre-B acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL; Dorrie, Sapala, and Zunino 2001). At least part of this response may relate to a decrease in Bcl-2. Although carnosol may be effective, it may also interfere with the actions of some other antitumor agents. Zunino and Storms (2009) reported that carnosol decreased the percentage of cell death in the pre-B ALL lines SEM, RS4;11, and REH when combined with cytarabine, methotrexate, or vincristine compared to these chemotherapeutic agents alone. Overall, these data suggest that carnosol, and possibly other constituents in rosemary, may block the terminal apoptotic events induced by some chemotherapeutic drugs and therefore may decrease the effectiveness of some standard therapies for leukemia.

17.14. SAFFRON Saffron is a spice derived from the flower of the saffron crocus (Crocus sativus) plant native to Southwest Asia. It has historically been the world’s most expensive spice per unit weight. Saffron imparts a bitter taste and hay-like fragrance to food. Saffron likely contains more than 150 volatile and aroma-yielding compounds. A carotenoid, α-crocin, comprises >10% of dry saffron’s mass and is responsible for the rich golden-yellow hue created when saffron is added to food dishes. Picrocrocin, a bitter glucoside, is responsible for saffron’s flavor. Significant information points to the ability of saffron to inhibit cancer (Abdullaev 2003). Aqueous saffron preparations have been reported to inhibit chemically induced skin carcinogenesis (Das, Chakrabarty, and Das 2004). Both changes in carcinogen bioactivation and tumor proliferation appear to occur. Saffron infusion given orally either before or after DMBA treatment increased GST, GPx, catalase, and superoxide dismutase in liver (Das, Das, and Saha 2010). Saffron and crocus also have significant antitumorigenic properties. Similar to other spices, they appear to suppress cell growth in neoplastic cells to a greater extent than in normal cells (Aung et al. 2007). The ability of crocin to decrease cell viability occurs in a concentration- and time-dependent manner (Bakshi et al. 2009). The response is not limited to cells in culture because pancreatic xenografts are also influenced by saffron (4 mg/kg diet for 30 days; Dhar et al. 2009). The effects of tumor suppression also have an impact on the longevity of the host. A significant increase in the life span of Dalton’s lymphoma-bearing animals was found in those provided with saffron (Bakshi et al. 2009). The mechanism by which saffron suppresses tumor proliferation has not been adequately explored, but a shift in caspases and an increase in Bax protein are possible (Mousavi et al. 2009). When a saffron extract (200-2000 μg/mL) was added to MCF-7 cells in culture, there was a marked decrease in cell viability as concentration and duration of exposure increased (IC 50 of 400 ± 18.5 μg/mL after 48 hours). Analysis of DNA fragmentation by flow cytometry revealed apoptotic cell death in these cells (Mousavi et al. 2009). Saffron-induced apoptosis was inhibited by pan-caspase inhibitors, indicating the importance of this process in determining the response.

17.15. THYME Thyme is another culinary and medicinal herb. Today, common usage refers to any or all members of the plant genus Thymus, also of the Lamiaceae family. Several active agents are reported, including thymol, carvacrol, apigenin, luteolin, tannins, γ-terpinene, and other oils (Aydin, Basaran, and Basaran 2005; Kluth et al. 2007). Feeding thyme leaves (0.5% or 2.0%) or its phenolic compounds, thymol and carvacrol (50–200 mg/kg), has been reported to enhance xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes, including phase I enzymes such as 7-ethoxycoumarin O-deethylase and phase II enzymes such as GST and quinone reductase (Sasaki et al. 2005). Admittedly, the isolated components were more effective than feeding the leaf. Kluth et al. (2007) examined the effects of thyme on enzyme induction in cultured human liver carcinoma cells and human colon adenocarcinoma cells. They observed a thyme extract to activate CYP3A4 promoter via PXR and the GI-GPx promoter via the electrophile responsive element, thus providing potential clues about the mechanism by which thymol and carvacrol may influence phase I and II enzyme expression (Kluth et al. 2007). The number of studies on genotoxic effects of thymol and carvacrol are limited, but contradictory. S. typhimurium tests have provided some, but not compelling, evidence that thyme is weakly mutagenic (Stammati et al. 1999). In vivo, 0.25% thyme had no detectable effect on mouse embryo development (Domaracky et al. 2007). In comet assays with human lymphocytes, thymol and carvacrol did not induce DNA strand breakage at concentrations lower than 50-100 μM, and were therefore considered safe for consumers (Undeger et al. 2009).