Modeling the Fluid Dynamics in a Human Stomach to Gain Insight of Food Digestion
Flow field behavior within the stomach

As a result of the motor activity of the gastric wall, a highly 3-D flow was predicted within the stomach, independently of the viscosity of the fluid. The strongest fluid motions were also always predicted in the lower part of the stomach, while a slow recirculation of gastric contents from the proximal to the distal stomach was also identified. These results (illustrated in in the case of the 0.001 Pa.s fluid) are in good agreement with the classical description of gastric functions, where the upper part of the stomach acts as a reservoir and supplier of gastric contents to the antrum, whereas the lower part is responsible for the mechanical forces and fluid motions that promotes their breakdown and mixing (Pal and others 2007; Kong and Singh 2008a). However, unlike these overall flow patterns, the local characteristics of the flow field within the stomach were significantly influenced by the viscosity of the fluid ( ).

Effect of viscosity on the formation of the retropulsive-jet like motion and eddy structures. Streamlines of the fluid flow within the stomach's middle plane at t+ 10 s, colored by velocity magnitude (cm/s).

Gastric flow at t+ 10 s for a Newtonian fluid (0.001 Pa.s). (A) Streamlines of the fluid flow, colored by velocity magnitude (cm/s). (B) Contour of the velocity field in the middle plane of the stomach model.

The flow field predicted by the model, in the case of the ingestion of a 10% glucose solution (Newtonian, 0.001 Pa.s), was in good agreement with the classical description of gastric motions (Schulze 2006). In particular, the flow field predicted within the antropyloric region was characterized by 2 main flow patterns ( ). As the ACWs moved toward the pylorus, gastric contents were forced back, and a retropulsive jet-like motion developed once the gastric occlusion reached a value of 56% (Boulby and others 1999). To illustrate and quantify the development of this jet-like motion, the maximum retropulsive velocity was tracked during the 20 s period of the flow ( ). As the ACW approaches the pylorus sphincter, the increasing speed and occlusion of the ACW strengthened this retropulsive jet successively faster, reaching a maximum retropulsive velocity of 7.6 cm/s in the most occluded section of the pylorus canal. The other main flow pattern identified within the antrum region corresponded to the formation of circular motions (eddies) between 2 consecutive ACWs ( ). Alike the retropulsive jet, the strength of these eddies, characterized by the average-vorticity of the flow field, increased as the ACWs approaches the distal antrum ( ).

Quantitative characterization of the retropulsive jet and eddy structures that developed within the antropyloric region, as the ACWs propagate toward the pylorus (Newtonian fluid, 0.001 Pa.s).

By forcefully mixing, rubbing and grinding of gastric contents, the retropulsive jet-like motion and eddy structures have been largely regarded as the main causes driving the gastric digestion of the food (Pallotta and others 1998; Pal and others 2004; Schulze 2006). However, the numerical results suggested that the characteristics, as well as the development, of these particular flow features are significantly affected by the rheological properties of the fluid.

By increasing the viscosity of gastric contents to 1 Pa.s, higher retropulsive velocities were predicted within the system, but the development of a retropulsive jet-like motion is arguable ( ). Similar to the case of a low viscous fluid, the higher retropulsive velocities were predicted at the location of the ACW peak, but they were confined to a smaller region at the core of the contracted section of the stomach. This result may be explained by the increased action of viscous stresses, which together with the stationary conditions of the gastric wall at the ACW peak, slow down the flow even further away from the wall. Since the deformation of the gastric wall and fluid density were assumed equal to those of the low viscous case, larger retropulsive velocities should develop at the core of the luminal region to ensure continuity. Similarly, the almost immediate decay of the retropulsive motion away from the ACW may be explained by the enhanced diffusion of viscous effects together with the presence of stationary walls between consecutive ACWs.

To quantify the effect of the rheological properties of the fluid on the characteristics of the jet, the initial velocity and length of the strongest retropulsive jet-structure developed within the system were computed ( ). The length of the jet was defined along its axis as the distance from its origin to the point where the jet-velocity decays 40% (largest decay that allowed the characterization of the jet-like structure's length before it reached the largest curvature of the stomach wall).

Effect of the rheological properties of the fluid on the jet-like structure.

As illustrated in , the formation and strength of eddy structures were also affected by viscosity. By increasing the viscosity of the fluid, the development of circular motions was confined to regions closer to the ACWs, and a lower and more uniform vorticity field was predicted ( ). To quantify the effect of rheological properties on the strength of the eddy structures, the average value of the vorticity field predicted within the antropyloric region was tracked during the 20 s period of the flow ( ).

Effect of the rheological properties of gastric contents on the average value of the vorticity field predicted within the antropyloric region.

Effect of viscosity on the vorticity of the flow field. Contour of vorticity within the stomach middle plane at t+ 10 s (lower part of the stomach).

These results suggest that, contrary to the traditional idea of a complete and rapid homogenization, gastric contents associated with high viscous meals seem to be poorly mixed. This result was also experimentally observed by Marciani and others (2001a), where the process of dilution and mixing of gastric contents associated with viscous meals were analyzed by using MRI color-coded dilution maps.

To analyze the effect of modeling the 3-D feature of the system, the flow field predicted by Pal and others (2004) for a 1 Pa.s Newtonian fluid was compared against the one predicted in this study. The results indicated that although the velocity or vorticity profiles obtained within the symmetry plane of the stomach are not significantly affected, their magnitudes are. In particular, the use of an actual model of the system predicted velocity and vorticity values larger by one order of magnitude.