Reporting Foodborne Threats: The Case of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE)
In the chapter’s final contribution, Wil Hueston of the Center for Animal Health and Food Safety at the University of Minnesota shares insights gained from 16 years of involvement with BSE and the interface between animal and human health. He distills this experience into seven lessons that lead to a series of key actions that could be taken to address key issues raised by BSE and, more generally, to improve the response to infectious disease.

Maura Ricketts, who has directed prion disease surveillance and research for Health Canada and the World Health Organization ( WHO ), discusses BSE and vCJD from a public health perspective in the chapter’s third paper. After defining and applying relevant core principles of public health, Ricketts identifies and explores key issues that underlie the development and implementation of health policy to address BSE and vCJD. She concludes with an overview of possible public health actions that reflect the importance of controlling the risk of BSE exposure.

The second paper, by Steven Collins, codirector of the Australian National CJD Registry, describes his country’s approach to TSE surveillance in both animals and humans. The vast majority of CJD cases in the Australian Registry are sporadic; no cases of vCJD or endogenous cases of either BSE or scrapie have been reported to date in the country. Collins recounts the range of measures Australia has adopted to protect commercial livestock from BSE and scrapie, which include bans on the importation of meat and bone meal and of live cattle from any country reporting BSE, as well as the prohibition of ruminant-to-ruminant feeding of meat and bone meal.

Prusiner presents experimental evidence for the prion model of TSE and describes the etiology and diagnosis of vCJD and other human prion diseases. He emphasizes the differences between prion and viral illnesses—most notably, that prions can arise spontaneously—and observes that the mistaken equation of the two can impede the development of effective preventions against invariably fatal prion diseases. “The only rational strategy is to test all cattle for prions and eliminate those harboring prions from the food supply,” Prusiner concludes.

A member of the family of diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs; also known as prion diseases), BSE was first identified in 1986 in the United Kingdom and has since been detected in 26 countries ( GAO, 2005 ). In the early 1980s, Stanley Prusiner, the author of this chapter’s first paper, proposed that the pathogens that cause two TSEs—Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and scrapie, a disease of sheep—consist entirely of an infectious form of protein that he termed the prion ; in 1997, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine for his work on prion biology. Researchers have since learned that in addition to scrapie and CJD, prions cause BSE and its human variant, vCJD , as well as chronic wasting disease in deer and elk.

The rapid reporting of foodborne threats is essential to reducing the burden of foodborne illness, but it also carries direct and indirect costs to individuals, communities, industries, and national economies. The balance of costs and benefits associated with reporting foodborne threats is clearly illustrated by the world’s recent and ongoing experience with bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( BSE , or mad cow disease). A series of workshop presentations by contributors to this chapter explored the biology of BSE and its implications for food safety, international perspectives on BSE surveillance and prevention, and public health lessons learned from this disease and its consequences.

PRIONS AND THE SAFETY OF THE FOOD SUPPLY

Stanley B. Prusiner, M.D.1

University of California San Francisco

In December 2003, mad cow disease made its U.S. debut when federal officials announced that a Holstein cow from Mabton, Washington, had been stricken with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). Although the U.S. government acted surprised by the finding, they should have expected such cattle based on the biology of the prion diseases. Perhaps the novel principles of disease that have emerged over the past two decades from investigations of prions (Prusiner, 2004b) are still too new and different for many people to grasp easily the implications of this discovery. Prions are unprecedented infectious pathogens that are composed solely of protein; they are devoid of nucleic acid—DNA and RNA. The absence of a nucleic genome sets prions apart from all other infectious pathogens including viruses, viroids, bacteria, fungi, and parasites.

Because prions multiply and cause disease in the host, scientists thought for many years that prions must be slow-acting viruses. Moreover, the identification of varieties or strains of prions made the argument that prions must be viruses even more appealing. Because so many attempts to detect a prion-specific nucleic acid genome failed (Alper et al., 1967; Bellinger-Kawahara et al., 1987a,b; Safar et al., 2005b), some scientists argued that the nucleic acid must be quite small (Bruce and Dickinson, 1987; Chesebro, 2004; Kimberlin, 1982; Weissmann, 1991). Although the identification of micro RNAs has given new life to such arguments in recent years, the production of synthetic prions from recombinant prion protein (PrP) is likely to end the quest for an auxiliary molecule within the prion (Legname et al., 2004, 2005).

Based on a wealth of data including the production of synthetic prions in mammals and fungi, it is reasonable to define prions as infectious proteins. Prions multiply by forcing the precursor protein to acquire a second conformation. Different conformations of proteins in the prion state encipher distinct strains and are prone to aggregation. In mammals, prions accumulate to high levels in the nervous system where they cause dysfunction and fatal degeneration.

Both mammalian and fungal prions have been produced in cell-free systems (Brachmann et al., 2005; Maddelein et al., 2002; Sparrer et al., 2000; Tanaka et al., 2004). Synthetic PrP peptides and recombinant PrP fragments have been used to form mammalian prions, and N-terminal regions, called prion domains, that are rich in glutamine and asparagine have been used to form fungal prions.

In mammals, prions cause a group of invariably fatal, neurodegenerative diseases. No human or animal has ever recovered from a prion disease once neurologic dysfunction has manifested. Prion diseases may present as genetic, infectious, or sporadic disorders, all of which involve modification of normal, cellular PrP, designated PrPC. The tertiary structure of PrP is profoundly altered as prions are formed, and as such, prion diseases represent disorders of protein conformation. In the sporadic and genetic forms of prion disease, prions arise spontaneously. In contrast, infectious prion diseases result from exposure to an exogenous source of prions. Although the incidence of sporadic prion disease in humans is low (1–5 cases per 106 people), it is the most common form, accounting for approximately 90 percent of all cases. The genetic, or inherited, forms of prion disease account for approximately 10 percent of all human cases and the infectious forms for less than 1 percent. Whether or not the infectious forms of human prion disease are underestimated and low levels of animal prions in the food supply are responsible for 10–20 percent of the sporadic cases is unknown.

The prion diseases in humans include CJD, which generally presents as a progressive dementia, as well as kuru and Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease (GSS), both of which frequently present as ataxic maladies. Like kuru and GSS of humans, scrapie of sheep and BSE of cattle usually manifest as ataxic illnesses. Deer, elk, and moose with chronic wasting disease (CWD) appear emaciated and ataxic.

In these diseases, mammalian PrPC is recruited and converted into the disease-causing isoform (PrPSc). PrPC has a high α-helical content and little β-sheet structure, whereas PrPSc has less α-helical structure and a high β-sheet content. Comparisons of secondary structures of PrPC and PrPSc were performed on proteins purified from Syrian hamster (SHa) brains (Pan et al., 1993). Limited proteolysis of PrPSc produces a protease-resistant core, designated PrP 27–30, which retains prion infectivity; under these conditions, PrPC is completely hydrolyzed.

The Mad Cow Epidemic The world awoke to the dangers of prion disease in cows after the BSE outbreak began ravaging the British beef industry in the mid-1980s. The truly novel concepts emerging from prion science forced researchers and society to think in unusual ways and made coping with the epidemic difficult. Investigators eventually learned that prions were being transmitted to cattle through meat-and-bone meal (MBM), a dietary supplement prepared from the parts of sheep, cattle, pigs and chickens that are processed, or rendered, for industrial use. High heat eliminated conventional pathogens, but PrPSc survived and went on to infect cattle. As infected cattle became food for other cattle, BSE began appearing throughout the UK cattle population, reaching a high of 37,280 confirmed fied cases in 1992 (Phillips, 2000). The British authorities instituted some feed bans beginning in 1989, but it was not until 1996 that a strict ban on cannibalistic feeding finally brought BSE under control in the United Kingdom; the country saw 612 cases in 2004. Overall, the United Kingdom has identified approximately 180,000 mad cows, and epidemiologic models suggest that another 1.9 million were infected but went undetected (Anderson et al., 1996). For many people, the regulations came too late. Despite the British government’s early assurances to the contrary, mad cow disease proved transmissible to humans. In March 1996, Robert Will and his colleagues reported that 11 British teenagers and young adults had died of a variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) (Will et al., 2004, 1996). In these young patients, the patterns of PrPSc deposition in the brain differed markedly from that found in typical CJD patients. Many scientists, including myself, were initially dubious of the presumed link between BSE and vCJD. I eventually changed my mind, under the weight of many studies. The most compelling of these studies used Tg mice genetically engineered to resemble cattle, at least from a PrP point of view. These mice became ill approximately 250 days after receiving injections of prions either from cattle with BSE or people with vCJD, and the resulting disease looked the same whether the prions originated from diseased cows or vCJD patients (Scott et al., 1999). Since the detection of mad cow disease in the United Kingdom, two dozen other nations have uncovered cases. Canada and the United States are the latest entrants to the list of countries affected. On May 20, 2003, Canadian officials reported BSE in an eight-year-old cow that had spent its life in Alberta and Saskatchewan. (The country’s only previous mad cow had arrived as a UK import 10 years earlier.) Although the animal had been slaughtered in January 2003, slow processing meant that officials did not test the cow remains until April. By then, the carcass had been turned into pet food and exported to the United States. Seven months later, on December 23, 2003, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) announced the country’s first case of BSE in Washington state. The six-year-old dairy cow had entered the United States at the age of four. The discovery meant that U.S. officials could no longer labor under the misconception that the nation is free of BSE. Like Canada, U.S. agricultural interests want the BSE problem to disappear. Financial woes stem primarily from reduced beef exports: 58 other countries are keeping their borders shut, and a $3 billion export market has largely evaporated. At the time of writing, six more cases of BSE in Canada and two additional cases in the United States have been reported.

The Only Rational Strategy The only rational strategy is to test all cattle for prions and eliminate those harboring prions from the food supply. No reasonable human would knowingly expose himself or herself to prions as prion diseases are invariably fatal. In Europe, a policy was instituted four years ago of prion testing for all cattle destined for human consumption that are over 30 months of age. The 30-month cutoff point was chosen for surveillance by the Office International des Epizooties (OIE; also known as the World Organization for Animal Health), but it was never intended for food safety. Some European countries have arbitrarily adopted a 24-month cutoff. It is irrational to believe that all cattle younger than 24 months of age are free of prions and that those older than 24 months are potentially infected. Initially, the Japanese government proposed adopting the European Union’s testing protocol, but consumer advocates forced the government to change its policy and test every slaughtered animal. Rapid prion tests used in Europe vary in their sensitivity and reliability. Until now, the tests have not been sufficiently sensitive. Whether or not one or more of the newer tests can provide the desired sensitivity is unclear. Further, confining testing to brain tissue may be imprudent because other tissues such as muscle and lymphoid cells can harbor substantial levels of prions. Given that seemingly healthy animals can carry prions, I believe that testing all slaughtered animals is the only rational policy. But this policy needs to be accompanied by a systemic approach to reward food suppliers for identifying livestock harboring prions. To maximize the protection from ingesting prions, we must aim to eliminate prions from the food supply by using the most sensitive and reliable test. The current system of using the least sensitive of the government-approved tests to minimize the number of prion-positive livestock is an unacceptable, dangerous common practice that must be terminated immediately. Providing the most safe food supply is a critical responsibility of every government—it is not an optional, incidental activity.