Mom Catches Pedophile Trying to Rape Child, Blows His Head Off With Shotgun

Notorious sex offender found in 12-year-old girls bedroom by mother

© press Pedophile Michael Lindsey was killed by the young girl's mother

A notorious pedophile has been found dead by police after a mother blew his head off with a shotgun when he tried to rape her 12-year-old child.

The furious mom found convicted child sex offender Michael Lindsey in her daughter's bedroom and took matters into her own hands.

The woman from Blakely, Georgia, became suspicious and went into her young daughter's room to find Lindsey attempting to rape her daughter after breaking into their home.

She tried to save her daughter by attacking the rapist with a spoon but he fled and hid in their house.

The mother, who can't be named for legal reasons, ran to get her shotgun, and when the attacker jumped out of a closet, she shot him in the face and killed him.

© press Police say the mother did what was necessary to defend her and her daughter from the attack

After shooting the 53-year-old, the mother and daughter locked themselves in a room and waited for police to arrive.

According to police reports, Lindsey staggered out of the front door and collapsed on the doorstep where he was found dead.

It is believed that he died almost instantly due to the severity of his injuries.

Local news reports stated that during a 9-1-1 call placed late Saturday, the victim reported she was assaulted after discovering 53-year old Michael Lindsey hiding in a closet of her home. The woman’s 12-year old daughter was also present.

“Deputies arrived at the scene and insured the safety of the victims who had locked themselves inside a room because they weren’t sure if the intruder was still inside the home,” Early County Investigator Captain Will Caudill said.

Officers also discovered 53-year old Michael Lindsey outside the home where he was pronounced dead.

He’s believed to have stumbled from inside before collapsing.

Prior to the shooting, she fought off her attacker with a spoon, a police report states.

Caudill said Lindsey molested a child in 1999 and is listed on the Georgia Sex Offender Registry.

© press The attack took place inside the family home in Blakely, Georgia

Caudill said his car was found parked behind a motel located a short distance from the home.

He isn’t sure if he had broken into the home before the victim arrived home or afterward.

Records indicate the victim’s home had recently been burglarized twice.

Caudill isn’t sure if those incidents are related to the home invasion.

No charges were filed against the woman who fatally shot Lindsey, and Caudill predicts if no new evidence is discovered none will be.

“We plan to present our findings to the district attorney’s office, a standard practice on these type cases, and they can decide what action, if any, should be taken.”

An Early County grand jury could consider evidence.