A Population-Based Study of Measles, Mumps, and Rubella Vaccination and Autism
This study provides three strong arguments against a causal relation between MMR vaccination and autism. First, the risk of autism was similar in vaccinated and unvaccinated children, in both age-adjusted and fully adjusted analyses. Second, there was no temporal clustering of cases of autism at any time after immunization. Third, neither autistic disorder nor other autistic-spectrum disorders were associated with MMR vaccination. Furthermore, the results were derived from a nationwide cohort study with nearly complete follow-up data.

All previous studies of an association between autism and MMR vaccination have been case series,1,14,15 ecologic studies,11,12 or cross-sectional studies,10,13 and the majority have not used optimal data for risk assessment. In a well-conducted, cross-sectional prevalence study, Taylor and colleagues10 found that there was no sharp increase in the prevalence of autism after the introduction of the MMR vaccine. However, it could be argued that a more gradual increase would be expected, since autism is characterized by an insidious onset and a delay in diagnosis. A case-series study by Peltola et al.15 also provides evidence against a causal connection.

One of the main reasons for public concern has been that the widespread use of the MMR vaccine in some regions appeared to coincide with an increase in the incidence of autism. However, this is not a uniform finding. In Denmark, the prevalence of autism (according to the criteria of the International Classification of Diseases, 8th Revision) was less than 2.0 cases per 10,000 children between the ages of five and nine years in the 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s. Since then, the rates have increased in all age groups except for children younger than two years of age, and in 2000, the prevalence of autism (according to the ICD-10 criteria) was higher than 10.0 cases per 10,000 children five to nine years of age (unpublished data). Thus, the increase in autism both in California5 and in Denmark occurred well after the introduction of the MMR vaccine.

Our study was based on individual reports of vaccination and diagnoses of autism in a well-defined geographic area. The exposure data were collected prospectively, independently of parental recall and before the diagnosis of autism. Furthermore, the diagnosis was recorded independently of the recording of MMR vaccination. Thus, there was little possibility of differential misclassification of exposure or outcome measures. Furthermore, our analysis was based on complete follow-up data.

We assume that the data on MMR vaccination are almost complete, since general practitioners in Denmark are reimbursed only after reporting immunization data to the National Board of Health. We had an unvaccinated reference group with almost 500,000 person-years of follow-up, even though the study was numerically imbalanced in favor of the vaccinated group. The power of the study is reflected in the narrow 95 percent confidence intervals.

We had no information on the presence or absence of a family history of autism, which could explain our negative findings only if families with a history of autism avoided MMR vaccination. If so, we would expect to have found high relative risks at the beginning of the study period, before the hypothetical link between vaccination and autism was publicized. This was not the case. We had no information on whether the children with autism had regression, and thus we could not perform a subgroup analysis. However, the fact that the overall relative risk of autism or an autistic-spectrum disorder was less than 1.0 does not support the possibility of a subgroup of vulnerable children.

The Danish vaccination program recommends that children receive the MMR vaccine at 15 months of age and provides the vaccination free of charge. Among the children in our cohort who were born in 1995, the rate of MMR vaccination was lower than the rate of vaccination with the first Haemophilus influenzae type B vaccine (86.9 percent vs. 97.0 percent). However, the rate of MMR vaccination in our study was similar to that in the United States (87.6 percent in 1995) and Belgium (83.0 percent in 1997).31,32 Nevertheless, the main concern is the comparability of vaccinated and nonvaccinated children in relation to the end point under study. In all analyses, when risk estimates were calculated, we controlled for possible confounders (age, sex, calendar period, socioeconomic status, mother's education, gestational age, and birth weight). Except for age, none of these possible confounders changed the estimates. The confounding by age was a function of the time available for follow-up, since much of the follow-up for the unvaccinated group involved young children, in whom autism is often undiagnosed.

We assessed the validity of the diagnosis of autistic disorder in a subgroup of children and found it to be high. This was to be expected, since only specialists in child and adolescent psychiatry are authorized to code the diagnosis of autism in the Danish Psychiatric Central Register. All schools have access to health care personnel as well as psychologists. Because of the comprehensive health care surveillance for children in Denmark, all severe cases of autism are likely to be diagnosed and reported to the registry at some point. Reporting of the other autistic-spectrum disorders is less complete than that for autistic disorder, and some diagnoses are almost certainly missed. However, it is unlikely that this misclassification would be associated with vaccination status. It is very difficult to determine the onset of autism, and many cases are probably due to prenatal factors. Our records did not contain information on when the first autistic symptoms were noted, and we could not adjust for a differential delay in the diagnosis. Again, it is highly unlikely that a delayed diagnosis was associated with MMR vaccination in this study.

There are few published data on the incidence of autism, but the prevalence rates reported in the literature vary widely, from 1.2 cases per 10,000 (according to the criteria of the third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders) to 30.8 per 10,000 (according to the ICD-10 criteria).33,34 The prevalence rates among eight-year-old children in our cohort were 7.7 per 10,000 for autistic disorder and 22.2 per 10,000 for other autistic-spectrum disorders. These rates are similar to the prevalence rates of 5.4 per 10,000 for autistic disorder and 16.3 per 10,000 for other autistic-spectrum disorders in a cohort of 325,347 French children (ICD-10 criteria), reported by Fombonne et al.,35 and the rate of 11 per 10,000 for autistic disorder in a cohort of U.S. children (DSM-IV criteria), reported by Croen and colleagues.36 The DSM-IV classification system used in the United States and the ICD-10 classification system used in many European countries are almost identical with regard to the classification of autistic disorder.23-26 In our validity substudy, we found that 93 percent of cases diagnosed according to the ICD-10 criteria met the DSM-IV operational criteria for the diagnosis of autistic disorder.