Hurricane Irma damage: Weather reporters who risk their lives on TV
THEY’RE one of the few people running towards danger when everyone else is fleeing.

You’ve probably seen them almost getting blown away in howling winds, or getting lashed by torrential rain and debris as they yell into a soaked microphone.

When a natural disaster strikes, weather reporters often put themselves in life-threatening situations attempting to do the impossible.

Some of the ludicrous reporting that has emerged from Hurricane Irma has shown TV journalists and meteorologists doing live crosses as they battle the full force of the storm.

Incredible footage shows meteorologist and storm chaser Juston Drake getting pummelled by the eye wall of Irma as he attempts to get a wind speed reading while holding an anemometer.

Seconds after exiting his car, the paintball mask he is wearing is ripped off and the storm chaser is almost swept away as he struggles to keep his footing.

Drake, who was filmed by his colleague Simon Brewer, later posted an image of the device, which showed a wind speed reading of 117mph (188km/h).

Haven't slept in 2 days, too much work to do, still doing. Please help devastated #FloridaKeys @JustonStrmRider pic.twitter.com/aKJv1snP8W — Simon Brewer (@SimonStormRider) September 11, 2017

In this clip, CNN reporter Chris Cuomo is shown reporting from Naples in 228km/h winds gusts. He can barely look at the camera with sheets of rain battering his face.

Chris Cuomo battling Irma's full force in Naples. Peak gust 142 mph at 4:35 pm https://t.co/SBp2cjLCIK pic.twitter.com/Gv1IjMAQij — CNN Weather Center (@CNNweather) September 10, 2017

Another CNN reporter, Bill Weir, is almost blown over by a wind gust in the middle of a cross in Key Largo, Florida.

Shortly after the incident, another reporter tells him: “Alright brother, do me a favour — get to safety. The reporting is important but your safety is essential.”

CNN’s @BillWeirCNN gets slammed in Key Largo by #HurricaneIrma’s wind gusts as the storm’s eyewall reaches the Florida Keys pic.twitter.com/OHYwQ7TdT7 — CNN (@CNN) September 10, 2017

In one extraordinary cross, Weather Channel reporter Mike Bettes braces his feet as the storm rages around him. He almost loses his footing and is forced to stagger back to safety.

This is what the eyewall of Hurricane #Irma looks like. Watch The Weather Channel for continuing storm coverage. pic.twitter.com/7U7JzbVo3Z — The Weather Channel (@weatherchannel) September 10, 2017

Another Weather Channel reporter, Mike Seidel, fights one of Hurricane Irma’s early squalls in Miami late Saturday.

“Getting slapped by one of the early squalls from #Irma tonight in the Brickell section of #Miami. @stevedresner captures behind the scenes,” Seidel tweeted.

Getting slapped by one of the early squalls from #Irma tonight in the Brickell section of #Miami. @stevedresner captures behind the scenes pic.twitter.com/6uXw51mGmB — Mike Seidel (@mikeseidel) September 10, 2017

The outrageous crosses have been met with backlash on social media with some people slamming the coverage tactics as “crazy”.

While the tradition of television crews reporting on significant events from potentially dangerous locations is well established, users suggested no story was worth a life.

Seriously, there's no need to be IN the storm to report about the storm. Keep reporters safe. No story is worth someone's life. We get it... — Dayngr (@Dayngr) September 10, 2017

Who gave these storm reporters the idea that we need to see them standing in the storm? I believe you. Go inside #HurrcaneIrma — Shawn Bonfine (@BonfineScience) September 10, 2017

CNN weather reporters be like #HurrcaneIrma has finally hit land pic.twitter.com/6zDoZodgsA — I Do Not care (@iamreal2017) September 10, 2017

However, other users commended reporters and cameramen on their bravery, praising the “amazing” footage.

Amazing he's in the eye. Amazing job — J (@willettjustin) September 10, 2017

Can we talk about the real MVPs here? The cameramen. Balancing a 15 pound camera in that wind is way more impressive. — Megan Schmidt (@schmidtyrva) September 10, 2017

These camera men do all the work and no credit! I think you guys need to have them on the live cast when #Irma over❤️ — Gaylene+Lee (@racer9876) September 10, 2017