Left-Handedness and Life Expectancy — NEJM
The above letters were referred to the authors of the letter in question, who offer the following reply:

To the Editor: One of the major themes in the criticism of our finding that left-handers have shorter life spans than right-handers seems to be based on the presumption that we are dealing with an artifact caused by a historical trend in handedness. The argument goes that social pressures on left-handers born earlier in this century forced them to become right-handed. If this were so, then our finding of fewer older left-handers would really be due to the fact that many of our elderly right-handers are actually left-handers who switched. However, research shows that there is no historical trend toward increasing numbers of left-handers.1 To illustrate this, let us limit ourselves to the few U.S. studies with samples larger than 5000. In 1932, Pyle and Drouin2 tested 13,435 elementary school students (who would have been about 70 years old at the time of our study) and found that 6.4 percent were left-handed. In 1953, Karpinos and Grossman3 tested 12,159 U.S. army registrants (who would be in their mid-50s now) and found that 8.6 percent were left-handed. In 1987, Chapman and Chapman4 tested 5825 college students (who would now be in their mid-20s) and found that 6.6 percent were left-handed. Thus, for more than 50 years of recent history, there has been a negligible change in the percentage of left-handers. This lack of a historical trend was confirmed by a statistical analysis of 34 studies of handedness conducted between 1913 and 1976, using only white subjects and preference measures for handedness.5 The results showed a slight trend toward increased left-handedness in the more recent studies, but it clearly failed to reach statistical significance. Furthermore, analysis showed that even had the trend been statistically significant, it would only have predicted a decline in the population of left-handers with age, which would account for only one quarter of the change actually observed in the life-span data.

Perhaps even more relevant is the fact that a report by Ramaley6 showing that there are fewer older left-handers appeared in the literature as far back as 1913. Looking at handedness in families, he found that 15.7 percent of children were left-handed as compared with 8.1 percent of parents. This reduction in sinistrality with age appeared at a time well before any purported liberalization of attitudes toward handedness. This generational decrease in left-handedness has been confirmed in 14 studies from 1928 to 1985, summarized by Annett.7 On average, the incidence of left-handedness in parents is about half that of their offspring.

The alternative to a historical trend is the presumption that over their life span left-handers gradually learn to be right-handed. This is unlikely, since direct attempts to change handedness are successful less than half the time, and 80 percent of the successful shifts of handedness are accomplished before the age of nine years.8

In the absence of any evidence of statistically significant historical, secular, or environmental trends suggesting that older left-handers have been converted to right-handedness, an analysis based on the mean age at death is completely justified. To the extent that this is so, our conclusion that left-handers have a shorter life span is compatible with the facts. As a final note, no reinterpretation of our data based on presumed historical factors seems capable of explaining the observation that, according to our data, left-handers are nearly six times more likely to die of accident-related injuries.9