1984: George Orwell predicted 2017 almost 70 years ago
April, 1984. 13:00. Comrade 6079, Winston Smith, thinks a thought, starts a diary, and falls in love. But Big Brother is always watching. Set in a world where an invasive government keeps a malevolently watchful eye on its citizens, this radical and much-lauded staging explores surveillance, identity and why Orwell?s vision of the future is as relevant now as ever. Now with a brand new Australian cast, we bring adapter-directors Robert Icke and Duncan Macmillan?s thrilling vision back to Australia for a national tour.

THERE was no crystal ball, no religious apparitions or voices from the dead when George Orwell wrote Nineteen Eighty-Four, accurately depicted our present almost 70 years ago.

It’s no coincidence that Orwell’s 1949 novel had climbed back into multiple bestseller lists this year — people have realised its scarily accurate foretelling.

In 2013 its relevance — still strong and worryingly reliable — led to the West End smash hit adaptation of the book, which is currently showing in Australia.

The book is one of the greatest dystopian novels every written. It looks at a future where people are controlled into what to think, how to act and how to live by the Government known as Big Brother. It uses telescreens, fearmongering, media control and corruption to control the masses. The main protagonist is the initially apathetic Winston who craves something more than the controlled world he inhabits.

Corey McMahon, the associate director of the 1984 production in Australia, said the book’s reach and resonance will always continue as it speaks to more than a literary audience.

“It speaks to a world filled with unpopular policies and world leaders,” McMahon said.

The production takes a deeper look into some of the core themes of the novel such as governmental surveillance through the subconscious co-operation of the public through their screens. You are reading this very line on one of your ‘screens’.

McMahon said the production looks to act as a sort of catalyst for its audiences to look at the world in a different light. To question what is true and what isn’t, to look beyond the political spin.

“We are so busy Facebooking, Snapchatting, Tweeting etc that we are missing what is happening in the world,” he said.

He pointed to a quote from the production he said not only sticks out to him every time, but one that he think will challenge audiences to really think about the world they inhabit and how they chose to be a part of it.

The line is from one of the characters that works for the Government, otherwise known as Big Brother. He says: “The people will not revolt. They will not look up from their screens long enough to notice what’s happening.”

Orwell didn’t have a crystal ball, what he did have was an understanding of the human condition and its weakness. Apathy.

1984 is holding shows across Australia. You can purchase tickets here.