The Girls Who Tried to Kill for Slender Man
This is a tale of a young friendship gone horribly wrong. In late May, in the Milwaukee suburb of Waukesha, Wisconsin, two 12-year-old girls allegedly lured a friend into the woods and stabbed her 19 times. The victim, also 12, managed to crawl to a road, where she lay on the sidewalk with stab wounds in her arms, legs and torso, blood soaking her black fleece jacket, until a bicyclist found her and called 911. According to police, the assailants had been plotting the crime for months. Their motivation? They said they wanted to prove themselves worthy of Slender Man, an evil character who lives only on the Internet.

It sounds like the outlandish plot of a horror movie, in part because it is incredibly rare for young girls to murder. In 2012, of the 8,514 people arrested for murder and nonnegligent homicide in the U.S., just one was a girl under the age of 13. It's not so surprising, then, that when girls do kill, their crimes often devolve into sensationalized pop culture narratives, replete with simplistic explanations and groundless moralizing. "This should be a wake-up call for all parents," Waukesha Police Chief Russell Jack said in a much-quoted statement about his two young prisoners. "The Internet has changed the way we live. It is full of information and wonderful sites that teach and entertain. The Internet can also be full of dark and wicked things."

Diluted advice to parents and ill-informed attempts at making sense of this case won't get us far. We do not know enough about the two girls' mental states, friendship, families and backgrounds to generalize about their motivations. And their act is so unusual that it tells us little about our daughters.

We do know about fear, however, and a rising cultural panic this case seems to encapsulate. The response to what these girls are accused of doing reflects our deepest anxieties about girlhood, technology and the growing gulf between parents and their children. And that's why this kind of news story rivets us. We say to ourselves, "How awful," while yearning for more.

'One Millimeter Away From Certain Death'

In 2009 an online forum called Something Awful announced a Photoshop contest to create fake supernatural photographs—images so convincing that they would pass as the real thing in other online paranormal forums. Eric Knudsen submitted two black-and-white photos of an impossibly tall, thin and faceless creature stalking children. According to the website Know Your Meme, one of the captions read, "We didn't want to go, we didn't want to kill them, but its persistent silence and outstretched arms horrified and comforted us at the same time.… " Knudsen called his monster Slender Man.

The legend of Slender Man morphed and grew as people contributed to his story, writing fan fiction and creating their own forged photos in a kind of modern-day, tech-fueled folklore. Dressed in a black suit, Slender Man has black tentacles protruding from his back. He can stretch his arms to inhuman lengths and is often pictured lurking in leafless forests or behind unsuspecting children. Legend says he can cause memory loss, coughing fits (referred to as "slendersickness," according to Know Your Meme) and a litany of paranoid behaviors. He can remove your organs, impale you on a tree or stalk you slowly and drive you to madness. Slender Man is now a facsimile of the Puritan devil: He is everywhere, every day, a specter of our anxieties about raising children in a world where technology reigns and the lines between reality and fantasy grow dimmer.

According to the criminal complaint obtained by Newsweek, Morgan Geyser and Anissa Weier, both 12, discovered Slender Man on Creepypasta Wiki, a website dedicated to Internet horror stories (its tagline: "Proudly hosting 12,151 of your worst nightmares since 2010"). They believed he was real. In early 2014, Geyser and Weier decided to become what they called "proxies" of Slender Man, thereby proving their dedication to him and his existence to skeptics. To do so, they'd have to kill someone. In February, the girls decided to carry out their act on May 30, the night Geyser planned to celebrate her 12th birthday. (This, and the description that follows, recounts the actions of the two girls as they are presented in the criminal complaint.)

In the intervening months, Geyser and Weier whispered about their plan, sometimes while riding the bus, often using code words like "camping trip" (to refer to the Nicolet National Forest in Wisconsin's Northwoods, where they believed Slender Man lived). On the evening of Friday, May 30, Geyser, Weier and the victim went roller skating and then headed back to Geyser's house for a sleepover. Geyser and Weier knew when they were going to stab their friend: 2 a.m. And how: cover the girl's mouth with duct tape, stab her in the neck and then pull the covers over her. Then they'd run.

But they didn't kill their friend that night. "I wanted to give [the victim] one more day," Geyser told police.

On Saturday morning, Geyser and Weier's new plan was to stab the victim in a bathroom at a local park, but they finally attacked her in the woods during a game of hide-and-seek. According to the criminal complaint, Weier pushed the girl down and sat on her, thinking Geyser would then stab her. The victim started yelling, complaining that she couldn't breathe, so Weier got off of her. Geyser gave Weier the knife, but Weier said she felt too squeamish so she gave it back to Geyser.

"I'm not going to until you tell me to," Geyser told Weier, according to the complaint.

"Go ballistic, go crazy," Weier replied. "Now."

Then, as Geyser put it to police, "stabby, stab, stab."

The girls stabbed the victim 19 times, piercing her liver, pancreas and stomach, and barely missing an artery near her heart. The victim cried, the girls told police, and Weier remembered her screaming, "I hate you! I trusted you!" After the attack, Weier said, she and Geyser told the girl to lay down and be quiet, and they would go get help.

Instead, they fled. "It was the hope that [the victim] would die and they would see Slender and know that he exists," reads the complaint.

The victim crawled out of the woods and onto a sidewalk, where a bicyclist found her. "Please help me," she said. "I've been stabbed." When a police officer arrived, she said she was in extreme pain. Asked who hurt her, she replied that it was her best friend. The victim was rushed to a hospital, "one millimeter away from certain death," according to the complaint. It was there in the hospital that she told police about the second assailant.

Police found Geyser and Weier near Interstate 94 more than four hours later. One of them had a knife with a five-inch blade in her bag. When questioned by police, the girls expressed regret mixed with cold-blooded intent. "I believe it's ending a life, and I regret it," Weier said about the attack. "The bad part of me wanted her to die; the good part of me wanted her to live."

The criminal complaint offers many similarly dismaying details from Geyser's interview: "When asked again why they were going to stab [the victim] Geyser stated, 'It seemed necessary.' When Geyser was asked what Geyser was trying to do when Geyser stabbed [the victim] Geyser stated, 'I may as well just say it. Kill her.'"

Geyser told police she was sorry, adding, "It was weird that I didn't feel remorse."

Geyser and Weier have been charged as adults for attempted first-degree intentional homicide. Each faces up to 65 years in prison.

The victim was discharged a week after the attack and started walking again. "While we have kept discussions about the events of May 31, 2014, with her short, we did ask how she found the strength to crawl out of the woods," the victim's family said in a statement. "Her response was simple: 'I wanted to live.'"

'Little Girls Doing Terrible Things'

Few facts about the case have been made public. Attorney Anthony Cotton, who represents Geyser, would not go into details about his client for Newsweek. Phone calls to Weier's attorney, Joseph Smith, went unreturned. Neither family has spoken to the press, although in early June, Weier's brother told the Daily Mail that his sister "loved the Slender Man stories, just anything a bit creepy. But I don't see why it changed from dream to reality."

The experts on childhood violence interviewed by Newsweek would not comment on this case, but they were willing to speak more generally about the culture and context in which this crime occurred. "When these episodes come up, people right away think girls are becoming more violent," says Kathleen Heide, a professor of criminology at the University of Southern Florida who has evaluated 150 juveniles charged with violent crimes, mostly murder. "There is no evidence that the involvement of girls in homicide or murder is increasing."

Historically, girls have been more likely to engage in bullying, gossip and manipulation, not physical violence. That is, in part, what makes crimes like the Slender Man stabbing so noteworthy. "We are intrigued by the oddity, the horror, the irony of little girls doing terrible things. It doesn't go with the age or gender," says Frank Ochberg, a clinical professor of psychiatry at Michigan State University and leading expert on violence and trauma.

The few cases in recent memory in which very young girls committed murders exemplify how gripping these stories can be. One of New Zealand's most notorious murders occurred in 1954, when Pauline Parker, 16, and Juliet Hulme, 15, killed Parker's mother. The teens had developed an intense friendship, bonding over their wild imaginations, inventing their own religion, writing novels together. Their parents started to worry about the girls' relationship. Around this time, Hulme also learned that her parents were getting divorced; she would be moving to South Africa with her father, thereby separating the two girls forever. Parker's mother, who was especially concerned about her daughter, insisted that she not join Hulme on the trip. When Parker and Hulme found out, they lured Parker's mother down a secluded path in a local park and bludgeoned her with a brick. Parker and Hulme were tried in the Supreme Court of New Zealand and found guilty. Each spent five years in prison. The crime inspired novels, plays and films, including Peter Jackson's Heavenly Creatures.

Books, films and Law & Order episodes followed the 1968 deaths of two young boys in England. The day before Mary Bell's 11th birthday, she strangled 4-year-old Martin Brown. He was found dead in an abandoned house. Two months later, with the help of a 13-year-old girl, Bell strangled Brian Howe, 3, and left him covered in grass and weeds, puncture marks on his limbs and the letter "M" carved into his stomach. Experts said she showed "classic symptoms of psychopathy"; Bell was sentenced to life in detention but released in 1980, at the age of 23.