Sheriff Clarke: 'Political Hit' May Cost Job, But Not Trump Loyalty
Milwaukee County Sheriff David Clarke said Monday a "political hit job" may wind up derailing his Homeland Security appointment – but it will not shake his loyalty to President Donald Trump.

In an interview on Newsmax TV's "The Joe Pags Show," Clarke, author of "Cop Under Fire," lashed out at CNN and the journalist who first reported alleged plagiarism in his master's thesis – a charge Clarke has vehemently denied.

"It's a political hit job by the Communist News Network, CNN, and this hack Andy Kaczynski, this college dropout, who just goes out there and smears people, throws stuff up against the wall and then hopefully some of it will stick to damage the person politically," he charged.

He said he is not sure if the scandal will kill his Department of Homeland Security appointment.

"President Donald Trump has to do what's in the best interests of his administration," he said. "They've cut people loose before. I don't know why. So, time will tell, but I know that he values loyalty, and you know he's smart enough. President Trump knows what's going on here with me. He knows fully well, as does [Homeland Security Secretary John] Kelly."

"This is just an attempt to undermine me and to undermine the confidence that they have in me as well," he added. "But when you make political decisions, sometimes you know what, in the best interest you got to do things."

See Joe Pagliarulo on Newsmax TV : Tune in beginning at 6 PM ET to see "The Joe Pags Show" — on FiOS 115/615, YouTube Livestream, Newsmax TV App from any smartphone, NewsmaxTV.com, Roku, Amazon Fire — More Systems Here

He said no matter what the outcome, his loyalty to Trump is unshaken.

"Regardless of what he has to do . . . I will never abandon this guy, the left needs to know this today," he said. "I will never abandon this guy regardless of what he or Secretary Kelly decide . . . and I'm going to fight like hell to continue to see that he stays there and that he's successful in making America great again."