Friends support Norman girl with cancer in charity event
NORMAN — Janae King realized there was something wrong with her daughter, Audri, 2, about a month ago.

She was running a fever and holding her back. They thought it might be a kidney infection. Then they were told maybe it was a hip problem.

After several trips to the doctor and finally the emergency room, doctors told the family Audri had rhabdomyosarcoma, a soft-tissue cancer. A scan of her body revealed several tumors in her chest area.

The toddler was diagnosed April 15; she started chemotherapy the next day. She will continue her treatments for the next year.

She doesn’t really understand what’s going on, but they’ve told her she needs medicine to make her better, Janae King said. She has a port in her chest to administer the chemotherapy medicine.

"We tell her that’s her owie, and it’s going to make her better,” she said.

Friends and family from around the metro area gathered Tuesday night in Norman for a rally and fundraiser to support Audri and her family, who live in Chickasha. Dozens of people lined up to pay to have their heads shaved or buy a T-shirt.

The goal of the event was to raise awareness about childhood cancer and to raise some money to help Audri’s family with medical expenses, said Danny Byard, event organizer. The family has medical insurance, but the cost of medicines and treatments will be high.

Janae King and her husband, Brandon, also have a 4-year-old daughter and are expecting another baby in July.

All the support they’ve received has been overwhelming, Janae said. People already have had bake sales, sold T-shirts and offered up lots of prayers, she said.

"It’s just been amazing, all the support,” she said.

Byard hopes to help other families who have children with cancer, too.

He’d like to start a foundation that would help families with medical, housing, travel and other associated costs while their children are in treatment. For more information, go to www.ladybughugs.org.