Obama: Nothing will ever 'dull the meaning' of 9/11
On his first 9/11 anniversary as president, Barack Obama urged Americans to come together in service just as they united after the terrorist attacks eight years ago.



“We can summon once more that ordinary goodness of America, to

serve our communities, to strengthen our country and to better our

world,” Obama said at a memorial at the Pentagon.

Obama on Thursday declared the anniversary of the attacks a

national day of remembrance and service. And he and first lady

Michelle Obama led the way Friday, visiting a Habitat for Humanity

construction site in Washington, where they pitched in by painting

a living room wall.

Earlier, the Obamas participated in the anniversary rituals that

have become familiar in the eight years since the attacks on New

York and Washington. They began the day by observing a moment of silence on the South Lawn of the White House at precisely 8:46

a.m., the moment the first jetliner struck the World Trade Center

on Sept. 11, 2001.



Nearly 200 White House staffers — from chief of staff Rahm

Emanuel to kitchen workers — gathered under a heavy downpour.

Moments before the president and first lady stepped outside, the

rain subsided and it held off as they placed their hands over their

hearts and bowed their heads.



After the Obamas walked back into the White House, the rain

resumed.



As a presidential candidate, Obama marked last year’s

anniversary in New York at the site of the World Trade Center. This

year, the commander in chief spoke at a Pentagon memorial service, and laid a wreath in honor of the 184 people who died there.



advertisement | advertise on newsday

About 500 family members of the victims and survivors of the

attacks gathered at the site. Obama told them he would never waver

in his defense of the country.

“Let us renew our resolve against those who perpetrated this

barbaric act and who plot against us still,” he said. “In pursuit

of al-Qaida and its extremist allies, we will never falter.”

Those words echoed Obama’s predecessor, former President George W. Bush, who said in a speech to Congress immediately following the attacks, “We will not tire, we will not falter and we will not fail.”



Though Obama has sought to distance himself from many of the

Bush anti-terror policies that followed the Sept. 11 attacks, he

has inherited his legacy in the form of two wars. Long a critic of

the war in Iraq, Obama is drawing down troop levels there, while

increasing the American presence in Afghanistan, where al-Qaida and the Taliban have regained strength.



At the Pentagon, Obama said the strongest rebuke against the

terrorist attackers is the nation’s renewal of a common purpose.

“Let us remember how we came together as one nation, as one

people, as Americans, united not only in our grief, but in our

resolve to stand with one another, to stand up for the country we

all love,” Obama said.

Bush issued a statement Friday expressing his condolences to the

victims and their families, and urging Americans to “renew our

determination to prevent evil from returning to our shores.”

In New York, Vice President Joe Biden laid flowers at the site

of the World Trade Center.

In a letter sent Thursday to intelligence officials, CIA

Director Leon Panetta recommitted the spy agency to the fight

against al Qaida and its sympathizers. “There is no higher

priority and no greater focus,” he wrote. “No life lost in this

attack or battle shall be lost in vain.”

>>PHOTOS: Ground Zero ceremonies

advertisement | advertise on newsday

|

Long Island remembers

>>PHOTOS: Relics and wreckage from Ground Zero | Victims



>>COMPLETE COVERAGE: September 11: Eight years later