Naked Flash Mob in Argentina Demonstrates Against Sexism and Gender-based Violence
Feminist demonstrators have taken part in a naked flash mob protesting gender-based violence in Argentina’s capital of Buenos Aires.

Displaying a banner that read “Femicide is Genocide,” dozens of women demonstrated on Tuesday in front of three buildings that represent the country’s democratic institutions: the parliament, the presidential palace, Casa Rosada, and Argentina’s highest court.

To a soundtrack provided by what appears to be a string quartet and a percussionist and with their backs to the public, the protesters slowly remove their clothes and gather around the banner, before collapsing to the ground to form a pile of bodies.

A woman on a loudspeaker highlighted the problem of gender-based violence and sexism in the country as passersby—wearing coats to stay warm as temperatures on the day were just below 60°F—observed the protest and took pictures. The women then began rising and advancing towards their audience, ending the flash mob with a long, angry scream.

The flash mob was the latest protest organized by a collective known as Fuerza Artística de Choque Comunicativo (F.A.C.C), meaning “artistic force of communicative shock” in Spanish, a team of activist artists formed last year.

The 120 women who participated in Tuesday’s flash mobs were meant to represent the victims of violence against women and girls, 133 just in 2016. In April, there was almost a femicide each day, according to the Argentinian newspaper La Nacion.

One of these was 21-year-old student and feminist activist Micaela Garcia, whose alleged killer Sebastian Jose Luis Wagner had been jailed for nine years in 2012 for raping two women, but was released early in July 2016.

Her death in April moved Argentina, where the “Not one less” (“Ni una menos” in Spanish) protest movement that began began in 2015 before spreading across Latin America and the world. The protests were resurrected in June 2016 to commemorate the anniversary of the movement and in October 2016, after three men were accused of the rape and murder of 16-year-old Lucia Perez in Mar del Plata.