Gun rights advocates pursuing at least nine lawsuits in Illinois seeking to overturn restrictive laws
Gun rights lawsuits take aim at Illinois, Chicago

At least 9 court challenges to restrictions are pending

At least nine separate lawsuits targeting Chicago, Cook County and Illinois are working their way through the courts, most of them backed by the National Rifle Association, which is pouring financial resources and political clout into efforts to loosen gun laws across the country.

In an unrelenting campaign to overturn restrictive handgun laws in Illinois, gun rights advocates have pummeled Chicago and the state with lawsuits that could keep them entangled in court battles for years.

Michael Moore, a retired Cook County Jail superintendent and plaintiff in a Second Amendment suit, practices his shooting at a shooting range in the south suburbs last month. (Zbigniew Bzdak, Chicago Tribune)

Meanwhile, the number of registered firearms, including handguns and previously allowed weapons, in Chicago has steadily increased to 15,757 since the city passed an ordinance two years ago allowing residents to have handguns at home. Since the law went in effect, the Chicago Police Department has issued 4,307 firearm permits.

Illinois has been one of the NRA's fiercest battlegrounds in the fight over Second Amendment rights. ThoughWashington, D.C., also has a concealed carry ban, Illinois is the last of the 50 states to prohibit licensed gun owners from carrying weapons in public.

Two federal lawsuits seek to overturn the ban, while efforts by mostly rural Illinois lawmakers to pass a concealed carry law have repeatedly failed in the Legislature.

Michael Moore, the lead plaintiff in one of the lawsuits against the state, said the ban penalizes law-abiding citizens while giving an unfair advantage to criminals.

"I don't care what laws you pass, criminals are not going to give up their guns. They will keep their guns and use them against people like me," said Moore, 62, a retired Cook County Jail superintendent who now lives in Champaign. "The Legislature seems to be determined to allow them to do that."

Former Mayor Richard Daley was a strong advocate of gun control, and, according to city officials, that commitment is shared by Mayor Rahm Emanuel. The city spent two years and more than $460,000 unsuccessfully defending the gun ban in McDonald v. Chicago as it made its way to theU.S. Supreme Court. Currently, the cases are being handled by city attorneys.

"Under Mayor Emanuel's direction, the city remains fully committed to defending our current ordinance and maintaining the fullest degree of lawful gun control," said city Corporation Counsel Steve Patton. "Handguns have had a detrimental impact on the lives of countless families and affected the quality of life for residents in neighborhoods all across the city."

Although the Supreme Court forced Chicago to rewrite its ordinance in 2010, gun rights supporters argue that some provisions are unconstitutional. In federal lawsuits, they are seeking to overturn the city's ban on retail gun stores and remove restrictions such as forbidding guns in yards or on front porches.

In response to an unfavorable ruling by the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals, the City Council passed a measure in July reversing its ban on firing ranges. Gun advocates, however, continued with the lawsuit, claiming that the city's guidelines for opening ranges are unreasonable.

"In the end, we'll get this to the Supreme Court and it will have the same outcome as McDonald," said Richard Pearson, executive director of the Illinois State Rifle Association, an affiliate of the NRA. "(Governments) are more than happy to spend taxpayer money to repress rights. People have been trampled on, and we are organizing them to fight back."