Port Arthur massacre
Using semi-automatic weapons that he had bought without a licence, Bryant had perpetrated one of the most deadly civilian mass shootings in the world to date. Australia, as a nation, was shocked to the core.

On Sunday 28 April 1996, Martin Bryant, a young Hobart man, went on a shooting rampage in and around Port Arthur, an historic site and major tourist destination in south-east Tasmania. The massacre left 35 people dead and many injured and traumatised.

Australian firearms laws

The Australian Government only has the power to make legislation relating to the importation of firearms into the country. Laws concerning private gun ownership are state based and, in 1996, varied greatly. There were different rules about licensing and background checks as well as the types of guns people could use.

In the wake of the Port Arthur massacre, both gun-control and pro-gun lobbyists came out in force. Those in favour of gun control used not only Port Arthur but also mass shootings and firearm-related homicides and suicides from the two previous decades to illustrate the need for tighter and uniform legislation across the country.

Pro-gun groups were vehemently against the limiting of firearms rights for responsible owners and disliked the implication that guns themselves, rather than their misuse by small numbers of people, were to blame for violence.

Road to change

After the massacre, the recently elected Coalition federal government decided to work towards engaging the states and territories to enact identical gun laws. This move was an attempt to ensure there would never again be another event like Port Arthur in Australia.

The new legislation would involve a ban on firearms that are fully automatic, semi-automatic (such as those used at Port Arthur), pump-action and self-loading.

There would also be limitations on who could legally sell or supply weapons, minimum licensing and permit requirements, and more secure storage rules.

A mandatory ‘cooling-off’ period of 28 days before being granted a gun licence was implemented, as were the introduction of compulsory safety courses and the need to supply a ‘genuine reason’ for owning a firearm that could not include self-defence.