FMVSS No. 202 Head Restraints For Passenger Vehicles
PRELIMINARY ECONOMIC ASSESSMENT

AND REGULATORY FLEXIBILITY ANALYSIS

FMVSS NO. 202

HEAD RESTRAINTS FOR

PASSENGER VEHICLES

Office of Regulatory Analysis and Evaluation

Plans and Policy

December 2000

Summary

The Proposal

This Preliminary Economic Assessment accompanies a proposal to require front seat head restraints in passenger cars, pickups, vans, and utility vehicles to be capable of achieving a height where the top of the head restraint is least 800 mm (31.5 inches) above the H-point (which represents the normally seated 50th male hip point). The proposal would also add a lower limit on height; all required head restraints may not be less than 750 mm (29.5 inches) from the H-point. The proposal would require rear outboard head restraints. The proposal also would require that the distance between the back of the head form representing the position of a 50th percentile head, in a normally seated position, and the head restraint (defined as backset) be no farther than 50 mm (2 inches) in any adjustment position.

Benefits

The benefits of increasing the height of head restraints are estimated to be:

9,575 whiplash injuries reduced in the front seat

4,672 whiplash injuries reduced in the rear seat

14,247 total whiplash injuries reduced

The agency does not have data to support an estimate of the benefits of the backset requirements.

Costs ($1998)

Average costs per vehicle are estimated to be:

$4.21 in front seats

$3.61 in rear seats for vehicles with rear head restraints

$12.34 in rear seats for vehicles with no rear head restraints

$10.32 per average vehicle

Total cost per year is estimated to be $160.5 million ($65.5 million for the front seat and $95.0 million for the rear seat).

Cost effectiveness

Based on the benefits from increasing head restraint height, and an estimate cost of $6,485 per whiplash injury, the cost per equivalent life saved is:

$3.0 million in front seats

$9.0 million in rear seats

$5.0 million total

Table of Contents

I. INTRODUCTION

There are an estimated 272,088 whiplash injuries per year occurring in police-reported and unreported rear impact crashes. Many of these rear impact crashes are at low speeds.

It is the consensus of the biomedical community that whiplash injuries, due to rear impact crashes, occur as a result of the movement of the head and neck relative to the torso. Minimum height requirements are based on the premise that in the case of no head restraint, both the bending moment on the neck and the head rotational angle are maximized, resulting in cervical hyper extension. The height requirements are intended to prevent whiplash injuries by requiring that head restraints be high enough to limit the movement of the head and neck.

It is widely believed that reducing the gap between the occupant's head and the head restraint should reduce the movement of the head relative to the torso, and thus result in lower whiplash rates.

This proposed rulemaking would upgrade Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) 202, "Head Restraints", by requiring head restraints to be higher, closer to the head, and be available in front and rear outboard positions. This proposal would harmonize many parts, but not all of FMVSS 202 with the Economic Commission for Europe Regulation No. 25 (ECE 25) - Uniform Provisions Concerning the Approval of Head Restraints (Head Rests), Whether or Not Incorporated in Vehicle Seats.) ECE 25 became effective beginning with newly introduced models approved after January 15, 1999, and all other vehicles 48 months later.

II. BACKGROUND

Current Standard

Since January 1, 1969, passenger cars have been required by FMVSS 202 to have head restraints in the front outboard seating positions. FMVSS 202 also applies to light trucks manufactured after August 31, 1991. The standard requires that either of two conditions be met:

During a forward acceleration of at least 8g on the seat supporting structure, the rearward angular displacement of the head reference line shall be limited to 45o from the torso reference line: or Head restraints must be at least 700 mm (27.5 inches) above the seating reference point in their highest position and not deflect more then 100 mm (4 inches) under a 372 Nm (3,300 inch-pound) moment. The lateral width of the head restraint, measured at a point either 65 mm (2.56 inches) below the top of the head restraint or 635 mm (25 inches) above the seating reference point, must be not less than 254 mm (10 inches) for use with bench seats and 171 mm (6.75 inches) for use with individual seats. The head restraint must withstand an increasing rearward load until there is a failure of the seat or seat back, or until a load of 890N (200 pounds) is applied.

The head restraint evaluation (1) performed by NHTSA in 1982 on passenger cars found that the effectiveness of integral restraints was 17 percent in reducing rear impact injuries, while adjustable head restraints were 10 percent effective in reducing rear impact injuries. An integral head restraint consists of a seat back high enough to meet the 27.5 inch height requirement. An adjustable head restraint consists of a separate head restraint pad that is attached to the seat back by sliding metal shaft(s). The occupant may adjust the restraint to the top, bottom, or intermediate positions. The difference in effectiveness may have been due in part to adjustable restraints not being as high as integral restraints when in their lowest position and not being properly positioned.

While the 1982 evaluation estimated the benefits of any injury in a rear impact, for the most part, head restraints are designed to reduce whiplash injuries. Page 86 of the same evaluation provides data which can be used to estimate the benefit of head restraints for just whiplash injuries. The data in the 1979 NASS data file were used because the effectiveness statistics were calculated using that data. There is no more recent statistics on effectiveness available. Combining non-towaways and towaways, whiplash injuries were the only injury in 60 percent of the cases. Thus, the effectiveness of head restraints in reducing whiplash injuries can be estimated to be 28.3 percent (17/0.6) for integral restraints and 16.7 percent (10/0.6) for adjustable restraints. This assumes that head restraints are only effective in reducing whiplash injuries.

Technical Report

In 1996, in order to help identify and examine issues related to the biomechanics of neck injuries, whiplash rates, occupant and head restraint positioning, and the state of contemporary and future head restraint designs, NHTSA issued a technical report for comments entitled, "Head Restraints - Identification of Issues Relevant to Regulation Design and Effectiveness." There were ten commenters to the technical report. The responses were mainly focused on three main issues, 1) rescission of dynamic test requirement, 2) clarification of test procedure, and, 3) proposal for testing consolidation . As part of the agency's Regulatory Reinvention Initiative, the agency discussed eliminating the alternative that limits rearward displacement of the head restraint to less than 45 degrees during a forward acceleration of at least 8g applied to the seat supporting structure because this alternative is cumbersome and has been rarely used.

The vehicle manufacturers supported eliminating the dynamic test requirement of FMVSS 202 as discussed in the technical report. Other respondents to the technical report did not agree that the dynamic test portion should be rescinded. The Liability Research Group believed that the dynamic test requirements of FMVSS No. 202 should be strengthened and not rescinded.

Atwood Mobile Products believed that the dynamic portion of the test requirements currently stated in FMVSS No. 202 depicted the real world more accurately and should not be eliminated. Also elimination of the test would place an undue burden by allowing only one test method.

Recreational Vehicle Industry Association (RVIA) believed that rescinding the dynamic portion of FMVSS No. 202 could limit the options available for testing and could place an undue burden on vehicle manufacturers by requiring the use of a single testing method.

RVIA stated that the dynamic testing option could be more representative of real world crashes involving rear impact than the more widely used static test provided in FMVSS No. 202.

IIHS stated that if FMVSS No 202 was amended as proposed in the technical report, only the geometric requirements would remain in the standard, and manufacturers would be deprived of the use of an alternative means of testing head restraints. IIHS "does not object in principle" to the effort to simplify FMVSS No. 202, but stated that the standard is one of the few standards where the U.S requirements are weaker than elsewhere.

Volvo, who was in favor of the elimination of the requirement, believed there was insufficient knowledge about injury mechanisms and that test dummies needed to be improved. However, Volvo has developed a seat design to specifically reduce whiplash injuries, indicating that they believe they have enough knowledge to change the way they design seats.

Chalmers University of Technology supported a dynamic test and believed it was a necessity for active head restraints. Active restraints are designed to deploy upon rear impact. A 1998 Saab model is equipped with an active restraint which operates by use of a lever. This type of system may not pass a static dimensional requirement in its undeployed state.

At that time, the agency was not aware that vehicle manufacturers such as these represented by the RVIA or by Atwood Mobile Products considered the alternative dynamic test of FMVSS No. 202 to be an engineering alternative because it had been rarely used. The agency believes that it was not the intention of the "Regulatory Reinvention Initiative' to restrict the choice of options available to manufacturers who wish to use them or to impose a hardship on manufacturers or to impede or stifle technical innovation. Based on these comments, the agency was and still is concerned that deleting the option could stifle future technological innovation in the area of deployable crash protection systems that provide head restraint during a crash. Therefore, based on the new information provided by RVIA, Atwood and IIHS, the agency decided that the dynamic test portion of FMVSS No. 202 should not be rescinded at that time because it offered manufacturers a convenient alternative to evaluating head restraint performance during vehicle manufacture and that this alternative may be used in the future.

In addition to the above reasons, the agency still wishes to retain the dynamic option because future designs which may use air bags, could be assessed. Looking to the future, the agency would ideally have a more performance based regulation for head restraints rather then the current design regulation. A more performance-based regulation provides the means to assess the many other seat design parameters which affect whiplash reduction. Research has shown that seat back stiffness, seat cushion stiffness, seat cushion contour and seat cover material can all affect neck loading. A dynamic test is the ideal way of combining aspects of the seat standard (FMVSS 207) and FMVSS 202. However, future rulemaking will be needed to deal with improving seat performance related to occupant injury in higher speed rear impacts. Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety supports the agency's exploration of a dynamic only head restraint regulation. The current dynamic option provides a stepping stone towards a purely performance based regulation.

III. THE PROPOSED RULE

The proposal would require that head restraints in all outboard seats, when adjusted to their lowest possible adjustment position, be higher (at least 750 mm or 29.5 inches) than they are currently required to be at their highest position (at least 700 mm or 27.5 inches). It would also require them to be able to achieve a greater height at their maximum height adjustment in front outboard seats (at least 800 mm (31.5 inches)), and lock positively in that position. Head restraints in front outboard seats would also be subject to a new requirement limiting the amount of backset to less than 50 mm (two inches) at any adjustment position. It also adds a requirement that head restraints be provided in the rear outboard seating positions. With the exception of the width requirement for head restraints on bench seats and the backset requirement, the amendments being proposed by NHTSA are the same as the requirements for head restraints in ECE Regulation No 25. The agency proposal would also modify the test procedures used for certifying compliance to Standard 202. Manufacturers would have the option of certifying compliance in one of two ways: the first option is a series of dimensional, strength and energy absorption requirements. The second option consists of a dynamic test with associated performance criteria and a static width requirement. With the second option, demonstrate compliance with the 50th percentile male Hybrid III test dummy specified in Part 572 Subpart E. For front seating positions demonstrate compliance with the 95th percentile male Hybrid test dummy specified in Part 572. When testing with the 95th percentile male Hybrid dummy demonstrate compliance with the head restraint at one position of height adjustment, at the option of the manufacturer. When testing with the 50th percentile demonstrate compliance with the head restraint at any position of height and backset adjustments.

Alteration of the dynamic sled test compliance option

Altering the height requirement will necessitate the modification of the dynamic compliance option in FMVSS 202. The current dynamic test accelerates a seat loaded with a 95th percentile adult male dummy to at least a 78.1 m/s2 (8g) half sine acceleration pulse over 80 ms. The dummy neck must not rotate rearward with respect to the torso more than 45 degrees. The 45 degree performance limit was developed such that a 700 mm (27.5") high restraint would pass the dynamic test. If left unaltered, manufacturers could pass the standard using the dynamic test with 700 mm (27.5") high restraints even though the new proposed height requirement is 800 mm (31.5").

To avoid this, the agency proposes to alter the performance requirements in the dynamic procedure such that head restraints of 750 mm (29.5") with a 50 mm (2.0") backset, could pass. Additionally, the way in which the sled pulse corridor is defined has been refined. Additionally, the way in which the acceleration pulse corridor is defined has been altered. Rather than being defined by two sinusoids, it is now a series of straight lines scaled down from the sled pulse corridor in FMVSS 208. In addition to the head rotation performance criterion, the HIC must remain below 200 during the acceleration test. The dynamic compliance option also requires a minimum head restraint width.

Height Requirements

FMVSS 202 currently requires that all head restraints be capable of achieving a height where the top of the head restraint must be at least 700 mm (27.5 inches) above the seating reference point measured parallel to the torso reference line. The agency proposes to change this requirement to 800 mm (31.5 inches) above the H-point for front seat head restraints, and require a lower limit on both front and rear head restraints of not less than 750 mm (29.5 inches) above the H-point. The new requirements will result in integral front seat head restraints having a minimum height of 800 mm (31.5 inches); adjustable front seat head restraints would be capable of achieving a height of 800 mm (31.5 inches) and could not be adjusted lower than 750 mm (29.5 inches).

The proposed alteration in the height requirement is intended to prevent whiplash injuries by requiring that the head restraints be high enough to limit the rearward movement of the head and neck. Research conducted since the implementation of the current height requirements has shown that head restraints should be at least as high as the center of gravity (CG) of the occupant's head to adequately control motion of the head and neck relative to the torso. Assuming the simplified representation of a head restraint and occupant head in fig.1, a head restraint height of 750 mm (29.5 inches) would provide this height for a 50th percentile male until a backset of approximately 125 mm (5 inches) is reached. While a head restraint height of 700 mm (inches) will be above the C.G. of the 5th percentile female up to about 10 inches of backset.

The difference in average erect seating height between a 50th and 95th percentile male is 58 mm (2.3 inches). It is reasonable to assume that this difference is due to a longer torso between the H-point and base of the neck and that the dimensions from the base of the neck to the top of the head are nearly identical. A 95th percentile male will have the top and C.G. of the head 53 mm (2.1 inches) higher than the same points on a 50th percentile male. It is further assumed that the back of the 95th and 50th percentile male heads are in the same backset position relative to the head restraint. This is because the longer torso of the 95th percentile male would tend to place it closer to the head restraint and the larger lower back and buttocks would push the H-point away from the back of the seat, resulting in a zero sum gain of backset. Based on these assumptions, a 750 mm (29.5 inches) high head restraint would be as high as the 95th percentile male C.G. up to a backset of 13 mm (0.5 inches). A head restraint with a height of 800 mm (31.5 inches) would be as high as the 95th percentile male C.G. up to a backset of 133 mm (5.3 inches). Since backset is limited to 50 mm (2 inches) a seated occupant with a head C.G. approximately 38 mm (1.5 inches) higher than the 95th male would be covered by the proposal. This would mean that the proposed regulation would require head restraint heights sufficient to capture greater than 99 percent of the population.

There are several reasons why the agency is proposing to allow lower head restraints for the rear seat than for the front seat. First, the rear seats of many passenger cars are fixed and may result in lower injuries. The NASS data indicate a lower whiplash rate for rear seat occupants (see Table V-3). Second, the average height of rear seat occupants is less than front seat occupants. Third, visibility out the rear window was considered. The taller the rear head restraints, the less visibility is afforded to drivers out of the interior rearview mirror.

Backset Requirement

NHTSA is proposing to add a requirement that head restraints must have a backset of less than 50 mm (2 inches), at any adjustment position. (see Figure 1 in Chapter V for a visual depiction of backset). As proposed by the agency, backset would be measured at any point between a height of 750 mm and 800 mm. The consensus of the biomechanics community is that the backset dimension has an important influence on the forces felt by the neck and the length of time a person is disabled by injury. This has been based on both physical tests, computer modeling and real world crash data. Research seems to indicate 100 mm (four inches) as the upper limit of acceptable backset. Some researchers have seen further potential injury reduction as the backset goes to zero, allowing no relative motion between the head and torso upon rear impact.

In general, the NHTSA computer modeling results using a 50th Hybrid III dummy can be summarized in the following way. The lowest relative head rotation value was seen for the head restraint height positions between 750 and 800 mm, with a backset of about 0". Backset increased by an average of 2.2 inches when backset was increased to 50 mm. The average head rotation change was 19.8 degrees when going from 50 mm to 100 mm backset. Therefore, NHTSA believes that a head restraint which can achieve this position would be best.

Adjustment Retention Requirement

Adjustable restraints are most often criticized because they are not positioned properly by motorists and they do not lock in position. Most commentors to the Technical Report were in favor of positive locks on adjustable head restraints. The benefit of the locking requirement is to keep the head restraint in the adjusted position. The agency believes that if the head restraint can be pushed down or back by the head during the crash sequence, there is a higher likelihood of injury to the occupant.

The modification to the existing height requirements and the addition of a backset requirement that are now being proposed are expected to improve the performance of all adjustable head restraints. The performance of adjustable head restraints may be further improved if steps are taken to ensure that restraints remain in position after they have been set by the user. It is proposed that adjustable head restraints for the front outboard seating positions must lock in several height positions under application of a downward force. In addition to locking a height position of not less than 800 mm (31.5 inches), they must lock at the highest and middle height adjustment positions.

The agency has tentatively concluded that a lock requirement for other positions within the range of adjustable is unnecessary. Requiring additional locking mechanisms to hold the restraint in an intermediate position within this two inch range of adjustment of height would not, in NHTSA's view, result in additional safety benefits commensurate with the cost. The agency notes, however, that manufacturers would not be precluded from using locking mechanisms that operate within the range of the head restraint's vertical adjustment.

This NPRM proposes performance requirements which are intended to assure that the head restraint, if adjustable, will remain locked in specific backset and height positions. The agency believes that this important for designs which adjust vertically as well as rotate for backset adjustment. The requirement for horizontal locking is located in S4.3(b)(11) and is tested as part of S5.6. The requirements are written such that a front seat restraint must be placed in a height position closest to but greater than 800 mm (31.5 inches) and the backset position closest to 50 mm (2 inches). Rear head restraints must be in a height position closest to but not less than 750 mm (29.5 inches). Positive locking of the head restraint is not required in other adjustment positions, but is not forbidden. The tests are written such that an initial small load is applied to the head restraint and the reference position of the loading device (head form) is recorded. The head form reference position is measured with this load applied to eliminate positioning variability associated with the soft upholstery of the head restraint. A larger load of 500 N (56.2 lbs) for vertical loading and a load sufficient to generate a 373 Nm (3,300 inch lb) moment for rearward loading is then applied to test the locking mechanism. Finally, the load is then reduced back to the initial value and the head form is checked against its initial position. It must be within 10 mm (0.36")of its initial position to pass. The test was designed assuming, if the locking mechanism fails, the head form would not return to its original position.

Harmonization

The process of global harmonization in the field of vehicle regulatory requirements began in 1949. The Geneva Convention on Road Traffic and Signs was created by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe to examine the problem of vehicle movement across countries. This convention formally permitted the temporary passage of road vehicles from one country to another without meeting national vehicle construction and use regulatory requirements, so long as a list of minimum specific requirements was met. Since then, most countries around the world have become signatories to it.

It is the opinion of many that global harmonization would eliminate the barriers to trade resulting from unwarranted differences in vehicle regulations and certification and compliance procedures. Compliance with multiple regulatory frameworks reduces vehicle affordability as it imposes substantial cost due to design and manufacturing constraints. These constraints extend the time needed to develop new products, thus preventing manufacturers from responding quickly to the needs of consumers world-wide. The agency favors harmonization as long as safety is improved or the safety effects are neutral.

Harmonization with all other aspects of ECE 25

In addition to the height and rear seat requirements, harmonization with ECE 25 would entail adding maximum gap dimensions (a gap is defined as either see-through holes in the head restraint or the distance between the top of the seat and the bottom of an adjustable head restraint) and energy absorption requirements to FMVSS 202. Harmonization would also require reducing the head restraint width for bench seats from 10" to 6.7". Since most head restraints probably meet the gap and energy absorption criteria in ECE 25, putting these requirements in FMVSS 202 should not add significantly to safety or to cost.

a. Width

NHTSA believes that the final rule should not incorporate the portion of ECE 25 which would allow a 6.7" wide restraint on bench seats rather than the 10" required by FMVSS 202 because this may degrade the level of safety currently available. Based on the length of bench seats, occupants seated on bench seats compared to occupants of single seats are freer to position themselves such that they are not directly in front of the head restraint. This is especially true if they don't use their safety belts. Thus, the wider the head restraint, the more likely it will provide benefits to occupants.

b. Gaps

In order to eliminate head restraint designs that have gaps so large that they would detract from the safety aspects of the head restraints, this proposed rule establishes maximum gap requirements similar to ECE 25. For fixed designs, ECE 25 allows a maximum 60 mm (2.36") gap in the head restraint. This is to prevent the head from getting too far into the gap in the head restraint. The gaps in the head restraint may be used for visibility. For height adjustable restraints, 60 mm (2.36") gaps are allowed in the head restraint and a 25 mm (0.98") gap is allowed between the head restraint and seat. The agency is not aware of the exact rationale used by the Europeans in developing the specific gap limits. Nonetheless, in the absence of independent test data the gap requirements in the proposed regulation are, with one exception, identical to the ECE 25 specifications. This exception is for the gap requirement between the head restraint and seat, when the seat is in the lowest position. The ECE requirement does not contemplate back set adjustability and simply allows no more than a 25 mm (0.98 inch) gap. However, for the proposed regulation, this gap cannot be greater than 60 mm (2.36 inches) in any position of backset adjustment.

The agency is proposing that adjustable restraints in their lowest height position have some position of adjustment where the gap between the seat and head restraint is less than 25 mm. There can be no position of adjustment where this gap is greater than 60 mm. The agency requests comments on the need for the 25 mm gap and whether it could be increased.

c. Energy Absorption

This proposal would require an energy absorption requirement similar to ECE 25. The impact procedure used by ECE 25 to determine energy absorption is consistent with that previously used for the back of the seat in FMVSS 201 and 222. The impactor may be a free-flying head form or a pendulum. The impactor would be used to strike the front of the head restraint. The agency has no knowledge of occupant head-to-head restraint contact being a source of injury. However, if a head restraint were too hard, head injury could occur. The agency also believes that most, if not all head restraints, would be in compliance. Therefore, this requirement is added on the basis of increasing the level of harmonization with ECE 25, and directionally to prevent possible head impact injuries from striking a head restraint that was too rigid. The ECE 25 test procedure specifies that the head restraint be placed in the most unfavorable position. The proposed regulatory text requires the head restraint to pass in any position of adjustment. As in ECE 25, the injury criteria requires an acceleration of less than 785 m/g2 (80g) for more than 3 ms. Another difference between the proposed regulatory text and ECE 25 is the impact area. The ECE 25 standard limits this area to within 70 mm (2.76") of the head restraint centerline. The agency proposes this same limit for bucket seats, but increases the impact area to within 105 mm (4.13") of the centerline for bench type seats. This is done because in FMVSS 202 bench type seats must have wider head restraints then single seats. The proposed impact area covers the same percentage of the required head restraint width for both types of seats.

The agency believes that the requirement should include a minimum radius of curvature for the front surface of the head restraint that matches ECE 25. Any part of the head restraint outside of the impact zone for the energy absorption requirement must not have a radius smaller than 5 mm (0.2") unless it can pass the energy absorption requirement. This requirement does not allow sharp edges on the head restraint and it avoids high pressure points that could injure someone and still pass the 80 g criterion. NHTSA has no knowledge that small radius surfaces exist on current restraint designs and believes that most, if not all head restraints, would be in compliance.

d. Head Restraint Displacement Test Procedure

The agency proposes altering the head restraint displacement test procedure so that it matches the test in ECE 25. The genesis for this change was a petition for functional equivalence from AAMA/AIAM indicating that they believed that the ECE 25 test procedure for head restraint deflection was more severe that the FMVSS 202 procedure.

The difference in the two test procedures is the back pan load. In FMVSS 202 the back pan load is removed before application of the moment to the head restraint and in ECE 25 the back pan position is maintained while the head restraint moment is applied.

Depending on the stiffness of the seat in the ECE test, the back pan load will decrease as increasing load is applied to the head restraint. AAMA/AIAM provided data from one 1998 model year vehicle seat that showed a 64 mm (2.5 in.) displacement for the US method and a 89 mm (3.5 in.) displacement for the ECE method. Although this may not be representative of the difference in displacement which is likely to occur in most seats, AAMA/AIAM believed that in all cases the displacement measured by the ECE procedure will be equal to or greater than the US procedure.

The agency has reviewed this information and believes the data provided by AAMA/AIAM to be reasonable. Because the back pan position is maintained in the ECE procedure, some level of load may be applied through it to the seat. This load, along with the load applied to the head restraint, result in the total applied seat moment and contribute to head restraint deflection. Thus, the head restraint deflection may be greater if the back pan not is removed before application of the head restraint load. The agency believes that applying loads to both the back pan and the head restraint simultaneously better reflects the stresses that occur in rear end crashes. This change in the test procedure will result in safer performance and is closer to a real world situation.

Finally, the existing displacement procedure allows the seat back to fail without consequence under application of 890 N (200 lbs) to the head restraint. Yet, the requirement specifies that the head restraint must "withstand" this load. NHTSA believes that allowing the seat back to fail renders this requirement unenforceable. Therefore, the NPRM removes the allowance for seat back failure.

Visibility Aspects

A common consumer complaint about head restraints is that they reduce visibility to the rear of the vehicle. There are two areas of concern. The first is the driver's head restraint. When the driver has the vehicle in reverse and turns his/her head to see behind the vehicle, a properly positioned head restraint may be in the line of sight of the driver, forcing the driver to lean to the side to see around the head restraint or to straighten up to see over the head restraint. (Some head restraints have openings, but looking through these relatively narrow gaps does not seem to be a preferred way of backing up). The majority of drivers would not be affected by the proposed head restraint height increase because the line of sight of a 50th percentile male is approximately 690 mm, which is below the 700 mm head restraint height currently required. Therefore, at least 50 percent of the male driving population and over 50 percent of the female drivers have to lean around current head restraints to look rearward. An increase in the head restraint height requirement will not adversely effect these drivers. Head restraints with a minimum height of 750 mm (29.5 inches) will cause a much higher percentage of drivers (many of those 47 percent of current drivers that leave their head restraint in the lowest position) to straighten up or to lean to the side to see around the head restraint. The physical difficulty of straightening up or leaning to the side while looking backwards depends upon the flexibility of the driver. Those drivers with neck, shoulder, or back problems, and some elderly drivers, may find it difficult or painful to straighten up or lean to the side and look back. Drivers could use the exterior mirror systems on the vehicle to back up, but that does not seem to be the preference of drivers.

The second area of concern is how rear seat head restraints reduce the direct visibility of the driver when looking backward and the indirect visibility of the driver when looking through the inside rearview mirror. The agency is not proposing that head restraints be installed in the center seating position of the front or rear seats. These positions would be even less cost effective than the rear outboard seating positions and they further reduce rear visibility. The agency is proposing that the rear seat head restraints need not be able to be raised as tall as the front seat head restraints. There are several vehicle models already on the road with head restraints that meet the proposed rear seat height requirements. The agency requests comments on whether there are problems with these models. An informal survey of NHTSA employees of different heights was performed in a MY 1999 Toyota Camry, which meets the rear seat height proposal. The rear seat head restraints were adjusted to their highest point. The findings of the survey were that drivers could still see well to the rear of the vehicle over the top of the raised head restraints, but the head restraints do reduce visibility. However, this is just one model and there may be large differences in the vision blockages caused by rear head restraints. Again, drivers could use the exterior mirror systems on the vehicle to observe following traffic. However, there may be blind spots using the exterior mirror that could have been seen by the driver using the interior rear view mirror that may now be blocked by the rear seat head restraint. Rear head restraints could cause a change in driver behavior, forcing them to use exterior mirrors more or to be even more cautious and turn their head to the side to check for vehicles. For many drivers it is preferable to have as much visibility as possible to the rear of the vehicle using the interior rear view mirror. There are many potential visibility impacts and potential changes in driver behavior that could impact on lane change maneuvers. Their overall impact on crash avoidance is difficult to determine.

IV. Research

A study (2), by Mats Y. Svensson, Per Lovsund, Yngve Haland and Stefan Larson, presented at the 1993 International IRCOBI Conference on the Biomechanics of Impact, 8-10 September, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, on the Influence of Seat-Back and Head-Restraint Properties on the Head-Neck Motion during Rear-Impact found that backset had the largest influence on head-neck motion, with the maximum head-torso displacement increasing with increasing backset. The study also found that the increased stiffness of the seat-back frame resulted in slightly increased maximum head-torso displacement, but a stiffer lower seat-back cushion combined with a deeper upper seat-back cushion resulted in a clear reduction of the head-torso displacement.

A study (3) of 26 rear end crashes involving 33 front seat occupants in Volvo cars was made in Sweden during 1987-88. The study investigated neck injuries sustained in rear end crashes and correlated the severity of the injuries with the various crash, occupant, and vehicle parameters. All injuries in the study were of minor severity (AIS 1). Seventy percent of the occupants suffered neck injuries with symptoms localized in the neck only. The study found that there was a relation between an increase in backset and the severity and length of neck symptoms. That is, a distance of more than 10 cm between the head and the head restraint correlated with an increased risk of neck injuries in rear end collisions, and reducing the backward movement of the head in relation to the chest might be of primary importance.

A neck injury criterion (NIC) to mathematically model and predict neck injuries in low-speed rear-end automobile crashes has been proposed (4) based on the relative acceleration and velocity between the top and the bottom of the cervical spine. In the study none of the subjects' NIC values exceeded the previously proposed 15 m2/s2 threshold, yet overall 33 percent of the tests resulted in symptoms. Of the 42 subjects tested 22 (52%) reported symptoms at either 4 or 8 km/h speed change. One reason the NIC may not have predicted the occurrence of whiplash symptoms in the test subjects was because NIC is based on a pressure gradient injury mechanism model that predicts dorsal root ganglion pathology, while the precise source of the tested subjects' symptoms was not known. It was not possible to verify by histopathological examination whether or not dorsal root ganglia injury occurred to the test subjects. Furthermore, no significant differences were noted in post-impact clinical examinations for reflex, sensory, or upper extremity muscle strength, which suggested that the test subject symptoms were not nerve based. NIC was not able to predict the presence of symptoms in the test population. This study suggests that further refinement may be necessary for NIC.

Head Restraint Height in Vehicle Fleet

Table IV-1 presents data on the difference between the proposal and measurements of head restraint height and backset taken on 14 model year (MY) 1999 models at the highest adjusted height for the head restraint. For example, the MY 1999 Toyota Camry was measured and the driver's seat highest head restraint position was 30.75 inches or 0.75 inches lower than the proposed height of 800 mm (31.5 inches).

Sales weighted averages derived from these measurements are shown in the Tables IV-2, IV-3, and IV-4. They represent the differences between the measured heights and the proposed standard. Averages in the front seat are for the driver and right front passenger positions and in the rear seat are for the right and left rear passenger positions. Both the lowest height and highest height are used for calculations made in the safety benefit and cost sections of this assessment.

Table IV-1

Measured at the Highest Head Restraint Height

Number of Inches Head Restraint Has to be Increased

and Backset Reduced to Meet Proposed Standard

31.5 Inches Front and 29.5 Inches Rear Height (Ht) and 2 Inch Backset (BS)

Make Driver Right Front Pass. Right Rear Pass. Left Rear Pass. Toyota Camry* Ht BS Ht BS Ht BS Ht BS 0.75 0 0.75 0 0 0.36 0 0.56 Honda Accord 1.25 0.95 1.75 0.95 2.75 2.75 Taurus/Sable 3.0 1.54 3.25 0.26 4.5 2.04 6.25 2.04 Chevy C1500 /GMC 0.25 0 0.5 0 ... ... ... ... Chevy S-10 0.25 0 0.25 0 ... ... ... ... Neon 0 2.53 1.0 0.95 3.0 3.5 Saab 9-5 0.25 0 0.25 0 0 0 0 0 Lumina 1.0 0.76 1.25 0.66 5.5 5.25 Grand Cherokee* 2.75 1.94 3.25 0 1.37 2.92 1.37 2.92 Chevy. Cavalier 1.37 1.45 1.25 1.25 2.12 2.33 2.75 2.72 Malibu 0.75 0 1.0 0.17 5.0 4.0 Cadillac 0 2.04 1.75 2.53 4.12 4.3 4.75 Caravan* 0.5 0.56 1.75 0.5 2.0 1.54 1.75 1.54 Explorer* 2.62 3.12 2.5 3.32 0 1.25 1.5 1.99 * These vehicles have adjustable rear seat head restraints. Some of the other vehicles have integral restraints which consist of a lump in the seat back that raises the height of the seat back.

Note: Of the vehicles with adjustable head restraints:

In the front seat, 6 had positive locking mechanisms for height and 6 did not.

In the rear seat, 3 had positive locking mechanisms for height and 3 did not.

Table IV-2

Measurements at Highest Head Restraint Height

Number of Inches Needed to Meet Proposed Height

(31.5 inches in front seat and 29.5 inches in rear seat)

Front Seat Rear Seat Integral Head Restraint 1.2 3.9 Adjustable Head Restraint 1.4 1.0 Average 1.3 2.6

Table IV-3

Measurements at Lowest Head Restraint Height

Number of Inches Needed to Meet Proposed Height

(29.5 inches in front and rear seat)

Front Seat Rear Seat Integral Head Restraint NA 3.9 Adjustable Head Restraint 1.5 3.7 Average 0.9 3.8

Table IV-4

Measurements at Highest Head Restraint Height

Number of Inches Needed to Meet Proposed

Backset (maximum of 50 mm)

Front Seat Rear Seat Average 0.9 1.8

Distribution of Head Restraints

In the 1982 Evaluation of passenger car front seat head restraints, 62 percent were adjustable head restraints and 38 percent were integral. In the 1988 to 1996 NASS-CDS, which includes whatever model year of vehicle had head restraints, the mix was 77 percent adjustable and 23 percent integral for passenger cars. NHTSA found that in a sample of MY 1998 passenger cars representing 47 percent of passenger car sales, 93 percent were adjustable and only 7 percent were integral head restraints. Thus, there has been a significant trend towards adjustable head restraints in the front seat of passenger cars.

The distribution of adjustable and integral head restraints for light trucks is very different. In the 1988 to 1996 NASS-CDS, 23 percent of the front seat light truck head restraints were adjustable and 77 percent were integral. In a sample of MY 1998 light trucks representing 72 percent of light truck sales, a sales weighted distribution found 20 percent adjustable and 80 percent integral head restraints.

Sales-weighting cars and light trucks by calendar year 1998 sales results in 9.06 million vehicles (an average of 58 percent of the vehicles) having adjustable head restraints and 6.49 million (an average of 42 percent of the vehicles) having integral restraints (based on 8.15 million passenger cars and 7.40 million light trucks totaling 15.55 million vehicles). These estimates are close to the original passenger car distribution (62 adjustable and 38 integral) in the 1982 evaluation and thus the average effectiveness, regarding the distribution of adjustable and integral, from the 1982 evaluation can be used for this analysis. Although the injury rate of cars and light trucks are not identical, the agency is using the average effectiveness of passenger cars because there is no available effectiveness statistics on light trucks.

While the agency has some information on the distribution of head restraints in the rear seat, the information is not very complete. About half of the vehicles with rear seats have "head restraints" and half do not. However, some of the so called "head restraints" are far from the height being proposed and they may constitute just a lump at the top of the seat back. Whether the manufacturers would extend these into integral head restraints or change the design and add an adjustable head restraint is not known. It appears that most of the European passenger cars are using adjustable head restraints in the rear seat. Whether this is in consideration of visibility concerns through the inside rearview mirror or not, is not known.

V. BENEFITS

The Safety Problem

NHTSA estimates from NASS data, that between 1988 and 1996, there were 805,851 occupants with whiplash injuries annually in the outboard seating positions of passenger cars, light trucks, and vans in towaway and non-towaway, police reported and unreported, nonrollover impacts. The average cost (excluding property damage) of such an injury is $6,485, resulting in a total annual cost of $5.2 billion. However, since the agency believes head restraints will be most effective in rear impacts, the benefits analysis will be restricted to this crash mode.

It is estimated from National Automotive Sampling System - Crashworthiness Data System (NASS-CDS) data that between 1988 and 1996, there were 70,307 occupants with whiplash injuries (non-contact AIS 1 neck injuries) annually in the outboard seating positions of passenger vehicles (5) in police-reported towaway nonrollover rear impacts (see Table V-1a). Whiplash injuries can occur at low speeds and many times the occupant doesn't know they have been injured for several hours. Thus, adjustments must be made to account for injuries in non-towaway police reported crashes and for crashes that are not reported to the police.

Data on non-towaway whiplash injuries are not available in the NASS-CDS data base since 1988. The agency examined data in two states, Pennsylvania (1997, State data file) and Indiana (1996, State data file) that had data elements on body region of injury and towaway versus non-towaway police reported crashes. In rear impacts in Pennsylvania, there were 2,840 outboard occupants in towaway crashes and 5,815 in non-towaway crashes with a whiplash injury (defined using Pennsylvania data as a neck injury, with no visible sign of injury but a complaint of pain.) Thus, the multiplier from police reported towaway injuries to total police reported injuries would be 3.05 [(5,815 + 2,840)/2,840]. In rear impacts in Indiana, there were 2,074 outboard occupants in police reported towaway crashes and 4,096 in police reported non-towaway crashes that had neck injuries, with a complaint of pain. Thus, the multiplier from police reported towaway injuries to total police reported injuries would be 2.97 [(4,096 + 2,074)/2,074]. There is no statistically significant difference between these two multipliers. On average, the multiplier from towaway injuries to total injuries is 3.0. Thus, we estimate the annual estimated number of police-reported whiplash injuries in rear crashes to be 210,921 (70,307 x 3).

Based on estimates provided in a NHTSA report (6), the multiplier from police-reported crashes to all crashes, including unreported crashes, for AIS 1 injuries is 1.29. Thus, the annual estimated number of total whiplash injuries in rear crashes, police- reported and unreported is

272,088 (210,921 x 1.29).

Out of the 70,307 estimated whiplash injuries in towaway crashes, an estimated 5,440 (7.7 percent) were in rear outboard seating positions. The annual estimated number of total whiplash injuries in rear outboard seating positions, police- reported and unreported is 21,053 (5,440 x 3 x 1.29). Of the 5,440 whiplash injuries in rear seats in towaway crashes, only 564 (10.4 percent) were in vehicles with head restraints in the rear seat. The number of vehicles with head restraints in the rear outboard seats has increased dramatically over the last several years. Based on the MY 1999 vehicles with rear seat head restraints and MY 1998 sales, an estimated 41 percent of the MY 1999 fleet have head restraints that were at least 750 mm (29.5 inches), 39 percent have a rear seat but no head restraints, and 20 percent have no rear seat. Out of the possible 80 percent of the fleet with a rear seat, 41 percent have a head restraint. Thus, 51 percent (41/80) of the possible rear seat injury cases for new models would now have a head restraint. Since the average effectiveness of rear head restraints is estimated to be about 14 percent (see discussion on page V-16), then the expected number of rear seat outboard whiplash injuries for a fleet of MY 1999 vehicles if they had no rear seat head restraints would be 21,429 based on the following calculations: