Forms of Municipal Government

Council-Manager

Characteristics include:

City council oversees the general administration, makes policy, sets budget

Council appoints a professional city manager to carry out day-to-day administrative operations

Often the mayor is chosen from among the council on a rotating basis

This is the most common form of government. According to surveys by the International City/County Management Association (ICMA), this form of government has grown from 48% usage in 1996 to 55% usage in 2006. It is most popular in cities with populations over 10,000, mainly in the Southeast and Pacific coast areas. Some examples are Phoenix, Arizona; Topeka, Kansas; San Antonio, Texas, and Rockville, Maryland.

Mayor-Council

Characteristics include:

Mayor is elected separately from the council, is often full-time and paid, with significant administrative and budgetary authority

Depending on the municipal charter, the mayor could have weak or strong powers

Council is elected and maintains legislative powers

Some cities appoint a professional manager who maintains limited administrative authority

Occuring in 34% of cities surveyed by International City/County Management Association (ICMA), this is the second most common form of government. It is found mostly (but not exclusively) in older, larger cities, or in very small cities, and is most popular in the Mid-Atlantic and Midwest. Cities with variations in the mayor-council form of government are New York, New York; Houston, Texas; Salt Lake City, Utah, and Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Commission

Characteristics include:

Voters elect individual commissioners to a small governing board

Each commissioner is responsible for one specific aspect, such as fire, police, public works, health, finance

One commissioner is designated as chairman or mayor, who presides over meetings

The commission has both legislative and executive functions

The commission form of city government is the oldest form of government in the U.S., but exists today in less than 1% of cities. It typically occurs in cities with populations below 100,000, such as Sunrise, Florida and Fairview, Tennessee.

Town Meeting

Characteristics include:

All voters meet to decide basic policy and elect officials to carry out those policies

Although the town meeting form of government is generally viewed as the purest form of democracy, because it allows all eligible voters a voice in local policy decisions, it is practiced in only 5% of municipalities.

Town meeting government is found in Marblehead, Massachusetts.

Representative Town Meeting

Characteristics include:

Voters select a large number of citizens to represent them at town meetings, where only they can vote

Each town meeting must be announced with a warrant that provides the date, time and location of the meeting and specifies the items to be discussed

The selectmen are responsible for implementing policy

This form of government is found in fewer than 1% of cities, almost exclusively in small, New England municipalities, such as Bowdoin, Maine and Lexington, Massachusetts.

Current Trends

Recent examinations of government structure indicate that these forms of government are less distinct that they once were. This is due, in part, to the common practice of incorporating structural features from other forms into one's current form. This mixing is also attributed to local responses to socioeconomic, demographic, and political changes. The most common mixing occurs across the two most prevalent forms, mayor-council and the council-manager. Among all cities proposing a change to their structure of government, the most common proposal was to add the position of chief administration officer/city manager. This professionalization of government administration also had the highest percentage of voter approval. Among other proposed changes, 50% or more respondents of ICMA's 2006 survey reported voter approval to increase or decrease the number of council members, to modify the method of electing the mayor and to decrease the power or authority of the mayor.

The Form of Government in the Thirty Most Populous Cities

Listed below is the form of government for the thirty most populous cities in the United States, based on the 2010 U.S. Census figures. The forms of government are informed by the member database at the National League of Cities.

Rank City Name State Form Of Government 1 New York NY Mayor-Council 2 Los Angeles CA Mayor-Council 3 Chicago IL Mayor-Council 4 Houston TX Mayor-Council 5 Philadelphia PA Mayor-Council 6 Phoenix AZ Council-Manager 7 San Antonio TX Council-Manager 8 San Diego CA Mayor-Council 9 Dallas TX Council-Manager 10 San Jose CA Council-Manager 11 Indianapolis IN Mayor-Council 12 Jacksonville FL Mayor-Council 13 San Francisco CA Mayor-Council 14 Austin TX Council-Manager 15 Columbus OH Mayor-Council 16 Fort Worth TX Council-Manager 17 Louisville-Jefferson County KY Mayor-Council 18 Charlotte NC Council-Manager 19 Detroit MI Mayor-Council 20 El Paso TX Council-Manager 21 Memphis TN Mayor-Council 22 Nashville-Davidson TN Mayor-Council 23 Baltimore MD Mayor-Council 24 Boston MA Mayor-Council 25 Seattle WA Mayor-Council 26 Washington DC Mayor-Council 27 Denver CO Mayor-Council 28 Milwaukee WI Mayor-Council 29 Portland OR Commission 30 Las Vegas NV Council-Manager



Sources

Barnes, William R. "Forms and Structure of Municipal Government in the United States." Presentation to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Edinburgh, Scotland, October 24, 1991.

DeSantis,Victor S. and Tari Renner. "City Government Structures: an Attempt at Classification." State and Local Government Review, 34(2) (Spring 2002).

Frederickson, H. George, Curtis Wood, and Brett Logan. "How American City Governments Have Changed: The Evolution of the Model City Charter" National Civic Review 90(1) (2001).

Frederickson, H. George, and Gary Alan Johnson. "The Adapted American City: A Study in Institutional Dynamics." Urban Affairs Review36(6) (July 2001).

Krane, Dale, Platon Rigos, & Melvin B. Hill, Jr. Home Rule in America: A Fifty-State Handbook. Washington, D.C.: CQ Press, 2001.

Moulder, Evelina. "Municipal Form of Government: Trends in Structure, Responsibility, and Composition." In The Municipal Year Book 2008. Washington, D.C.: International City/County Management Association, 2008.

National League of Cities. Choices of the Citizenry: Forms of Municipal Government. Washington, DC: National League of Cities, May 1989.

Svara, James H. "The Shifting Boundary Between Elected Officials and City Managers in Large Council-Manager Cities" Public Administration Review 59(1) (January-February 1999).

Svara, James H. Two Decades of Continuity and Change in American City Councils. Washignton, D.C.: National League of Cities, September 2003.