Washington Redskins vs. Philadelphia Eagles RECAP, score and stats | NFL Week 7
PHILADELPHIA -- The Philadelphia Eagles -- led by quarterback Carson Wentz, wide receiver Alshon Jeffery and tight end Zach Ertz -- met the Washington Redskins in NFL Week 7 action on Monday Night Football, October 23, 2017 (10/23/17) at Lincoln Financial Field, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Check the scoreboard above for the final score and click on the stats link for game stats.

App users: For the best mobile experience, use the mobile web version.

Here's NJ.com's coverage:

Carson Wentz report card | QB maintains MVP lead

Eagles show why they're a Super Bowl favorite

Eagles LT Jason Peters carted off field

Here's the AP recap:

PHILADELPHIA (AP) -- Carson Wentz tossed four touchdown passes, and the Philadelphia Eagles overcame losing nine-time Pro Bowl left tackle Jason Peters in a 34-24 win over the Washington Redskins on Monday night.

Wentz threw for 268 yards and ran for a career-best 63 after a shaky start to lead the NFL-best Eagles (6-1) to their fifth straight win. But the victory was costly because Peters was carted off the field with a knee injury in the third quarter.

Kirk Cousins had 303 yards passing and three TDs for the Redskins (3-3).

The Eagles went three-and-out three times in their first four drives and had only 57 total yards before Wentz hit Mack Hollins in stride with a perfect 64-yard TD pass to tie it at 10.

That got the offense rolling.

Wentz connected with Zach Ertz for 46 yards on the next series and found him again for a 4-yard TD pass to make it 17-10.

After getting the second-half kickoff, the Eagles drove 86 yards for another touchdown. Peters was injured during the series, and fans chanted his name while teammates surrounded the cart.

Wentz finished the drive off with a play that Peters would appreciate.

While being hit by two defenders and falling forward, Wentz lofted a 9-yard TD pass to Corey Clement.

Wentz fired a 10-yard TD pass to Nelson Agholor to expand the lead to 31-17. Wentz kept that drive alive by escaping a sack and running 17 yards on third-and-8.

Cousins tossed a 7-yard touchdown pass to Chris Thompson to give the Redskins a 10-3 lead. He connected with Jordan Reed on a 5-yard TD to cut the deficit to 24-17 and threw a 12-yard pass to Reed to cap the scoring.

The Eagles were penalized on four straight plays to start their first possession before Wentz was intercepted by Quinton Dunbar on a deep pass to Torrey Smith on second-and-31.

Philadelphia swept Washington for the first time since 2013 and has a commanding lead in the NFC East. The Cowboys and Redskins are tied for second place.

INJURIES

Redskins: LT Trent Williams (knee), CB Fabian Moreau (hamstring), RG Brandon Scherff (knee) and LB Preston Smith (groin) were hurt.

Eagles: LB Jordan Hicks (ankle) got hurt on the first series. Peters was replaced by Halapoulivaati Vaitai.

MIA

Redskins WR Terrelle Pryor had two catches for 14 yards and didn't start.

HEY ROOKIE

Eagles first-round pick Derek Barnett had his first two-sack game.

STREAK OVER

Eagles kicker Jake Elliott connected from 50 and 42 yards before he missed from 45 yards, ending his streak at 12 straight field goals. Four of those were from beyond 50 yards, including a 61-yarder.

HALL OF FAME

Six-time Pro Bowl kicker David Akers was inducted into the Eagles' Hall of Fame at halftime. Akers is the team's all-time leader in regular-season points (1,323) and games (188) and postseason points (134) and games (19).

UP NEXT

Redskins: Host the Dallas Cowboys (3-3).

Eagles: Host the San Francisco 49ers (0-7).

Here's what you need to know:

Who: Washington Redskins at Philadelphia Eagles

When: Monday, October 23, 2017

Where: Lincoln Financial Field, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Kickoff: 8:30 p.m. Eastern

TV: ESPN, PHL 17

Announcers: Sean McDonough, Jon Gruden, Lisa Salters (Sideline Reporter)

Local Radio: SportsRadio 94.1 (FM) WIP

Announcers: Merrill Reese, Mike Quick, Howard Eskin (Sideline Reporter)

National Radio: Westwood One Sports

Announcers: Kevin Harlan, Boomer Esiason, Ross Tucker (Sideline Reporter)

Livestream: ESPN App/WatchESPN

Line: Eagles (-6)

Eagles vs. Redskins: Key Matchups To Watch

The Eagles can tighten their stranglehold on the NFC East lead by beating the Redskins, which would up their division record to 3-0 with a win on Monday.

Quarterback Carson Wentz's impressive play, including a touchdown-to-interception ratio of 13-to-3 over the first six games has been critical to the Eagles' fast start.

Redskins head coach Jay Gruden says he couldn't be more impressed by Wentz's rapid improvement from his 2016 rookie season.

"I think he's progressed at a rate as fast as anyone I've seen, really," Gruden said during a conference call with reporters Thursday. "His ability to make plays in the pocket, his ability to stand in the pocket in the face of the rush and deliver a ball accurately, his command of the offense, I think he's already proven this short in his career that he's one of the top quarterbacks in the league, quite frankly. He's going to be for a long time."

Matt Lombardo may be reached at MLombardo@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattLombardoPHL.