Northern Ontario Plant Database Plant Description Trillium grandiflorum (Michx.) Salisb. En: white trillium, large-flowered trillium, white wakerobin

Fr: trille grandiflore, trille blanc

Oj: ini'niwin'digige'gun, baushkindjibgwaun Melanthiaceae (Melanthium Family)

Click on thumbnail to see larger image.



General: A perennial herb (forb), to 4.5 dm tall, growing from a thick rhizome.



Leaves: A whorl of 3 sessile leaves is borne at the top of the smooth, erect stem. Leaves are elliptic to broadly ovate, 12–20 cm long, 8–15 cm wide, smooth (glabrous), bases are tapering (cuneate) to rounded; apices are sharply pointed (acuminate); margins are entire.



Flowers: Bisexual; the single terminal flower is stalked, the flower stalk (peduncle) is 2–12 cm long. Sepals 3, green, lanceolate, the tip sharply pointed (acuminate), 2–5.5 cm long; petals 3, white, flushing to pale pink with age, oblong-ovate, 4–7.5 cm long; stamens 6; the single pistil with an ovoid, greenish-white, 6-angled, superior ovary, 0.8–1.8 cm long, including the 3 curved stigmas. Flowers bloom in May and early June.



Fruit: A single, ovoid, 6-angled berry, 1.2–1.6 cm long. Fruits mature in summer.



Habitat and Range: Rich deciduous or mixedwood forests. Trillium grandiflorum, is native to northeastern North America; in Ontario, it is found as far north as the Chippewa River Valley, Algoma District. Trillium grandiflorum is the provincial flower of Ontario.



Internet Images: The Trillium grandiflorum webpage from the



Read more about the different species of Trillium in North America at Dr. Susan Farmer's Trillium Website.



Similar Species: The nodding trillium, Trillium cernuum, occurs as far north as James Bay and is the only trillium in northwestern Ontario. Its white flowers, borne on a stalk (peduncle) that bends downward, are usually hidden beneath the leaves and are smaller than the flowers of the white trillium. In the North Bay-Nipissing area, Trillium undulatum, the painted trillium, may be found; it is easily distinguished by the prominent reddish-purple streaks at the base of the white petals, which form a triangular pattern at the centre of the flower, and the wavy (undulate) margins of the petals. Compare the webpages from the



Comparison of Trillium species in northern Ontario







Trillium cernuum

(nodding trillium)



Trillium grandiflorum

(white trillium)



Trillium undulatum

(painted trillium)



Trillium erectum

(red trillium)



flower colour



white, to 2.5 cm long



white, fading to pink, 2–5 cm long



white with reddish-purple streaks at the base, 2–5 cm long



dark red, to 5 cm long



flower position



nodding, hidden beneath the leaves



erect



anthers



pink



yellow



white or pink



maroon to yellow



ovary colour



white to pinkish



white to greenish



white



dark red to maroon



leaves



sessile



petiolate





Back to species list A perennial herb (forb), to 4.5 dm tall, growing from a thick rhizome.A whorl of 3 sessile leaves is borne at the top of the smooth, erect stem. Leaves are elliptic to broadly ovate, 12–20 cm long, 8–15 cm wide, smooth (glabrous), bases are tapering (cuneate) to rounded; apices are sharply pointed (acuminate); margins are entire.Bisexual; the single terminal flower is stalked, the flower stalk (peduncle) is 2–12 cm long. Sepals 3, green, lanceolate, the tip sharply pointed (acuminate), 2–5.5 cm long; petals 3, white, flushing to pale pink with age, oblong-ovate, 4–7.5 cm long; stamens 6; the single pistil with an ovoid, greenish-white, 6-angled, superior ovary, 0.8–1.8 cm long, including the 3 curved stigmas. Flowers bloom in May and early June.A single, ovoid, 6-angled berry, 1.2–1.6 cm long. Fruits mature in summer.Rich deciduous or mixedwood forests., is native to northeastern North America; in Ontario, it is found as far north as the Chippewa River Valley, Algoma District.is the provincial flower of Ontario.Thewebpage from the Gallery of Connecticut Wildflowers , a website of the Connecticut Botanical Society.Read more about the different species ofin North America at Dr. Susan Farmer'sThe nodding trillium,, occurs as far north as James Bay and is the only trillium in northwestern Ontario. Its white flowers, borne on a stalk (peduncle) that bends downward, are usually hidden beneath the leaves and are smaller than the flowers of the white trillium. In the North Bay-Nipissing area,, the painted trillium, may be found; it is easily distinguished by the prominent reddish-purple streaks at the base of the white petals, which form a triangular pattern at the centre of the flower, and the wavy (undulate) margins of the petals. Compare the Trillium cernuum and Trillium undulatum webpages from the Gallery of Connecticut Wildflowers