FEATURE-As churches get political, U.S. IRS stays quiet

June 21 (Reuters) - Pastor Jim Garlow will stand before

congregants at his 2,000-seat Skyline Wesleyan Church in La

Mesa, California, on Sunday, Oct. 7, just weeks before the U.S.

presidential and congressional elections, and urge his flock to

vote for or against particular candidates.

He knows such pulpit pleading could endanger his church's

tax-exempt status by violating IRS rules for a 501(c)(3)

charitable organization. A charity can take a position on policy

issues but cannot act "on behalf of (or in opposition to) any

candidate for public office." To cross that line puts the $7

million mega-church's tax break at risk.

Even so, Garlow not only intends to break the rules, he also

plans to spend the next four months recruiting other pastors to

do the same as part of Pulpit Freedom Sunday. On that day each

year since 2008, ministers intentionally try to provoke the IRS.

Some even send DVD recordings of their sermons to the agency.

Last year, 539 pastors participated. This year organizers

expect far more. Participants want to force the matter to court

as a freedom of speech and religion issue.

"I believe we're on the early stages of the next great

awakening," Garlow told his congregation last year. "We're going

to see it just sweep across this nation."

The situation is fraught with peril for the IRS, which needs

to be seen as apolitical. When it cracks down on political

activities proscribed by the 501(c)(3) regulations, it is

inevitably branded as partisan.

When the target is a church, mosque or synagogue,

enforcement puts two fundamental American values at odds:

freedom of speech and the separation of church and state.

Although the agency has enforced the tax-exemption rules against

churches in the past, it has so far ignored the provocations of

Freedom Sunday.

The IRS has also been silent about the increasingly

aggressive political activity of the U.S. Catholic bishops, who

have called for their own Fortnight for Freedom this week.

Masses, rallies, and parish bulletins are being mobilized

against the Obama administration's healthcare regulations on

contraceptives.

The result of agency inaction, according to tax experts and

former IRS staffers, will be a lot more electioneering by

leaders of the faithful, in local races as well as national, and

to the benefit of Democrats as well as Republicans.

"It will get worse unless the IRS takes action, and they

seem reluctant," said Nicholas Cafardi, dean emeritus and

professor of law at Duquesne University and the longtime lawyer

for the Catholic diocese of Pittsburgh.