Advice for storing, preserving valuables during hurricane
Regarding the tip, "Pack your photographs and important things that you can't fit into the car in Ziploc bags and put them all in the dishwasher and lock the door, because it's the only thing that's waterproof in your house": That doesn't work.

I put dishes I wanted to save in my dishwasher. They did not break, but the mud and water in St. Bernard Parish managed to get inside. Photographs stored in a dishwasher would just be little pieces of white paper. Some things I put in Ziploc bags were wet and others were dry. If you put things in Ziploc bags, make sure there are no pinholes in the bag.

The only way to guarantee that pictures will survive is to take them with you. Or scan them into a computer and send copies to several out-of-town friends before you evacuate.

Barbara Hussey, Belle Chasse

Readers may want to think twice about storing pictures in a locked dishwasher to protect them from flood. There should be an opening at the top of any dishwasher which lets steam (hot water vapor) out. This should also allow water to run back into the washer once the dishwasher is fully submerged.

It is doubtful that the door gasket would maintain its seals when the water rises high enough to create a significant outside pressure on the seals.

Water could flow backwards in the pump-out line once the sink is completely submerged, even if there is a check valve in the line, since check valves can't be counted on to seal well.

The locking in Ziploc bags sounds OK and the dishwasher suggestion may work if the water level is only 1 or 2 feet, but it would be expected to fail if the water rose above the kitchen counters. You might want to store pictures at an elevation above any expected water line or just take them with you.

Robert Planchet, Covington



I was able to save "most" of the dishes from my wedding set. The only ones I was unable to save were the ones in the dishwasher; they were covered with the most "muck."

I guess when the house is under 6 feet of water for several days, nothing is waterproof. My suggestion is if you can't fit your important documents with you in the car, something else of less importance should be put in the dishwasher. Don't take the chance with documents.

Ginger Jackson, New Orleans

. . . . . . .

To share your firsthand hurricane preparedness advice, e-mail katlessons@timespicayune.com, or write KATRINA LESSONS, c/o The Times-Picayune Living Section, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans LA 70125-1429