Jay-Z stands alone and surrounded at the Smoothie King Center
Wow, talk about your solo performances. Though he was surrounded by thousands of fans, Jay-Z was alone at the Smoothie King Center on Thursday night in New Orleans. The renowned rapper stood like a castaway in the middle of an octagonal island stage in the center of Center. The live musicians who laid down the beats were barely visible in sunken bunkers around the edges.

Jay-Z was the show, the whole show, and nothing but the show, so help me.

And he was splendid. Costumed in nothing more than a T-shirt, running pants, ball cap, and jacket, he was just like an ordinary dude ... with a volcano of words exploding from inside like hot lava. From "Heart of the City" to "Hard Knock Life," to "99 Problems" to the spare spoken word-like "Smile," Jay-Z's dense raps rained almost continuously on the audience for more than 90 minutes.

Of course The Blender (as the Smoothie King Center is affectionately known) is a big room for one man to command, visually anyway. But Jay-Z had some help from the absolutely ingenious science-fictiony stage design. Imagine four gigantic wedge-shaped screens (that looked like partially open books) suspended over a huge black pyramid with telescoping top. It was an amazing piece of stage engineering.

Amazing, but not distracting. The 3-D stage design focused attention on Jay-Z, not away from him. It was much, much more compelling than the elaborate yet flat video backdrops of either the recent James Taylor or U2 concerts.

Jay-Z expressed his gratitude to his fans, urging them to: "Dream as big as you want. Nobody can stop you; it's America, right?" He dedicated the last song, "Numb/Encore," which was a collaboration with the band Linkin Park, to Chester Bennington, the Linkin Park frontman who took his own life in July.

Beyonce, Jay-Z & Solange tonight at Dooky Chase's Restaurant in New Orleans! pic.twitter.com/lPK3gJpuqA -- THE BEYHIVE (@TheBeyHiveTeam) November 9, 2017

On the day before the show, Jay-Z, his megapopular wife Beyonce, and beyond talented sister-in-law Solange dined at Dooky Chase's and posed for pictures with chef Leah Chase. Now THAT'S some star power.