The 'American Sniper's' preposterous post-Katrina New Orleans story: Jarvis DeBerry
Chris Kyle, the now-deceased Navy SEAL who is celebrated in Clint Eastwood's movie "American Sniper" was a proved liar. Jesse Ventura, the former military man, wrestler and governor of Minnesota, sued Kyle before he died, claiming that he defamed Ventura in his memoir, "American Sniper." Kyle claims to have punched out Ventura in a bar after Ventura bad-mouthed the troops who'd been sent to Iraq. Kyle was killed before the trial, but a jury determined that none of what he had written about Ventura was true and awarded Ventura $1.8 million.

Because he's a proved liar, we should be awfully skeptical about Kyle's claim that the U.S. government sent him into New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina. They perched him atop the Superdome, he said, and it was from there that he picked off 30 looters in the city.

A June 2014 Washington Post report about Kyle's "unverifiable legacy" doesn't outright call the celebrated sniper a liar, but it nudges the reader toward that conclusion. After including a quote from one of Kyle's officers who said, "I never heard that story," the Washington Post writes, "Does that mean it didn't happen? Who knows. It's certainly possible that Kyle... killed 30 armed assailants in New Orleans to protect its residents in Katrina's aftermath. But it's also possible Kyle couldn't let go of his own legend, and, in a haze of post-traumatic stress, let his tales veer into untruth."

At the website mpmacting.com, writer Michael McAffrey is far less kind. He excoriates Kyle and reporters who either have failed to question Kyle's bogus stories or, worse, criticized Ventura for suing Kyle for lying about him.

Kyle also told a story about killing a pair of carjackers in Texas and then dialing up the Pentagon for the law enforcement officials who arrived at the scene. That's another story that nobody -- no police, deputy, coroner or witness -- has been able to confirm. McAffrey writes, "Just like he didn't shoot two car jackers in the middle of nowhere Texas, and he didn't shoot looters in the aftermath of Katrina. None of those things are true...but that doesn't mean there aren't people who desperately need them to be true."

Apparently there are some people out there who believe that Kyle's lies are a manifestation of post traumatic stress disorder. Is it that what he is? Or could he just be an American liar?

Jarvis DeBerry can be reached at jdeberry@nola.com. Follow him at twitter.com/jarvisdeberry.