JAY-Z GETS CLEAR OF HARD-KNOCK STRIFE
Jay-Z has found out what it's like to be the victim of a bad rap. The hip-hop star has come under fire because of a scene in the 2000 concert documentary "Backstage," in which he appears to strike a woman who takes his picture after a performance. Jay told us last week that the woman, Chaka Pilgrim, is "one of my best friends," insisting, "We were playing.

" Now "Backstage" director Chris Fiore is corroborating that the hand-to-face smoosh was "playful.

" What's more, Fiore admits to us, he left out footage where "they both laughed and hugged" immediately afterward. "The shot in question was taken out of context by me, and was used in the film to create a sense of heightened tension at the end of the tour," Fiore says. Pilgrim, who works for Jay's Rocawear company, confirms they're still pals and that "we were just playing around.

" Meanwhile, Jay and girlfriend Beyoncé stepped out last Thursday to celebrate the birthday of music and marketing honcho Steve Stoute. Jay threw a dinner for Stoute in the private sake room at Matsuri in the Maritime Hotel. His co-host was Sean (P. Diddy) Combs. (Combs and Stoute have moved past that ugly business in 1999 when Combs and two bodyguards were charged with beating Stoute with a phone, a chair and a Champagne bottle.) Also on hand for the dinner and party later at Marquee were Will Smith, Jada Pinkett Smith, Sting, Fran Drescher, Tommy Hilfiger, Ja Rule, Bijou Phillips, Stephen Dorff and Nicole Richie. Beyoncé and Jay-Z wouldn't talk about reports that they've eloped. But the Destiny's Child star did tell us she's having a giggle making movie romance with Steve Martin while filming "The Pink Panther.

" "There is this one scene where I am trying to seduce Steve [who plays Inspector Clouseau] and his hair catches on fire. I was laughing the whole time at his expressions. We had to do it over and over because I was trying to stay in character for this love scene and I couldn't do it.

" Paltrow lauds parenting Gwyneth Paltrow needed a minute to collect her thoughts the other night in Los Angeles when she spoke at the 2004 Crystal & Lucy Awards, presented at Century City by Women in Film. "I just had a baby, in case you've been living in a cave," the new mom said. "My brain cells are coming out in my breast milk.

" (Now that's an image.) The Oscar-winner went on to say that "the only reason I've turned out to be half-decent" is because of her mom, actress Blythe Danner, and her late father, director Bruce Paltrow. Steven Spielberg also professed his love for Bruce Paltrow, his pal for 31 years. "He knew that men need women more than women need men," said Spielberg. "He told me on the day of my marriage to Kate [Capshaw] that the key word to a great marriage is the word 'Yes.

' " New Paltz's delayed Pride Mayor Jason West of New Paltz, N.

Y., has won national attention by crusading for gay marriage. But you won't see him in any limos. Last Thursday, West was tardy to New York's City Hall, where he was honored by the San Francisco and Broadway Salute to Pride, because "the bus [from Ulster County] was late.

" Also picking up awards were San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom and actors Laura Linney, Hal Sparks, Harvey Fierstein and Alan Cumming. What did Cumming do to get his honor? "I suppose it's for being queer and loud," he told us. "What I get out of this is that I should get louder - because I can't possibly get any queerer.

" Simon sings apart harmony Carly Simon's tip for a happy marriage: Don't live with your husband. The singer has been hitched for 17 years to poet Jim Hart. But they live in separate houses on Martha's Vineyard. "We're still married and still love each other," she tells Reader's Digest. "Maybe we'll actually find some way of living under the same roof together in a different environment.

" Simon, who moaned in another interview that she's looking for a real "partner," is even less close to ex-husband James Taylor, with whom she shares two children. "I would say [our relationship] is nonexistent.

" The last time Simon talked to Taylor was "going down the aisle, bringing [our daughter] Sally to the altar," nearly a year ago. "It's not the way I want it.

" Side dish FRIENDS OF Dr. Ian Smith snickered at a New York Post item suggesting that the WNBC-TV medical correspondent is getting romantic with Sale Johnson, ex-wife of Jets owner Woody Johnson. The old friends were just out celebrating the publication of Smith's new book "The Blackbird Papers" WE TOLD you that "Signs" director M. Night Shyamalan has been wooing Denzel Washington and Laurence Fishburne for his next (unannounced) movie. Bruce Willis wishes the filmmaker would call him as well. "I really want to do a sequel to 'The Sixth Sense,' but it is Night Shyamalan's decision," Willis told Webster Hall's Baird Jones. Surveillance NEW JERSEY Net Richard Jefferson celebrated his birthday at Suede by popping 40 bottles of Cristal with N' Sync's Joey Fatone, Miss Universe Jennifer Hawkins, Miss USA Shandi Finnessey, "Scrubs" star Donald Faison, MTV's Damien Fahey and Qudus, and soccer stars Clint Mathis and Cobi Jones. Laker Luke Walton shouted out birthday wishes from the deejay booth ADAM SANDLER and his wife, Jackie Titone, who just celebrated their first anniversary, did some shopping in Westhampton, then headed over to Dockers Seaside restaurant in East Quogue. E-mail:rushmolloy@edit.

nydailynews.

com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!