Teenager arrested after mobile phone found in car that had been broken into
A WOMAN yelled at police as they handcuffed her teenage son and led him from the family home in Darwin’s northern suburbs on Thursday.

It’s the stuff of nightmares for most parents.

But the tragedy is although he is only 14, the blond-haired boy, pictured, is already well known to police.

The Police’s property crimes group, Strikeforce Trident, swooped on the knocked-about Territory Housing dwelling in Wanguri not long after 8am.

The raid followed the discovery of a Sumsung mobile phone inside a car which was broken into on Wednesday.

Wanguri resident Tiffany Von Voskuilen, 30, said when she went to take her eldest child to school that morning she noticed the centre console of her Toyota Camry was open and had been rifled through.

Ms Von Voskuilen quickly came across a Samsung smartphone on the driver’s seat.

“It had no passcode on it — I only had to press the home button and swipe and I was in,” she said.

“His Facebook was open, all his apps — everything was there.”

Ms Von Voskuilen, a mother of two, said she posted on the alleged burglar’s wall and then sent him a private message.

He responded saying he’d return what he had stolen from Ms Von Voskuilen’s car if she didn’t call the police.

While she didn’t respond to his request, she did call police.

Not surprisingly, the 20-year-old police were looking for wasn’t at homeThursday morning.

But when they left they had the man’s 14-year-old brother in custody instead.

“He was arrested for an outstanding incident,” police said.

The teen was arrested for the alleged unlawful use of a motor vehicle, they said.

Police are continuing their hunt for the owner of the Samsung found inside Ms Von Voskuilen’s car.

During the raid the mother directed a highly-personal brand of abuse at the man leading the raid, Senior Sergeant Mark Stringer.

It’s families like the one police visited yesterday who have become the subjects of Taskforce Neo.

Taskforce Neo brings together police and agencies including Children and Families, Justice, Education, Housing and Corrections.

As the NT News reported on Wednesday, Taskforce Neo is targeting particular families in a bid to steer young people away from a life of crime.