DARK HORSE, DARK RIDER DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION, JUNE-JULY 1924 CHAPTER 28 PART TWO OF TWO
PROHIBITION, IT was supposed, would be the principal issue as the Democratic Party prepared to put up a man to run against President Calvin Coolidge in November, and the line was sharply drawn between the two leading candidates as the party convened in Madison Square Garden: New York Gov. Al Smith was wet, and former Secretary of the Treasury William Gibbs McAdoo was dry. To a lesser degree, a platform fight was expected over the League of Nations, that wheezing legacy of the late President Woodrow Wilson, McAdoo's father-in-law. Instead, both matters receded from the dialogue as the Democratic National Convention of 1924 became almost entirely a scalding referendum on religious and racial tolerance in the party of Jefferson and Jackson. For Smith was a Catholic, bitterly opposed by conservative Democrats in the South and West. Protestant McAdoo, meanwhile, refused to repudiate Ku Klux Klan support, thus rendering himself unacceptable to large numbers of Catholics and Jews in the East. Convention brawls would be unavoidable, and the Garden free-for-all had barely opened before some party leaders were concluding that it would be political suicide to nominate either front-runner. Boss George Brennan of Illinois, who had succeeded Tammany Hall's late Boss Charles Murphy as the nation's most important Democratic power broker, was a solid Smith man, but he was not unmindful of the destructive religious battle brewing. Waiting in the wings were nearly three dozen dark-horse compromise candidates. Brennan was known to be looking favorably upon one of them, John Davis of West Virginia and Long Island, a former ambassador to Great Britain. Davis happened still to be a big League of Nations man. In 1924, nobody else cared about that, and it didn't matter anyway. Even as the convention opened on Monday the 23rd of June, the Ku Klux Klan had emerged as the sole issue on the floor, cleaving the Democratic Party in twain. AND PUNCHES were thrown and inkwells hurled and flags ripped from the hands of their bearers as the names of Smith and McAdoo were placed in nomination, and police rushed in to quell the rioting. "Klanbake," the newspapers started calling the convention. Demonstrations went on all week as pro-klan and anti-klan filibusterers wrangled over the party platform and various committees sought to keep both sides placated. The question was fundamental: Could the party somehow accommodate both Catholic and klansman? By Friday the 27th, ballot-counting hadn't even begun. "The religious issue, which ought never to be a political issue in this country, has overshadowed every other issue," the Daily News mourned. "Democracy has turned upon and is rending itself.

" BALLOTING BEGAN Monday morning the 30th. Late that night, 15 ballots later, Smith and McAdoo were deadlocked, both far short of the necessary 732 votes. On the 30th ballot, late Tuesday night, the deadlock remained. By Thursday night, there had been 61 ballots, and still the stalemate was unbroken. In Elkwood Park in Long Branch, N.

J., on Friday the 4th of July, 20,000 klansmen, klanswomen and klanschildren picnicked in full regalia, listened to guest speakers hoot at "the clownvention in Jew York" and lined up to throw baseballs at a swinging effigy of Al Smith. Keep Al Smith Out of the White House. Three Shots for 5 Cents. The Independence Day merriment concluded at midnight with a cross-burning. AMID THE devastating Teapot Dome oil-lease scandals that Coolidge had inherited from Warren Harding, it had been thought that the Republican White House would be the easiest thing in the world to knock off. But now the Democratic Party was in total chaos. It was entirely possible that the party's presidential nomination would be quite worthless. On Monday the 7th of July, meanwhile, word came from Washington that Coolidge's 16-year-old son, felled by a tennis blister that had swiftly turned into blood poisoning, was dead. Now, on top of everything else, the Democrats were surely looking at a big Coolidge sympathy vote. As the nation grieved for the First Son, the fruitless balloting went on at Madison Square Garden. At 4 a.

m. on Wednesday the 9th, midway through the convention's third dispiriting week, Al Smith and William Gibbs McAdoo both abruptly withdrew from the race after the 99th ballot. Three roll calls later, the obscure John Davis became the nominee. Later that day, Smith made a gracious concession speech. McAdoo, for his part, immediately sailed for Europe without comment. And Democratic National Committee Chairman Cordell Hull resigned his post on the spot. AS THE DELEGATES boarded their trains and returned to their cities and towns and hamlets and valleys, local party attention now returned to Tammany Hall, still leaderless three months after Boss Murphy's demise. At this point, anyone would do. On Monday the 14th - save only for one John Curry, a crusty old-guard district leader - Tammany executives unanimously voted to give Murphy's seat to General Sessions Judge George Olvany. A former alderman and deputy fire commissioner, Olvany was little-known to nearly everyone, an unexpected dark horse if ever one was. But he appeared to have Smith's support. That was good enough. Olvany moved at once to make peace. His first official act was to pledge Tammany support to presidential candidate Davis. His second was to drop broad hints that the wigwam would be pleased to support John Hylan for a third mayoral term if that's what Hylan desired. This happy show of unity lasted for just about two weeks, at which point Hylan, just returned from visiting newspaper publisher William Randolph Hearst in California, announced that he might consider running against Smith for governor in November, "if the people demand it.

"

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!