1974 was a deadly year in Chicago

A record 970 people were slain in the city

The alarming spike in Chicago homicides this year raises the specter of the city's murder epidemic that began about 1970 and didn't abate until the late 1990s. While 1994 saw the highest per-capita homicide rate in city history, 1974 saw the largest number of people killed: 970.

In March 1974, three elderly people were killed in their sixth-floor apartment in an apparent burglary in the 1900 block of North Clark Street. A sergeant on the scene called it, “the cowardliest sort of crime.” (Chicago Tribune)

Chicagoans had seen a precipitous rise in murders since the city registered 395 people killed in 1965. The death toll in the city by the lake topped 800 in 1970 and 1971. And in 1973, the city hit a cruel new record of 864 homicides.

It took 80 minutes for 1974 to post its first homicides (60-year-old Gilbert Glass at 78th Street and Cornell Avenue), and the rate of killings for the rest of the year must have felt unrelenting as sensational slayings grabbed the headlines.

On Jan. 3, an 81-year-old man suffering from dementia shot and wounded an officer before police returned fire and killed him.

Less than two weeks later, residents were confronted with the shocking slaying of a school principal, allegedly by the 14-year-old son of a policeman. The boy, who was upset about being transferred, also allegedly shot and wounded three others.

In a separate incident the next day, a 12-year-old girl vanished, and another 14-year-old boy was held in her beating death. The two high-profile homicides in quick succession, with youths as the alleged perpetrators, must have shaken many residents.

It was just the beginning.

In early February, Chicago police Officer James Campbell was shot in a robbery attempt. The father of five died eight days later. About 1,200 people attended his funeral. On Feb. 27, patrolmen Bruce Garrison and William Marsek were shot and killed in the Raven's Pub on West Foster Avenue after they followed a suspected fugitive into the tavern. The suspect escaped, prompting a massive manhunt that ended in Milwaukee after police killed him during a hostage standoff.

The onslaught continued, and no area of the city was spared. In mid-March, three elderly people were killed in an apartment in an apparent burglary in the 1900 block of North Clark Street. A sergeant on the scene called it, "the cowardliest sort of crime." In early June, a North Side doctor was stabbed to death, allegedly by his 50-year-old son, and that same week police hunted an ex-convict suspected in a triple slaying in the 5700 block of North Winthrop Avenue.

In mid-June, Officer Robert Strugala was killed and his partner was wounded after a ferocious gun battle in a tavern on 26th Street near Kedzie Avenue, and in August, police Sgt. Otha LeMons was killed during an armed robbery at a bar on East 103rd Street. He was off duty.

What was going on? The nation's social net appeared to be tearing apart. The Tribune published a three-part series on the homicides in January 1975 that found, in part: "Police and criminologists express chagrin at what they see as a change in the nature of homicide, long thought to be something that mostly happens indoors among people who know each other, and on hot summer nights."