George Martin wasn't the only "fifth Beatle"
They always got by with a little help from their friends.

John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr were the Fab Four, but during their rise to fame and after they broke up, close friends of the group — from the past and present — were labeled as the ”fifth Beatle.”

The Beatles rock Shea Stadium in 1965

The band’s producer George Martin, who died on Tuesday, “earned the title of the fifth Beatle” more than anyone,” McCartney said in a statement, even though he was instrumental in working with other musicians such as Jeff Beck, Cheap Trick and America.

LEGENDARY BEATLES PRODUCER GEORGE MARTIN DEAD AT 90, RINGO STARR TWEETS CONDOLENCE

Though McCartney says Martin is the quintessential “fifth Beatle” — the bassist uses that term loosely — other figures associated with the group are also worthy of the title.

Brian Epstein

Beatles manager Brian Epstein (l.) with the Fab Four at Heathrow Airport in 1964. (ASSOCIATED PRESS)

Without Epstein, Martin may not have ever worked with the Beatles.

The man who was fortunate enough to discover the band in 1961 while they played an afternoon show in Liverpool was closer to the Beatles than arguably anyone.

A Liverpool native, Epstein became the band's manager early in 1962 and single-handedly helped them get signed to Parlophone records after getting thumbs down from many other record labels. In his meeting with Martin, the head of Parlophone at the time, Epstein insisted that the Beatles were going to change music.

Following his death in 1967, the Beatles only made one more record before splitting up.

"If anyone was the fifth Beatle, it was Brian," McCartney said of Epstein, who was the subject of the 2013 graphic novel and New York Times best-seller “The Fifth Beatle.’

Pete Best

Pete Best was the first drummer of the Beatles. (ASSOCIATED PRESS)

He just wasn’t the best drummer.

Before Ringo Starr joined The Beatles in August of 1962, Pete Best was their drummer. But when the Fab Four first hit the studio in the summer of 1962 to record tracks for Parlophone, Martin and multiple engineers suggested a more skilled session drummer lay down the drum tracks.

Although use of studio musicians is common in the industry, the rest of the band decided to oust Best. Epstein, as he explained in his autobiography, "A Cellarful of Noise," had to deliver the news to him.

Stuart Sutcliffe

Before they hit it big, the Fab Four actually had five members.

Sutcliffe was the original Beatles’ bassist. The close friend of Lennon played the four-string in the early days of the band, when they went as “The Beetles,” He left the group in 1961 to pursue his passion for painting, and McCartney switched from rhythm guitar to bass.

Stuart Sutcliffe (c.) with George Harrison (l.) and John Lennon, as the three pose for a portrait in Liverpool circa 1959. (AP Photo/Fleetwood Owen, Astrid Kirchherr)

Like Best, Sutcliffe was not the most technically proficient musician, but he left an indelible mark on the band — as the first member to don the “mop” hairdo.

He died a year later in art school at the age of 21 from a brain aneurysm, but the remaining members of the Beatles never forgot about Sutcliffe. He is one of the many people featured on the cover of “Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band.”

Eric Clapton

A legend in his own right, Slowhand has very close ties to each member of the Beatles.

He is not credited on the White Album, but Clapton played the lead guitar melody on “While My Guitar Gently Weeps.”

Eric Clapton (r.) helped George Harrison (l.) write "While My Guitar Gently Weeps." (Dave Hogan/Hulton Archive/Getty Images)

When Harrison first quit the Beatles in 1969, Clapton almost replaced him. And once all of the Fab Four went their separate ways, Clapton appeared on at least one of each member’s solo works.

Yoko Ono

She’s often wrongfully blamed for breaking up the Beatles, but Yoko Ono had the most inside look at the group during their toughest time.

Toward the end of 1968, Lennon’s then-girlfriend was present, in the studio, for the recording of the White Album — the one and only time a band member’s significant other was allowed.

Yoko Ono (l.) at the 1968 premiere of "Yellow Submarine" with Paul McCartney (r.) and John Lennon. (PETER KEMP/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

The album’s substance, sound and recording process “wasn’t a pleasant one,” McCartney later said, and along with Lennon both at times admitted the White Album — not Ono — planted the roots of their eventual split.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!