Six brutes wanted after brazen assault on young couple outside Missouri bar
A group of six cowards brutally assaulted a couple outside a Springfield, Mo., nightclub after one of the men allegedly sexually assaulted the woman.

Cops have released terrifying surveillance footage from outside the Outland Ballroom of the Aug. 22 beatdown that sent Meredith Cole and boyfriend Alex Vessey to the hospital.

“It was pretty brutal,” Cole told KYTV.

Meredith Cole says she fractured her ankle in the attack, making it difficult for her to care for her infant. (KY3)

Vessey was inside working as a DJ that night when Cole went outside by herself and was approached by the goons, who started to touch her as she tried to fend them off.

“It was embarrassing, kind of, and weird and uncomfortable, it was really intimidating too,” Cole told the news station of the sexual assault. "It was scary, I guess is what I'm trying to say.”

Meredith Cole and Alex Vessey were attacked after Vessey DJed at the Outland Ballroom. (KY3)

The mother to an infant managed to get away from the punks and grabbed Vessey to tell him of the terrifying experience. They went outside to get a better description of the young men for police when the group pounced.

Video shows one brute run up and sucker punch Vessey in the head as they wrangle the couple towards a wall in an alley. The rest of the gang joins in, indiscriminately throwing punches, including at least one that struck Cole in the face.

Meredith Cole and Alex Vessey were attacked in downtown Springfield, Mo., where Vessey was DJ at the Outland Ballroom. (KY3)

"And then they all just ran up on Alex, and I know I got hit ... I don't even remember how it all happened, I hit somebody with my shoe and it was crazy," Cole told the station.

A group starts pounding on Vessey as Cole tries to fend off the goons, who again punch her, sending the high heel-clad woman to the cement.

The attack continues as a sixth man runs up and punches and kicks Vessey, who can barely stand.

The punks turn tail and run off after two police officers show up and chase after the men.

The gang teams up in the vicious assault, hitting and kicking without a care as they desperately land blows on their unsuspecting marks. (KY3)

No suspects have been taken into custody.

"It was about the fact that they sexually assaulted me, it wasn't about the fact that we're white and they were black," Cole said of any insinuation that the brawl was motivated by race, since the young men shown in the video are black.

Two police officers give chase immediately after the attack took place. (KY3)

Grim photos of the aftermath show Cole with a large knot on her face, blood streaming down her cheek. Vessey’s face, too, was left bruised and bloodied by the allegedly unprovoked attack.

Cole said she fractured her ankle, too.

“I was livid, because I could hardly take care of my kid for like a week. Because with a messed up foot you can't chase a 16-month-old around,” Cole said.

Anyone who recognizes the suspects is encouraged to call Crime Stoppers at (417) 869-TIPS.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE FOR VIDEO.

sgoldstein@nydailynews.com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!