Georgia boxer 'Terrible Thomas' charged in death of his wife
A Georgia boxer who goes by the nickname “Terrible Thomas the Punisher” was charged with murdering his wife Monday, officials said.

Police say they had incarcerated Yathomas Riley, 32, since he reported his wife, Dr. Lisa Riley, 34, dead on July 10 because the firearms they found in his Leesburg home that day violated an earlier bond he had received.

That bond was given to him after he held a gun to her head last month, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported.

A judge in Lee County in southern Georgia denied Riley, who was acquitted in the shooting of an ex-girlfriend in Florida three years ago, bond on the new murder and assault charges on Tuesday, according to WALB-TV.

Riley's wife Dr. Lisa Marie Riley, 34, worked as an emergency room physician in Albany, Ga., before the boxer reported her dead on July 10. She died from a single gunshot wound to her head. (Instagram) Riley had been in custody since he reported his wife's death earlier this month because police say they discovered guns in his Leesburg home - a violation of a bond provision in his alleged assault of her in June. (Lee County Sheriff’s Office) Riley is now charged with murder in the shooting death of his wife, Dr. Lisa Marie Riley, officials say.

Medical examiners ruled that Dr. Riley, an emergency room doctor, died from a gunshot wound to her head, the Journal-Constitution reported. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation and the Lee County Sheriff’s Office concluded the boxer killed his wife after reviewing the circumstances of her death, according to GBI.

Riley accused his wife of an affair and allegedly pointed a gun at her three times, including one time while he wrapped his legs around her neck, on June 14, the Journal-Constitution reported. Police arrested him and charged him with aggravated assault and battery following that incident.

The self-styled “Terrible Thomas” won a 2006 Golden Gloves title but had been training for his first pro fight in two years at his gym in Albany, Ga., the boxer’s website says. Just as in the attempted murder case of the different woman in Florida, Riley is telling investigators his wife shot herself, the Journal-Constitution reported.

Riley didn’t immediately respond to an inquiry placed on his website Tuesday night.

The boxer’s Instagram feed shows him holding up two chrome guns in a post around the time police accused him of assaulting his wife with a caption reading, “Desert Eagle...we them boys!!!! God is good." He poses with Dr. Riley and the couple’s 9-month-old baby in other entries.

“When u make it this far in life with the one u love at the end of the day nothing else matters besides family. God is good. Team Riley,” the boxer wrote under a picture of him and his wife sitting in a red convertible last month.

Investigators with the Lee County Sheriff's Office and the Georgia Bureau of Investigation linked the boxer, who was acquitted in an attempted murder case in 2012, with the death of his wife earlier this month. (WBRC) Riley hits William Rosinsky in a semifinal matchup in the 178-pound division at the national Golden Gloves competition in Omaha, Neb. in 2006. Then a promising amatuer, the self-style "Terrible Thomas" won the tournament. (NATI HARNIK/AP) Riley, the former national Gold Gloves champion known as “Terrible Thomas the Punisher” has been arrested and charged with the death of his wife, Dr. Lisa Riley. (WBRC)

“Except you were charged with her murder,” a commenter responded.

The Georgia Division of Family and Children Services took custody of the baby, WALB reported.

“Keep him prayed up,” Riley’s friend and fellow boxer Jamaad Parker told the local TV station. “Pray for the baby, because no one really knows what's going to happen with the baby. Everything is up in the air.”

Athletes in trouble with the law

Follow on Twitter @tobysalkc

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE