NRA's Wayne LaPierre joins Trump to push for Supreme Court pick
Look who's riding shotgun.

President Trump on Wednesday rallied his conservative troops around his Supreme Court nominee, including National Rifle Association leader and spokesman Wayne LaPierre.

Trump, in a White House meeting, put the face of the gun lobby group right next to his seat of power as the President urged his supporters to fight hard for Neil Gorsuch, his nominee to fill a vacant seat on the nation’s highest court.

Although LaPierre was virtually silent during the recorded portion of the meeting, his mere presence spoke volumes about his growing influence, especially considering the seating arrangements.

President Trump nominates Neil Gorsuch to Supreme Court

As he went around the table asking participants to introduce themselves, Trump started with LaPierre, and joked about his stature.

“And, Wayne, I would say they know you,” Trump said. “Perhaps they know you better than they know me.”

The NRA's Wayne LaPierre joined Trump's posse to support Supreme Court nominee Neil Gorsuch at the White House on Wednesday. (MICHAEL REYNOLDS / POOL/EPA)

LaPierre gave a humble reply before introducing himself to the panel.

“I doubt that,” LaPierre said.

Dems struggle with Trump's 'go nuclear' threat over Supreme Court

Other guests included Grover Norquist of Americans for Tax Reform, Charmaine Yoest of American Values, David O’Steen of National Right to Life and Paula White of the Evangelical Advisory Council.

But it was LaPierre’s presence, with a seat to Trump’s left, that had observers on both sides of the political aisle taking notice.

“Swamp draining continues,” tweeted California Lt. Gov. Gavin Newsom. “Who’s that at Trump’s side? @NRA’s own Wayne LaPierre who spent $30M to get Trump elected. #SwampThings.”

President Trump and NRA CEO Wayne LaPierre shake hands at the White House on Wednesday. (Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP)

“#NRA given literal seat at the table for $30M.,” tweeted Shannon Watts, founder of Moms Demand Action, a gun control advocacy group.

After Trump shared his Supreme Court choice Tuesday in a prime time announcement, the NRA was among the first groups to publicly applaud the pick.

Gorsuch “has an impressive record that demonstrates his support for the Second Amendment,” said NRA Executive Director Chris Cox.

LaPierre’s White House appearance came on the same day that Trump’s spokesman suggested that the President may use an executive order to get rid of gun-free school zones.

“I think you’ve seen that the President has been very active in terms of getting executive orders out and following up on the campaign pledges that he made to the American people, last night being another example of that,” White House spokesman Sean Spicer said in direct response to a question about the no-gun zones.

“We’re going to continue to move through this process, and I think we’ll have further updates on where we are with respect to the rest of the (executive order) process.”

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!