Rev. Al Sharpton gets $1M in birthday gifts for his nonprofit
The Rev. Al Sharpton received a big present for his 60th birthday bash — $1 million in contributions to help bail out his nonprofit National Action Network.

A thick, glossy program distributed to guests who attended the lavish Four Seasons party Wednesday night lays out the companies that ponied up. ATT and the developer Forest City Ratner paid for full page ads at what was called the “Activist Level.”

GE Asset Management and Walmart saluted NAN with half-page ads at the “Preacher Level.”

The Humane Society, billionaire Ron Perelman’s holding company MacAndrews & Forbes, McDonald’s, DC37, Verizon and the Partnership for New York City got in at the lower “Track Suit Level” at the back of the book.

In an interview, Sharpton said he didn’t know what the different donor levels gave because fund-raising was outsourced to an event planner. He said “corporate checks take 90 days” to cash, so it was too early to say exactly who paid what, but he said the party brought in a projected $1 million.

That will help the National Action Network, which has owed millions of dollars in back taxes over the years, get out of the red.

“We have no new liens,” Sharpton said. “We’ll be operating in the black this year. The biggest debts have already settled, and the party last night was the second big fund-raiser.

“The bigger fund-raiser was my convention where President Obama spoke,” he said.

Denzel Washington was among those mentioned in the party's program. (Alexander Tamargo/Getty Images)

Host committee members — most of whom did not attend — were listed in the program. Bold-facers included: fashion personality Andre Leon Talley, Denzel and Pauletta Washington, Robert F. Kennedy Jr., MSNBC host Chris Matthews, former Gov. David Paterson, and AFT President Randi Weingarten, former Mayor David Dinkins and ballet dancer Misty Copeland.

Sharpton said the celebrities didn’t give money — they just wanted the opportunity to wish him happy birthday and be associated with NAN.

The program included testimonials from celebs and pols, which were published for free.

“The work you have done throughout your life is thoroughly admirable,” Mick Jagger wrote in a full-page glossy open letter. "Congratulations on all that you achieved."

Three-term former Mayor Michael Bloomberg wrote: “You’re truly a unique American voice. A voice that has matured a great deal without mellowing one bit. And your best days are still ahead.”

Sharpton stayed quiet about Bloomberg’s decision to overturn term limits after he received a $110,000 grant from the mayor’s nonprofit, the Daily News reported at the time.

Rep. Marcia Fudge (D-Ohio), chair of the Congressional Black Caucus, Ebony Magazine publisher Linda Johnson Rice, and the Rev. Jesse Jackson also weighed in.