PEANUT OIL USED IN A NEW VACCINE
Adjuvant is an emulsion of refined. peanut oil in water to which are added an emulsifier and a stabilizer.

As the company explains it, the antigens are contained in small particles of water, which are surrounded by the oil. When injected into the body, the emul­sion is distributed along the muscle fibers. The antigens are released as the peanut oil is absorbed by the body's tissues.

The research on Adjuvant covered six years and represen­ted the collaboration of several departments of the Merck Institute for Therapeutic Research and the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

Dr. Woodhour is assistant di­rector of the department of vi­rus diseases in the Merck labo­ratories. Dr. Stim is now a re­search associate at Yale Univer sity. Their patent is No. 3,149,036.

Radio‐Isotope Remover

A process for removing radio­active Iodine from milk, if fall­

The patentees are Gopala K. Murthy, Jeptha E. Campbell Jr. and James E. Gilchrist, special­ists for the United States Pub­lic Health Service in Cincinnati. According to the patent (3,­148,989), the process will get rid of the radio‐isotope iodine­131, which is particularly harm­ful to infants, without chang­ing the composition, flavor, odor or appearance of the milk. The decontaminating is done with an ion‐exchange resin available commercially.

Before use, the resin is loaded with heavier concentrations of chloride, phosphate and citrate salts than exist naturally in the milk. After the iodine is re­moved, however, these materi­als are found in the milk in their original proportions.

In 1962, Mr. Murthy, Mr. Campbell and two associates patented a method of remov­ing strontium-90 from milk.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Jumping Water Skis

New water skis, invented and manufactured at Cyprus Gar­dens, Fla., have been specially designed to withstand the strains they must undergo when used for jumping.

The jumper, towed behind a motor boat, travels at high speed up a ramp and lands on the water with great impact.

William N. Bennett, a profes­sional skier, obtained Patent 3,148,392 this week for Cyprus Gardens Skis, Inc. The patent includes drawings based on high‐speed research films.

The jumping ski is made in an electronic press from five layers of laminated wood. It has a slight lengthwise curve and the tip rises to conform to the ramp angle.

To improve steering and bal­ance, Mr. Bennett has made the edges sharp and has attached a pair of fins, rather than a single fin, under the heel end of each ski.

Self‐Sealing Ballot Box

The Seismograph Service Cor­poration of Tulsa, Okla., re­ceived a patent this week for a voting‐machine ballot box that automatically seals itself. The box fits in voting machines of the kind with which ballot cards or papers are used.

After the voting, when the panel giving access to the box is opened, the box lid moves to a closed position and a distinc­tive seal is affixed.

To preserve secrecy, the bal­lots drop alternately into two compartments of the box. Guil­bert M. Hunt says in Patent 3,148,827 that this makes it im­possible to determine how a per­son voted by referring to the order in which he executed his ballot.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Nose‐Diving Submarine

A submarine patented for the Electric Boat division of the General Dynamics Corporation, Groton, Conn., is designed to descend vertically, nose first. The access hatch is in the stern.

The crew and their instru­ments are to stay on a weighted platform in the vessel. The platform, according to Patent 3,148,650, moves like a pendu­lum and tends to remain horizontal.

The inventor, John S. Leon­ard, has provided for a drive system to tip the platform in relation to the hull. In this way, the vessel's angle or pitch can be controlled.

The submarine, which was de­signed to serve as an inexpen­sive tool for oceanographic re­search, has never been built and remains only a concept.

Nuclear Power System

August Valfells of Reykjavik, Iceland, was granted a patent this week for a new method of converting atomic energy into electricity.

The inventor notes that any conductor moved through a magnetic field generates elec­tricity. As the conductor in his system, he uses a stream of gas that has been ionized by nu­clear fission.

In an example given in Pa­tent 3,149,248, uranium-235 tet­rafluoride gas is mixed with uranium tri‐iodide gas and fed into a fission chamber. The ex­panding gases pass through a magnetic field between elec­trodes, which draw off the cur­rent. The gases are then cooled, the fission products are re­moved, and the uranium iso­tope is replenished before re­cycling.

Trap for Bank Bandits

Nadina Billi of Astoria, Queens, is inventor of a trap for bank bandits. The cashier pres­ses a button to drop a bullet­proof shield in front of him and a metal net around the holdup man.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The mechanism, as described in patent 3,148,640, also sounds an alarm and automatically ex­pels tear gas inside the net.

Patent Office records rarely show whether an invention is in production. To get a copy of a patent, send the number and 25 cents to the Commis­sioner of Patents, Washington, D. C: Design patents are 10 cents each. To reach an in­venter or an assignee if the address is given is insufficient, write him in care of the Com­missioner of patents, being sure to cite the patent number.

This article can be viewed in its original form. Please send questions and feedback to archive_feedback@nytimes.com