Iraq vet says he was beaten by 'black lives matter' teens
An Iraq war veteran claims he was brutally attacked by a group of teenagers after he didn't respond when they asked if he believed “that black lives matter.”

Police are investigating a report that Chris Marquez, a decorated Marine, was eating at a Washington D.C. McDonald’s when a group of rowdy teens approached him Friday night.

"They asked me if I believe that black lives matter," Marquez told WJLA News.

Washington D.C. police said the suspects, all of whom are black, were three young men and one young woman. They said they aren't currently considering the incident a hate crime.

Decorated war veteran Chris Marquez was attacked at a McDonald's in Washington, D.C. after a group of teens ask if he believed black lives matter. Marquez is an eight-year veteran of the Iraq War. (WJLA)

OHIO COP ON LEAVE FOR CALLING ACTIVIST'S SUICIDE 'HAPPY'

"I felt threatened and thought they were trying to intimidate me, so I figured I'm just going to keep to my food, eat my food and hopefully they'll leave me alone. And because I wasn't responding back to them, they were calling me a racist,” Marquez said.

What happened next is blurry, according to Marquez, but he was told by the McDonald’s manager that the pack of teens followed him outside and jumped him.

Marquez said he was robbed by the attackers. (Courtesy WJLA-TV)

“As soon as I walked out of the McDonald’s I got hit in the back of the head, or the side of the head. I just dropped to the ground, and he says I looked unconscious,” Marquez told WJLA.

The vet said that the teens took off with his wallet, including his credit cards, which they immediately used.

Marquez had signs of the beating — cuts on his forehead — and says he is still in pain from the attack due to head and neck injuries.

Marquez said he was eating at the Washington, D.C. McDonald's when the teens approached him. (WJLA)

“My head really hurts. I get this sharp pain, straight down my face, and I haven’t really slept too well at all since it happened,” said Marquez, who served eight years in Iraq, who added that the attack reminded him of combat.

Marquez is the subject of the “No Man Left Behind” statues, at Camp Lejuene and Camp Pendleton, depicting him and another man holding up a wounded soldier at the Battle of Fallujah.

“Kinda brought back memories of the war and stuff,” he added.

Police said they are reviewing surveillance footage from the McDonalds but have not made any arrests.