Arizona immigration law SB 1070 has most controversial parts blocked by federal judge

Evans/AP Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer signed the controversial anti-illegal immigration law in April.

At the 11th hour, a federal judge blocked the most controversial parts of Arizona's tough new "papers, please" immigration law, which takes effect Thursday.

U.S. District Judge Susan Bolton suspended the law's requirement that cops check a person's immigration status during traffic stops, detentions and arrests.

She also put a hold on the requirement that legal immigrants carry their citizenship papers at all times or face penalties and the provision making it illegal for an undocumented immigrant to have a job.

In her ruling, Bolton said the law would put an unfair burden on legal immigrants.

"There is a substantial likelihood that officers will wrongfully arrest legal resident aliens," the Clinton appointee ruled. "Preserving the status quo is less harmful."

The Obama administration and American Civil Liberties Union had asked Bolton to strike down the law.

Gov. Jan Brewer, who signed the law in April, called the judge's injunction "a little bump in the road" and vowed a quick appeal.

"This fight is far from over," she said. "At the end of what is certain to be a long legal struggle, Arizona will prevail in its right to protect our citizens."

Arizona Attorney General Terry Goddard tweeted, "Brewer played politics with immigration - and she lost."

The ruling came just as police were making last-minute preparations to begin enforcing the new law, and demonstrators were massing for large protests and civil disobedience.

"I was prepared to spend this weekend in jail if necessary," said the Rev. Al Sharpton.

Arizona Senate Bill 1070 is to take effect Thursday. Less controversial parts of the law, including new penalties for alien smuggling and harboring illegal immigrants, will go into effect at 12:01 a.m.

Critics say the law codifies racial profiling and legalizes the harassment of all Latinos, legal or not.

The two largest police forces in the state - Phoenix and Tucson - are headed by chiefs who oppose the law, saying it drives a wedge between cops and citizens and puts officers in an impossible position.

Supporters say the law is necessary because the feds aren't deporting enough illegal immigrants. Nationally, polls show a majority supports the law.

Critics say the numbers show it's not needed. The Associated Press obtained statistics that show the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office - where Phoenix is located - has already forced the deportation of 26,146 immigrants since 2007, without the new law. That's a quarter of all the deportations in the United States.

Twenty other states are considering enacting versions of the Arizona law.