Kansas Third Graders Exposed To Ebola. 7 Test Positive, Substitute Teacher To Blame.
BREAKING NEWS – Olathe, Kansas. A substitute teacher is being blamed for spreading the Ebola virus to a third grade classroom. 7 out of the 19 students became violently ill and tests have confirmed positive for contraction of the deadly virus.

Jeremy Hillsdale, the substitute teacher suspected of spreading the virus, had just returned to the U.S. after spending 2 weeks in Monrovia, West Africa, visiting a girlfriend whom he had a long distance relationship with online. He was called to fill in as substitute for the third grade class his second day back. By mid morning he started feeling extremely ill. He was ordered to go home that afternoon. Jeremy then tested positive for Ebola, right before the students started to show symptoms.

The regular third grade teacher, Susan Ronner, returned to class the following day and is now being quarantined under close medical supervision at a local hospital, as are 12 other children. She reached out to media outlets describing the day her classroom became ill.

It was a nightmare. One child after another started vomiting, violently. I tried cleaning up after each child, while isolating the sick children, but it became too overwhelming. I had a classroom of screaming, sick kids. In the back of my mind I wondered if this was Ebola related. My worst fears came true after the tests returned positive for 7 of the children. I’m awaiting my own fate, and I am frightened to think of how many others may have been exposed to the Ebola virus through contact with these children.

A former, now vacant factory farm on the edge of town is ground zero for emergency care and treatment of the current Kansas outbreak, and any near future cases to come. The pop up Ebola ward has been heavily surrounded by parents and relatives of the sick children, many demanding minute by minute status updates. Heavy security has been brought in to subdue the panic, while bio-hazard decontamination equipment is being trucked into the rurally located facility every few hours. Dozens of medical staff can be seen wearing large hazmat suits, entering and exiting the facility. The staff on hand refuses to disclose the current health condition of the children, and whether or not there has been any immediate loss of life.