NRA chief LaPierre claims 'looters ran wild in south Brooklyn' after Sandy, but Coney Island residents say he is full of it
NEW YORKERS took aim at NRA chief Wayne LaPierre's bizarre claim that looters "ran wild in south Brooklyn" after Hurricane Sandy — and some even used the Kings English.



"He's a f---ing idiot," said Steven Feinstein, 66, owner of Wilensky Hardware in Coney Island — one of the neighborhoods that LaPierre claimed Wednesday became a "hellish world" of apocalyptic violence. "He makes it sound like it was the 1970s around here. That's nonsense."



In a column in the Daily Caller, a conservative website, LaPierre reiterated his call for more gun ownership — and cited the storm's aftermath as a prime reason.



"There was no food, water or electricity," LaPierre wrote. "And if you wanted to walk several miles to get supplies, you better get back before dark, or you might not get home at all."



It sounded good. Too bad it's not true, said NYPD spokesman Paul Browne.



"(In) the 60th Precinct in Coney Island, it was hardly hell week — there were no murders, no rapes and no shootings," he said.



The same was true in the neighboring 61st Precinct, where there were no murders, rapes or shootings.



There was a big spike in burglaries, as criminals picked through abandoned homes, Browne said. But all other crime categories were down.



Shootings were down 17%. Rape was down 47%. Robberies were down 22%. Assaults were down 18%. Grand larceny was down 45%. And car thefts were down 22%.



Overall, crime fell by 25%.



And Browne delivered another inconvenient truth for the NRA man — the city actually went a record eight straight days without a single murder.



LaPierre also made the preposterous claim that Mayor Bloomberg "refused to allow the National Guard into the city to restore civil order because Guardsmen carry guns!"



City officials dismissed that claim as more NRA nonsense and said there were plenty of armed National Guardsmen in the city in the aftermath of Sandy.



"Wayne's world is a loopy place," said Bloomberg spokesman John McCarthy. "New York is the safest big city in the country — thanks in part to our strong gun laws — and in the aftermath of



Sandy, crime stayed at record lows. He should touch base with reality."



Rep. Joe Crowley, a Democrat who represents the area, invited LaPierre to "come see firsthand what New York City really looks like."



Even a crime victim said it didn't look that bad. "There was no food or water, but you could still walk the streets at night," said Ron Troyano, whose Joann's Discount Wines and Liquor store actually was looted during Sandy. He called the break-in an aberration. "There was a cop on every street corner," Troyano said. "It wasn't that bad."



Neighborhood residents conceded the area is no stranger to gun violenc, but said more guns, which is what the NRA is advocating, are not the answer.



"This isn't the Wild West," said Marty Bromberger, 71, of W. 22nd St. in Coney Island.



There was no immediate rebuttal from LaPierre, but in his column he insisted that all of America is in peril if President Obama succeeded in ramming through tough new gun-control measures.