New Jersey Nazi lover on the run: cops
The wife of a New Jersey Nazi is on the run after she assaulted her roommate, cops said.

Deborah Campbell, 30, remained at large Wednesday according to Hunterdon County authorities — two days after she took off following disputes with Bethanie Zito.

Both women have birthed little neo-Nazis with the notorious Heath Campbell, who lives with both baby mamas in Holland Township.

The Hitler lover with a total of nine kids from five different women lamented that the incident had been blown out of proportion and that Deborah’s warrant was the result of prejudice against Nazis.

Heath Campbell has appeared in court several times wearing a Nazi uniform. (nbc10.com )

“They argue about stuff all the time! They're like sisters,” Campbell said.

“Society thinks the Germans and the Nazis are bad people when really we're not. We're family oriented.”

Zito, 22, said that the incident Monday was a simple misunderstanding, and that no assault occurred. She’d just fallen down some stairs, she said.

Child welfare workers took Eva Lynn Patricia Braun two days after Bethanie Zito gave birth to her.

“We were trying to rush down the stairs to get cigarettes,” said Zito, Campbell’s ex. “I got clumsy and slid. Her elbow hit my eye.”

When cops arrived at the scene Deborah had already left. Zito did not wish to press charges but had injuries consistent with an assault, so police issued the warrant for Deborah’s arrest, according to the Hunterdon County Democrat.

The paper reported that cops had also been called to the residence Sunday about a related dispute between the two Nazi lovers.

Heath Campbell says Nazis are 'family oriented' and misunderstood. (Norman Y. Lono for New York Daily News)

Zito said she had no idea who alerted police.

Campbell and Zito said they hadn’t spoken with Deborah since the incident and had no idea where she is.

“First off, she doesn't read the newspaper so she doesn't know what's going on,” said Zito.

Heath Campbell and ex-girlfriend Bethanie Zito are pictured in more romantic times. Campbell has since reconciled with his wife, Deborah. Both women share an apartment with Campbell. (Norman Y. Lono for New York Daily News)

“Second, she probably would turn herself in if she knew.”

Campbell believed the latest trouble with the law was yet another example of a conspiracy against him.

“This government here is so against the word 'Naziism.' It's pathetic,” he said. “You can't breathe without them saying we're violent people and shouldn't have children.”

Heath and Deborah Campbell leave court in 2009. (Mike Derer/AP)

Campbell first made headlines in 2008 when he became outraged that a grocery store wouldn’t write “Happy Birthday Hitler” on a cake for his 3-year-old son, Adolf Hitler Campbell.

He’s lost custody of all his kids, often appearing in court wearing a Nazi uniform. Bethanie’s child, Eva Lynn Patricia Braun, was taken by child welfare workers two days after she was born in November.

Campbell conceded it was a little unorthodox for his wife and ex-girlfriend to live together. He said they often got in arguments, but the disputes would be familiar to any family.

“It’s a family thing...They do yarning together. Crochet and all that,” he said.

“We're all fighting for children. We don't need this garbage anymore.”

Hunterdon County Prosecutor Anthony Kearns would not comment further on the case, citing an ongoing investigation.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!