HOUSE COMMITTEE SAYS U.S. EMBASSY INGNORED WARNINGS
WASHINGTON, Oct. 3— The House Select Committee on Intelligence said today that officials responsible for security at the United States Embassy in Lebanon paid insufficient attention to warnings of potential terrorist attacks before the building was bombed last month.

The committee, in a report about the bombing that was approved by Republican and Democratic members, concluded that ''the probability of another vehicular bomb attack'' against United States installations in Lebanon was ''so unambiguous that there is no logical explanation for the lack of effective security'' at the embassy.

The committee reported that the United States has information implicating one terrorist group in the bombing. The committee did not identify the group but said, ''It may have received support from Iran'' and may be one of several organizations that use the name Islamic Holy War.

Report Disputes Reagan

The report, made public today as it was delivered to the Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., said, ''Intelligence portrayed a situation where those responsible for security at U.S. installations in Beirut - both in Washington and on the scene - should have been on full alert and should have taken every precaution possible to thwart just such an attack as occurred.''

The committee's conclusions differed from those of President Reagan and other Administration officials, who have said that adequate security steps were under way at the embassy when it was attacked.

Responding to the committee's report, the State Department said that its own investigation into the bombing had not been completed but that ''if there was negligence involved, we will find it.'' A department statement also defended security measures at the embassy, noting that they were 75 percent completed at the time of the bombing.

The 'Principal Concern'

The statement added, ''But our principal concern in dealing with the reality of terrorism is to protect our people adequately while performing embassy functions and not to allow these murderers to deter us from doing what is right and necessary to help bring peace to the Middle East.'' On Tuesday President Reagan, campaigning in Brownsville, Tex., said he accepted full responsibility for security at the embassy and added: ''We've had an investigation. There was no evidence of any carelessnes or anyone not performing their duty.''

Asked if he considered the case closed, Mr. Reagan said ''Yes.''

Mr. Reagan said it was difficult to prevent suicide terrorist attacks. ''How do you, without knowledge beforehand of what a target is going to be or why someone, who with no regard to who they kill, is going to kill themselves in an effort to do this,'' Mr. Reagan said.

The six-story embassy building in a suburb of East Beirut was heavily damaged on Sept. 20 in a car-bomb attack. Two Americans, 7 Lebanese employees of the embassy and 5 to 15 other Lebanese were killed, according to State Department figures, and many others were wounded when a van packed with explosives blew up in front of the embassy after it was driven through a guarded but open entrance at the north end of the street.

It was the third car-bomb attack against a United States post in Lebanon in the last 19 months.

A State Department team that investigated the bombing identified some lapses in security, including a failure to bar all traffic from the street leading to the embassy, but concluded in general that adequate steps were under way before the attack to defend the building.

Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic Presidential nominee, and other Democratic leaders have criticized Mr. Reagan and his Administration for not providing better security.

The intelligence committee said in its report that it was ''distressed that intelligence contributions were not given more attention'' by officials responsible for embassy security. 'Credible Reports' Cited

While noting that intelligence warnings were ''never specific as to time or place'' of potential attacks, the committee said the information ''provided adequate warning that attacks might occur, particularly in light of the overall situation in Beirut.''

The panel reported that there were ''credible reports'' in the months before the attack warning that terrorist groups, in particular Moslem fundamentalists with Iranian connections, were planning attacks against United States posts.

The State Department has said that the embassy was placed on a high state of alert on Sept. 8 when a Beirut news agency received a call from an unidentified man who warned that ''a vital United States interest'' in the Middle East would soon be attacked.

The caller said he was from Islamic Holy War, a terrorist group that took responsibility for attacks in 1983 against the American Embassy and the United States Marine barracks in Lebanon. The same organization said it was responsible for the car bombing last month.

The environment in Beirut, the committee said, ''has been so hostile to American officials and military personnel'' since the first car bombing of the American Embassy in April 1983 that ''it could well have been analogized to a war zone.''

''Common sense would have suggested that terrorists would continue to use vehicular bombs until such time as the U.S. was able to develop adequate defenses against such a threat,'' the report said. Defense Intelligence Report

In addition, the committee said, a security team from the Defense Intelligence Agency reported in July that the threat to American installations in the East Beirut area was ''exceedingly high.''

Nevertheless, the committee found, there was ''an overall intelligence community consensus'' that it would be safer to move American personnel from predominantly Moslem West Beirut to the new embassy near East Beirut at the end of July, even though security measures at the building were incomplete.

The committee also reported that it was satisfied with the way intelligence information about terroriost threats was analyzed and provided to security officers, noting that the system worked better than it had before the Marine garrison was attacked last year.