Rare Threat of Stroke at the Beauty Salon
THE position commonly used for shampooing at beauty salons, with the neck tipped far backward over the edge of a sink, can diminish the blood supply to the brain, sometimes precipitating strokes in older people, a new survey has found.

In today's issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association, Dr. Michael Weintraub described five women between the ages of 54 and 84 who developed serious neurological symptoms requiring hospitalization after shampoos at beauty parlors.

The patients suffered from a variety of complaints attributable to poor blood flow in arteries leading through the neck to the back of the brain, including severe dizziness, imbalance and facial numbness. Four out of five suffered strokes leading to permanent neurologic damage.

"In older people, neck motion beyond a certain degree can be extremely dangerous, particularly hyperextension and rotation," said Dr. Weintraub, chief of neurology at Phelps Memorial Hospital in North Tarrytown, N.Y., referring to backward arching and twisting.

He and others have suggested that patients receiving anesthesia or undergoing prolonged dental work may also be vulnerable, since they too have their necks arched back abnormally for prolonged periods. The effect on elderly men of getting a shampoo at a barber has not been studied. Chiropractic and Anesthesia Cases

"It's not a well-recognized problem, but I thinks it's very interesting and it does make a lot of sense anatomically," said Dr. John C. M. Brust, professor of neurology at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons. "It's been known that this could happen during chiropractic manipulations of the neck, and this is a variation on that theme."

A paper in the March issue of the journal Neurology described 10 patients who had strokes after anesthesia that were attributed to extreme neck positions. Anesthesiologists must often temporarily arch the neck far back to insert the tube that maintains lung function during surgery.

"Patients have their necks hyperextended and they can't complain of symptoms, so they may be in this position for hours," said Dr. Conrad Estol, a stroke expert at the Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases of Buenos Aires, the lead author of the Neurology paper.

He and Dr. Weintraub suggest that elderly people and professionals who care for them should avoid prolonged neck arching or twisting.

"This is not an epidemic," Dr. Estol said. "People have been getting shampoos for years. But at the same time, I would be cautious and avoid significant hyperextension, especially in elderly people. It is a small thing to do and it can avoid a potentially devastating situation." Neurologists' Recommendations

To prevent these rare but serious problems, Dr. Weintraub recommends that in older people the neck not be arched backward or twisted more than 15 degrees, particularly if the person has problems with arthritis in the neck or circulation to the brain. He suggests that beauty parlors consider shampooing elderly clients leaning forward, a position less likely to compress the arteries.

Dr. Estol recommends that doctors taking care of anesthetized or sedated patients take great care to make sure the neck is returned to a neutral position once breathing tubes have been put in place.

The arteries that feed the back of the brain, called the vertebral arteries, travel through canals in the bones of the upper spine. They are particularly vulnerable in the elderly, Dr. Weintraub said.

With aging, these crucial blood vessels become somewhat narrowed with debris, and the normally smooth bones that they run through develop jagged internal projections. When the neck is moved into an extreme position, the bones shift in relation to one another, and the bony spikes can compress or otherwise injure the already narrowed vessels.

In some cases the bones may interrupt the blood supply by actually tearing the vessel. In others, the compression of the vessel reduces flow to part of the brain, and clots may form in the stagnant blood. When the neck is returned to a more normal position and flow resumes, these clots may travel into the brain and block smaller vessels

In either case, the brain is temporarily deprived of adequate blood supply, and if the deprivation lasts long enough, the result is permanent damage or a stroke.