Obama has to confront the gangs
What about the gangs, Mr. President?

We know the equally tragic reason the president will use the city as a backdrop to pitch his gun-control agenda: More than 500 people were murdered in Chicago last year, more than any other city in the nation — and more than the number of coalition troops killed in Afghanistan in 2012.

Everyone in Chicago knows by now of the tragedy that likely prompted President Barack Obama's visit to the city Friday: the killing of 15-year-old honor student Hadiya Pendleton in a park last month.

A cross that reads "Stop Shooting" sits at 79th Street and Loomis Boulevard in Chicago in September. It was placed at the corner during a peace rally in a part of the Auburn Gresham neighborhood where two rival gang factions have been fighting. (Heather Charles, Tribune photo)

Three days before Hadiya's murder, seven people were killed in Chicago within 24 hours, the youngest a 16-year-old boy. The mother of one of those shot had already lost her three other children to gun violence.

Last year, 7-year-old Heaven Sutton was caught in a shooting and killed as she was selling candy and snow cones with her mother on the street outside her home.

In Chicago alone, more than 270 children have been killed since 2007.

The president will imply his proposed ban on "military-style" weapons, along with expanded background checks, will help curb the violence here in the murder capital of the United States.

But so far Obama has scarcely mentioned the one factor that lies behind Hadiya's murder and behind most of the killings in Chicago last year: gangs.

Although the president does not acknowledge the gangs' role as a major cause of the epidemic of violence, the FBI does.

The FBI estimated in 2011 that there are roughly 1.4 million active gang members in the U.S., an astonishing 40 percent increase from 2009.

These gangs, the FBI says, are responsible for "an average of 48 percent of violent crime in most jurisdictions, and much higher in others."

Chicago police estimate that roughly 80 percent of homicides in the city are gang-related. There are about 100,000 gang members here.

There's no avoiding the fact that black Americans especially suffer in the cycle of violence gangs help feed. Only 13 percent of the U.S. population is black, but this group accounts for half of all homicide victims nationwide. The homicide victimization rate for black males ages 18 to 24 is 19 times the national average.

But while gangs affect some populations disproportionately, they in fact show broad variation. There are Asian gangs, East African gangs, West African gangs, Caribbean gangs, Latin American gangs, Eastern European gangs and white supremacist gangs.