Citizenship is Voted For Robert E. Lee
The House should consider the living, said Representative. Elizabeth Holtzman, Democrat of Brooklyn. And Representative John Conyers Jr., a black Democrat from Michigan, scoffed that the resolution was nothing more than a bit of “Bicentennial fluff.”

The tale of Lee's effort to regain his citizenship is still clouded in mystery.

Scarcely months after surrendering to Ulysses S. Grant at Appomattox Court House, Va., on April 9,‐1865, Lee wrote a note to President Andrew Johnson, asking for a pardon ‘so that he could become a citizen again.

Grant recommended that th pardon be granted but note the absence of the necessary oath of allegiance. Lee was so notified.

That fall, the same day he became president of Washington College (now Washingtonand Lee University) in Lexington, Va.. Lee sought out a notary public and swore the following oath of allegiance:

I, Robert E. Lee, of Lexington, Virginia, do solemnly swear, in the presence of Almighty God, that I will henceforth faithfully support, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States and the union of the states thereunder, and that I will, in like manner, abide by and falthfully support all laws and proclamations which have been made during the existing rebellion with reference to the emancipation of slaves, so help me. God.”

For some reason, the oath of allegiance never reached President Johnson and was discovered only in 1970, buried among other Civil War records in the National Archives.

Lee died Oct. 12, 1870, still without citizenship and unable to hold any Federal or state office.

For years after his death, no effort was made to have his citizenship restored. But in 1957, Senator Homer Capehart, a Republican of Indiana, introduced a bill granting Lee full citizenship. The Capehart bill died in committee. And subsequent efforts by others likewise failed until this year.

Senator Harry F. Byrd, independent of Virginia, spearheaded the drive for Senate passage, and the Virginia delegation in the House united in pushing it through that body.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“If Robert E. Lee is not worthy of being a United States, citizen, then who is?” Representative M. Caldwell Butler, Republican of Virginia, asked ‘during House floor debate toduy.

Watching from the House gallery, the general's greatgrandson was beaming as the electronic tally board flashed the final vote: 407 to 10.

“He obviously wanted to be back as a citizen of the United States,” Mr. Lee commented later. The action, he said, “closes the historical chapter” in his great‐grandfather's life.

Joining Miss Holtzman and Mr. Conyers in voting against the resolution were two New York Democrats, Bella S. Abzug of Manhattan and James H. Scheuer of Brooklyn and Queens.

Also voting against were Robert M. Carr, Democrat of Michigan, Ronald V. Dellums, Augustus F. Hawkins, Fortney H. Stark and George Miller, Democrats of California, and one Republican, James M. Jef‐.. fords of Vermont.