Clintons to Repay $86,000 to Gift Givers of Last Year
WASHINGTON, Feb. 2 — After days of widespread criticism, former President Bill Clinton and Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that they would pay for $86,000 in gifts they received last year and that Mr. Clinton's presidential foundation would share the cost of his new office space in Midtown Manhattan.

The moves came as Mr. Clinton stepped up his defense of his pardon of the fugitive financier Marc Rich, who had been accused of one of the largest tax evasions in the nation's history. Among the gift-givers to be repaid is Denise Rich, Mr. Rich's ex-wife and an important Democratic campaign contributor who last year gave the Clintons two coffee tables and two chairs valued at $7,375.

The former first couple had been heavily criticized since leaving the White House after the disclosure that they received $190,000 in flatware, furnishings, art and other gifts from friends and admirers in Hollywood, New York and elsewhere — $86,000 of it during the last year of Mr. Clinton's presidency.

In a joint statement from the president's transition office, Mr. Clinton said they were paying for the gifts received last year to try to remove any suggestion of impropriety.

"To eliminate even the slightest question, we are taking the step of paying for gifts given to us in 2000," Mr. Clinton said in the statement.

Senator Clinton said separately in the statement that "I believe the step we are taking today reaffirms that I am fully committed to being the best senator I can possibly be for the people of New York."

A barrage of criticism about the gifts and the office overshadowed the Clintons' first weeks out of the White House and Mrs. Clinton's first days as the junior senator from New York. The gifts were portrayed — in newspaper editorials, by some of Mrs. Clinton's new Congressional colleagues, and on a special Thursday night edition of NBC's "Saturday Night Live" — as a last-minute effort to cash in on the presidency.

Her Senate spokesman, James E. Kennedy, said that the Clintons would write checks to each of the 27 donors whose gifts the Clintons took with them as they left the White House to furnish their new homes in Chappaqua, N.Y., and Washington.

The items include nearly $4,920 in china from the filmmaker Steven Spielberg and his wife, the actress Kate Capshaw; another $4,790 in china from the actress Mary Steenburgen and her husband, the actor Ted Danson; and flatware valued at $4,970 from Mr. and Mrs. Morris Pynoos of Beverly Hills, Calif., major donors to the Democratic Party.

The Clintons will keep — without reimbursing the givers — nearly $104,000 in gifts received before last year. "As have other presidents and their families before us, we received gifts over the course of our eight years in the White House and followed all the gift rules," Mr. Clinton said in the statement.

His decision to open his presidential offices on the 56th floor of the Carnegie Hall Tower at 152 West 57th St., which features sweeping views of Central Park, has been criticized by Republicans in Congress and even some of Mr. Clinton's friends. The offices will take up the entire floor, at an estimated annual rent of $650,000.

Speaking at an impromptu news conference on a sidewalk at Park Avenue and East 54th Street after a meeting nearby to discuss relief efforts for victims of the Indian earthquake, Mr. Clinton said his Presidential Library Foundation would pay part of the rent.

An aide later said the foundation's share would be $300,000 a year. That would reduce the public's share to a level roughly equal to the rent paid for former President Ronald Reagan's offices in Los Angeles.

Even so, Mr. Clinton wanted to make the point that he — and the public — had gotten a pretty good deal on the office space.

"The General Services Administration is charged with approving the lease; they tell us what the price is in Manhattan. Everybody knew it was more expensive than anything else," Mr. Clinton said. "They said the actual price I got was below a lot of the market prices in Manhattan and a decent price."

Saying that he did not want the taxpayers to shoulder the extra expense, Mr. Clinton said he would do part of his foundation work in the offices and allocate a percentage of that budget to the rent.

"I've got my staff working on it and we're going to work it out so that the taxpayers pay for the New York office on a square-foot basis is about what President Reagan pays, somewhere in that range," he said.

Mr. Clinton did not mention, though, that Mr. Reagan's $285,000 office costs for this year are the highest of any former president.

"I'm not going to let the taxpayer get gigged on this," Mr. Clinton said. "But, I mean, it's New York. I also pay higher taxes in New York and I'm glad to be here. But I don't want the taxpayer to get taken for a ride on the lease."

In Washington, Representative Ernest Istook, a Republican of Oklahoma who heads the House Appropriations subcommittee that handles the budget for former presidents, said Mr. Clinton's remarks today were "a step in the right direction" but that they "don't solve the problem."

"Even if he got people to donate $300,000 a year, he's still asking taxpayers to pay $400,000 every year for his presidential penthouse," Mr. Istook said. "At this point, I don't even know if the foundation has that much in their bank account for one year, much less for multiple years."

Mr. Clinton also defended his pardon of Mr. Rich, the commodities trader who has lived in Switzerland for 17 years while facing charges of mail fraud, racketeering, income tax evasion and trading oil with Iran in violation of a trade embargo. Mr. Rich's former wife, Denise, has given more than $1 million to the Clintons and Democratic causes.

Asked if Mr. Rich had been pardoned by political reasons, Mr. Clinton said, "Absolutely not."

He noted that he had pardoned "about as many people" as former President Reagan and "far fewer" than former Presidents Jimmy Carter and Gerald R. Ford.

Mr. Clinton said he pardoned Mr. Rich only on the condition that he "would waive all his defenses to the same sort of civil action the government took against everybody."

"If he presents himself for that, if I'm wrong and he shouldn't have been pardoned, the government can go against him like they could everybody else," Mr. Clinton said. "Otherwise, they would never have had the chance to do that, so in my view you get the best of both worlds here."