Hazy Records Helped Florida Gunman Buy Arms
JACKSONVILLE, Fla., June 19— The police said today that ballistics tests had confirmed what witnesses told them earlier: that the man who killed eight people at an automobile loan office Monday was the same man who killed two people in shootings over the weekend.

The authorities said they were also trying to determine how the 42-year-old gunman, James E. Pough, could have avoided being classified as a felon after pleading guilty in 1971 to an assault charge involving a fatal shooting.

Because he was technically not listed as a convicted felon, the authorities said today, Mr. Pough had little trouble obtaining weapons. They said he used a .30-caliber semiautomatic assault rifle in the spree in the auto-loan office and in the weekend shootings.

Facts, but Not Understanding

Investigators said the connections did not help them understand what led Mr. Pough to begin shooting in the offices of the General Motors Acceptance Corporation and, finally, to kill himself with a .38-caliber revolver.

Initially, the police had linked the Monday shooting, in which five people were wounded, to the repossession of Mr. Pough's car six months ago by the financing agency. But the weekend shootings, in which two people were wounded in addition to the two slain, seemed unrelated.

''That brings the number of people that he shot to 17,'' said Duval County Sheriff James E. McMillan. ''We can only speculate that he may have been wreaking havoc on all the people he had a grudge against.''

The last contact the General Motors Acceptance Corporation had with Mr. Pough about his overdue car loan was in March, G.M.A.C. officials said. The 1988 Pontiac was eventually repossessed.

Sheriff McMillan said Mr. Pough, a construction worker, had been linked to the other shootings by witnesses. Ballistic tests on the assault weapon he used at the finance office confirmed that the witnesses were right, the sheriff said.

Shootings Near Suspect's Home

The other shootings occurred late Saturday and early Sunday in the northside neighborhood where Mr. Pough lived, miles away from scene of the shooting Monday.

Mayor Thomas L. Hazouri today called the Monday slayings ''a nightmare'' and announced plans for a prayer vigil Friday at the convention center for the victims.

William Lovejoy, the president of G.M.A.C., flew here from Detroit to announce the establishment of a $100,000 fund to aid the victims and their families. The company has already begun to put together a team of counselors and financial and legal experts.

Voices on Phone Tape

The Associated Press today reported that voices of terrified office workers pleading for help can be heard on tape-recordings of 911-emergency calls to the police.

''He's got an AK-47 and he's killing everyone,'' a loan office employee whispered into the phone.

''He's shooting everyone, please come on,'' implored one man.

''All I know is he came in and starting shooting,'' said another voice.

The A.P. said Mr. Pough (pronounced PEW) was troubled by a failing marriage.

Debate on Gun Control

Legislators and experts on gun control began trying to assess what effect the shootings might have on efforts to strengthen gun-control laws in the state which, like much of the South, has historically had few, if any, restrictions.

''About 50 percent of the people here oppose stricter gun control, and about 50 percent favor it,'' said State Senator Jack Gordon, a longtime advocate of control legislation. ''Events like this do have some impact on public opinion.''

He cited the state's response last year to a series of shootings in which children killed or wounded other children with their parents' weapons. The Legislature passed a bill making parents criminally liable in such situations.

Gary Gleck, an associate professor of criminology at Florida State University and an expert on efforts to control guns, said the shootings would probably spur legislative activity, but he said much of it would be ''political window dressing.''

The police have been unable to determine where Mr. Pough purchased the assault-type rifle.

Standing on a Corner

The police said Mr. Pough fatally shot a man and woman late Saturday night as they stood on a corner in the neighborhood where he lived. Later that night, a man matching the description of the husky construction worker shot a 17-year-old and an 18-year-old, wounding both.

The sheriff said the motive in the earlier shooting seemed to have been a sex-for-money deal that went bad. But in the second case, the gunman reportedly had simply asked the two youths for directions.

There were no indications that Mr. Pough was linked with drug dealing or drug use, said the sheriff, but he did have a history of arrests, the most serious involving murder charges in 1971. Because of a plea-bargain, Mr. Pough eventually pleaded guilty to aggravated assault and was placed on five years' probation.

But in a gesture of leniency, perhaps motivated by Mr. Pough's claims of self-defense, the judgment of guilty was withheld by the court subject to the successful completion of probation, the sheriff said.

Because of this action, under state law he was not considered a felon barred from purchasing a handgun, the sheriff said. Police records indicate that he did purchase two guns - a .357 magnum and the .38-caliber revolver with which he took his own life.

Under Federal law, he should have been barred from purchasing a weapon because of the 1971 case. Mr. McMillan said he could not explain how the police failed to catch this in 1979 and 1986, when the two revolvers were purchased.

Judge Gave a Warning

The sheriff said the judge in the 1971 case, taking note of Mr. Pough's past violent behavior, specified in his findings that he should not ever be allowed to own a gun. That fact was unknown to the police until today, the sheriff said.

Mr. Pough's neighbors recalled the man most of them knew as a quiet person who kept a regular schedule. But some of them also described him as someone who readily showed anger, someone whose conversation was often full of bluster and rage.

''Pop was an all-right dude,'' said Vanessa Gadsden, 35, who said she had known him for the entire 10 years he had lived in the neighborhood. ''But you better not get him mad. Especially about things like money or his car.''

Photo: James E. Pough, who the police say killed eight people and wounded five before taking his own life in an automobile loan office in Jacksonville, Fla., Monday. (Agence France-Presse)