Books of The Times
TRUMP: The Art of the Deal. By Donald J. Trump with Tony Schwartz. Illustrated. 246 pages. Random House. $19.95. WHAT ''Trump: The Art of the Deal'' is about is how its author, the builder Donald J. Trump, is simply smarter than the rest of us. He's smarter than Barron Hilton of Hilton Hotels and Stephen A. Wynn of the Golden Nugget Hotel in Atlantic City and the people who run Holiday Inns and all the others he's beaten in the various deals he's made.

He's smarter than Mayor Koch, of whom Mr. Trump writes: ''Koch has achieved something quite miraculous. He's presided over an administration that is both pervasively corrupt and totally incompetent.'' He's smarter than the tenants of 100 Central Park South, who, by beating Mr. Trump in his attempt to have them evicted, forced him to make even more money out of Trump Parc than he would have had he succeeded in his original plans.

Well, maybe ''smarter'' isn't quite the word. He writes: ''More than anything else, I think deal-making is an ability you're born with. It's in the genes. I don't say that egotistically. It's not about being brilliant. It does take a certain intelligence, but mostly it's about instincts.'' Whatever it is, Mr. Trump has what it takes, and he's the first to say so.

In short, ''Trump'' is a display of the author's not inconsiderable ego. And he's got a lot to be egotistical about, particularly in the elemental terms he keeps track of such things. He's makes more money: ''. . . much more than I'll ever need,'' he writes. He builds higher buildings - the highest one in the world, if he can ever get approval for his development on Manhattan's Upper West Side.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Most impressively, he does these things with elegant simplicity. Mr. Trump's best-laid plans rarely gang agley, or so it would seem from the way he describes them here. In the opening chapter, ''Dealing: A Week in the Life,'' he recounts a typical week in his business routine. Monday consists of a dozen or so telephone conversations, two meetings, one deposition in a lawsuit and a request to his secretary for a can of tomato juice for lunch. Life at the top is uncluttered.