OLYMPICS: Barcelona '92; Yugoslavia Agrees to Terms Of Restricted Entry in Games
BARCELONA, Spain, July 22— Yugoslavia's uncertain participation in the Barcelona Olympics moved closer to resolution today when its national Olympic committee accepted a conditional invitation to attend the Games.

All that remains is formal agreement by the International Olympic Committee, which is expected to be announced on Thursday, along with a plan to have two republics once part of Yugoslavia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia, also participate. That would bring to at least 171 -- a record -- the number of countries and territories competing when the Games open on Saturday. In all likelihood, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia would compete as one team.

Juan Antonio Samaranch, the I.O.C. president, called Yugoslavia's acceptance a victory for the Olympic movement and predicted that the I.O.C. executive board would approve the arrangement unanimously after a final meeting Thursday morning. Guideline Set by U.N.

In effect, Yugoslavia agreed to terms set forth by the United Nations Security Council, whose recent sanctions against Yugoslavia as aggressor in the current Balkan war prevent other countries from allowing Yugoslavia to be represented in international competition.

Yugoslavia had intended to send a team of approximately 120 athletes to the Olympics, but under the restrictions, only those in individual events, about 60, will be admitted. They may not participate in opening or closing ceremonies nor in any other activity in which their nationality might draw recognition.

Excluded are Yugoslavia's team entries -- including those in water polo, men's and women's handball and women's basketball -- with the only exception being relay races in track. Yugoslavia's places in the other events will be filled by runner-up teams from qualifying tournaments.

The decision by Yugoslavia, now just the two republics of Serbia and Montenegro, came grudgingly after a meeting of several hours by representatives of the country's various sports federations. Wanted Everyone to Participate

Like the I.O.C., the national Olympic committee wanted to send all its athletes, and less than 24 hours before accepting, senior Yugoslav officials, angered with the United Nations restrictions, raised the possibility that they would decline to compete.

"I thought they would refuse to participate under any conditions," Boris Stankovic, an I.O.C. member from Belgrade, the Serbian capital, said earlier in the day. "But maybe they will change and take part."

Stankovic, the secretary general of the World Basketball Federation, said it was his understanding that in addressing the possibilities, the individual federations were split, predictably, between those representing athletes in mostly individual sports and those in team sports.

By early evening, it was clear the individual sports won the day, which confirmed Stankovic's earlier view that the team sports would ultimately recognize their untenable position and support the other federations.

"I'm sure they understand it's nothing against them," he said of the team sports. "It was just their desire to take part." Four New Board Members

The final day of I.O.C. meetings will also be devoted to election of four new members of the executive board, a group of 11 that sets virtually all major I.O.C. policies. The board is composed of Samaranch, four vice presidents and six others.

The vacancies are one vice president and three other board members although Kim Un Yong of South Korea, who joined the board in 1988, is expected to assume the vice presidency.

Until last year, the United States, the largest financial contributor to the Games through television and commercial contracts, had its customary two I.O.C. members, Robert Helmick, who was president of the United States Olympic Committee at the time and a member of the executive board, and Anita DeFrantz.

But when questions arose last year over his business relationships while president, Helmick resigned his U.S.O.C. and I.O.C. positions, leaving a major influence vacuum. DeFrantz, who had followed him onto the I.O.C. in 1986, had not yet reached a point where her voice carried much weight. Support for Pound of Canada

It is possible that not much has changed. As one of 11 candidates for the other vacancies, she is not necessarily considered a leading contender. She might not even win the support of the 15 I.O.C. members from the Americas. In a vote Tuesday night, they supported Richard Pound of Canada, a former I.O.C. vice president, over DeFrantz by 10-4 with one absentee.

A source familiar with the vote said that by "gentleman's agreement," the results mean that all 15 would vote for Pound to finish out the last year of Helmick's four-year term. That would ostensibly position him well for next year, when he would have the right to run for a four-year term. Pound, a 50-year-old lawyer from Montreal, has often been cited as a possible successor to Samaranch.

DeFrantz, a 39-year-old former Olympic medalist in rowing, would be free to run for either of the other positions, although one is virtually certain to go to one of the three candidates from Africa. Keba Mbaye of Senegal, a judge on the International Court and the only current African member, is the outgoing vice president.

The United States is still without a second I.O.C. member. That could also change on Thursday, but it is up to Samaranch alone. If he decides it is time, the likely replacement would be William Hybl, the Colorado Springs lawyer who volunteered to serve out Helmick's term as U.S.O.C. president, then step aside.

If the selection is postponed until next year, that is a clear sign Samaranch is unhappy with Hybl and three others nominated for consideration by the U.S.O.C. and that he prefers one of the alternatives proposed by people outside the official nominating process. The front-runner is considered to be William Payne, the president of the organizing committee for the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta.

Photo: Pedestrians stroll in downtown Barcelona, three days before the Olympics begin. The National Art Museum of Catalonia is in the background. (Barton Silverman/The New York Times)