Michael Brown Never Faced Serious Felony Charge, St. Louis Official’s Lawyer Says
The judge made no decision on whether to unseal records for lesser offenses, if any existed.

At the same time, Gov. Jay Nixon of Missouri lifted the executive orders that established a state of emergency and activated the National Guard, a sign that Ferguson has been slowly returning to normal after several weeks of unrest over the killing of Mr. Brown on Aug. 9. But the seemingly procedural move illustrated lingering tensions.

Some black leaders have been calling for Mr. Nixon to appoint a special prosecutor to handle the case of the Ferguson police officer, Darren Wilson, who shot Mr. Brown. But by lifting the executive orders, Mr. Nixon appeared to have stripped himself of the power to remove the official now handling the local investigation, Robert P. McCulloch, St. Louis County’s top prosecutor. Mr. McCulloch has a history of showing bias toward law enforcement in police shootings, some black leaders have said, noting that the prosecutor’s parents worked for the St. Louis police and that his father was shot and killed by a black man.

State officials suggested that the governor’s power to remove Mr. McCulloch was tied to the emergency declaration. “The expansive powers of a governor during a state of emergency are temporary, and end when the governor lifts the declaration of emergency,” a spokesman for the Missouri attorney general said in a statement.

Mr. McCulloch has said his office was handling the investigation and the presentation of evidence to a St. Louis County grand jury “in a fair, full and impartial manner.” Mr. Nixon had recently expressed support for Mr. McCulloch and said he wanted the two investigations into Mr. Brown’s death, one county and one federal, to move forward.

Organizers of a highway shutdown next week, aimed at pressuring Mr. Nixon to appoint a special prosecutor, said the governor’s move on Wednesday would attract more attention and protesters to their civil disobedience action. It is set for Wednesday afternoon on Interstate 70 at Hanley Road.