Man Said to Be Acting Head of New England Mob Is Held
BOSTON — The man federal authorities say was the acting head of the New England mob was arrested here Wednesday morning, and in a federal court appearance in Providence, R.I., later in the day pleaded not guilty to multiple counts including racketeering and conspiracy.

In a colorful indictment returned Tuesday and unsealed Wednesday, federal prosecutors allege that the man, Anthony DiNunzio, 53, became the acting boss of New England’s Cosa Nostra crime family in late 2009 and oversaw the organization’s extortion of Rhode Island strip clubs and other such businesses, demanding payments of $2,000 to $6,000 per month.

Photo

“Our indictment alleges that Mr. DiNunzio was an unscrupulous and intimidating leader of the New England L.C.N.,” said James Trusty, the head of the Justice Department’s organized crime unit, during a news conference.

It was the first time that the authorities had publicly identified Mr. DiNunzio as the leader of La Cosa Nostra. They say he spoke unambiguously of his role. According to the indictment, Mr. DiNunzio was recorded bragging that he would remain the boss if he went to jail and telling a member of New York’s Gambino crime family that he would be willing to bury uncooperative insubordinates alive.

“You and I get to watch you die in the ground,” Mr. DiNunzio is alleged to have said.

Mr. DiNunzio was detained in a social club in Boston’s North End neighborhood on Wednesday morning. He is the ninth person alleged to be a member of the New England Mafia to be charged in Rhode Island during an effort by law enforcement here to dismantle the mob. Six of them, including Luigi Manocchio, who is said to be the former boss of the New England Mafia, have entered into plea agreements.

Also named in the indictment were Albino Folcarelli and Theodore Cardillo

Mr. DiNunzio, whose brother, Carmen DiNunzio, is a former mob boss, has a formal detention hearing scheduled for May 3. Prosecutors requested that he remain in custody until then.