White House Says Putin Will Skip G-8 Meeting at Camp David
WASHINGTON — Russia’s newly inaugurated president, Vladimir V. Putin, will not attend a summit meeting of world leaders in Maryland next week, the White House said on Wednesday, postponing until June the much-anticipated first meeting of President Obama and Mr. Putin as the leaders of their respective countries.

The surprising White House announcement, which came after a telephone call between the men, serves to underscore what appears to be a difficult start to their relationship.

It comes two months after Mr. Putin was elected for a third time to the Russian presidency following a campaign during which he used strident anti-American language, at one point accusing Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton of trying to stoke political unrest in Russia.

After the election, the Obama administration debated how to respond, with some officials favoring strong condemnation of the results. The White House ultimately settled on a tempered statement, not directly congratulating Mr. Putin but saying that the United States looked forward to working with him. But Mr. Obama pointedly took several days to call Mr. Putin to congratulate him; by contrast, he called François Hollande within hours of his victory over Nicolas Sarkozy in the French presidential elections on Sunday.

Of course, the White House statement made no note of any of this. “In their May 9 telephone conversation, President Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin commemorated the occasion of Russia’s celebration of Victory in Europe day,” the statement said blandly, describing Wednesday’s phone call.

“Noting his responsibilities to finalize cabinet appointments in the new Russian government, President Putin expressed his regret that he would be unable to attend the G-8 Summit at Camp David on May 18-19. President Obama expressed his understanding of President Putin’s decision and welcomed the participation of Russian Prime Minister Medvedev at the G-8 Summit,” the statement said. Dmitri A. Medvedev was Mr. Putin’s predecessor as president, but did not run for re-election.

The White House said that Mr. Putin and Mr. Obama would meet next month at the next big meeting of world leaders, in Los Cabos, Mexico.

The Russian president’s decision to skip the summit meeting is particularly surprising because several Obama administration officials and European diplomats said the meeting was moved to the Camp David presidential retreat in Maryland to accommodate him. The meeting is to take place the day before a summit meeting in Chicago of leaders of NATO member countries, and American officials decided to hold the two meetings in separate places to avoid putting Mr. Putin in an awkward position, because he would not be attending the NATO meeting.

But on Wednesday, White House officials disputed that . “The president supported moving the summit to Camp David because he preferred having a more relaxed atmosphere to facilitate a candid discussion among world leaders,” said Benjamin Rhodes, the director for strategic communications at the National Security Council.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Putin served as Russia’s president for eight years, until 2008, when his second term ended; Mr. Medvedyev, who succeeded Mr. Putin as president, then appointed him prime minister, a position he held until he was once again elected president in March and succeeded Mr. Medvedev. Mr. Putin then named Mr. Medvedev prime minister.

The contrast between the two Russian leaders was underscored by the speech Mr. Putin gave Wednesday in Moscow commemorating the anniversary of the defeat of Nazi Germany.

For the past two years, Mr. Medvedev went out of his way to celebrate the alliance of Russia and the West against the Nazis. Speaking at a parade of high-stepping cadets and heavy weaponry through Red Square, Mr. Putin sounded a different tone, declaring Russia had “a great moral right” to the respect of other nations, particularly on matters of global security.

Mr. Putin seemed simultaneously to demand and appeal for respect from the West, saying Russia had earned it through its wartime sacrifices.

“Russia is consistent in its policy of strengthening security in the world,” he said. “We have a great moral right in taking this principled and firm stand, because it was our country that bore the brunt of the Nazi attack, met it with historic resistance, traversed immense hardships, determined the war’s outcome, routed the enemy and liberated the world’s peoples.”

Mr. Putin also saluted Western countries that fought against Germany, but he alluded to a criticism implicit in generations of Soviet textbooks, which held that the Allies delayed too long in entering the fight.

“Divisions between countries and their mutual suspicion and ideological disputes prevented them from being able to stop World War II,” he said. “Humanity paid a terrible cost for this, but in the end, the inevitable happened and responsibility and the collective determination to vanquish this evil finally triumphed.”