White House Confirms Pre-Election Warning to Russia Over Hacking
But for now the situation underscores the uncertainty around the world about the direction of American foreign policy and gives Mr. Putin the opportunity to exploit differences between the current president and his successor until Mr. Trump is inaugurated on Jan. 20. It is also raising the question of whether the Obama White House pushed back hard enough when American intelligence agencies concluded on Oct. 7 that “only Russia’s senior-most officials could have authorized these activities.”

James A. Lewis, a computer expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, dismissed the administration’s claim that it had deterred Russia’s hacking.

“It seems a little bold to claim this is a success for deterrence, since the Russians weren’t deterred from doing anything,” he said. “Their hacking work was mostly complete. The issue now is whether they will be deterred in the future, and the guessing is they will not. Strong private warnings aren’t enough to constitute deterrence.”

In fact, the Russians appear to have paid less of a price for their hacking around the election than North Korea did for its attack on Sony Pictures Entertainment in 2014. That attack melted down about 70 percent of Sony’s computers and servers at its studios, wreaking considerable damage, and embarrassed many Sony executives. It was in response to the release of a movie, “The Interview,” that imagined a C.I.A. plot to kill Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader.

After the Sony episode, the United States issued more sanctions against North Korea and encouraged China to limit the North’s internet access, all of which runs through Chinese switching centers. Many experts had expected the White House to follow a similar path with Russia.

Instead, the White House concluded that the warnings, and the unstated suggestion that the United States had the power to reach inside Russian networks and see the origin of attacks, might suffice. It is not clear if the administration plans any other actions against Russia before Mr. Obama’s departure from office, but that seems less and less likely.

The Oct. 31 warning did not deal with the hacking of the Democratic National Committee or Mr. Podesta’s account, which James R. Clapper Jr., the director of national intelligence, had previously said was conducted with the knowledge of the Russian leadership. Instead, it referred only to the concerns about hacking around the election process itself, and the fear it was originating from Russian territory, though it stopped short of saying it was a state-sponsored attack.