No Indictment in Shooting of 12-Year-Old Tamir Rice
To the Editor:

Re “Jurors Decline Charges in Death of Cleveland Boy” (front page, Dec. 29):

A 12-year-old boy playing with a pellet gun in a Cleveland park is shot and killed by a police officer within moments of the officer arriving at the scene. A grand jury, with the guiding hand of the county prosecutor, has now determined not to charge the police officer with a crime. However, this should be far from over.

The police officer in question once resigned from another police department after a “dangerous loss of composure” during a firearms training. Is that the kind of officer who should be making a split-second decision as to whether to shoot to kill? Did the failure of the officer or his partner to attempt to administer first aid for almost four minutes after the shooting exhibit a disregard for the boy’s life? Frankly, if this had been a white youth, would the situation have turned out differently?

Tamir Rice was admittedly large for his age. However, the telephone call that prompted the police to arrive cautioned that this was probably a juvenile with a fake gun. That information was, reportedly, not relayed to the police officers sent to the scene. Apparently, the police officers could not make the same assessment as the caller in the seconds before one of the officers, the one prone to a serious loss of composure while training, decided to shoot to kill.

We can argue about standards of reasonableness; however, there is nothing reasonable about a 12-year-old with a fake gun being shot to death in a park. I can remember playing with a cap pistol, albeit of the cowboy type, in a Queens playground as a boy. That was over 50 years ago, and I guess I was just lucky not to have been shot to death while playing with my gun. Times have changed somewhat, but children are still children.

BRUCE NEUMAN

Sag Harbor, N.Y.

To the Editor:

The Cuyahoga County prosecutor describes the death of Tamir Rice as “a perfect storm of human error.” I cannot recall one instance in which a prosecutor used such language for the death of a police officer. If someone who is not a police officer is charged in connection with the death of another, the courts are never so kind.

We have a different justice system for police officers, and it does not work.

KELITA SMITH

Santa Fe, N.M.