Walter Radermacher

Vice-President of the Federal Statistical Office in Germany



Mr. Walter Radermacher has been Vice-President of the Federal Statistical Office in Germany since 2003. He joined the Federal Statistical Office in 1978 and worked in different positions and statistical areas before his appointment as Vice-President: until 1990 in the service industry statistics and the land use statistics, from 1990 until 1998 development of environmental accounting, until 2000 he was head of the Organisation Division and until 2003 head of the Administration Department.

During his career, Mr. Radermacher has had teaching assignments in statistics and environmental economy at the specialised college of higher education (Fachhochschule) in Wiesbaden and the University of Lüneburg in Germany.

After studying business economics at the Universities of Aachen and Münster in Germany, he became a member of the academic staff of the University of Münster where he worked in the field of business mathematics (operations research) from 1975 until 1978.

Selection of publications with reference to indicators: Sustainable income: reflections on the valuation of nature in environmental-economic accounting (Statistical Journal of the United Nations ECE, Volume 11, 1994) – Environmental-economic accounting: how can it support decision-making (Global Monitoring of Terrestrial Ecosystems, edited by W. Schröder, O. Fränzle, H. Keune and P. Mandry, Berlin, 1996) – Goal functions, eco targets: the role of information in societies decisions processes, contribution to „Eco targets, goal functions and orientors“ (Publication of Salzau Workshop 1996) – Indicators, green accounting and environment statistics - information requirements for sustainable development (International Statistical Review, Volume 67, No. 3, 1999, International Statistical Institute) – GREENED national statistical and modelling procedures: the GREENSTAMP approach to the calculation of environmentally adjusted national income figures (Int. J. Sustainable Development, Volume 2, No. 1, 1999).