charles hugh smith-Obama Administration Proposes 2,300-Page "New Constitution"
Obama Administration Proposes 2,300-Page "New Constitution" (October 10, 2013)





The U.S. Constitution leaves too many areas open to interpretation; a New Constituion of 2,300 pages (+ 200 redacted secret pages) is the solution. The Obama Administration has proposed replacing the current U.S. Constitution (4,543 words, including the signatures with a 2,300-page "new Constitution" that in the words of an administration spokesperson, "clears up the gray areas in the current Constitution." The proposal was launched after the success of two recent 1,000+ page pieces of legislation, the Affordable Care Act and the Dodd-Frank financial reform act. An additional 200+ pages of the "new Constitution" are redacted due to the sensitive nature of the National Security-related amendments. Lobbyists from key industries were invited to contribute amendments to the new Constitution;" constitutional legal experts were also invited to submit improvements to the current law of the land. Some critics who have reviewed the 2,300 pages of the proposed "new Constitution" have stated that the document is impenetrable even to those with law degrees. Average citizens "will be unable to understand the laws that govern their lives." Other observers note that the complexity and length of legislation such as the Affordable Care Act and the Dodd-Frank financial reform act are already beyond the comprehension of all but a handful of experts. An administration spokesperson defended the proposed re-write on the grounds that "the new Constitution will provide the clarity that people want in their Constitution." NOTE: this is a parody/satire. Posts and email responses will be sporadic in October due to family commitments. Thank you for your understanding.





The Nearly Free University and The Emerging Economy:

The Revolution in Higher Education Reconnecting higher education, livelihoods and the economy With the soaring cost of higher education, has the value a college degree been turned upside down? College tuition and fees are up 1000% since 1980. Half of all recent college graduates are jobless or underemployed, revealing a deep disconnect between higher education and the job market. It is no surprise everyone is asking: Where is the return on investment? Is the assumption that higher education returns greater prosperity no longer true? And if this is the case, how does this impact you, your children and grandchildren?





We must thoroughly understand the twin revolutions now fundamentally changing our world: The true cost of higher education and an economy that seems to re-shape itself minute to minute. The Nearly Free University and the Emerging Economy clearly describes the underlying dynamics at work - and, more importantly, lays out a new low-cost model for higher education: how digital technology is enabling a revolution in higher education that dramatically lowers costs while expanding the opportunities for students of all ages. The Nearly Free University and the Emerging Economy provides clarity and optimism in a period of the greatest change our educational systems and society have seen, and offers everyone the tools needed to prosper in the Emerging Economy. Read the Foreword, first section and the Table of Contents.



print edition (list $20, now $18) Kindle edition: list $9.95



Things are falling apart--that is obvious. But why are they falling apart? The reasons are complex and global. Our economy and society have structural problems that cannot be solved by adding debt to debt. We are becoming poorer, not just from financial over-reach, but from fundamental forces that are not easy to identify. We will cover the five core reasons why things are falling apart:





2. Crony capitalism

3. Diminishing returns

4. Centralization

5. Technological, financial and demographic changes in our economy The reasons are complex and global. Our economy and society have structural problems that cannot be solved by adding debt to debt. We are becoming poorer, not just from financial over-reach, but from fundamental forces that are not easy to identify. We will cover the five core reasons why things are falling apart: 1. Debt and financialization2. Crony capitalism3. Diminishing returns4. Centralization5. Technological, financial and demographic changes in our economy Complex systems weakened by diminishing returns collapse under their own weight and are replaced by systems that are simpler, faster and affordable. If we cling to the old ways, our system will disintegrate. If we want sustainable prosperity rather than collapse, we must embrace a new model that is Decentralized, Adaptive, Transparent and Accountable (DATA). We are not powerless. Once we accept responsibility, we become powerful.

Kindle: $9.95 print: $24

NOTE: gifts/contributions are acknowledged in the order received. Your name and email remain confidential and will not be given to any other individual, company or agency. Thank you, Helen S.C ($10), for yet another much-appreciated generous contribution to this site-- I am greatly honored by your steadfast support and readership.

"This guy is THE leading visionary on reality. He routinely discusses things which no one else has talked about, yet, turn out to be quite relevant months later."

--Walt Howard, commenting about CHS on another blog.





Or send him coins, stamps or quatloos via mail--please request P.O. Box address. Subscribers ($5/mo) and contributors of $50 or more this year will receive a weekly email of exclusive (though not necessarily coherent) musings and amusings. At readers' request, there is also a $10/month option. What subscribers are saying about the Musings (Musings samples here): The "unsubscribe" link is for when you find the usual drivel here insufferable. Your readership is greatly appreciated with or without a donation.

All content, HTML coding, format design, design elements and images copyright © 2013 Charles Hugh Smith, All rights reserved in all media, unless otherwise credited or noted. I am honored if you link to this essay, or print a copy for your own use. Terms of Service:

All content on this blog is provided by Trewe LLC for informational purposes only. The owner of this blog makes no representations as to the accuracy or completeness of any information on this site or found by following any link on this site. The owner will not be liable for any errors or omissions in this information nor for the availability of this information. The owner will not be liable for any losses, injuries, or damages from the display or use of this information. These terms and conditions of use are subject to change at anytime and without notice.



blog My Books Archives Books/Films home