'Freeway Killer'? Or killers?
Fear gripped Southern California in the 1970s as the bodies of dozens of young men started turning up alongside freeways, some tortured, some mutilated and some bound.

So, many in law enforcement breathed a sigh of relief in June of 1980, when an unemployed Downey truck driver, William George Bonin, was arrested in Hollywood and linked to several unsolved murders.

Bonin was dubbed "The Freeway Killer," the nickname reporters had given to the killer responsible for the serial murders.

But as Bonin's case wound its way through the courts in Orange and Los Angeles counties, the bodies kept piling up.

There was someone else out there. More on that later.

•••

The Register is chronicling the most notorious crimes in OC history. We started with 50 cases, but readers suggested a couple of others that worthy of inclusion, so we have expanded the list. A different case is featured each day at www.ocregister.com/50cases – from the oldest to the most recent. We are also recapping these cases in weekly installments in "The Morning Read."

The seven most recent postings include:

1977: A congressman is convicted

As a conservative republican in conservative Orange County, Rep. Andrew J. Hinshaw had one of the safest seats in the House – until he was arrested and charged with accepting bribes from the Tandy Corporation in his previous job as Orange County assessor.

After a headline-making trial during which he was represented by two of the top lawyers of the day, Marshall Morgan and Robert Green, Hinshaw was convicted and sentenced to prison for one to 14 years. He served a year.

1976-78: A political kingmaker caught in the cookie jar

Dr. Louis Cella Jr. was an Orange County multimillionaire, a philanthropist, a political kingmaker and, eventually, a convict.

He was charged and convicted in federal court of tax evasion, Medicare fraud and conspiracy, and grand theft and Medi-Cal fraud in state court.

It was said that at one time he was instrumental is electing four of the five supervisors in Orange County, plus several other Democrats in state offices.

1977-79: Orange County's Super D goes to prison

Orange County Supervisor Ralph Diedrich (known as "Super D" for his larger-than-life persona as chairman of the Board of Supervisors) was indicted, tried and convicted of bribery and sentenced to jail for three years.

His jury deliberated for six days before finding that he accepted bribes from an Anaheim Hills development company in 1973, '74 and '75.

The verdicts were overturned by an appellate court, but later two felony counts were reinstated by the California Supreme Court. After exhausting all appeals, Diedrich began serving his prison term in 1982.

1977: Hare Krishna devotees plus Mafioso equals murder

Excommunicated followers of the Hare Krishna religious sect involved in a lucrative drug-smuggling enterprise hired three ex-Mafia thugs who were federally relocated witnesses to protect them.

When former Krishna Alexander Kulik was kidnapped for ransom in 1977, it led to the murder of Fountain Valley drug dealer and kidnapper Stephen John Bovan. He was gunned down outside the El Ranchito restaurant in Newport Beach on Oct. 22, 1977.

Three men with Mafia ties were convicted of second-degree murder in 1978 for their roles in the gangland-style shooting.

1979: An abortion gone bad

Dr. William Waddill, a prominent Huntington Harbour obstetrician, was charged with strangling a fetus delivered after an unsuccessful abortion on an 18-year-old high school student.

The frightened young woman had to push her way through throngs of protesters and glaring camera lights outside the Santa Ana courthouse to testify against Waddill in two headline-making trials that focused public attention on the abortion debate raging across the country.

Twice, Waddill was tried on murder charges. Twice, the jury deadlocked. Orange County Judge Byron K. McMillan ultimately dismissed the case against Waddill in 1979 after the second hung jury.

1979: A child-killing defendant becomes a serial-murder suspect

Rodney James Alcala has been in custody since his July 1979, when he was arrested on suspicion of kidnapping and murdering Robin Samsoe, a 12-year-old Huntington Beach girl. The blond ballet student was abducted as she was riding her bicycle home on June 20, 1979.

He was tried, convicted and sentenced to death twice, but both cases were reversed on appeal.

Before he could be tried a third time, he was linked by DNA evidence to the murders of four women in Los Angeles County in the late 1970s.

His third trial – now on five murder charges – is scheduled to get under way soon. Alcala, now 66, recently won court permission to serve as his own lawyer.

And 1980: The Freeway Killer

William George Bonin confessed to killing 21 people: an astounding and horrific total.

He lured the victims into his green van, where he sexually assaulted and strangled them. Their nude bodies were often found face down, dumped alongside freeways.

He was tried in both Los Angeles and Orange counties in the early 1980s and convicted of murdering 14 boys.

Bonin was executed by lethal injection Feb. 23, 1996, at San Quentin prison. He was the first O.C. killer to be executed since California reinstated capital punishment in the 1970s.

But many of the bodies attributed to "The Freeway Killer" were found before Bonin's crime spree began. And, after he was arrested, bodies continued to be dumped.

Detectives knew there was another serial killer out there, one who had amassed even more kills than Bonin.

To be continued next week.