Justice Dept. Escalates Inquiry on Global Sports Corruption
Among the specific sports marketing companies that prosecutors are scrutinizing, according to the subpoena, is Helios Partners, a firm that has lobbied global sports officials to award high-profile events to particular cities and countries. Helios helped Russia secure the 2014 Winter Olympics and the coming 2018 World Cup, before its acquisition in 2012 by the Amaury Group, a French media company.

American prosecutors are also specifically interested in Eugene’s successful bid for the track and field event, which the U.S.O.C. actively supported, and Doha’s successful effort to host the 2019 edition of that competition, which occurs every two years.

Abroad, the same competitions have drawn intense scrutiny. France’s national financial prosecutor’s office has been investigating the track and field governing body and its choices of Eugene and Doha. Track and field’s world governing body gave the 2021 event to Eugene without a bidding process. The BBC reported in June that the F.B.I. and the I.R.S. were investigating Eugene’s selection.

Lamine Diack, who ran the international track federation for 16 years and served as a longtime member of the I.O.C., has been detained in France since November 2015, accused of accepting bribes for covering up the doping violations of Russian athletes.

Connections to Mr. Diack and his son led the Brazilian authorities to arrest Carlos Arthur Nuzman, the head of Brazil’s Olympic committee, last fall amid suspicions that Rio de Janeiro’s successful bid to stage the 2016 Summer Games was helped by bribery to secure supportive votes from members of the I.O.C.

The wide net newly cast by American prosecutors suggests overlapping threads with the French investigation, but the Justice Department is also soliciting broader information, including about FIFA — suggesting that American authorities’ scrutiny of that organization, which figured prominently into a federal trial late last year, is far from over.

FIFA itself has sought to turn the page on its corruption scandal, emphasizing its status as a victim in the American case and its cooperation with investigators. Former officials were charged with an array of crimes, including racketeering conspiracy and fraud — the same issues central to the prosecutors’ continuing scrutiny.

FIFA, too, has a major competition scheduled to be held in Qatar: the 2022 World Cup. At the FIFA trial last year, new information emerged about alleged bribery that helped to steer that tournament to Qatar.