John Kasich Credits 1978 Victory to ‘Women Who Left Their Kitchens’
Video

FAIRFAX, Va. — Recalling his earliest days in politics on Monday, Gov. John Kasich of Ohio said that he first won election to the State Legislature thanks in large part to “women who left their kitchens” to campaign for him.

“How did I get elected? I didn’t have anybody for me,” he said at a town-hall-style forum at George Mason University. “We just got an army of people — and many women who left their kitchens to go out and go door to door and to put yard signs up for me, all the way back when, you know, things were different.”

Mr. Kasich was elected to the Ohio Senate in 1978, when he was 26.

“Now you call homes and everybody’s out working,” Mr. Kasich added. “But at that time, early days, it was an army of the women that really helped me to get elected to the State Senate.”

Later, a nursing student noted his earlier comment before asking him about his support for legislation stripping funding from Planned Parenthood in Ohio, which he signed on Sunday.

“First off,” the student said. “I want to say, your comment earlier about the women came out of the kitchen to support you — I’ll come to support you, but I won’t be coming out of the kitchen.”

“I gotcha, I gotcha,” Mr. Kasich said.

Mr. Kasich’s remark immediately drew criticism, and his campaign later issued a statement addressing his remark.

The Ohio Democratic Party issued a news release with the title, “Kasich Gives Don Draper a Run for His Money,” referring to the “Mad Men” character.

Dawn Laguens, an official with the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, called his comment “flat-out insulting” and said his “condescending attitude toward women needs to stop.”

And Ilyse Hogue, the president of Naral Pro-Choice America, said, “When I heard John Kasich’s latest offensive views on women and our rights, I almost dropped the casserole I was taking out of the oven!”

Hillary Clinton’s campaign also responded to his comment, posting on Twitter: “It’s 2016. A woman’s place is … wherever she wants it to be.”

Asked later Monday about the Twitter post by Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, Mr. Kasich told reporters, “I completely agree”

Before an event at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, Mr. Kasich said the town-hall-style meetings he now holds on the campaign trail used to be in kitchens and living rooms, and said women have played a large role in his political career. He noted that his campaign manager, his lone appointment to Ohio’s Supreme Court, and his lieutenant governor are all women.

“Everybody’s just got to relax,” Mr. Kasich said, adding that he was “not a scripted candidate.”

“I’m real,” he said, “and maybe sometimes I might say something that isn’t artfully said as well as it should be, but, you know, I’m kind of a real guy, and I think people want authenticity, and I’m going to continue to be authentic, and every once in a while I’ll have to go back and make sure people know what I really mean when I say something.”

Mr. Kasich, who has received less attention than some other Republican candidates, said the criticism on Monday suggested that “somebody’s listening out there” to him.

“So I’ll be a little bit more careful, but I’ll continue to operate, you know, on a high wire without a net,” he said, “and frankly I’d like to see everybody who’s running for president get out of the scripted role and start to be real and take questions.”