OECD iLibrary: Statistiques
30.3. Number of private vehicles per 100 inhabitants: Asia and Oceania 30.4. Number of private vehicles per 100 inhabitants: Europe 30.5. Number of private vehicles per 100 inhabitants: North America Transport activity generates pressures on the environment through air pollution and consumption of natural resources such as land and energy. In urban areas, motor vehicles are the main contributors to ground-level ozone, a major component of smog. The number of private vehicles per capita is the indicator most commonly used to set policy targets for integrating environmental objectives with transportation policies. The variation in the number of private vehicles per capita is large with OECD, ranging from around 8 vehicles per 100 inhabitants in Turkey to 70 in Denmark (the ranking among countries does not change when taking into account the relative weight of people under the driving age). Regional variations within countries are large as well. The largest variations occur in Canada (ranging from 36 to 88), Korea (from 16 to 66), the United States (from 18 to 62) and Japan (from 34 to 75). In these countries, with the exception of the United States, the large variation is due to one outlier region with a very high number of vehicles per capita - the Yukon Territory (Canada), Jeju (Korea) and Toukai (Japan). France, Greece, Mexico and the Slovak Republic also had one region with value much higher than the rest of the country. Ireland, Iceland, Belgium and the Netherlands displayed almost no regional variation (Figure 30.1). The correlation between the number of private vehicles per capita and the share of population by typology of region (PU, IN, PR) does not show a clear trend across OECD regions (Figure 30.2). The correlation is positive for urban regions in 13 countries out of the 25 considered and it is negative for rural regions in 13 countries. Definition Private vehicles are defined as the number of motor vehicles other than motorcycles, intended for the carriage of passengers and designed to seat no more than nine persons including the driver. The Spearman correlation coefficient measures the strength and direction of the relationship between two variables, in this case the number of private vehicle per capita and the share of population in predominantly urban (PU), intermediate (IN) or predominantly rural (PR) regions. A value close to zero means no relationship (see for formula). Source OECD Regional Database, http://dotstat/wbos/, theme: Regional Statistics. See for data sources and country related metadata. Reference years and territorial level 2005; TL2 Denmark and Iceland last available year 2003. No regional data available for New Zealand and Portugal. Further information OECD Key Environmental Indicators (2008). Figure notes Figure 30.2: For each country three correlations are run between the number of vehicles per capita and the share of regional population living in PU, IN and PR regions.

Indicator in PDF Figures 30.1. Range TL2 regional variation in the number of vehicles per 100 inhabitants, 2005 30.2. Spearman correlation between private vehicles and population share by regional type, 2005 (TL2)