Should homeless people be able to use food stamp benefits to buy hot food?
Igmar Rodas finds it ironic that he can dip into his $194 in monthly food stamp benefits for a frozen pizza from 7-Eleven to heat in the store’s microwave, but can’t use it to buy any hot food.

And forget about trying to prepare his own meals.

Homeless for two years, Rodas sleeps in his car in Santa Ana and has no means of doing any cooking, much less storing fresh groceries.

“You can get eggs, but that doesn’t do any good,” said Rodas, 44, an activist and co-founder of the Civic Center Roundtable, a grassroots group that advocates for the homeless in Santa Ana.

But Rodas and other homeless people in Orange County with food stamp benefits would be able to use their CalFresh EBT cards to buy meals at participating restaurants under a proposal that county officials are being urged to approve. Advocates want the county to enact the Restaurant Meals Program, an option available under the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), or CalFresh as it is called in California.

Susan Price, the county’s director of care coordination, recommended adoption of the Restaurant Meals Program in a presentation Tuesday to the Board of Supervisors that addressed Orange County’s homeless crisis.

Price, hired in May and often referred to informally as the county’s “homeless czar,” has met with members of a local coalition that supports the Restaurant Meals Program.

“It’s a good program for food security,” Price said in an interview.

Among its benefits, the report notes, the program has the potential to promote access to healthier food options and perhaps prevent food-borne illnesses “related to compromised access and storage food supplies.”

In addition to homeless people, the program would extend to elderly and disabled CalFresh recipients – populations that may have difficulty cooking meals for themselves or accessing grocery stores.

With a swipe of a plastic electronic benefit transfer card, eligible CalFresh recipients could purchase hot prepared food at participating restaurants.

If approved, Orange County would join eight other California counties in the Restaurant Meals Program. San Francisco County was the first in 2003; San Diego County is the most recent with a 2013 start. The program became so popular in Los Angeles County since its start there in 2005, the county froze the number of participating restaurants because resources were stretched thin.

Supporters include the county’s two food banks and the Orange County Food Access Coalition, the Santa Ana Business Council, and the Roman Catholic Diocese of Orange County.

The Social Services Agency compiled a report on the program in 2014 at the request of the Board of Supervisors. The agency estimated annual administrative costs at $250,000 and that it could take a year to put into effect. About 19,000 elderly, homeless or disabled Orange County residents were CalFresh recipients.

With the renewed push, social services staff have been updating its information on the program. But the agency will not be making a recommendation, said Elizabeth DenBleyker, social services public information officer, in an email.

Don Haylock, a homeless man who has lived at Santa Ana’s Civic Center for more than two decades, said he is a CalFresh recipient but rarely uses the benefit because of its limitations, including having a safe, clean place to keep food.

“I’m not living inside anywhere,” said Haylock, 66, who mostly relies on meals served by volunteer groups at the Civic Center. “I can’t store it.”

He has heard of the Restaurant Meals Program.

“I often wondered why they don’t have it here,” Haylock said. “I would like to go to Jack in the Box, McDonald’s and Burger King for my food. I don’t see why I shouldn’t be able to do that.”

One health-related concern about the Restaurant Meals Program: using the benefit to purchase fast food. San Diego County reached out to Subway sandwich shops to include as restaurant participants for that very reason, said Jessica Bartholow, policy advocate with the Western Center on Law and Poverty.

Some homeless advocates have been lobbying Orange County for years.

Mohammed Aly, a community organizer and aspiring public interest attorney in Santa Ana, has led the current effort. Recently graduated from UC San Diego and waiting on the results of his bar exam, Aly compiled much of the research presented to Price.

Aly’s work on establishing the Restaurant Meals Program in Orange County dates back to 2011, when he was attending Orange Coast College and headed a campus chapter of Amnesty International. Aly said he was inspired by the previous efforts of Dwight Smith at the Catholic Worker’s Isaiah House shelter in Santa Ana.

Aly, 27, started a Restaurant Meals Program Facebook page and earlier this year launched a Change.org petition. The online petition, aimed at county supervisors, so far has received about two-thirds of the 200 signatures Aly is seeking.

“All we’ve asked the Social Services Agency to do is put it forward to the Board of Supervisors,” said Aly, who coaches speech and debate part time at Orange Coast College while waiting for the results of his bar exam.

“When they do, I believe the merit of the program will speak for itself.”

The emphasis may be on giving homeless people with CalFresh benefits more options, but the potential impact is much wider because the program applies equally to the elderly and the disabled, said Mark Lowry, longtime director of OC Food Bank operated by Community Action Partnership in Garden Grove.

“That’s almost been lost in all of this,” Lowry said. “It’s a good reason to do it because it’s going to help homeless street people. It’s an even better idea because it will also help seniors and disabled persons.”

With a recent change in state law, it also could benefit struggling college students.

In September, Gov. Jerry Brown signed AB 1747, a bill to help reduce hunger on California college campuses. The bill requires campus food facilities to apply to join the program if it is an option in the counties where they are located.

Lowry, the food bank director, believes the timing is right to bring the Restaurant Meals Program to Orange County.

“I think very clearly now it’s an idea whose time has come,” Lowry said. “There’s more attention now than five years ago on homelessness, and specifically in the Civic Center.”

Contact the writer: 714-796-7793 or twalker@ocregister.com or on Twitter @TellTheresa