Organisation of The Islamic Conference
23/12/2010

Prof. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, Secretary General of the Organization of the Islamic Conference expressed his satisfaction with the Security Council’s resolution to lift the sanctions imposed on the Republic of Iraq since 1990.... more



23/12/2010

The Secretary General of the OIC Prof. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu has today, 22 December 2010 received in audience at the General Secretariat, H. E. Mr. Aleksandr Semeshko, Ambassador of the Republic of Belarus to the United Arab Emirates.... more



22/12/2010

The Secretary General of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) extended letters to the Foreign Ministers of the UN Security Council Permanent Member States to draw their attention to the threats facing the Aqsa Holy Mosque which put in peril the safety of its premises, stating that the OIC considers the Holy Aqsa Mosque a red line and that Israel, the occupying power, is fully responsible for any outcome which may be brought about by any prejudice to its safety. He also called on them to prevent Israel’s persistence in its aggressions and to allow Islamic Endowments to implement the required maintenance works in the mosque.... more



21/12/2010

The Secretary General of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) Prof Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu has welcomed the formation and subsequent approval of the new Iraqi government today by the Parliament and congratulated Prime Minister Maliki and the members of his Cabinet. He expressed the hope that the new government, which reflects the broad based consensus among the Iraqi political groups, would further help strengthen national unity, stability, development and prosperity of the country.... more

The burgeoning collaboration between OIC and ECO came under focus in the message of His Excellency, Professor Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu to the 11th Summit of the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), which concluded its proceedings in Istanbul, Turkey on 23 December 2010.... more