How Obamacare affects women's health
Obamacare and its effect on women's health

Numerous Affordable Care Act provisions specifically benefit women, including guarantee of maternity coverage

Finnegan, who is self-employed and has a pre-existing medical condition, was having trouble finding health insurance at all, let alone a policy that would cover pregnancy and childbirth. So she was thrilled to discover that the plan she signed up for last fall under the Affordable Care Act includes maternity coverage.

Meg Finnegan thought she might never be able to afford to have a baby.

"When you don't have insurance, you're afraid of any life event that brings you to the hospital, for a good or a bad reason," said Finnegan, 37, an Evanston resident. "If I didn't have insurance, I wouldn't have a baby. All those doctor's appointments and tests, and possibly a high-risk delivery — how would you pay for it?"

A guarantee of maternity coverage — all new insurance policies must provide it — is just one of a basket of provisions in the federal health law that specifically benefit women. Other guaranteed services include preventive care, which must be covered with no out-of-pocket cost. For most plans, preventive care includes at least one annual "well-woman" visit, breast-feeding support, contraceptives and contraceptive counseling, annual mammograms and cervical cancer screening.

Women's health advocates also expect women to benefit more from some provisions in the law that apply to people of either sex.

For example, the expansion of Medicaid, as well as financial assistance in the form of tax credits and cost sharing, is expected to disproportionately benefit women, who are more likely than men to have low incomes. Insurers also are required to cover mental health screening and treatment, and women have higher rates of depression and other types of mental illness.

Kathy Waligora of EverThrive Illinois (formerly the Illinois Maternal and Child Health Coalition) said she considers the law "a huge victory for women."

"It creates new ways for everyone to access care with the extension of Medicaid and the establishment of the marketplace," she said, referring to the exchanges where new health insurance plans are sold. "But it disproportionately helps women."

Finnegan, who said she has a rare condition called Behcet's disease, is one of 129 million Americans with pre-existing conditions, which private policies generally did not cover before the health overhaul. Now, by law, insurers may not deny coverage or charge higher premiums on the basis of health status.

"I couldn't get insurance," said Finnegan, who owns TruFit Personal Training Studio in Evanston. "I tried five different companies. One offered me a policy for $850 a month with a huge deductible and terrible coverage — nothing related to my condition. But all my medical costs are related to that, so basically it meant no coverage."

At the same time, many insurance plans used to consider pregnancy, cesarean section, and even domestic violence and sexual abuse as pre-existing conditions.

Typically, women had to buy special insurance to cover prenatal care and childbirth, and then make sure they did not become pregnant before the end of the waiting period. Even if Finnegan had a rider that covered pregnancy, her Behcet's — a rare autoimmune disease characterized by inflammation of the blood vessels — puts her in a high-risk category requiring close monitoring with expensive scans. There was a good chance those tests would not have been covered before the health overhaul.