Racists Panic As Anonymous Starts Releasing Details Of KKK Members
The cyberbattle between the group of social justice hackers known as Anonymous and America’s most the notorious white supremacy group, the Ku Klux Klan, has reached a boiling point. Last week, Anonymous announced they had infiltrated a KKK member’s Twitter account and had retrieved the identities and contact information of over a thousand of his fellow racists and would release the bulk of the data on Thursday, November 5th, but began releasing small batches of data on Monday morning on the text-sharing website Pastebin. If you are curious, you may find the data here.

The International Business Times reports that the feud between the groups began during the Ferguson riots of 2014, when the KKK announced that it would use “lethal force” against black protesters in the streets. The shadowy members of Anonymous promptly hacked into the group’s main Twitter page and began releasing information about its members. The hackers released a public statement detailing their plans and the reasoning behind it, and it’s hard to argue with:

After closely observing so many of you for so very long, we feel confident that applying transparency to your organizational cells is the right, just, appropriate and only course of action. You are abhorrent. Criminal. You are more than extremists. You are more than a hate group. You operate much more like terrorists and you should be recognized as such. You are terrorists that hide your identities beneath sheets and infiltrate society on every level. The privacy of the Ku Klux Klan no longer exists in cyberspace. You’ve had blood on your hands for nearly 200 years. You continue to inflict civil rights violations, commit violent crimes and solicit others to commit violent criminal acts. You seek to intimidate and/or eliminate those that are different from you and those that you dislike by any means possible. You seek to terrorize anyone and anything that you feel is a threat to your narrow view of the “American way of life”. The last time we took your hoods off, you claimed to be misunderstood. Victimized. No. You are a damaged, dangerous, fragmented, splintered and amorphous collection of terroristic cells with a hate-based ideology and a well documented history of violence against the American public – assault, murder, terrorism. You play a deep, damaging and historically sinister and malevolent role in the United States. We understand you far too well.

The truth is finally coming out, and America will learn just who among us participate in the horrific rituals and share the hateful beliefs of the Ku Klux Klan.

EDITOR’S NOTE: We reported earlier that several US Senators and Mayors had been outed in a preliminary leak. That information is still unconfirmed and Anonymous has denied any connection with that information. Their release of data is taking place on November 5th.

Related

Comments