Robert 'LaVoy' Finicum yelled at police, 'Just shoot me,' witness says
Robert "LaVoy" Finicum, spokesman for the occupiers of the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge, was yelling "just shoot me" before he was shot and killed by police in a traffic stop, according to a woman at the scene.

Shawna Cox, who was arrested with four other occupiers on Tuesday, revealed new details about what happened at the roadblock on Tuesday. in a phone interview with Rick Koerber, who posted to the Periscope online video service.

In a telephone interview Sunday, Koerber said he runs a web-based talk show out of Northwest Utah. He said he had driven to Oregon in an attempt to interview Bundy.

"He wasn't there, but I got to know Shawna," he said. "I was not planning on an interview with her."

He later interviewed Shawna, and she asked it be released.

Koerber said the periscope link may expire in the next day, and suggested those who want to listen to the interview visit his site: www.freecapitalist.com

Cox described how Ryan Payne and Ryan Bundy were shot, what happened before Finicum was killed and how those arrested were transported to Portland.

On Friday, U.S. Magistrate Judge Stacie Beckerman ordered the release of Cox and another defendant in the case. Beckerman denied the release of five men accused of being key players in the takeover. The Multnomah County Jail's website shows that Cox was released Friday.

Koerber, who runs a Facebook page entitled "Free Capitalist," says on the video that he visited the refuge a day before the shooting. The recording was posted Saturday.

Cox, 59, of Kanab, Utah, was arrested Tuesday with Ryan Bundy and Ryan Payne, who were in the vehicle with her and Finicum. Ammon Bundy and Brian Cavalier, who were in another car, were also arrested at the scene. The group had left the wildlife refuge and were headed north to the Grant Day community of John Day for a meeting with residents.

Cox said Finicum was driving. She was in the back seat 18-year-old Victoria Sharp, who has not been charged. Bundy was in front. Payne was also in the vehicle. She said they hit

a

roadblock on Highway 395.

"We noticed the vehicles," Cox said, referring to Oregon State Police and FBI cars. "They flipped their lights on."

Payne told Finicum to slow down, Cox said.

Police vehicles pulled up behind them and Payne put his hands out the window, Cox said. She said he was shot in the wrist.

"They shot at him," Cox said. "He said they mean business."

Payne got out and he was taken into custody.

Cox, Sharp and Bundy stayed inside. Finicum said they could get out but the doors were locked, Cox said, and she wanted to stay with Sharp, who was petrified, she said.

"We slid down to the floor," Cox said.

She said Finicum was yelling, "We're going to see the sheriff, we're going to see the sheriff."

Grant County Sheriff Glenn Palmer was at the meeting in John Day, waiting for the occupiers.

The video shows that Finicum was stopped when Payne got out but then took off, speeding through a series of curves before arriving at a second police roadblock.

Cox said Finicum, 54, charged towards the roadblock and hit the brakes.

"We kind of slid through the snow," she said. "Then bullets started flying."

Finicum jumped out but Cox didn't see what happened because she was on the floor. She said she thought he was wearing a bulletproof vest.

"He was yelling, 'Just shoot me, just shoot me, just shoot me,' That's all he said. And then they did."

They were put in a van with the others and sat for hours. Later, each was put in a separate vehicle. They sped to Portland, she said, traveling 80 miles an hour in a convoy.

Police later arrested Joseph O'Shaughnessy and Peter Santilli. Jon Ritzheimer surrendered to police in Arizona. They've all been charged with conspiracy to interfere with a federal official, a felony.

Cox said she intends to keep fighting.

"We can't let this die," she said. "We still have to stand on the Constitution."

-- Lynne Terry