Kellogg's Peanut Flour Nutrition
Kellogg's Peanut Flour Details, Information and Facts



We know you have questions about changes we announced in March regarding updating the allergen labels on some Keebler and Austin sandwich cracker products. We’ve also seen unsubstantiated rumors about the change, so we’ve addressed many of the common myths you’ve asked us about below.

Myth: Kellogg is adding peanut flour across all of our products

Fact: In March, we told consumers that we would be changing the allergen statement on eight flavors of Austin and Keebler sandwich crackers:

Austin® Cheddar Cheese Cracker Sandwiches

Austin® Pepper Jack Cracker Sandwiches

Austin® Variety Pack Cracker Sandwiches

Austin® Grilled Cheese Cracker Sandwiches

Keebler® Club® & Cheddar Sandwich Crackers

Keebler® Cheese & Cheddar Sandwich Crackers

Keebler® Pepper Jack Sandwich Crackers

Keebler® Variety Pack Sandwich Crackers

Our announcement was only focused on these eight products, but based on the conversations we’ve had with parents, our team is working to find ways to make more sandwich crackers without peanut ingredients. We are starting by making our Austin Grilled Cheese Sandwich Crackers without peanut products. They will be available in stores around the country starting in September. As always, we remind consumers to read the package label prior to every purchase.

Myth: Kellogg added peanut flour to some Keebler and Austin sandwich crackers to avoid complying with the Food Safety Modernization Act (FSMA)

Fact: This is completely false. Food safety is a top priority for us at Kellogg. Our food safety standards are in full compliance with FSMA and FDA regulations issued under FSMA. These products all remain subject to FSMA and are not exempt from regulation.

FSMA requires food companies to include allergen control as part of their hazard analyses and to ensure allergen preventative controls are in place where appropriate. Kellogg does all of these things. We carefully identify and evaluate all food safety hazards, including hazards posed by allergens.

Guided by our robust hazard analysis, we have controls in place to prevent allergen cross-contact and contamination during shipping, receiving, storage, handling and use of all ingredients. We also have controls in place to ensure proper labeling of allergens on our foods. In many areas, our food safety standards even go above and beyond those required by the FDA.

Myth: Kellogg added peanut flour to the Apple Cobbler flavor of Nutri-Grain Fruit Crunch Granola Bars and didn’t tell anyone.

Fact: This is false. The information communicated by Snack Safely is inaccurate and was retracted. The “Fruit Crunch” Nutri-Grain bars mentioned in the blog post have been discontinued and are no longer on the market. Additionally, they always had peanut flour listed as an ingredient since they were introduced in 2012, and there is currently no new product or ingredient change.

Got a question? Give us a call at 1-800-962-1413 or email us by clicking here.