Gun surrender bill intended to prevent suicide moves forward
SALEM -- Intending to prevent suicides and shootings, state Senate lawmakers narrowly approved a bill Monday that would require a person to surrender his or her firearms if a judge rules the individual poses a threat to themself or people they live with.

Senate Bill 719 would establish a process for a judge to issue an "extreme risk protection order" if a person is found by clear and convincing evidence to pose a risk of suicide or threat to family members or roommates. If an order is issued, that person would have to surrender his or her deadly weapons within 24 hours to a law enforcement officer, gun dealer or third party.

Bill author Sen. Brian Boquist, R-Dallas, said the legislation is modeled after a Washington initiative, which passed in November with nearly 70 percent voter approval.

Boquist, a combat veteran, said Oregon lawmakers have struggled to prevent suicide, particularly by veterans.

He said three people he served with in the military committed suicide after returning home from combat. Boquist's stepson, Sethan Sprague, a veteran of the U.S. Navy, committed suicide in 2016. Boquist did not mention Sprague during Monday's debate.

Suicide is the eighth leading cause of death among Oregonians and is one of the state's "most persistent public health problems," according to a 2012 report from the Oregon Health Authority. Oregon suicide rates have been climbing, particularly among adolescents and the middle-aged, the report shows. A quarter of suicides are among veterans.

"This legislature has struggled, and struggled and struggled to figure out what we're going to do about that," Boquist said.

In a speech from the Senate floor, he addressed concerns from critics, some of whom he said had spread "bold face lies" about his bill. Detractors have said judges or law enforcement officers may use extreme protection orders to unlawfully confiscate a person's weapons or brand them as unstable.

"We're only trying to target those who may unfortunately want to commit suicide," Boquist said, "and who may murder their spouse who's in the house, their children who're in the house or their roommate."

He noted that similar laws exist in Connecticut and California and are credited by some as having saved lives.

"This isn't some broad, sweeping confiscation like you see in Breitbart News," Boquist said, referencing an April article from the online conservative news outlet with the headline "Republican state sen. pushing gun confiscation law in Oregon."

Though his Republican colleagues may have been unconvinced -- all voted against the bill -- none appeared to be unmoved.

"I'm not a veteran, but my family has been touched by suicide," Sen. Kim Thatcher, R-Keizer, said, choking up.

She voted against Boquist's bill, saying she worries some people who may relieve stress with target practice could have their firearms confiscated through legal standards she described as a "catchall" that could be abused.

"Shame on us. Shame on this legislative body that we're at this point," Sen. Alan Olsen, R-Canbdy, said, referencing Oregon's high suicide figures.

But he expressed doubts that Boquist's bill could do much good to prevent suicide.

"If a person wants to commit suicide, they will," Olsen said, before urging lawmakers to explore ways of expanding mental health treatment programs.

Sen. Dennis Linthicum, R-Klamath Falls, said he sees "good intentions" in Boquist's bill, but was concerned about what says is vague language that could lead to misuse by authorities.

Senate Bill 719 passed 17-11, mostly along party lines, with Boquist being the only Republican to vote "yes" and Sen. Betsy Johnson, of Scappoose, being the only Democrat to vote "no." The bill now heads to the House.

-- Gordon R. Friedman

GFriedman@Oregonian.com

503-221-8209; @GordonRFriedman