My Life, by Bill Clinton: on Principles & Values





Bill Clinton: Born in 1946 in Hope Arkansas to a widowed mother

My father met my mother at Tri- State Hospital in Shreveport, Louisiana, in 1943, when she was training to be a nurse. Two months later, they were married and he was off to war. He served in a motor pool in the invasion of Italy, repairing jeeps and tanks. After the war, he returned to Hope for Mother and they moved to Chicago, where he got back his old job as a salesman for the Manbee Equipment Company.

On May 17, 1946, [my father died in a traffic accident] drowned, only twenty-eight years old, married two years and eight months, only seven months of which he had spent with Mother.

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, First Chapter Jun 23, 2004

Bill Clinton: Father’s death in traffic accident drove Bill to achieve

When I was about 12, sitting on my uncle’s porch in Hope, a man walked up the steps, looked at me, & said, “You’re Bill Blythe’s son. You look just like him.“ I beamed for days.

My father left me with the feeling that I had to live for two people, and that if I did it well enough, somehow I could make up for the life he should have had. And his memory infused me, at a younger age than most, with a sense of my own mortality. The knowledge that I, too, could die young drove me both to try to drain the most out of every moment of life and to get on with the next big challenge. Even when I wasn’t sure where I was going, I was always in a hurry.

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, First Chapter Jun 23, 2004

Bill Clinton: Discovered a half-brother in 1993

My father’s other son was identified as Leon Ritzenthaler, a retired owner of a janitorial service, from northern California. He said he had written me during the ‘92 campaign but had received no reply. I got in touch with him and later met him & his wife, Judy. We had a happy visit and since then we’ve corresponded in holiday seasons. He and I look alike, his birth certificate says his father was mine, and I wish I’d known about him a long time ago.

Somewhere around this time, I also received information about a daughter, born Sharon Lee Blythe in Kansas City in 1941, to a woman my father later divorced. I’m sorry to say that, for whatever reason, I’ve never met her.

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, First Chapter Jun 23, 2004

Bill Clinton: Learn from Creation what one must be

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.235 Jun 21, 2004

Bill Clinton: Developed the New Democrat Philosophy for 1992 campaign

Change may be the only constant in today’s American economy [Human capital] is probably more important than physical capital now. A more constructive partnership between business and government is far more important than the dominance of either. As we try to solve problems which arise out of the internationalization of American life and the changes in our own population, cooperation in every area is far more important than conflict. We have to share responsibilities and opportunities--we’re going up or down together. Waste is going to be punished [especially corporate debt]. A strong America requires a resurgent sense of community.

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.326-7 Jun 21, 2004

Bill Clinton: Asks forgiveness from Monica and her family

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.810 Jun 21, 2004

Bill Clinton: Cites John 8:7 as defense against impeachment

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.846-7 Jun 21, 2004

Bill Clinton: Right wing ideology trumps compassionate conservatism

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.951 Jun 21, 2004

Bill Clinton: Bush believes in his way, but history favors Clinton’s

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.951 Jun 21, 2004

Evan Bayh: Liberal in conservative state; but less so than Birch Bayh

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p. 96-97 Jun 21, 2004

George Bush Sr.: 1992: Saddam foiled in plotting his assassination in Kuwait

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.525-526 Jun 21, 2004

Hillary Clinton: 1980s: Earned more at Rose Law than Bill did as Governor

One day [as Attorney General], I appeared at a committee hearing to speak against a measure. The room was packed with people representing interests who were for it, including Vince Foster. And Hillary. He had brought her along for the experience, not knowing I would be appearing for the other side. We just smiled at each other and did our jobs. Luckily, the Rose firm had gotten an opinion from the ABA saying it could hire the wife of the attorney general and setting out the steps necessary to avoid conflicts of interest. Hillary followed them to the letter. After I became governor, and she was a full partner at the Rose firm, she gave up her portion of the annual profits made from state bond business, legal work the firm had been doing since the 1940s.

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.244-246 Jun 21, 2004

Hillary Clinton: 1979 commodities deal: profit is not evidence of corruption

For example, the New York Times reported that, starting with a $1,000 investment, Hillary had made $100,000 in the commodities market in 1979, with the help of Jim Blair. Blair did help Hillary and a number of his other close friends in trading commodities, but she took her own risks, paid more than $18,000 in brokerage fees, and, following her own instincts, got out of the market before it dropped. A Republican reviewed all of Hillary's trades and said there was nothing wrong with them. It didn't matter. For years, the critics would refer to Hillary's commodity profit as prima facie evidence of corruption.

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.584-585 Jun 21, 2004

John Warner: 1994: Endorsed Democrat over Oliver North for Senate

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.630 Jun 21, 2004

Newt Gingrich: 1998: Proceeded with unpopular impeachment "because we can"

Later in November, Erskine Bowles had a very different conversation: Newt told Erskine that they were going to go forward with the impeachment despite the election results and the fact that many moderate Republicans didn't want to vote for it. When Erskine asked Newt why they would proceed with impeachment instead of other possible remedies such as censure or reprimand, the Speaker replied, "Because we can."

The right-wing Republicans who controlled the House believed that they had now paid for impeachment so they should just go on and do it before the new Congress came in. The right-wingers in the House caucus were seething over their defeat. Now they were going to seize back control of the Republican agenda through impeachment.

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.824-825 Jun 21, 2004

Ralph Nader: OpEd: Liberal trap: perfect is the enemy of the good

Al was going to win big states by large margins, but Bush was going to win more small rural states, and they had an advantage in the electoral college.

Gore did win [the popular vote], but the electoral college was in doubt. The race came down to Florida, after Gore won a narrow victory in New Mexico, one of several states that were closer than they would have been had Ralph Nader not been on the ballot.

New Hampshire went for Bush by a margin of just over 7,000 because Nader got 22,198 votes. Even worse, Nader received more than 90,000 votes in Florida, where Bush was hanging by a thread in an election contest that would drag on for more than a month.

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p.357-8&928-9 Jun 21, 2004

Bill Clinton: Father brought date to hospital where he met mother, a nurse

He met my mother at Tri-State Hospital in Shreveport, Louisiana, in 1943, when she was training to be a nurse. He brought a date with some kind of medical emergency into the ward where she was working, and they flirted while the other woman was being treated. The next day he sent the other woman flowers and Mother's heart sank. Then he called Mother for a date, explaining that he always sent flowers when he ended a relationship. Two months later, they were married and he was off to war.

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p. 4 Jun 1, 2004

Bill Clinton: Knew his father only through stories from family

On May 17, 1946, my father was driving from Chicago to Hope to fetch his wife. Late at night on Highway 60 outside of Sikeston, Missouri, he lost control of his car when the right front tire blew out. He was thrown into a drainage ditch. The ditch held three feet of water. When he was found, after a two-hour search, his hand was grasping a branch above the waterline. He had tried but failed to pull himself out. He drowned, only 28 years old.

That brief sketch is about all I ever really knew about my father. All my life I have been hungry to fill in the blanks, clinging eagerly to every photo or story or scrap of paper that would tell me more of the man who gave me life.

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p. 4-5 Jun 1, 2004

Bill Clinton: Father had two children from three previous secret marriages

My father's other son was identified as Leon Ritzenthaler, a retired owner of a janitorial service, from northern California. I got in touch with him and later met him and his wife, Judy. Since then we've corresponded in holiday seasons. He and I look alike, his birth certificate says his father was mine, and I wish I'd known about him a long time ago.

Somewhere around this time, I also learned about Sharon Pettijohn, born Sharon Lee Blythe in Kansas City in 1941, to a woman my father later divorced. She sent copies of her birth certificate; her parents' marriage license; a photo of my father. I'm sorry to say that, for whatever reason, I've never met her.

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p. 5 Jun 1, 2004

Bill Clinton: Father's early death left me with sense of my own mortality

Source: My Life, by Bill Clinton, p. 7 Jun 1, 2004

Page last updated: Jan 01, 2013