Veteran's Day themed events set for Monday night's game
The Green Bay Packers’ Monday night game against the Minnesota Vikings is dedicated to showing appreciation to the U.S. Military through a variety of activities in recognition of Veteran’s Day.



Upon entering Lambeau Field fans will receive an American flag, compliments of the Wisconsin Army National Guard and Oshkosh Defense. Attendees will also take part in an in-stadium USAA card stunt to thank veterans and current military for their service.

“At Oshkosh Defense, we are inspired by the brave men and women who serve and protect our nation,” said John Urias, Oshkosh Corporation executive vice president and president of Oshkosh Defense. “We're honored to join the Green Bay Packers, the Wisconsin National Guard and football fans worldwide in thanking every Soldier, Sailor, Airman, Marine and Guardsman for their service, commitment and sacrifice.”



The USO of Wisconsin will be standing by with Oshkosh Defense in the parking lot on Monday to accept phone cards for the military. People can drop off phone calling cards to the USO reps at the Oshkosh Defense M-ATV, or can donate cash to be used to purchase cards for their "Operation Phone Home" efforts. If bringing cards, people are encouraged to get international cards, which provide the most reliable service for the military members.

Other military-themed activities scheduled include a large on-field flag with stars representing all military branches during the national anthem, military shout-outs on TundraVision, and a halftime show featuring the Wisconsin National Guard 132nd Army Band and fireworks display.



The Packers and WPS will also be recognizing and welcoming home 1st Lieutenant Infantry Officer Kent Gavin through Operation Fan Mail on-field prior to the national anthem. Gavin will be accompanied by his fiancée and her parents.



The national anthem will be performed by Steel Magnolia’s Meghan Linsey and Joshua Scott Jones.



Packers alumni Marco Rivera and Ken Stills will be recognized prior to team introductions and will also be in the Packers Pro Shop on Sunday, Nov. 13 signing autographs from 12:30 to 2 p.m. Rivera will be mingling with fans in the Tundra Tailgate Zone on gameday from 6 - 7 p.m. while Stills is in the Legends Club for suite and club seat ticket holders.



A full rundown of all Lambeau Field gameday information is available online at http://www.packers.com/gameday/gameday-information.html