George Zimmerman gun auction remains 'upcoming' with $100K opening bid
George Zimmerman's latest attempt to auction off the 9mm gun used to kill Trayvon Martin was in limbo Monday on UnitedGunGroup.com, which listed it as "upcoming."

The starting price for bidders was still $100,000 and the "buy it now" price remained at $500,000.

Zimmerman has been trying to sell the Kel-Tec PF-9 pistol since Wednesday, when he posted it on the gun-auction website, GunBroker.com.

The former Neighborhood Watch volunteer advertized it as the gun used in the February 2012 incident, saying the pistol "is the firearm that was used to defend my life and end the brutal attack from Trayvon Martin."

The auction listing quickly garnered international attention, leading GunBroker.com to pull the post just minutes before the sale was set to go live Thursday morning. The company later released a statement saying it wanted "no part in the listing on our web site or in any of the publicity it is receiving."

The final day of trial, closing arguments and jury verdict in the murder trial of George Zimmerman in the shooting death of Trayvon Martin in Sanford, Fla. Complete George Zimmerman Trial coverage

Later that afternoon, Zimmerman confirmed to the Orlando Sentinel that he had reposted the gun on a different site – UnitedGunGroup.com.

The listing looked almost exactly the same, describing the gun as an "American firearm icon" and a piece of history. It had a starting bid of $5,000 and went live immediately.

But soon after word got out about the new auction, the website crashed and was down most of Thursday evening.

When it came back up Friday morning, numerous bogus bidders had raised the price to more than $65 million.

United Gun Group released a statement that afternoon saying it is a "pro-2nd Amendment platform for law-abiding citizen to exercise their constitutional rights."

And as long as no laws are broken, the company will allow "members to use any of the available features."

"While not always popular, this is where we stand," the statement reads."

Zimmerman was acquitted 2013 of second-degree murder after killing Martin, an unarmed black 17-year-old during a struggle in a Sanford neighborhood. Zimmerman said he was defending himself when he shot the teen.

sallen@orlandosentinel.com or 407-420-5417