Latest from the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM), based on information received as of 19:30, 18 August 2017
This report is for the media and the general public

The SMM recorded fewer ceasefire violations in both Donetsk and Luhansk regions, however more explosions in Luhansk region, compared with the previous reporting period. The SMM continued monitoring the Zolote and Stanytsia Luhanska disengagement areas and recorded ceasefire violations near the Zolote disengagement area. Its access there and elsewhere remained restricted, including in Verkhnoshyrokivske.* The Mission saw weapons in violation of withdrawal lines in Stanytsia Luhanska. The SMM observed unexploded ordnance near Staromarivka and in the centre of Pikuzy. It again facilitated and monitored mine and unexploded ordnance clearance, co-ordinated by the Joint Centre for Control and Co-ordination, enabling the SMM to travel the M03 road between Svitlodarsk and Debaltseve. The Mission continued to facilitate and monitor repairs and maintenance to infrastructure in Shchastia, Popasna and Stanytsia Luhanska. It visited two border areas not under government control in Luhansk region. The SMM monitored a protest in Odessa.

In Donetsk region the SMM recorded fewer ceasefire violations,[1] including fewer explosions (about 70), compared with the previous reporting period (about 90 explosions).

On the evening of 17 August, while in “DPR”-controlled Donetsk city centre, in about one minute, the SMM heard 23 shots of small-arms fire 0.5-1km north-west.

On the evening of 17 August, while in government-controlled Svitlodarsk (57km north-east of Donetsk), in about three hours, the SMM heard almost 40 undetermined explosions and about 50 bursts of heavy-machine-gun fire, all 5-10km south-east. On 18 August, while in Svitlodarsk for about five hours, the SMM heard one undetermined explosion 6-8km south-east.

On the evening of 17 August, the SMM camera at the Donetsk Filtration Station (15km north of Donetsk) recorded three explosions assessed as impacts 2km south and, three hours later, it recorded, in sequence, one undetermined explosion, two projectiles in flight from east to west, one projectile from west to east, two projectiles from north-east to south-west, one projectile in vertical flight, two projectiles from south-west to north-east, one undetermined explosion, one outgoing explosion, one projectile from north-east to south-west and one projectile from west to east, all 2-4km south. On the night of 18 August, the same camera recorded two projectiles in flight from west to east and one undetermined explosion 2-3km south.

On the evening and night of 17-18 August, the SMM camera in Shyrokyne (20km east of Mariupol) recorded, in sequence, ten tracer rounds in flight from east to west, one tracer round from west to east, one tracer round from east to west, one tracer round from west to east, followed by aggregated totals of seven undetermined explosions, one outgoing explosion, one explosion assessed as an impact, two rocket-assisted projectiles in flight from west to east, 33 tracer rounds (20 from east to west and 13 from west to east) and five bursts from east to west, all at unknown distances north.

On 18 August, the SMM camera in government-controlled Avdiivka (17km north of Donetsk) recorded two explosions assessed as impacts 4-5km south-east. The same day, positioned in Avdiivka for about five hours, the SMM heard eight undetermined explosions 1-4km south-east.

In Luhansk region the SMM recorded fewer ceasefire violations, including, however, more explosions (about 115), compared with the previous reporting period (30 explosions).

On the evening and night of 17-18 August, while in government-controlled Popasna (69km west of Luhansk), the SMM heard about 70 explosions of infantry fighting vehicle (IFV) (BMP-1) cannon (73mm) fire, two explosions assessed as outgoing artillery rounds, three explosions assessed as impacts of mortar rounds, two shots of automatic-grenade-launcher fire and about 50 bursts of heavy-machine-gun fire, all 3-4km south-east, two explosions assessed as outgoing artillery rounds 10km south-east and two undetermined explosions 10km south-west. On 18 August, while in Popasna, the SMM heard five shots of small-arms fire 2km east.

On 18 August, positioned in “LPR”-controlled Holubivske (51km west of Luhansk), in 20 minutes, the SMM heard 15 undetermined explosions 7-10km north-west.

On 18 August, while in “LPR”-controlled Kadiivka (formerly Stakhanov, 50km west of Luhansk), in about five minutes, the SMM heard eight undetermined explosions 12-15km north-north-east.

The SMM followed up on reports of damage in residential areas caused by shelling. The SMM saw recent damage to a house at the eastern end of Akhmatova Street in “DPR”-controlled Pikuzy (formerly Kominternove, 23km north-east of Mariupol) – sections of the corrugated roof had collapsed into the house, cinder blocks of the western-facing wall had collapsed and there were scorch marks on the north-, east- and west-facing exterior walls of the house. The SMM assessed that the damage was caused by impacts of rounds from undetermined weapon systems; however it was unable to assess the direction of fire.

The SMM continued to monitor the disengagement process and to pursue full access to the disengagement areas near Stanytsia Luhanska (16km north-east of Luhansk), Zolote (60km west of Luhansk) and Petrivske (41km south of Donetsk), as foreseen in the Framework Decision of the Trilateral Contact Group relating to disengagement of forces and hardware of 21 September 2016. The SMM’s access remained restricted but the Mission was able to partially monitor them.*

On the evening of 17 August, the SMM camera in government-controlled Stanytsia Luhanska recorded one illumination flare from west to east 1.2km south, assessed as inside the disengagement area.

On the evening of 17 August, the SMM camera in government-controlled Zolote recorded one projectile in flight from north-west to south-east 3-5km east and three shots of small-arms fire 1.5km south-east, all assessed as outside the disengagement area.

On 18 August, positioned at the disengagement areas near Stanytsia Luhanska and Zolote, the SMM observed a calm situation.

The SMM continued to monitor the withdrawal of weapons, in implementation of the Package of Measures and its Addendum, as well as the Memorandum.

In violation of the respective withdrawal lines, in government controlled areas, on 17 August an SMM mid-range unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) spotted three stationary self-propelled howitzers (2S1 Gvozdika, 122mm) in the north-western outskirts of Stanytsia Luhanska.

The SMM observed the presence of armoured combat vehicles[2] in the security zone. In government-controlled areas, on 17 August, an SMM mid-range UAV spotted two stationary armoured personnel carriers (APC) (BTR-variant) and one probable IFV (BMP-variant) in the north-western outskirts of Stanytsia Luhanska. On 18 August, the SMM saw two stationary IFVs (BMP-2) in Starohnativka (51km south of Donetsk) and two stationary IFVs (one BTR-4 and one BRDM) and one automatic grenade launcher under camouflage netting in Makarove (19km north-east of Luhansk).

In areas not under government control, on 17 August the SMM saw seven stationary IFVs (BMP-1) in Nova Marivka (64km south of Donetsk), a truck towing an APC (MT-LB) in Kadiivka (formerly Stakhanov, 50km west of Luhansk) travelling south and tank (T-72) tracks on a road between Kadiivka and Kalynove (60km west of Luhansk).

The SMM continued to observe unexploded ordnance (UXO). Near a “DPR” checkpoint 2km east of government-controlled Staromarivka (62km south of Donetsk), a “DPR” member showed the SMM the remnants of a rocket-propelled grenade launcher (RPG-7) round which had bullet holes in its tail fin and its head. The SMM could not see a fuse. In addition, the SMM saw one of the five previously observed tail fins of mortar rounds embedded in the asphalt 130m east of the checkpoint, among other fragments of UXO. (See SMM Daily Report 24 July 2017).

The SMM saw that a previously observed tailfin of an 82mm mortar round sticking 2cm out of the asphalt between Akhmatovoi and Peremohy Streets in the centre of Pikuzy was still there and that no mine hazard signs had been erected. (See SMM Daily Report 13 August 2017).

The SMM facilitated and monitored the clearance of mines and UXO, co-ordinated by the Joint Centre for Control and Co-ordination (JCCC), of road M03 between Svitlodarsk and “DPR”-controlled Debaltseve (58km north-east of Donetsk), enabling the Mission to travel the road for the fourth time this year. (See SMM Daily Report 11 August 2017).

The SMM continued to facilitate and monitor repairs and maintenance, co-ordinated by the JCCC, to the ongoing works at the thermal power plant in government-controlled Shchastia, the Zolote-Popasna water pipeline in Popasna and water wells in Stanytsia Luhanska.

The SMM visited two border areas not under government control in Luhansk region. At the border crossing point near Voznesenivka (formerly Chervonopartyzansk, 65km south-east of Luhansk), in about one hour, the SMM saw 48 cars (26 with Russian Federation, 20 with Ukrainian and one with Georgian licence plates, and one with “LPR” plates) and 11 pedestrians (six men, three women and two children) in a queue to exit Ukraine and 19 cars (eight with Ukrainian and 11 with Russian Federation licence plates) and six pedestrians (three men and three women) enter Ukraine.

At the unstaffed pedestrian border crossing point in Verkhnoharasymivka (57km south-east of Luhansk), in about one hour and a half, the SMM saw eight people entering Ukraine and five people exiting.

On 17 August the SMM observed a protest outside the office of the movement “Council of Public Security” (CPS) in Odessa. The SMM saw a group of about 200 people (mostly men aged 16-40) which was led by the head of the Odessa regional branch of the political party “People’s Movement of Ukraine” (RUH), and comprised of people known to the SMM as members of RUH and the movement “Street Front”. Protesters told the SMM that RUH called the protest to denounce CPS as a criminal organization. The SMM saw people holding banners in Ukrainian language that read “Stop crime, do not spoil Odessa”. The SMM also saw a smaller group of about 50 people (mostly men aged 16-40) comprised of those known to the SMM as members of the movement CPS, together with people from Odessa Automaidan, and the groups Self-Defence and Marine Self-Defence. The SMM observed the presence of about 50 riot police and 25 police officers who formed a cordon to separate the two groups when they began exchanging insults. The protest lasted for about one hour and ended without further incidents.

The SMM continued monitoring in Lviv, Ivano-Frankivsk, Kyiv, Kherson, Kharkiv, Dnipro and Chernivtsi.

*Restrictions of the SMM’s freedom of movement or other impediments to fulfilment of its mandate

The SMM’s monitoring and freedom of movement are restricted by security hazards and threats, including risks posed by mines, UXO and other impediments – which vary from day to day. The SMM’s mandate provides for safe and secure access throughout Ukraine. All signatories of the Package of Measures have agreed on the need for this safe and secure access, that restriction of the SMM’s freedom of movement constitutes a violation, and on the need for rapid response to these violations. They have also agreed that the JCCC should contribute to such response and co-ordinate mine clearance. The SMM’s operations in Donetsk and Luhansk regions remained restricted following the fatal incident of 23 April near Pryshyb; these restrictions continued to limit the Mission’s observations; including at the disengagement area near Petrivske.

Denial of access:

Armed persons prevented an SMM patrol from proceeding east at an entry-exit checkpoint in “DPR”-controlled Verkhnoshyrokivske (formerly Oktiabr, 29km north-east of Mariupol). The SMM informed the JCCC.

Related to disengagement areas and mines/UXO:

The SMM was prevented from accessing areas in the Stanytsia Luhanska disengagement area, with the exception of the main road, due to the possible presence of mines and UXO. A Ukrainian Armed Forces officer at the JCCC told the SMM that no demining activities had taken place during the previous 24 hours in the area. The SMM did not consider it safe to proceed and informed the JCCC.

The possible presence of mines and UXO prevented the SMM from accessing secondary roads north of the Zolote disengagement area. At a checkpoint on the northern edge of the area a Ukrainian Armed Forces officer at the JCCC told the SMM that no demining had taken place over the previous 24 hours. The SMM informed the JCCC.

The possible presence of mines and UXO prevented the SMM from accessing secondary roads south of the Zolote disengagement area. Armed “LPR” members positioned on the southern side of the disengagement area told the SMM that no demining activity had been conducted in the area. The SMM did not consider it safe to proceed and informed the JCCC.

The SMM could not travel across the bridge in Shchastia due to the presence of mines. A Ukrainian Armed Forces officer at the JCCC told the SMM that mines on the road south of the bridge were still present. The SMM informed the JCCC.

Other impediments

While the SMM was following up on media reports of a civilian casualty at a hospital in “LPR”-controlled Dovzhansk (formerly Sverdlovsk, 60km south-east of Luhansk), medical staff told the Mission that they could not share any information without permission from the Head Doctor and the “LPR” “Ministry of Health”.

[1] For a complete breakdown of the ceasefire violations, please see the annexed table. During this reporting period the SMM camera at the Oktiabr mine (Donetsk) remained non-operational.

* Please see the section at the end of this report entitled “Restrictions of SMM’s freedom of movement or other impediments to fulfilment of its mandate”.

[2] This hardware is not proscribed by the provisions of the Minsk agreements on the withdrawal of weapons.