New PBS NewsHour/NPR/Marist Poll Finds Majority Believe Trump Response to Charlottesville ‘Weak,’ Fatal Car Rampage Act of ‘Domestic Terror’
WASHINGTON, DC (4pm, August 16, 2017) — A new PBS NewsHour/NPR/Marist Poll finds a majority of Americans believe President Trump’s response to race-fueled clashes in Charlottesville, Virginia to be “weak” and that the fatal car rampage against counter-protesters to be an act of domestic terror. Eighty-six percent of Americans disagree with the white supremacist rhetoric present in Charlottesville, and a majority report that race relations have worsened in the past year. The poll surveyed 1,125 adults in the U.S. from August 14 – August 15th, 2017 and was produced in partnership by the Marist College Institute for Public Opinion, NPR, and PBS NewsHour.

Toplines from the poll include:

President Trump on Charlottesville: More than half of African-Americans and Latinos believe President Trump’s response to deadly race-fueled clashes in Charlottesville, Virginia to be “inadequate.” 46 percent of white Americans also believe President Trump’s statements came up short.

Domestic Terror: A strong consensus, 67 percent, of Americans believe that the use of a car to plow into counter-protesters in Charlottesville, Virginia should be investigated as an act of domestic terror. Fifty-eight percent of Trump supporters agree the fatal car crash should be characterized in this way.

Confederate Statues and White Nationalism: Eighty-six percent of Americans condemn the rhetoric of the white supremacy movement, including that of neo-nazis, KKK members and the so-called alt-right.

Six in 10 Americans believe the statues honoring Confederate leaders should remain, with 67% of white Americans and 65% of Latinos recognizing the historical significance of such statues. African-Americans divide with 40 percent for the statue’s removal, and 44 against.

Racial Tensions in the Trump Era: 52 percent of Americans think race relations have worsened in the past year, and another 22 percent say they are unchanged and describe that as a bad thing.

President Trump as a Leader: Over half of Americans disapprove of how President Trump is performing as a leader — a number that has held steady since our last poll. Additionally, nearly two-thirds Americans doubt President Trump’s ability to lead the nation in an international crisis, such as a nuclear conflict with North Korea.

Topline results, national tables, and nature of sample accessible here.

PBS NewsHour reporting on the NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist Poll:

New poll: Majority of Americans unhappy with Trump’s response to Charlottesville

**All reference to poll data must source PBS NewsHour/NPR/Marist Poll**

Media Contact:

Nick Massella

nmassella@newshour.org

7039982176