BREAKING! Roy Moore’s Accuser Worked for Democratic Leaders and Is Actively Campaigning for Moore’s Opponent ⋆ Activist Mommy
Advertisement

We have just received information that one of the women accusing Alabama senatorial candidate Roy Moore of soliciting dates from her when she was a teenager and he was in his 30’s is not only a passionate progressive, but she has actually worked for the DNC and is actively campaigning for Moore’s opponent, Doug Jones.

Deborah Wesson Gibson, aka Debbie Gibson, was named in the Washington Post article accusing Moore, and social media evidence makes clear that she is a fervent supporter of Jones and Democrats in general, and has even worked for the DNC.

Wesson Gibson is a sign language interpreter, who has interpreted at rallies for both Joe Biden and Hillary Clinton.

She has also vocalized fervent support for Jones.

Also, of course, she is a vocal opponent of Roy Moore and is clearly dedicated to him losing:

This is not surprising, considering the timing of these wild stories of Moore courting and even sexually groping teenage girls when he was in his 30’s. Moore has been hated passionately by the left for decades, for his consistent dedication to biblical morality.

Consider how suspicious this is – a woman comes forward 39 years later with a vicious never-before-made accusation – and how is one suppose to defend oneself and prove it is a lie 39 years later? Welcome to politics in America.

The establishment doesn’t want Roy Moore, a man who can’t be bought or bribed, to pull up their political skirts and overturn their tables of corruption and greed! Roy Moore will win big! Buckle up RINOS…time to meet a real man!

Kayla Moore, Roy Moore’s wife, in an exclusive statement to The Activist Mommy yesterday, told us that “The Washington Post has been calling and harassing our friends and family, trying to find garbage. We’ve had people back home telling us they are getting phone calls and when they would tell them good things, the Washington Post would ask them if they knew anything bad on him.”

Well, her story continues to be corroborated, as witnesses have come forward saying the Washington Post, a paper that has officially endorsed Jones, has actually been bribing people to dig up dirt on Moore!

Go figure! This is exactly what Kayla claims has been happening.

Roy Moore had this to say about the fabricated campaign against him:

The Obama-Clinton Machine’s liberal media lapdogs just launched the most vicious and nasty round of attacks against me I’ve EVER faced!

We are in the midst of a spiritual battle with those who want to silence our message. The forces of evil will lie, cheat, steal –– even inflict physical harm –– if they believe it will silence and shut up Christian conservatives like you and me.

I believe you and I have a duty to stand up and fight back against the forces of evil waging an all-out war on our conservative values!

Our nation is at a crossroads right now — both spiritually and politically.

Our children and grandchildren’s futures are on the line.

So rest assured — I will NEVER GIVE UP the fight!

The Democrats always pull this stunt. Ever since they saw it work for the Clintons they’ve been trying it every chance they get! But they completely underestimate Roy Moore and the people of God.

This is a last-ditch, hail mary pass effort from the Democats to slander a man they’ve hated as long as he has held public office. This fabricated story can’t hold water for long!

This statesman is going through the fires of testing for the survival of this nation. Let us all pray for him and give him our most generous support right now. Visit RoyMoore.org now!!

Like a club or a sword or a sharp arrow is one who gives false testimony against a neighbor. (Proverbs 15:18)