Non-hydrogenated Oil Sprinkles
Paulaur Corporation manufactures Non-hydrogenated Sprinkles.

Otherwise known as NHO or NHA, Non-hydrogenated oil is simply the opposite of hydrogenated oil or trans-fat. Trans-fat is very dangerous to the human body and is among the leading causes of cardiovascular diseases such as arteriosclerosis, heart disease and stroke.

With this backdrop, the FDA has mandated that all manufacturers should use Non-hydrogenated oil as a measure to reduce the epidemic of cardiovascular diseases and improve the health of the American population.

What are Non-hydrogenated Oil Sprinkles?

Non-hydrogenated Sprinkles are manufactured by Paulaur Corporation. These are tasty toppings which come in a variety of colours and flavors, perfect for all your needs. With the elimination of trans-fat from the manufacturing process, our NHO Sprinkles are now even healthier. More information about NHO Sprinkles is available here.

Why Non-Hydrogenated Oil?

Hydrogenated oil or trans fat is a complex fat that the human body finds very difficult to break down. As a result it accumulates as bad cholesterol in the body, creating the perfect atmosphere for inflammation, leading to arteriosclerosis, heart disease, stroke, hypertension and other cardiovascular diseases.

FDA Requires Non-Hydrogenated Oils

The US government, through the FDA, now requires all manufacturers to only use Non-Hydrogenated Oils in their manufacturing processes. At Paulaur Corporation, we have complied with this requirement because we care about the health of all our consumers as much as we care about our business. As of August 1st, 2014, all our Sprinkles are free of hydrogenated oils! See our Non-hydrogenated Oil Sprinkles press release here.

Benefits of Non-hydrogenated Oil Sprinkles

NHO provides several benefits over its hydrogenized counterpart. These include:

• Prevents heart disease

• Rich in HDL or good cholesterol

• Easily metabolized by the human body

• Helps the body absorb fat soluble vitamins A, D, E and K

These are some of the many benefits you get from Non-hydrogenated Oil. And they are very important.

Paulaur Supplies Non Hydrogenated Oil (NHO) Sprinkles

So if you are looking for Non Hydrogenated Oil Sprinkles (NHO Sprinkles), Paulaur Corporation is the place to call. We manufacture and supply a vast variety of Non-hydrogenated Oil Sprinkles for all your needs. NHO Sprinkles are available in many colours and flavors. Click here for more information.

Related Search terms

Control No. 2384112