Ted Cruz: Americans Have No Right To Masturbate
Ted Cruz claims Americans do not have the right to stimulate their own genitals.

GOP presidential hopeful Ted Cruz is a dangerous Christian extremist, a theocrat who openly states that his loyalty is to the church, not the state. Earlier this year Cruz declared:

I’m a Christian first, American second…

Thus it should come as no surprise that as Texas solicitor general, a post he held from 2003 to 2008, Cruz defended Conservative Christian causes like the inclusion of “under God” in the Pledge of Allegiance, the display of the Ten Commandments on the grounds of the state capitol, and a ban on late-term abortions.

In addition, Cruz also defended a Texas ban on the sale of dildos and other sex toys, and in so doing made the absurd claim that Americans have no right to masturbate:

There is no substantive-due-process right to stimulate one’s genitals for non-medical purposes unrelated to procreation or outside of an interpersonal relationship.

Mother Jones reports that in 2007, Cruz, working on behalf of then-Attorney General Greg Abbott (who now is the governor), filed a 76-page brief with the US Court of Appeals, arguing that there is no “right to promote dildos, vibrators, and other obscene devices.”

The brief went on to compare the use of sex toys with “hiring a willing prostitute or engaging in consensual bigamy,” and it equated advertising these products with the commercial promotion of prostitution, declaring:

… that Texas in order to protect “public morals” had “police-power interests” in “discouraging prurient interests in sexual gratification, combating the commercial sale of sex, and protecting minors.” There was a “government” interest, it maintained, in “discouraging…autonomous sex.”

In perhaps the most noticeable line of the brief, Cruz goes on to argue that Americans have no right to masturbate:

There is no substantive-due-process right to stimulate one’s genitals for non-medical purposes unrelated to procreation or outside of an interpersonal relationship.

In a 2-1 decision issued in February 2008, the court of appeals rejected Cruz’s crazy anti-masturbation argument, and Cruz lost the case.

Craig Mazin, Ted Cruz’s freshman roommate at Princeton, offered a humorous perspective on Cruz’s anti-masturbation argument via Twitter:

Ted Cruz thinks people don’t have a right to “stimulate their genitals.” I was his college roommate. This would be a new belief of his. — Craig Mazin (@clmazin) April 13, 2016

(Ted Cruz thinks people don’t have a right to ‘stimulate their genitals.’ I was his college roommate. This would be a new belief of his.)

Bottom line: Ted Cruz is at once both a ridiculous clown and a dangerous Christian extremist who would deny Americans their right to masturbate. As such, he is unfit to be president of the U.S.

(H/T Mother Jones, Occupy Democrats, Addicting Info)