APPLE VALLEY: Deputies respond to reports of shots fired; no arrests made (UPDATE)
San Bernardino County sheriff's deputies and an FBI agent responded Sunday morning, March 27, to a report of gunshots in the rural Deep Creek Hot Springs area of Apple Valley.

While authorities found a group of men with firearms, they found no evidence that any crimes had been committed, according to a Sheriff's Department news release. No arrests were made.

Someone called 911 about 8:25 a.m. to report seeing five to seven "subjects wearing turbans" shooting various firearms and hearing more than 100 gunshots, the release said. Deputies later learned that the caller's description of the men was not accurate, and that one man was wearing a scarf.

Sgt. David Rodriguez - one of several officers who responded to the scene - said people shoot guns in the area "all the time" since part of it is in Bureau of Land Management territory - where you can shoot shotguns - and another part is in a portion of the San Bernardino National Forest where recreational shooting is permitted.

When deputies arrived, they could not find the group of men the caller was talking about, Rodriguez said. Eventually, they walked about a tenth of a mile away from the campsite to a group of 17 men carrying backpacks and other items.

The men were detained as the deputies and a local FBI agent searched through their things and interviewed them.

The men had handguns, a rifle and a shotgun, all of which were registered with the California Department of Justice except for the rifle. Rifles and shotguns do not require registration in California, Rodriguez said.

The men cooperated with the investigation, and none were found to have a criminal history, authorities said.

Deputies also contacted several hikers in the area, but none reported seeing the men shooting guns.

Rodriguez said deputies will not be doing any further investigation into the incident.

Sheriff's officials said anyone with information about the investigation may call them at 760-552-6800. Tipsters wishing to remain anonymous can call 1-800-782-7463 or go to www.wetip.com.