Franklin
Peppermint Patty and Franklin ice skate. Frnklin holds a hockey stick. Peppermint Patty says, "All right, Franklin, what do you think you're doing?!" Franklin winds up to shoot the puck and says, "Playing hockey! What does it look like?" Peppermint Patty replies, "It looks like you're in my way, that's what!" Peppermint Patty shouts, "I'm practicing for a figure skating competition

Franklin and Roy walk outside. Franklin says, "My mom and dad were going on a little vacation but they changed their minds." Franklin says, "Mom is kind of a worrier." Franklin says, "She says, what if they were driving along the freeway doing about seventy and suddenly something went wrong with the glove compartment?" As Roy pays for his movie ticket he says, "That is som

Charlie Brown and Snoopy stand ion line at the ticket booth. Franklin stands behind Snoopy. Charlie Brown says, "One, please." Linus and Lucy stand behind Franklin. Franklin reaches over snoopy and says, "One, please." Linus reaches over Snoopy and says, "One, please." Sally and Schroeder stand behind Lucy. Lucy reaches over Snoopy and says, "One, please." S

Peppermint Patty sits at her desk in school and says, "A science project?" Franklin sits in front of Peppermint Patty. Peppermint Patty frowns and says, "Oh, good grief! I hate science projects . . . I can never think of anything different . . ." Franklin says, "I'm going to do mine on the various kinds of metals in the earth and how each has affected the progress of mankind . . ."

Peppermint Patty sits on her bed and says into the telephone, "Hi, Franklin! About this 'War and Peace' we're supposed to read during vacation . . ." Peppermint Patty continues, "Why don't we sort of cooperate? You read 'War' . . . Marcie can read 'Peace.'" Franklin asks, "What will you read?" Peppermint Patty says, "'And'!"

Charlie Brown, Franklin and Snoopy stand at the wall. Franklin says, "My grandfather says his ambition is to be a perfect grandparent." Charlie Brown asks, "What does he call a perfect grandparent?" Franklin replies, "Somebody who's made at least one hole in one . ."

Charlie Brown kicks a football to Franklin. Charlie Brown says, "My grandmother and grandfather have been married for fifty years . . ." Franklin asks, "They're lucky, aren't they?" Charlie Brown replies, "Grandfather says it isn't luck . . It's skill!"

Franklin and Charlie Brown stand at the wall. Franklin says, "I hear your grampa just retired . . ." Franklin asks, "What does he do all day?" Charlie Brown replies, "Oh, he keeps busy . . ." Charlie Brown continues, "He spends the day looking for things he's misplaced . ."

Charlie Brown and Franklin lean on the wall. Franklin asks, "Does your grampa play much golf these days?" Charlie Brown answers, "He says he plays mostly in his head . . ." Franklin follows Charlie Brown. Charlie Brown says, "But he says the course is too narrow . ."

Peppermint Patty sits at her desk in school and sleeps. Peppermint Patty wears her notebook on her head. She says, "Oh, no!" Peppermint Patty continues to wear the notebook on her head. She says, "Who discovered what? Well, let me think . . . Yes, ma'am . . . It's my notebook . . It got sort of caught in my hair again . . ." Marcie sits behind Peppermint Patty. Peppermint P

Charlie Brown walks with Franklin. Charlie Brown asks, "Have you ever noticed how certain homes have distinct cooking odors?" Franklin asks, "You mean like garlic or spaghetti?" Franklin continues, "I know one kid's house that always smells like they've been cooking cabbage." Charlie Brown says, "Ours smells like tv dinners!"

Marcie, Peppermint Patty and Franklin sit in their school desks. Peppermint Patty says, "Yes, ma'am . . This is my report on the music concert . . It was very beautiful . . ." Peppermint Patty says, "It was the first time I ever heard a veal piccata . . ." Marcie whispers, "Bach Toccata." Peppermint Patty says, "Whatever."

Franklin stands between Marcie and a boy. He says, "Inscrutable?" Franklin says, "No, ma'am . . . I can't spell inscrutable." Franklin walks away and says, "You said, if I took part in the spelling bee, all I'd have to do is spell words . . ." Franklin sits at his desk and says, "You didn't say I had to spell 'em right!"

Charlie Brown and Franklin lean against a brick wall. Charlie Brown says, "Grampa wishes he had his old car back." He says, "When the mileage made a big change, it was fun to watch all the numbers on the odometer roll up.." He says, "He says that was his favorite program."

Linus, Charlie Brown, Franklin and Snoopy walk away from the movie theater. Linus says, "That was a good movie... I liked it.." Charlie says, ""A boy and his Faithful dog"." Franklin says, "I thought it was pretty realistic.." Snoopy thinks, "The dog was overly faithful.."

Charlie Brown and Franklin stand in line at a counter. Charlie Brown says, "My grampa says he's very disappointed . . He thought life would be better when he was mature . . ." Charlie Brown and Franklin walk away with ice cream cones. Franklin asks, "What happened?" Charlie Brown replies, "He says he went from maturity to old age in ten minutes!"

Marcie and Peppermint Patty sit at their school desks. Marcie says, "Whenever we have a test, I get so nervous I bite all my fingernails . ." Peppermint Patty says, "I usually chew on my hair . . ." Franklin says, "I nibble all the erasers off my pencils . . ." Peppermint Patty says, "You have a real cafeteria here, ma'am."

Peppermint Patty sits at her desk with her hands over her face. She says, "If she sees me, she'll call on me..." She closes her eyes and continues, "Please don't call on me!" "Please! Please!" With her head on the desk, she slouches in her chair behind Franklin. She says, "Psst! Don't move your head, Franklin..." She continues, "If she sees me, she'll call on me! Don't m

Franklin walks with Peppermint Patty and says, "I got six compliments today . . ." Peppermint Patty and Franklin walk across a log. Peppermint Patty replies, "Fantastic!" Peppermint Patty and Franklin walk in the grass. Peppermint Patty continues, "It's not often you can get six compliments in one day." Franklin adds, "Two of them were even sincere!"

Sally, Linus and Franklin stand in line. Sally asks, "Is there a lot of throwing up in this movie?" Sally continues, "I'm not going to pay good money just to watch some stupid actor throw up!" Sally and Linus stand in front of the ticket window. Sally says, "If I want to watch someone throw up, I can watch the kid who lives next door to us . . . He has the flu!" Linus walks

Charlie Brown and Snoopy stand on the pitcher's mound. Snoopy holds his supper dish in his mouth. Charlie Brown says, "Oh, no you don't!" Charlie Brown continues, "You get fed after the game, not before!" Snoopy walks away with the supper dish still in his mouth. Charlie Brown stands on the pitcher's mound and says, "I hate these salary disputes."

Peppermint Patty and Charlie Brown sit at the table. Peppermint Patty holds up a piece of paper and says, "I've worked out the baseball schedule for our two teams, Chuck . . ." Peppermint Patty slides the paper over to Charlie Brown and says, "Here, take a look at it, and see what you think . ." Charlie Brown reaches for the paper. Peppermint Patty smiles and says, "You tou

Charlie Brown sits in front of Lucy's psychiatric booth. He says, "Sometimes I ask myself questions . ." Charlie Brown continues, "Sometimes I ask myself, 'Is this your real life, or is this just a pilot film?'" Charlie Brown holds his arms out and asks, "Is my life a thirty-nine week series or is it a special?" Lucy replies, "Whatever it is, our ratings are down . . Five c

Sally lies in bed and says, "So here it is, Christmas Eve, but there'll be no sleigh bells outside my window tonight . ." Sally continues, "Why? Because I've totally rejected the concept of the fat guy in the red suit! For the first time in my life I feel free! For once I . . ." Sally sits up and listens. She says, "What's that? I thought I heard a sleigh bell . . ." Sally

Charlie Brown sits at the table and writes, "Dear Little Red-Haired Girl, Evening is coming on." Charlie Brown continues to write, "I wish it were snowing huge white flakes, and you and I were walking along holding hands and." Charlie Brown stops and looks at the paper. Charlie Brown crumples up the paper and throws it over his shoulder. He says, "A lot of great letters nev

Snoopy sits on the ground with a rope tied around his neck. Woodstock stands in front of him. Snoopy smiles and thinks, "Woodstock is going to rescue me . ." Woodstock climbs on the rope. Snoopy thinks, "Woodstock will have me untied in no time at all . . ." Woodstock struggles with the rope. Snoopy thinks, "Woodstock is going to untie me, and we're going to . . ." Woodstoc

Peppermint Patty runs along. Peppermint Patty is on the telephone: "Hey, Chuck, come on over, and see what my Dad gave me for my birthday.." She points: "Roses!" Charlie Brown stands behind her. He says, "Wow!" Peppermint Patty adds, "And you know what he said?" They face each other. "He said that I'm growing up fast, and soo I'll be a beautiful young lady, and all

Snoopy sits in the grass and turns his head. Lucy stands next to him and holds her hand out. Lucy says, "It's bad luck to turn away from a 'Beep.'" Lucy grabs Snoopy's nose and says, "Beep!" Snoopy thinks, "I didn't know that."

Linus stands in the wind. He sucks his thumb and holds his blanket. Linus' blanket is blown out of his hands. Linus runs. Linus stands next to the doghouse. The blanket completely covers Snoopy. Snoopy thinks, "I hate to see fall come . . . It gets dark so early . ."

Linus stands behind Lucy and says, "I have a question." Linus asks, "What would happen if there were a beautiful and highly intelligent child up in heaven waiting to be born, and his or her parents decided that the two children they already had were enough?" Lucy says, "Your ignorance of theology and medicine is appalling!" Linus says, "I still think it's a good question .

Snoopy is wearing a baseball cap. He runs backwards, looking up at the sky. CLOMP! Snoopy stands up straight in the air and catches the ball in his mouth. Snoopy runs, his cap flying off his head. CLOMP! He jumps in the air and catches another ball. CLOMP! Snoopy catches the ball, hanging upside down the air. CLOMP! His cap flies off as he catches the ball.

Snoopy sits on the doghouse and sniffles. He thinks, "What do you do?" Snoopy lies on the doghouse and thinks, "What do you do when the girl-beagle you love more than anything is taken from you, and you know you'll never see her again as long as you live?" Snoopy sits up and thinks, "What do you do?" Snoopy eats and thinks, "Back to eating!"

Snoopy lies on the doghouse. Charlie Brown carries an envelope and says, "I have bad news for you." Charlie Brown continues, "That last letter you sent to your girl friend at the Daisy Hill Puppy Farm never reached her . . She's not there any more . . ." Charlie Brown explains, "She's been sold!" Snoopy screams and runs off the doghouse.

Snoopy lies on the doghouse and thinks, "That girl-beagle I met at the Daisy Hill Puppy Farm is really something." Snoopy sits up. He smiles and thinks, "I wonder why I liked her so much? I think it's because we teased each other . . ." Snoopy lies on his stomach and thinks, "We laughed a lot, and we teased each other . . ." Snoopy turns over and smiles. He thinks, "And the

Snoopy sticks his tongue out at Charlie Brown. Charlie Brown shouts, "Now you cut that out!" Snoopy walks away. Charlie Brown continues, "Just because you can't go running off to see that girl-beagle you met, you don't have to be so obnoxious!" Charlie Brown points and shouts, "By golly, you'd better start behaving yourself!" Snoopy drops the phone. Charlie Brown shouts, "A

Charlie Brown stands in front of Snoopy. Snoopy wears his supper dish on his head. Charlie Brown asks, "You want to go to the Daisy Hill Puppy Farm again?" Snoopy's ears stand up. Charlie Brown walks away and thinks, "No, I don't think you should . . . You've been out enough lately . . ." Snoopy kicks his supper dish and thinks, "Rats!" Snoopy sits on the ground and leans a

Charlie Brown stands next to Snoopy and talks into the phone. He says, "Hello? Is this the Daisy Hill Puppy Farm?" Charlie Brown continues, "I'm calling for a friend of mine . . . He wants to speak to one of your dogs . . No, he doesn't know her name . . Describe her?" Snoopy holds out his paws and smiles. Charlie Brown says, "She has very soft paws . . ."

Charlie Brown stands on the pitcher's mound. Lucy stands on the slope of the pitcher's mound. She holds out a piece of paper: "Here, Charlie Brown...Sign this petition!" "What's it for?" "Don't be so wishy-washy..just sign it!" He yells: "WANTING TO KNOW WHAT YOUR SIGNING IS NOT BEING WISHY-WASHY!" Lucy asks, "Why are you so crabby?" He looks up and wails, "YELLIN

The Literary Ace types, "Dear Sweetie, Have you missed me?" The Literary Ace continues to type, "I think about you all the time. I can hardly wait until Sunday morning. Don't forget . ." The Literary Ace thinks of hearts, hugs and kisses. Snoopy smiles and thinks, "I think I'm in love!"