Chasing the Sun
In 1966, Texas businessman, Rollin King, had an idea for an airline - a new kind of airline - one which could fly passengers cheaply and quickly across short distances. At the time, it was considered an outlandish idea. How could a no-frills airline succeed? But King approached the one man he figured might be crazy enough to help him - Herb Kelleher. Together, they started Southwest, a company which demonstrated just how successful an airline could be free from the restraint of federal price regulations. Southwest didn't cross state borders - it flew entirely within the state of Texas - and, thus, didn't have to follow the ticket prices mandated by the Civil Aeronautics Board. Southwest's drastically reduced fares helped the airline become an immediate hit. Other airlines had foreseen Southwest's potential for success. In fact, they tried to put a stop to the airline before it even got off the ground. Texas International, Braniff, and Continental Airlines all fought Southwest's arrival through litigation. It was Rollin King's attorney, Herb Kelleher, who argued Southwest's case. Kelleher won and Southwest finally took to the air in 1971.



Southwest Airlines began in 1971 with only four planes.

The new airline began with four planes and fewer than 70 employees. When it ran into financial trouble early on, Southwest was faced with a dilemma - either sell one of its planes or lay off some of its employees. Southwest made the unconventional choice - they sold the plane. In return, the airline requested their employees cut gate turn-arounds down to 15 minutes. The employees obliged, helping establish one of the friendliest management/labor relationships in the airline industry. Those good-natured feelings have everything to do with the man who's been with Southwest since its inception, Herb Kelleher. His down-to-earth, "everyman" demeanor has endeared him to the airline's employees. His zany antics have helped set the tone for the airline's offbeat culture. One outrageous incident was his arm-wrestling showdown with the CEO of Stevens Aviation in 1992. Both Stevens and Southwest were using the advertising tagline "Plane Smart." To settle the matter, Kelleher suggested an arm-wrestling competition with the winner keeping the rights to the slogan. Kelleher lost the match, but the event generated so much good will and publicity that Stevens let Southwest continue use of the tagline. Kelleher credits Southwest's employees for his company's success. He states he simply hires the best people, treats them with respect, and gives them the freedom to make decisions and to have fun just being themselves. On June 19, 2001, Kelleher stepped down from his day-to-day responsibilities as CEO and President of Southwest, but he continues to serve on its Board of Directors. In the 30 years since Rollin King began the airline with Kelleher, Southwest has grown from a regional upstart to the nation's fifth largest airline.