PhonepayPlus : Consumers : Frequently Asked Questions
FAQs

Below is a list of questions we're often asked. If you're new to PhonepayPlus, this might be a good place to start.

What are Phone Paid/Premium Rate Services?

Phone-paid services offer some form of content that is charged to your phone bill or pre-pay phone account. Services can be accessed by landline or mobile phone, fax, interactive TV (for example, by using the red button on the remote control) and PC (for example, in e-mails or on the internet). Most phone-paid services are run responsibly and don't cause concern.

The money paid by users for these services is shared between the phone network carrying the service and the organisation(s) providing the content.

Typical services include:

helplines (for example, for computer problems)

competitions

mobile ringtone and logo downloads

voting (such as Big Brother and The X Factor)

news and sports alerts

charitable giving

interactive games

information (for example, traffic updates)

adult entertainment

directory enquiries

Most services are advertised on either 09 dialling codes or, in the case of text services, four or five-digit short code numbers followed by a descriptive key word (for example, 11111 VOTE). Services offering adult entertainment can only be advertised on 0908, 0909 or 098 numbers and on mobile short code numbers beginning 69 or 89. Directory enquiry services are advertised on six-digit numbers beginning 118.

In some instances, such as interactive TV where you make ‘calls' by pressing the red button on the remote control, the phone number may not be shown. However, it should be made clear to you what the charge is and that it will appear on your bill.

Phone-paid / Premium Rate Services currently vary in cost from 10 pence to £1.50 per minute/call/text. Please note that your phone company (landline, cable or mobile) may also add a additional charge in addition to the advertised rate. Any additional charge will vary depending on your telephone company. You should check the cost of calling or texting Phone-paid / Premium Rate Services from your phone with your own telephone company.

I've seen a charge on my phone bill that I don't recognise - can you help?

If this number starts with 09 or 118, or is a mobile text shortcode (five or six-digits usually beginning 5, 6, 7 or 8), then PhonepayPlus can help.

You can use our online Number Checker to find out the name of the company that provides the number, their contact details and the cost of the service.

If you wish to log a complaint about a phone-paid service, you can call PhonepayPlus on 0800 500 212 (Mon-Fri, 8am-6pm) or fill in our online complaint form. You will need the number or text shortcode, and any other details you have about the service, in order to submit your complaint.

What if someone has made calls using my phone and I haven't given him/her permission - do I still have to pay?

We do receive complaints from people who have had unauthorised calls/texts made from their phone. In the first instance, we will put you in contact with the company that provided the service to see whether they can resolve the issue.

If you feel that the service was misleading and the person using the service didn't realise how much it would cost, then call us. We may wish to investigate the service.

PhonepayPlus encourages all consumers, especially young people, to get permission from the bill payer (or the person who tops up their mobile account) before using any phone-paid service.

If you wish to log a complaint about a phone-paid service, you can call PhonepayPlus on 0800 500 212 (Mon-Fri, 8am-6pm) or fill in our online complaint form. You will need the number or text shortcode, and any other details you have about the service, in order to submit your complaint.

What if I receive a text message and don't know who it's from?

If you receive a text message and don't know who it's from, don't delete it. Call your mobile company to see if they can give you any information on the sender and whether it cost you anything to receive it.

If you were charged for the text and don't think you signed up to receive it, then call PhonepayPlus on 0800 500 212 (Mon-Fri, 8am-6pm) or fill in our online complaint form. You will need the number that the text message came from and the content of it when you submit your complaint.

Advice on landline phone call charges

PhonepayPlus can help you with any question about or problem you've had with a premium rate service. All UK-based premium rate services must be advertised on '09' number types or mobile SMS/TEXT short codes. 'Adult' (sexually explicit) services start with 0908, 0909 or 098.

In addition to the advertised costs, calls to premium rate numbers made by landline phones may incur an additional charge. Any additional charge will vary depending on your telephone company. You should always check the cost of calling phone-paid from your phone with your own telephone company.

Advice on mobile phone call charges

Calls and texts made to phone-paid/using a mobile phone vary in cost depending on the mobile phone network you're using and your price plan. It's best to check the cost of calling or texting phone-paid/ from your phone with your telephone operator, before you do so.

What are SMS/text short codes?

These are normally four or five digit numbers. Often they begin with 5, 6, or 8 followed by a key word. For example: 81111 VOTE.

Before you sign up to an SMS/TEXT service, check that your handset is able to receive the service (for example not all handsets can receive or view videos).

Check whether you're signing up to a single (one off) text service with one single payment or to a subscription service where you will be billed on a regular basis (some ring tones operate this way, for example).

Companies offering subscription services must make it clear to you that you're signing up for a subscription service, and let you know:

how much each text you receive will cost,

how many texts you'll receive and

how you can stop the subscription.

The cost of SMS/TEXT services varies from network to network. However, typical costs for a single text message you'll receive range from 25p to £1.50 per message.

Phone-paid/Premium Rate SMS/TEXT Short Codes are allocated to service providers in accordance with a Code of Practice, administered by the Mobile Data Association.

How do I stop an SMS/text service?

You can unsubscribe from or stop any service that charges you for receiving texts (not sending them) by texting the word STOP to the SMS or TEXT Short Code number.

Make sure you only send the word ‘STOP'.

It doesn't matter if you use capital letters or lowercase.

If you are using two or more services from the same SMS/TEXT Short Code number, you'll need to send STOP ALL to each SMS/TEXT short code to unsubscribe from each services.

Can I get a refund?

PhonepayPlus can only order a company to pay a refund once we have completed an investigation and where refunds are agreed by the Board. The Board frequently agrees that refunds should be paid when a breach of the Code of Practice has occurred.

We will write to you when the investigation is complete informing you of the outcome of the adjudication and how you can receive your refund.

I tried voting/interacting on a popular TV show, but couldn't get through. Why?

Given the high volume of viewers and callers that some TV voting shows generate, it is possible for a very large number people to pick up the phone simultaneously when the onscreen announcement is made. Sometimes this can cause some callers to get an engaged tone for short periods of time immediately after an onscreen announcement; however, any congestion tends to clear quite quickly.

Television companies will always try to make sure that their voting windows are long enough for everyone who wants to vote as many times as they wish to.

But the other candidate's line is never engaged....is it a fix?

All the big shows use a voting system where at least the first eight digits of the phone numbers are the same for all contestants, with only the last few digits of the phone number changing depending on who you want to vote for.

As the telephone network only uses the first eight digits in a telephone number to route calls to the voting system, it is impossible for calls for different contestants to be treated differently.

Once calls reach the voting system they are answered in turn, on a first-come, first-served basis. Each answering point is instructed to accept votes for all contestants; there are no dedicated answering points for individual contestants.

This means that your chance of getting through to vote will never depend on the contestant you wish to vote for.

What if I send a text to vote, does it work the same way?

Texts work differently because you'll notice that all the votes are sent to the same five-digit number (or shortcode). Texts are filtered depending on the name or ‘keyword' that you put in the text. Systems are set up to recognise and count the number of texts with specific keywords.

So, again, your text vote entry will be treated the same way, regardless of who you vote for.

Will my ability to vote depend on where I live in the UK?

Anyone with a phone has the ability to vote, no matter where you live in the UK.

On some shows there can be regional support for local contestants. If lots of people from the same area are making a call to the same number, and those calls are all delivered to the same local exchange at the same time, then the local exchange can sometimes become overwhelmed. These exchanges have a limited capacity and must also leave space on the system for emergency calls.

However, the capacity at the local exchange is usually quite high and, if you don't get through, you will just get an engaged tone and should not be charged.

I’ve heard about a new service (118800) that gives out people’s mobile phone numbers. How does the service work?





The service it sounds like you’re describing is a directory enquiry service called 118800. In addition to the normal service that directory enquiry services offer (i.e. help you to find the fixed line telephone number of people or organisations you are trying to contact) 118800 also provides a directory for mobile phone numbers, so if you’ve lost someone’s number and you need to get in touch with them, you can ring 118800, tell them the name (and location) of the person you’re looking for and they will try to connect you to that person.

118800 doesn’t actually give out mobile phone numbers – if you call them and they have the number for the person you are looking for, they will call them up while you are still on the line and ask them whether they are happy to have your call put through to them. If the person you’re trying to reach isn’t available, you can choose for 118800 to leave a voicemail or send an SMS (text) message with your contact details on. If you’re searching for the person on the 118800 website, it will send a text to that person with your details so they can choose whether to call you.





How much will I be charged for using 118800?





When you call 118800 to try to get in touch with someone you don’t have a mobile number for, you will be charged for the call, whether 118800 is able to find the person you are looking for on their database or not. This cost is fixed, no matter how long your enquiry takes, and the amount you will be charged varies depending on whether you are calling from a landline or mobile phone, and depending on which telephone company you are with. If you make the call from a BT landline it will cost you 69p, but if you call 118800 from a mobile it may cost you considerably more.

If 118800 finds the person you want to reach, and that person is happy for your call to be put through to them, you will be charged an additional cost for the remainder of your call. This charge varies depending on whether you are calling from a landline or mobile phone, and which telephone company you are with. If you make the call from a BT landline it will cost you 14p per minute, but this may cost considerably more from a mobile phone.

When you use the 118800 website to get your contact details sent to the person you’re trying to get hold of, you will be charged £1. This cost will be charged to you via a reverse-charge SMS (text) message from 118800. You will only be charged if the contact you are looking for is located on 118800’s database.

These charges will appear on your phone bill, or will be deducted from your pre-paid credit if you’re on pay-as-you-go.

As with all phone-paid services, you should check the cost of calling 118800 with your telephone company.





What if I don’t want to speak to the person who is trying to contact me using 118800?

If someone is using 118800 to try to contact you, you will either be sent a text with their details on, or 118800 will speak to you before putting the call through to you, so you can choose whether you want to speak to them or not.





How did 118800 get my number?

If your number is on 118800’s database it’s because at some time in the past you’ve given your permission (for example, ticked a box on a form) to be contacted for marketing purposes.

When you do this, your number can sometimes be added to a database, and sold to other companies who want send you marketing information about their products. Connectivity – the company that operates the 118800 service – has bought lists like these to create its directory of mobile phone numbers.





How is 118800 allowed to run this service – isn’t it against privacy law?





The Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) has provided advice to Connectivity – the company operating the 118800 service – on compliance with the Data Protection Act (DPA) and Privacy and Electronic Communications Regulations (PECR). The ICO considers the service to be privacy-friendly because it will only connect people when the recipient agrees to take the call and even then it will do so without giving out their number.

The ICO has made it clear to Connectivity that they should not use numbers where there is any doubt about whether the consumer was happy for their information to be used in this way, and Connectivity is aware that if a consumer requests that their number is removed from the directory, then they are required to do this by law.

For more information on the ICO you can visit their website – www.ico.gov.uk– or call their helpline on 08456 306060 or 01625 545745.





How can I get my number taken off 118800 directory enquiry service?

Update: The 118800 website and service are currently suspended, and the provider is not accepting ex-directory requests; however, all ex-directory requests made to the 118800 directory to date are being processed and there will be no need to resend these requests.

If you would like to log a request for your number to be taken off the list while the 118800 service is unavailable, please call PhonepayPlus on 0800 500 212 (Mon-Fri, 8am-6pm). PhonepayPlus will take your details, including the mobile number you want to make ex-directory, and pass them to Connectivity – the company operating the 118800 service. Please note that any such requests will not be processed until the service becomes operational again.

Could my child’s mobile number be in the 118800 directory?





118800’s policy is not to include anyone in the directory who isn’t 18 years of age. However 118800 can’t tell if a parent has registered for a mobile phone and given it to their child to use.

To get your child’s number taken off the 118800 directory you can either click on the ex-directory button on the 118800 website – www.118800.co.uk – or you can text the letter 'E' to 118800 from the mobile phone you want to be made ex-directory. Standard network charges apply for this text. 118800 will send a free confirmation SMS message to your phone once the number has been taken off the list.





I’ve used the 118800 service but didn’t get what I asked for – can I get a refund?

If you believe that you were charged by 118800 but that the service wasn’t delivered, you are entitled to a refund by calling their customer complaints line – 0800 138 6263. Also bear in mind that the refund should include the fee for the call you make to call back and request it.

If you have any problems getting your refund, you can complain to PhonepayPlus on 0800 500 212 (Mon-Fri, 8am-6pm) and we will raise the issue with the provider, taking further action, if necessary.

Please consider the following information before applying for a refund or contacting PhonepayPlus to make a complaint:



If you didn’t get a confirmation SMS message from 118800 to say that your details have been sent to the contact you were searching for, this could be because you don’t have enough credit on your mobile phone, or because you have the wrong settings on your phone. Please contact your mobile phone company for help.

If you call 118800 and they don’t have the details of the person you are looking for on their database you will still be charged for the call. This cost is fixed, no matter how long your enquiry takes, and the amount you will be charged varies depending on whether you are calling from a landline or mobile phone, and depending on which telephone company you are with. If you make the call from a BT landline it will cost you 69p. 118800 is unable to give you a refund for calls like this.



What if I receive an abusive message via the 118800 service?

When someone uses 118800.co.uk to find you, 118800 sends you an SMS (text) message with that person’s contact details. 118800 doesn’t give them your number or the ability to send you an SMS message directly, so it is unlikely you will receive an abusive SMS message.

If someone calls 118800 to be connected to you, and you say you are happy for them to be put though to you, 118800 will connect you to each other, but from this point forward 118800 is unable to control what they then say. If this ever results in an abusive message, please call 118800 on 0800 138 6263 with the details and they will investigate. Where the situation warrants it, 118800 will blacklist such callers.

Any general concerns about nuisance callers should be reported to your mobile phone company.





What is PhonepayPlus doing to monitor 118800?





As the regulator of phone-paid services, PhonepayPlus looks at the way phone-paid services like 118800 are promoted and operated, and what content they are providing. For example, they make sure there is clear pricing for consumers, and that customers are getting the service that they pay for.

If you experience a problem with 118800 or any other phone-paid service you can get in touch with PhonepayPlus for advice on 0800 500 212 (Mon-Fri, 8am-6pm).



Phone-paid/premium rate numbers at a glance: