PhonepayPlus
What are premium rate services?

Quizzes & competitions





Find out more Adverts for quizzes and competitions can be found everywhere; on Facebook, websites and print media. Premium rate competitions will charge you for entry and may involve ongoing charges if you subscribe, you should ensure that you understand the pricing by reading the terms and conditions before entering. All subscription services require an interaction from the consumer in order to join, whether by sending a text, or by entering a PIN received on the mobile phone into the completion website.

Voting (TV & web)





Find out more Premium rate is often used a way vote interactive television shows and websites. Your vote is counted via your interaction which could involve a call to telephone number beginning with 09 or via a call or text to a short code from a mobile phone. Each interaction will result in a separate one-off charge.

Charity donations





Find out more Making a charity donation by text is a quick, simple method of making a one-off or ongoing contribution to a charity of your choice. These services will typically use five digit short codes prefixed 70xxx. You should ensure that you are happy with the amount you are donating before proceeding.

Digital content





Find out more Digital content is anything that you can purchase that is not a solid item; music tracks, videos, wallpapers or games. Purchases can be made on a per use basis, or via subscriptions that are charged periodically. Often games can be downloaded to your mobile device for ‘free’ but will also allow you to purchase additional content (such as coins, or extra lives) which can be charged to your telephone bill instead of a credit or debit card.

Directory enquiries (118 numbers)





Find out more Directory Enquiry Services are typically provided by calling a six digit number which starts with 118xxx – these services can be expensive, therefore you should check the pricing on the promotion for the service before calling. They are not required to provide pricing on connection, however must warn you of the ongoing cost if you wish to connect directly to the telephone number you have requested. It is often better to make a note of the number you have requested and call it separately.

Adult services





Find out more These are services intended for use by those over the age of 18 and can occur via telephone calls to premium rate numbers starting 09 or by text short codes.

Gambling