Hunter–gatherers and other primates as prey, predators, and competitors of snakes
AUTHOR SUMMARY

Relationships between primates and snakes are of widespread interest from anthropological, psychological, and evolutionary perspectives, but surprisingly little is known about the dangers that serpents have posed to people with prehistoric lifestyles and to nonhuman primates. Here, we report ethnographic observations of 120 Philippine Agta Negritos when they were still preliterate hunter–gatherers. Twenty-six percent of adult male respondents had survived predation attempts by reticulated pythons, and between 1934 and 1973, there were six fatal attacks on members of the group. Moreover, Agta ate pythons as well as three other animal species taken by the snakes, and therefore, people and pythons were reciprocally prey, predators, and potential competitors. These findings, combined with observations of snake interactions with nonhuman primates and interpreted within the context of snake and primate phylogenies, corroborate the hypothesis that complex ecological interactions have long characterized our shared evolutionary history.

Human reactions to snakes range from disgust and fear to consumption and deification, and snakes are of widespread interest from anthropological, evolutionary, and psychological perspectives (1). Nonetheless, we know little about the dangers that serpents posed to extinct hominins or humans with prehistoric lifestyles. Unlike crocodiles and carnivores, snakes have left no tooth marks on bones of our extinct australopithecine relatives, and their few fossilized stomach contents have not included any primates. Moreover, although venomous snakebites on forest dwellers have been studied, the meager evidence for attacks by predatory constrictors is limited to people with modern lifestyles. Here, we document that a group of 20th century hunter–gatherers had reciprocal, deadly interactions with giant serpents, and then synthesize the joint natural history of primates and snakes in the context of evolutionary relationships.

T.N.H. began working with the Agta Negritos in 1962, and in 1976, when they were still preliterate foragers (2), he used ethnographic techniques to interview 120 adults in northern Luzon, the largest island in the Philippines. Reticulated pythons had attacked 26% of 58 male respondents but only 1 woman, presumably because mainly men hunted in the rainforest for game and edible plants. Usually those people attacked had sustained bites that left scars on the lower limbs, hands, and torso, and they had escaped by dispatching snakes with a bolo knife or homemade shotgun. Six fatal incidents included one in which a python entered a thatched dwelling, killed two children, and was coiled around and swallowing one of them headfirst when the father returned and killed the snake with his bolo. The Agta ate pythons as well as deer, wild pigs, and monkeys, and T.N.H. examined a 6.9-m python after a hunter shot it (Fig. P1) that yielded at least 25 kg meat, assuming a butchering efficiency of 33%. Pythons also ate the three primary mammalian prey species of the Agta, who learned of this competitive relationship from the stomach contents of pythons that they butchered.

View larger version: Download PPT Fig. P1. Natural history data on hunter–gatherers and nonhuman primates corroborate the hypotheses that our complex relationships with snakes reflect 80 myr of shared history. (A) Reticulated python, 6.9 m in total length, shot for meat by a Philippine Agta hunter–gatherer in 1970 at a time when 26% of Agta men had survived predatory attacks by pythons (photo by J. Headland). (B) Southern African python, 3.04 m in total length, after killing and before ingesting a vervet monkey, exemplary of snake predation on 26 species of nonhuman primates (photo by B. Maritz).

Our data are among the few quantitative estimates of hazards confronting human foragers from any predators (3). An adult male Agta (mean mass = 44 kg) would constitute ≤60% of the mass of a large python, which is not a heavy meal by snake standards, and 24 attacks (18 nonfatal and 6 fatal) amount to a traumatic snake encounter for someone in the group every 2–3 y. Fatalities from python attacks would have been far commoner in the absence of iron weapons, which was the case until a few centuries ago, and thus, might have rivaled mortality suffered by another group of human foragers, the Paraguayan Aché, from jaguars. Plio-Pliestocene hominids before Homo erectus and as far back as Australopithecus afarensis and Ardipithecus ramidus averaged 30–52 kg in mass, and they would have been comparably susceptible to predation by giant snakes.

From an evolutionary perspective, flying lemurs and tree shrews are the closest living relatives of primates, the latter having diverged ∼80 mya into galagos, lemurs, and lorises on the one hand and tarsiers plus anthropoids on the other hand. Anthropoids diverged into New and Old World monkeys ∼45 mya, and within the latter group, hominoids (gibbons and apes) split off ∼30 mya. Boas, pythons, and other snake lineages, whose prey size ranges encompass fossil and living primates, originated ∼100 mya, whereas venomous cobras and vipers radiated ∼35 mya. Accordingly, we can ask whether (i) living members of core primate lineages suffer mortality from serpent lineages of comparable or greater age, (ii) members of those primate lineages eat and otherwise persecute snakes, and (iii) living members of core snake and primate lineages overlap in diet. Failure to confirm these expectations would falsify scenarios of primate–snake coevolution.

A winnowing of natural history literature reveals that snakes do kill tree shrews and at least 26 species of lemurs, galagos, lorises, tarsiers, New and Old World monkeys, and gibbons. Field observations show that primates have been ambushed by snakes as they walked on the ground, descended from trees, and passed over water on vegetation; although adults are often taken, juveniles have been snatched from mothers or eaten with them. No snakes specialize on primates, but some regularly predate them. For example, reticulated pythons take lorises, tarsiers, and several species of monkeys, whereas boa constrictors eat tamarins, titis, marmosets, sakis, and capuchins. Conversely, prehistoric Amerindians and modern humans have killed and eaten boas, pythons, and numerous other harmless and venomous snakes. Nonhuman primates also dispatch dangerous serpents, as exemplified by a tarsier that ate an Asian coral snake and capuchins that used branches to kill a large viper. Lemurs, tarsiers, monkeys, and chimpanzees respond to snakes with mobbing, group defense, social learning, and unease at the scenes of fatal encounters.

By showing snake predation on primates and vice versa in core lineages of each group, including human hunter–gatherers, we corroborate the view that they have had complex reciprocal relationships throughout 80 myr of shared evolutionary history. Our results also emphasize a central role for the natural history of hunter–gatherers, their nonhuman relatives, and their potential predators, prey, and competitors in the emerging synthesis of anthropology and biology (1⇓⇓–4).