Brighton Beach
EPITAUX'S (THE HAYMARKET)



In one matter Epitaux’s is deficient—there is no entrance lounge or waiting-room. A very smart little buffet, with ornamental glass windows, faces the Street, and alongside this a narrow entrance passage, gorgeous in white and gold, leads to a short flight of steps and the glass doors which shield the restaurant. . . I had chosen Epitaux’s for our dining-place because it is comparatively small. The pretty lady, looking round the dainty/ bonbonnière/ of a restaurant - with its walls of the lightest cream colour, its pilasters and cornices picked out with gold, its panels of deep blue-green stamped velvet, its musicians’ gallery filled with palms, under which in a glass-enclosed room a young lady in black serves out the wines and liqueurs, its blaze of electric lights on the walls and its shaded lights on the tables—approved thoroughly of my choice. She thought Epitaux’s, which was new to her, very snug and nice.

Messrs. Costa and Rizzi, the two proprietors - one tall, with a moustache that a cavalryman might envy; the other short, with a grizzled beard - had been hovering by the table, and the head waiter, with the carte de jour in one hand, and the menu of the/ table-d’hôte/ dinner in the other, was waiting for orders.

I chose the/ table-d’hôte/ dinner :



Hors-d’oeuvre variés.

Croûte au pot. Crème Dubarry.

Filets de sole Portugaise. Whitebait.

Côtelettes d’agneau aux pointes d’asperges.

Canard sauvage. Salade.

Céleri à la moëlle.

Biscuit glacé au chocolat.

Canapé de laitances à la Diable.

Dessert.



- and ordered a bottle of G. H. Mumm, 1889.

We had a table at the far end of the room from the kitchen, which accounted for the whitebait, excellently cooked as it was, not being as hot as whitebait should be.

... I told her something of the history of Epitaux’s; how the site was originally that of Foote’s Theatre in the Haymarket ... and how at a later period it became the Café de l’Europe.

The cutlets were excellent, and the asparagus the best I have tasted this winter, while the duck was cooked to an absolute nicety. The biscuit glacé au chocolat was as delightful and evanescent as a good dream. Altogether it was a very good dinner, though the cook did have a little accident with the salt-cellar in preparing the/ croûte au pot/ .

I asked for my bill.

Two dinners, 15s. ; two cafés, 1s.; champagne, 14s. ; liqueurs, 2s. ; total £1:12s., was what I paid.





From "Dinners and Diners" by Lieut.-Col. Newnham-Davis (1899) [ABOVE] A description of a meal enjoyed at the Epitaux' Restaurant in London's Haymarket, written in 1899 by Lieut.-Col. Newnham-Davis. The Epitaux' Restaurant was co-owned by Lucian Anton Rizzi (1854-1914), a Swiss immigrant. [ABOVE] Advertisement for B. Dellagana & Co. Ltd. Electrotypers and Stereotypers (1893). Giacomo (James) Dellagana and Bartolomeo Dellagana were important figures in the business of stereotype printing. Bartolomeo Dellagana established printing works in London, Liverpool and Manchester [ABOVE] One of the continental pastry shops owned by the Semadeni family. This photograph shows the Semadeni pastry shop at No. 5 Montague Street, Worthing. Guilio Semadeni (born c1851, Switzerland) owned pastry shops in Brighton, Hastings and Worthing. In the 1881 census, thirty year old Guilio Semadeni is recorded as "Swiss Confectioner" at 8 George Street, Hastings. Another member of the Semadeni family, Hans Semadeni is listed as a confectioner at 48 Preston Street, Brighton. The Semadeni shop in Montague Street, Worthing, was mentioned in local newspapers in 1886 when twenty-five year old Swiss pastry cook Giacomo Semadeni, died from injuries sustained during the Anti- Salvation Army Riots in Worthing.

Lucian Anton Rizzi (1854-1914) A Swiss immigrant who arrived in England during the 1870s Lucian Anton Rizzi was born in Switzerland in 1854. Sometime during the 1870s Lucian Rizzi arrived in England to take up employment in a restaurant. In 1879, Lucian Rizzi married Fanny Medhurst (born 1860, Reigate, Surrey), the youngest daughter of Harriet and William Medhurst, a dairyman who had been born in Greenwich, Kent, around 1814. When the census was taken on 3rd April 1881, Lucian Rizzi was living with his twenty year old wife Fanny at 8 Denman Street, Westminster. On the census return, twenty-six year old Lucian Rizzi is described as a "Restaurant Employee". When the next census was taken in 1891, Lucian Rizzi was living at 42 Langham Street, Marylebone, London. Living at the same address was Mrs Fanny Rizzi, Lucian's wife, and their 7 year old daughter, Violet Emily Rizzi (born 1883, St Pancras, London). By this date, Lucian Rizzi was working as a "Restaurant Superintendent". By 1895, Lucian Rizzi was letting out apartments at 42 Langham Street, London. By 1897, Lucian Rizzi had entered into a business partnership with a restaurant keeper named Francesco Costa. The partnership of Costa & Rizzi ran the Epitaux Restaurant at 9 & 10 Haymarket, London between 1897 and 1899. In 1907, Violet Emily Rizzi, Lucian Rizzi's daughter, married Rudolf Schneider (born c1880, Switzerland) a restaurant manager. Around 1900, Lucian Rizzi became the landlord of The Admiral Duncan public house at 54 Old Compton Street, in the Soho district of London. At the time of the 1901 census, Lucian Rizzi was recorded as a "Hotel Manager" at 54 Old Compton Street, Soho, London. The 1911 census records fifty-seven year old Lucian A. Rizzi as a "Publican" at The Admiral Duncan, 54 Old Compton Street, London. A fellow Swiss, twenty-six year old Bernard von Kanel was employed as a waiter in the pub. When Lucian Rizzi died in 1914 at the age of 60, his widow, Mrs Fanny Rizzi, took over the running of The Admiral Duncan. In 1922, Mrs Fanny Rizzi married John C. Gebhard, but she within two years she died at the age of 64. [The death of Mrs Fanny Gebhard was registered in Wandsworth in 1924] [ABOVE] A portrait of Lucian Anton Rizzi (1854-1914), a Swiss immigrant. This cabinet portrait was produced by John Wesley Thomas of 45 George Street, Hastings. The original portrait was taken around 1879, the year of Lucian Rizzi's marriage to Fanny Medhurst (born 1860, Reigate, Surrey). During the 35 years he spent in England, Lucian Anton Rizzi worked in several restaurants, let out apartments, co-owned the Epitaux Restaurant in London's Haymarket and managed a busy London pub. Photograph: Courtesy of Donat Rischatsch Giacomo (James) Dellagana (1828-1887). The photograph below was submitted by David Dellagana, the great, great grandson of the Swiss printer Giacomo (James) Dellagana (1828-1887). This photograph is a carte-de-visite group photograph taken at the studio of John Wesley Thomas at 45 George Street, Hastings around 1869. The man seated on the left is believed to be Giacomo Dellagana, who arrived in England with his younger brothers in 1852. The eldest son of Tommaso Bartolomeo Dellagana (1800-1876) of Aurigeno, Switzerland, Giacomo Dellagana emigrated to England with his 3 brothers in 1852. Travelling to England with Giacomo Dellagana were Bartolomeo Dellagana (1833-1882), Enrico Alberico Dellagana (1836-1920) and Antonio Dellagana (1848-1918). In England, all four Dellagana brothers worked in the printing trade. Enrico Alberico Dellagana and Antonio Dellagana eventually returned to Switzerland, but Giacomo Dellagana and Bartolomeo Dellagana settled in London and became naturalized British citizens on 7th January 1867. [ABOVE]. A group photograph of four men taken at the studio of the Hastings photographer John Wesley Thomas (c1869). The man seated on the left is believed to be Giacomo (James) Dellagana, a printer from Switzerland. The other three men in the photograph have been identified as Giacomo's brothers - Enrico Alberico Dellagana (1836-1920), Antonio Dellagana (1848-1918) and Bartolomeo Dellegana (1833-1882). Giacomo Dellagana (1828-1887) anglicized his first name to 'James' and became a naturalized British citizen in January 1867. [ABOVE]. The reverse of John Wesley Thomas's group photograph shown on the left. A handwritten inscription identifies the men in the photograph as members of the Dellagana family from Switzerland, namely Giacomo (James) Dellagana [seated left]; Bartolomeo Dellegana [seated right]; Alberico Enrico Dellagana [standing left] and Antonio Dellagana [standing right]. The group portrait was taken around 1869 at John Wesley Thomas's studio at 45 George Street, Hastings. Photograph: Courtesy of David Dellagana Acknowledgements I am grateful to Dennis W. Morelli the author of the Morelli & Vanoni Genealogy website which includes references to the four Dellagana brothers. Thanks also to David Dellagana and Donat Rischatsch for providing the photographs of Swiss immigrants taken at John Wesley Thomas's studio in Hastings.