U.S imposes travel sanction on Robredo~ Department of States

WASHINGTON,DC– U.S department of States has announced travel sanction against the Philippines Vice president, Leni Robredo for her continu...

http://www.pinoytribune.com/2017/03/us-imposes-travel-sanction-on-robredo.html



M/s Robredo has being accused by the Philippines government for having a hand in President Duterte’s impeachment. She has also being accused of joining the opposition to destabilize the Government from within.



President Rodrigo Duterte on Sunday said he would not be surprised if Vice President Leni Robredo is involved in the impeachment complaint filed against him.



“I will not be surprised if she is there, or I will not also be— I will also not speculate if she is not there,” Duterte said.



Sponsor

So what can you say about this one? Let us know your thoughts in the comment section below, and don't forget to share this post to your family and friends online. And also, visit our website more often for more updates.



[SOURCE] WASHINGTON,DC– U.S department of States has announced travel sanction against the Philippines Vice president, Leni Robredo for her continued effort to destabilize the government. Leni, who resigned from Presidents Duterte cabinet last year citing political frustrations has been banned from entering the United States for unspecified period of time, State department noted.M/s Robredo has being accused by the Philippines government for having a hand in President Duterte’s impeachment. She has also being accused of joining the opposition to destabilize the Government from within.President Rodrigo Duterte on Sunday said he would not be surprised if Vice President Leni Robredo is involved in the impeachment complaint filed against him.“I will not be surprised if she is there, or I will not also be— I will also not speculate if she is not there,” Duterte said.SponsorSo what can you say about this one? Let us know your thoughts in the comment section below, and don't forget to share this post to your family and friends online. And also, visit our website more often for more updates.

Visit and follow our website: Pinoy Tribune © Pinoy Tribune Share It To Your Friends! SHARE TO FACEBOOK

Loading...

Contributed articles does not reflect the view of pinoytribune.com. This website cannot guarantee the legitimacy of some of the information contributed to us. You may do additional research if you find some information doubtful. This site/blog shall not be responsible for any incorrect or inaccurate information, whether caused by website users or by any of the equipment or programming associated with or utilized in this website or by any technical or human error which may occur.