Post-Kaine DNC up in the air
Debbie Wasserman Schultz and Ted Strickland (right) could be Tim Kaine's replacement. | AP Photos Post-Kaine DNC up in the air

Democratic National Committee Chairman Tim Kaine is on the verge of a Senate run, but Team Obama wants to broaden the search beyond the two top candidates to succeed him — former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland and Florida Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Democrats say.

Strickland and Wasserman Schultz are very much in contention, sources close to the process tell POLITICO, but President Obama’s political team has expanded its hunt for a more out-of-the-box candidate for a job they view as central to keeping the White House and the Senate in 2012.

Story Continued Below

“All bets are off,” said one top Democrat.

Strickland, who was defeated by Republican John Kasich in 2010, was seen initially as a logical if not sparkling first option. But Wasserman Schultz nudged her way into serious consideration by dint of her fundraising ability, her popularity in Florida, a key swing state, and her appeal to Democratic and independent women.

Kaine could announce his candidacy for the seat being vacated by Virginia Sen. Jim Webb (D) as early as next week, Democrats say.

But there’s a growing sense in Obama’s orbit that while either Strickland or Wasserman Schultz would be acceptable candidates, neither would represent the kind of bold stroke that characterizes Obama’s electoral style.

Sources close to the matter didn’t proffer any other names, but POLITICO has learned that there are other beyond-the-Beltway Democrats being considered for the post.

“Debbie and Ted have been hanging out there for a while. But now there’s definitely a third choice, and maybe a fourth said,” a senior aide said. “They want to make a splash.”

Wasserman Schultz, who’d become just the third female party chief and first in nearly 20 years, would offer a touch more sizzle than Strickland, but President Obama wants to be sure that other, less-conventional pols are considered.

Alternative paths could lead toward a next-generation Democrat who’s still on the rise and would appeal to the youthful, multi-hued Obama coalition.

Strickland, a moderate from the swing battleground of southern Ohio, is seen as something of a safe pick. A former congressman and governor with rural roots, he could be an effective surrogate in the sort of purple-red districts Democrats lost in the midterms. And Obama’s senior adviser and strategist David Plouffe is “obsessed” with the Buckeye State, according to one House Democratic aide.

But the 69-year-old Strickland has his drawbacks. He’s blunt, and can occasionally veer off-message at a time when Plouffe is increasingly demanding that surrogates stick to the scripted party line.

And the suggestion last month that Strickland would be a sensible selection was met with some grumbling among prominent Democratic women who say Obama needs to appoint more women to positions of real authority.