Donald Trump Jr. breaks out on national stage
On Tuesday night, a political star may have been born.

Donald Trump Jr. delivered a powerful testimonial for his father on the second night of the Republican National Convention, casting him as an everyman who hasn’t forgotten his Queens roots while raising his own national profile on a high-stakes night.

Story Continued Below

Hours after the younger Trump cast the decisive New York delegation votes sealing his father’s nomination, he doubled down with the rousing speech. Trump Jr. has taken an active interest in his family’s first political campaign, making himself a crucial adviser along with his adult siblings, and the speech drew immediate suggestions that he should run for office himself.

“Perhaps Donald Trump Jr. should run? His speech was excellent,” tweeted politically active talk show host Montel Williams, a frequent critic of Trump Sr.

Despite an allegation of plagiarism that surfaced in the speech’s aftermath -- a line closely resembled one from a recent story in the publication, The American Conservative -- many other of Trump’s fiercest critics were won over by his performance. Conservative commentator Dana Loesch tweeted that the speech was “great.”

Former Barack Obama chief strategist David Axelrod, while criticizing the speech, conceded its widespread appeal. “However polished, a very political-sounding speech. Not sure attack dog is the role candidate's son should be playing,” he tweeted. But he admitted in a follow-up tweet, “In fairness, folks I respect had [positive] reaction to Don Jr., responding to his powerful speech as meaningful validation of his dad.”

Republican messaging guru Frank Luntz told POLITICO he found the speech — in which Trump's eldest son demonstrated natural ease at the podium — “authentic.”

Trump Jr. used the speech as a vehicle to personally vouch for his father as an executive. “You want to know what kind of president he'll be? Let me tell you how he ran his businesses, and I know because I was there with him by his side on job sites, in conference rooms from the time I could walk,” said Trump Jr., an executive vice president of The Trump Organization, on the second night of the Republican National Convention.

The Manhattan businessman “didn't hide out behind some desk in an executive suite,” he said.

“He spent his career with regular Americans. He hung out with the guys on construction sites, pouring sheet rock and hanging -- pouring concrete and hanging sheet rock,” Trump Jr. remarked, correcting himself after transposing words. “He listened to them and he valued their opinions as much and often more than the guys from Harvard and Wharton, locked away in offices, away from the real work.”

All of Trump’s grown children, with the exception of Eric Trump, attended the University of Pennsylvania, and Donald, his eldest son, and Ivanka Trump attended Wharton.

But, Trump Jr. insisted, his father has “recognized the talent and the drive that all Americans have.”

“He's promoted people based on their character, their street smarts, and their work ethic, not simply paper credentials,” Trump continued.

“To this day, many of the top executives in our company are individuals that started out in positions that were blue collar. But he saw something in them, and he pushed them to succeed. His true gift as a leader is that he sees the potential in people that they don't even see in themselves.”

Other executives might have overlooked such job candidates because their resumes did not “include the names of fancy colleges and degrees.”

“The potential that other executives would overlook because their resumes don't include the names of fancy colleges and degrees. I know he values those workers and those qualities in people because those are the individuals he had my siblings and me work under when we started out,” he said. “That he would trust his own children's formative years to these men and women says all you need to know about Donald Trump.” Trump continued, “We didn't learn from MBAs We learned from people who had doctorates in common sense.”

Americans, the eldest Trump son also promised, are “going to get” their country “back better than ever before.”

“I know we'll get it back because I know my father. I know that when people tell him it can't be done, that guarantees that he gets it done,” Trump said. “I know that when someone tells him that something is impossible, that's what triggers him into action.”

Drawing on the story of his father’s career as a real-estate developer, Trump remarked, “When people told him it was impossible for a boy from Queens to go to Manhattan and take on developers in the big city, rather than give up, he changed the skyline of New York.”

In a speech that went beyond the usual praise of his father, Trump laid out the stakes of the election against Hillary Clinton in stark terms.

"We're going to put Americans first -- all Americans," he said. "Not a special class of crony elites at the top of the heap."

Declaring his father a qualified and ready commander in chief, the eldest son of the Manhattan mogul finished on a personal note, referring to him as "my mentor, my best friend, my father, Donald Trump."

Trump Jr. apparently enjoyed the political spotlight. “That was intense,” he tweeted after leaving the stage. “What a rush.”