President Barack Obama leaves imprint on Prague
PRAGUE — Ronald Reagan had Reykjavik. Barack Obama has Prague.

Both presidents staked out neutral soil on which to try to make progress in moving beyond the Cold War.

For Reagan, Reykjavik, Iceland, was the place where he had a breakthrough in negotiations with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev that eventually led to a pact to reduce each nation’s nuclear arsenals.

For Obama, the enchanting capital of the Czech Republic is where he outlined his vision of a world without nuclear weapons — a proclamation that opened him up to criticism that he is a naive dreamer. His return to Prague on Thursday, a year later, to sign a new nuclear arms treaty with Russian President Dmitry Medvedev was a modest victory lap and a bit of a homecoming.

Obama’s stay was brief, just over 24 hours. But with it, he left his imprint on the city.

Czech President Vaclav Klaus joked that Obama has spent so much time in Prague, he could work as a tour guide here after he retires.

Obama joked back, in the private meeting, that by the time his administration is finished, being a tour guide in Prague might be all he has the energy left to do, his national security adviser, Jim Jones recounted later.

Just as Reagan’s efforts to reach an agreement with Gorbachev on nuclear weapons became synonymous with Reykjavik, Prague is now very much an Obama administration destination.

That’s not to say the two presidents had the same experience in their respective locales.

There were the simple differences: Reagan enacted a media blackout and was holed up in the Hofdi House as rain poured outside; Obama arrived in Prague to sunny skies and held a news conference in the gilded Spanish Hall.

The overall nature of their visits also was different, although their desired result was the same.

“Prague wasn’t a negotiating experience; Reykjavik was a negotiating experience. But both of those presidents had this vision of eliminating the weapons and planned how to do this in a negotiated and verifiable way,” said Joseph Cirincione, president of Ploughshares Fund, a foundation focused on nuclear weapons policy. “It’s the same direction. It’s the same goal.”

And it’s a goal that’s a long way from being met.

Obama’s first visit to Prague, last April, made a splash.

He took to a stage in Hradcany Square — hand in hand with first lady Michelle Obama — in front of tens of thousands of cheering people, many waving miniature Czech flags and donning Obama-themed garb. The president delivered a major speech on nuclear nonproliferation in the open air.