Michelle Fields joins The Huffington Post, will cover Trump
On Media Blog Archives Select Date… December, 2015 November, 2015 October, 2015 September, 2015 August, 2015 July, 2015 June, 2015 May, 2015 April, 2015 March, 2015 February, 2015 January, 2015

Michelle Fields will cover Donald Trump in her new position. Michelle Fields joins The Huffington Post, will cover Trump

The Huffington Post has hired former Breitbart reporter Michelle Fields, the site announced on Sunday.

Fields will be on the political team covering presumptive GOP nominee Donald Trump, an interesting position for Fields considering her history with the campaign.

In March, Fields, who was then working for Breitbart, accused Trump campaign manager Corey Lewandowski of forcefully grabbing her out of the way after she tried to ask Trump a question during an event in Florida. When the campaign initially denied the event took place and called Fields "delusional", Fields filed a police report which led to battery charges against Lewandowski, though a Florida prosecutor decided in April not to prosecute. Fields, and at least six other staffers, left Breitbart shortly after the incident, saying the website failed to adequately support her at the time.

At Breitbart, Fields was the Ted Cruz campaign reporter, and was at the Trump event in March to cover for a colleague who was sick. At The Huffington Post though, she'll be on the Trump trail full time.

Though the site does not shy away from taking a stand on Trump (each story mentioning the candidate comes with a tag that he is a "liar," "xenophobe," "birther" and "racist"), assigning a reporter with such a direct personal history with a candidate is an unusual move.

"I'd say that we all have our biases, whether we admit it or not, but as always the work should stand for itself," Huffington Post's Washington bureau chief Ryan Grim said in an email, adding that he's "very excited" for Fields to get started.

"After the tumultuous events of the last few months, I am ready to get back to writing and reporting on what is without question the most bizarrely fascinating presidential race of my lifetime (and, perhaps, any lifetime)," Fields said in a statement.

The news was first reported by CNN.

Hadas Gold is a reporter at Politico.