Christie trolls the press
Gov. Chris Christie stands in the Statehouse rotunda as he addresses a gathering Tuesday in Trenton. | AP Photo/Mel Evans Christie trolls the press

TRENTON — After Gov. Chris Christie issued a vague advisory saying he was going to make a “press announcement” on Tuesday at the New Jersey Statehouse — his first in months — the speculation began, and his phone went “nuts all night.”

By morning, the prognostications were piling up on Twitter. So were the jokes.

Story Continued Below

When word came down that President-elect Donald Trump was to announce his choice for transportation secretary, New Yorker writer Ryan Lizza tweeted: ‘And transportation expert Chris Christie has 11:30 am ‘announcement.’ Hmmm.”

Then the Republican governor, still mentioned as a longshot for a job in the new administration — despite being removed as chairman of Trump's transition team — finally made the big reveal around noon: He’s leaving the Statehouse, just not for Washington.

Christie said New Jersey would undertake a $300 million, four-year renovation of its 224-year-old Statehouse, a project that would displace the governor’s entire staff — and him.

Christie went on for some time about what poor shape the Statehouse is in, how it has many codes violations and how a trip to Annapolis with Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan revealed to him what a capitol building should really look like.

Then Christie stopped, and he took a moment to revel in his ability to turn out a crowd for what otherwise would have been a blip on the radar for many news outlets.

“From some of the reaction I got that was I having a press announcement, I think all of you thought I was announcing something else,” he said, standing at the foot of the Statehouse rotunda in front of dozens of people. “I appreciate all of you being here for the Statehouse renovations. It’s really wonderful.”

Christie also said, as he had last week on his monthly radio show, that he wants to serve the rest of his term and has no immediate plans to resign.

“I have said — and for some reason people think I’m equivocal about this, and I’m not — I am completing my term,” Christie said, noting he’d left a tiny bit of room for special circumstances during his radio interview. “I am telling you that that I am completing my term.

“Now, I will also tell you that if something extraordinary happens in the world where my service is needed, I will consider any requests that are made,” he said. “That’s not being equivocal about it — that’s understanding what the real world is.”

He told everyone to “take a deep breath and relax,” and said he wouldn’t leave the Statehouse before Jan. 18, 2018, the last day of his second term.

The press, he said, needed to give it a rest and “lower the hysteria.” Those who thought he was going to step down were foolish to believe he’d do so in Trenton.

“I know you’re all just trying to do your jobs, but just use a little common sense,” he said. “If I was announcing I was leaving for the Trump administration, would I really do it in the rotunda of the Statehouse, by myself, without the person who would be actually giving me the job? Knowing him, I’d suspect he’d want to be there to bestow that upon me or any of the other folks he’s announcing.”

Christie wouldn’t take questions from the Trenton press corps — something he hasn’t done since before the George Washington Bridge lane closures trial started more than two months ago.

He ignored reporters who shouted for him to come back for a chat, and he walked a few feet into his office, trailed by staff and state troopers.

The press started to pack up, and then a booming voice came from near where the governor has just been standing. Now someone was trolling Christie.

It was Bill Brennan, a relatively-unknown “citizen activist” who recently filed a criminal complaint against the governor alleging he had a hand in Bridgegate, a political revenge plot that targeted a Democratic mayor who refused to endorse Christie in his 2013 re-election campaign.

Brennan is fighting to get a special prosecutor to handle the case after the state attorney general recused himself but said his subordinates could handle it. Brennan will ask a state Superior Court Judge on Wednesday to appoint someone independent, claiming conflicts of interests trickle down from the top.

“If you’re concerned about the appearance of impropriety, you should do more than paint the building,” Brennan said, surrounded by a gaggle of reporters. “You should agree that a special prosecutor must be appointed now to make sure the integrity of our judicial system and the executive branch isn’t further called into question.”