Public deserves whole story on Whiteside death
CLOSE

Dr. Jeffrey Whiteside

We don’t know a lot about the death of Dr. Jeffrey Whiteside, but we do know this: The lack of information coming from police has led to weeks of unnecessary speculation.

From Door County, where his family vacationed and Whiteside was last seen, to the Fox Cities, where he was a respected pulmonologist and ThedaCare board member, rumors have been flying since his June 29 disappearance.

It didn’t have to be that way.

Since the initial news of Whiteside’s disappearance was made public, the Door County Sheriff’s Department has held all information close to the vest. Too tightly, we’d argue.

It seemed from the start that this could potentially be a suicide and that the family deserved privacy. We would understand if the family asked for as few details to be released as possible.

But Sheriff’s Department representatives instead added fuel to the fire for weeks.

We all were told over and over that foul play wasn’t ruled out, which led to those who were genuinely worried about the doctor to be even more concerned. But we were also told the public wasn’t in danger.

We were told a gun was missing, and then it wasn’t.

We were told that a group of Whiteside’s colleagues were ready to search in Door County, but that the Sheriff’s Department turned them away only to allow them to search the following week.

We were told that the Ephraim area was no longer being searched, but then — three days later — a Headwaters Search and Rescue team found a body east of Ephraim.

We were told that Whiteside’s body was located and that a gun was nearby and that it had been fired once, but we weren’t told if the death was a suicide, accidental or suspicious in nature. We still don’t even know if he died from a gunshot wound.

Just this past week, we were told that standard toxicology tests came back but that the results wouldn’t be released until the investigation was complete.

It has all added up to a mess.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-4924. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

If the Sheriff’s Department had been upfront about what they thought happened — which we asked them to do several times a week throughout July and into August — this case wouldn’t be shrouded in mystery. People wouldn’t be having side conversations on how they thought the doctor died.

In comparison this past week, the Neenah Police Department sent out the news that a truck belonging to Kyle Blohm, who disappeared about a year ago, had been found and that skeletal remains were nearby. All speculation was cut off because the initial release of information included a statement from Blohm’s family: We “understand the implications of the discovery.”

A day later, police said it was Blohm and that it was likely a suicide. Case closed. Any speculation ended with a press release.

In the Whiteside case, the Sheriff’s Department seems to be conducting a thorough investigation.

But, if we knew Whiteside’s death was a suicide, for example, we could have had a constructive conversation about how to help those around us who might be struggling.

If only the Door County Sheriff’s Department hadn’t let details dribble out one by one and had given a cohesive overall picture, the doctor’s family and friends could mourn without seeing additional reports every few days.

There’s still time for the Door County Sheriff’s Department to end the speculation. Give the community information instead of blocking it. Let everyone remember the talented doctor for who he was, not how this investigation has changed his legacy.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1TBBGCX