Pence insists U.S. is committed to Article 5 in speech honoring NATO leader
“NATO’s open door must always remain so … NATO is as important today as it was at its founding nearly 70 years ago," Vice President Mike Pence said. | AP Photo Pence insists U.S. is committed to Article 5 in speech honoring NATO leader

Vice President Mike Pence insisted the United States remains committed to Article 5 at an awards event Monday night honoring NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg in Washington.

“Make no mistake, our commitment is unwavering,” said Pence on Monday night at an Atlantic Council awards event at the Ritz-Carlton hotel. “We will meet our obligations to our people to provide for the collective defense of all of our allies ... an attack on one of us is an attack on all of us.”

Story Continued Below

Pence’s statement came the same day as a POLITICO report that President Donald Trump’s national security team was blindsided by the president’s failure to reaffirm America’s commitment to Article 5 during his May 25 speech in Brussels. That article treats an attack on one NATO nation as an attack on all NATO nations.

In his speech, Pence also suggested the possibility of future expansion of the trans-Atlantic alliance.

“As we look to the future, we cannot only look inward,” Pence said. “NATO’s open door must always remain so … NATO is as important today as it was at its founding nearly 70 years ago.”

Pence's comments came the same day as Montenegro's formal accession into the NATO alliance. In his remarks, the vice president congratulated the prime minister of Montenegro, whom Trump had shoved aside during the NATO summit in Brussels. A clip of the incident went viral during Trump's foreign trip last month.

Montenegrin Prime Minister Duško Marković , for his part, compared the occasion to the 1969 moon landing.

“Allow me to rephrase on this historic day for Montenegro the words of Neil Armstrong. This is a small step for the United States and its allies, but a great day for Montenegro," he said.