House Makes Progress On Budget

The House of Delegates staged a full turnaround Wednesday, restoring life to a budget compromise that includes a half- cent sales tax increase and setting up a showdown vote for Monday.

RICHMOND — Moderate Republicans and Democrats unite on a half-cent sales tax increase. The plan is up for debate Monday.

Gov. Mark R. Warner characterized the House action as an important breakthrough in the ongoing stalemate that has thrown local governments into limbo and threatens Virginia's standing on Wall Street.

Conservative Republicans still oppose the idea, and initial reaction from two senators was guarded.

Between now and Monday, all eyes will be on a coalition of House Democrats and 17 or 18 moderate Republicans who together represent enough votes to pass the plan and send it to the Senate. The key question: With intense lobbying all around them, will any votes change?

The day began with the House Finance Committee reversing itself. The committee agreed in a 10-8 vote to endorse the compromise and send it to the House floor. One day earlier, the committee had voted 12-9 to table the measure.

Four conservative Republicans were absent Wednesday, and there was talk that House Speaker William J. Howell had asked some members to stay away from the meeting, allowing the bill to get to the floor. One of them, Del. Mark L. Cole confirmed that story.

"Leadership had promised to get the bill to the floor, and I certainly couldn't support it," said Cole, R-Fredericksburg. "So I was asked not to attend."

Del. John M. O'Bannon III, another absentee, said he didn't attend because he had another meeting. "That's just how it worked out," he said.

A third member, Del. William R. Janis, R-Goochland, said Wednesday was his son's ninth birthday and he stayed home to make him waffles for breakfast. Del. Allen L. Louderback, R-Page, also did not make the meeting, although his reason was not immediately clear.

"I don't know whether they took a walk or not," said Del. Harry J. Parrish, the committee chairman. "They weren't here."

Howell, asked if he had given a directive to some members, replied, "I wouldn't say it was a directive."

All four later showed up for the floor session, an on-again, off-again affair with most activity taking place behind closed doors, as has been the case during much of this special session on the budget stalemate.

At the center of activity was House Bill 5018, sponsored by Parrish and drafted with the help of two fellow Republicans -- L. Preston Bryant Jr. of Lynchburg and S. Chris Jones of Suffolk.