How the U.S. Army Makes Its Tanks Look Like the Enemy's
For decades, U.S. Army wargames in the California desert have been full force-on-force exercises that pitch groups of soldiers against one another, using lasers to register hits. When you practice at battle, you want everything to feel as real as possible, including the enemy's weapons and vehicles. As War Is Boring reports, the army has gotten around the problem of scrounging up enemy tanks and armored vehicles by modifying local ones.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Just past the desert town of Barstow, CA, is Fort Irwin, home to the U.S. Army's National Training Center (NTC) and the Army's testing ground for frontline units. One battalion at a time, the Army and Army National Guard square off against the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment, a special unit that role plays the enemy OPFOR, or Opposing Force. Both sides are outfitted with lasers and sensors to "fire" and register hits on one another, and run through a variety of demanding scenarios to test a unit's fighting skills.

M113 armored personnel carrier modified to look like a T-72-series main battle tank.

The OPFOR is a mechanized force, modeled after modern armies such as Russia, Syria, and North Korea. The problem is getting the right vehicles—the NTC was started up during the Cold War, when Russian designed equipment was hard to source. The NTC had a need for hundreds of tanks, reconnaissance vehicles, armored personnel carriers, and other combat vehicles. At the same time, the Army was retiring the M551 Sheridan light tank from service, and suddenly hundreds of Sheridans were freed up for service. Engineers at the NTC took the Sheridans and, using fiberglass and other materials, turned them into T-72 tanks, BMP-1 infantry fighting vehicles, ZSU-23-4 mobile air defense guns, and so on. The new vehicles are called VISMODS (visual modifications).

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

In 1998, after decades of service, the M551s were replaced with M113 armored personnel carriers. The M113s are cheaper and easier to maintain, not a minor consideration when the each OPFOR vehicle racks up 3,000 or more miles a year batting it out with the rest of the Army.