How 'Back to the Future Part II' Foresaw the World of 2015
On Wednesday, we'll be in the future—well, the future that was imagined by Back to the Future Part II, the follow-up to the 1985 blockbuster, which sent Marty McFly (Michael J. Fox) and Doc Brown (Christopher Lloyd) to October 21, 2015 to see what happened to Marty's kids.

A new Blu-ray and DVD Back to the Future trilogy box set came out Tuesday to commemorate the occasion, and there already has been months of online buzz about how accurate Part II was at depicting the world of 2015. But while the 1989 sequel did a decent job forecasting the future, the film may ultimately be more memorable for creating a roadmap for subsequent Hollywood franchises to follow. We talked to screenwriter-producer Bob Gale about the film for this futuristic occasion.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

"We don't have 19 Jaws sequels, but they have Sharknado—that's kind of accurate, right?"

Surprisingly spot-on

For years, director Robert Zemeckis and Gale—or "Bob and Bob" as others call these creative partners—have insisted that they didn't worry about accurately predicting anything in Part II's 2015 sequence, figuring that making jokes about the 21st century would be a smarter bet since so many movies' bold visions of the future quickly look dated, silly, or just plain wrong. Yet Part II is surprisingly prescient: The clothing now looks dopey, sure, but the film correctly imagines a world where technological innovation has become central to people's lives.

Referring to scenes inside the future McFly home where the characters can watch multiple channels on the same flat screen monitor, Gale told me, "Look, we both read Popular Mechanics, we both read Popular Science—we like technology—so we knew that flat screen TVs were [something] people were trying to figure out. Was it a guess that people would wanna watch more than one video feed at a time? People [in the 1980s] actually did that. I remember [Steven Spielberg's former cinematographer] Allen Daviau watched all three network news broadcasts at the same time—he had three TVs in his house."

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Gale also proudly points to the automated waiters in the 2015 café, acknowledging, "We don't quite have that yet, but maybe five or eight years from now, we will. There are already cafés where the menu's in an iPad and you just push what you want and they bring your food out to you."

Sadly, a news story about "Queen Diana" didn't come to fruition because of Princess Di's 1997 death, through the possibility of the perennially hapless Chicago Cubs winning the World Series may no longer be a joke, considering, as of this writing, they're in the baseball playoffs. As for the existence of the movie Jaws 19, Gale notes that the made-up sequel "is in Holomax, which is basically 3D IMAX, so we got that right." He adds, joking, "We don't have 19 Jaws sequels, but they have Sharknado—that's kind of accurate, right?"

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

When they were conceiving Part II's future, Bob and Bob decided they didn't want a Jetsons-like landscape of space-ace sleekness. Instead, they thought of how the world actually changes over time, preferring to slightly alter prominent Hill Valley landmarks.

"So many movies that take place in the future, it looks like they just tore down everything and built everything up new," Gale explains. "I mean, you watch Blade Runner—which I really, really like—and that's supposed to be Los Angeles in the future, but there isn't one thing in there that looks like Los Angeles. That's not the way the future works. I'm in New York right now, and I've been coming here since I was a kid. Central Park is still the same, the subways are still all there, the Empire State Building is still there, and the Chrysler Building is still there. If you took somebody from New York City 30 years ago, or even 60 years ago, and you sat them down in 2015, all this technology would be new to them. But if you said, 'Get from Central Park to the Empire State Building,' they could do it. It hasn't changed that much."

"'Han Solo's in carbon freeze? What the hell is that?! That's no way to end a movie!'"

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Inventing the art of the sequel

Back to the Future Part II had a few misses and plenty of hits in its forward-looking approach to 2015. But what Bob and Bob really got right about 2015 isn't some technology they featured in the movie. It's the way they made the movie itself.

Back to the Future had been conceived to be just one movie. So when Universal approached Zemeckis and Gale a few months after the original's release to discuss a follow-up, the former University of Southern California classmates knew their predicament. "If we would've said no," Gale recalls, "Universal would've been in a position to get somebody else to do it. And we weren't gonna let that happen."

They did the movie, having to grapple with some dangling plot strands they had never intended to tie up. "Zemeckis has said many times, 'If we knew we were gonna do a sequel, we would've never put Jennifer [Marty's girlfriend] in the car at the very end [of the first film],'" Gale says with a laugh.

Back in 1989, Part II was novel for offering a cliffhanger ending that showed scenes from the subsequent Part III, which opened six months afterward: 1955 Doc and 1985 Marty needing to rescue 1985 Doc from the Old West. Not only did the Back to the Future sequels predict the multi-chapter movie franchises that were to come, it offered a glimpse into a Hollywood landscape in which individual films would be shot simultaneously in order to be released sooner, like with Peter Jackson's Tolkien trilogies.

"I'd love to take credit for that [trend]," Gale says, "but [producers] Alexander and Ilya Salkind did that with The Three Musketeers and The Four Musketeers. In the early 1970s, they shot both movies at the same time, and at the end of The Three Musketeers, there was a 45-second trailer for The Four Musketeers—and I remember seeing that and how excited I was."

When it came time to make Part II, Gale wanted to emulate the Musketeers movies' technique—as well as avoid the experience he'd had at a more recent blockbuster. "I remembered going to see The Empire Strikes Back and at the end of that how pissed off I was," Gale says. "'Han Solo's in carbon freeze? What the hell is that?! That's no way to end a movie!' We definitely did not want the audience at [Part II]walking out of the theater thinking, 'This is tragic.' We wanted you to know, 'Hey, it's gonna be okay. There's gonna be another movie—and not only is there gonna be another movie, you're gonna get to see it [soon], and here's a trailer for it.'"