Michele Bachmann: Remarks Announcing the End of Presidential Campaign Activities
Entrusted to every American is the responsibility to watch over our republic. From the pilgrims, to William Penn, to our founding fathers, we are encompassed about with a great cloud of witnesses that bear witness to the sacrifices made to establish our country and the precious principles of freedom that make it the greatest force for good on the planet. Each generation serves as the next stepping stone down the path of liberty.

Everyday I am reminded of the connection we have to the principles of freedom and justice by a painting, Howard Chandler Christy's scene at the Signing of the Constitution of the United States, which hangs in the East Grand Stairway of the United States Capitol.

But never was the painting's reminder more poignant than on the evening of March 21, 2010, the day Obamacare was passed. Staring out from the painting is the face of Ben Franklin as a consistent reminder of the fragile Republic he and the founders gave to us. That day served as the inspiration for my run for the presidency of the United States, because I believed firmly that what we had done in passing Obamacare endangered our Republic. I believed that it was my obligation to ensure that President Obama's program of socialized medicine was stopped before it became fully implemented.

And so my message has been the necessity for the complete repeal of Obamacare in this once in a lifetime campaign cycle. Obamacare represents the largest expansion of entitlement spending and playground of left wing social engineering in our country's history and must be stopped. Its repeal is more than just cliche for me, it is essential to my core of conviction because Obamacare violates the fundamental rights of freedom at the core of our republic, including for the first time in the history of the country, taxpayer funded abortion.

Deeply troubled by the state of our country, I ran for the Presidency foremost as an American citizen who believes in the foundation and greatness of our American principles. Our principles derive their meaning from the founders beliefs, rooted in the truths of the Bible.

And, while a Congresswoman by title, a politician I will never be. Motivated not by vainglory or the promise of political power, I have served one singular purpose in Washington DC — to lead an effort begun by the people to restore America. I ran as the next stepping stone of passing on and protecting the torch of freedom. That duty required taking on the charge of repealing Obamacare and Dodd-Frank, which mandated ensuring the election of thirteen more republican senators to guarantee their demise.

The implementation of Obamacare will represent a turning point for our country and our economy. And I worried what a future painting in Christy's vain might depict should Obamacare be placed into effect. Would future generations ask of us, what did we do and what did we give up to ensure the survival of our republic? I ran because I realized that 2012 is our last chance to get rid of Obamacare and Dodd-Frank, and I knew how to get rid of them. And I ran not only for me, but also to elect 13 more United States senators who could help me repeal it.

I ran because I have believed that since day one Barack Obama's policies, based in socialism, are destructive to the very foundations of our republic. I ran because I wanted my children and all of the children of this country to live free and have better opportunities than their parents had. I ran to secure the promise of their future. And so I decided to stand up for our country and fight.

And I'll keep fighting the president's agenda of socialism. And I'll keep fighting for you. Fighting for more liberty and less government. Fighting to stop the overspending in Washington. Fighting to keep our country free, safe and sovereign. Fighting against crony capitalism in Washington. Fighting to end excessive government regulation and a tax code that is unfair and kills American competitiveness. Fighting to legalize American energy production. Fighting for American families. Fighting to protect life from conception until natural death. Fighting to protect traditional marriage. Fighting to secure our borders. And fighting for religious liberty. I will fight for this country and for the American people everyday in the way that God allows me.

And so I came back here to this wonderful state where I was born and raised and that I've come to trust and love. And I had just one message: to tell you that I mean what I say and say what I mean. I've told you the truth that our country is in trouble and that this might be the last election to turn the country around before we go down the road to socialism to a burden of debt too heavy for our children to bear. I didn't just tell you what the polls said you wanted to hear. I didn't tell you what I knew to be false. I didn't try to spin you. I listened to the people of Iowa and all across America, and they agree that President Obama and his liberal policies must be stopped and that we must repeal Obamacare.

I sought nomination of the party of Lincoln and of Reagan that believes in the strength and goodness of the American people and that America is the greatest force for good on the planet. We don't believe that government has the answers, but that it should respect the rights and opportunities of the people to whom we are accountable. We believe that government should do its job as enumerated by the constitution and not your job, and that it should do it without spending more than it takes in.

Last night the people of Iowa spoke with a clear voice, and so I have decided to stand aside. I believe that if we are going to repeal Obamacare, turn our economy around and take back our country we must be united. I believe we must rally behind the person our country and our party selects to be that standard bearer. But make no mistake I will continue to be a strong voice. I will continue to stand and fight for this country and for the American people and for our freedom because Mr. Franklin and all of the founders, all of the men and women who given their last full measure of devotion are watching us. And we owe it to them, to our posterity, and to our God to keep our republic free.

I will be forever grateful to this state and its people for launching us on this path with our victory in the Iowa Straw Poll. While I will not be continuing in this race, my faith in the Lord God Almighty, this country, in our republic, has been strengthened. As I have traveled around this state and the country I have seen the very best in America, our people. And I will always believe in the greatness of them and the greatness of our God.

And, of course, I am deeply grateful to our entire campaign team, here in Iowa, in South Carolina and everywhere. I have no regrets. We never compromised our principles and we can leave this race knowing that we ran it with integrity and that we made an important contribution.

I want to thank my husband, Marcus, and my entire family. They, along with the Lord's provision of His incomprable faithfulness, have been my strength through the campaign. I look forward to the next chapter in God's plan—He has one for each of us, you know, if we will only cooperate with Him. He has always had something greater around the corner beyond what any of us could have ever imagined. I have lived an incredibly blessed life and am grateful to have been part of this presidential campaign.

Thank you, God Bless you and God Bless the United States of America.