Harry S. Truman: Executive Order 10186—Establishing the Federal Civil Defense Administration in the Office for Emergency Management of the Executive Office of the President
By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the statutes, and in furtherance of the civil defense of the United States, it is ordered as follows:

1. There is hereby established the Federal Civil Defense Administration (hereinafter referred to as the Administration) in the Office for Emergency Management of the Executive Office of the President. At the head of the Administration shall be an Administrator who shall be appointed by the President with compensation at the rate of $17,500 a year, and who may appoint a Deputy Administrator with compensation at the rate of $16,000 a year. The foregoing appointments shall be made without regard to the civil-service laws and the Classification Act of 1949.

2. The basic purpose of the Administration shall be to promote and facilitate the civil defense of the United States in cooperation with the several States. Subject to the direction and control of the President and within such amounts of funds as may be made available, and in accordance with law, the Administrator shall perform the following functions:

(a) Prepare comprehensive Federal plans and programs for the civil defense of the United States and coordinate them with the civil-defense activities of the States, of neighboring countries, and, with the consent of any such country, of any state, province, or similar political subdivision thereof.

(b) Conduct or arrange for the conduct of research to develop civil-defense measures and equipment and to effect the standardization thereof.

(c) Disseminate civil-defense information and exchange such information with foreign countries.

(d) Conduct or arrange for training programs for the instruction of State and local civil-defense leaders and specialists in the organization, operation, and techniques of civil defense.

(e) Assist and encourage any two States or groups of States or any one or more States and any neighboring state, province, or similar political subdivision of a foreign country, with the consent of such foreign country, in negotiating and entering into agreements or compacts for mutual aid across State lines, or into or out of the United States, to meet emergencies or disasters from enemy attacks which cannot be adequately met or controlled by the local forces: Provided, That all such agreements or compacts shall be subject to the consent of the Congress.

(f) Make appropriate provision for necessary civil-defense communications.

3. All departments and agencies of the Federal Government are authorized and directed to cooperate with the Administrator and, to the extent permitted by law, to furnish the Administrator such information and Assistance as he may require in the performance of his functions under this order. The Administrator shall, to the extent practicable, utilize existing facilities and services of the departments and other agencies. The Administrator shall review the civil-defense activities of the departments and agencies and promote the coordination of these activities with one another and with the comprehensive Federal plans and programs prepared by the Administrator pursuant to this order. Insofar as the functions assigned hereunder relate to negotiations or the exchange of information with foreign countries or their political subdivisions, such functions shall be performed in cooperation with and subject to the approval of the Secretary of State.

4. To the extent necessary to carry out the provisions of this order, the Administrator is authorized (1) to employ civilian personnel for duty in the United States, including the District of Columbia, or elsewhere, subject to the civil-service laws, (2) to fix the compensation of such personnel in accordance with the Classification Act of 1949, and (3) to make provision for supplies, facilities, and services: Provided, That the rates of compensation for not more than twenty-two positions (1) may be fixed without regard to the Classification Act of 1949, (2) shall be not less than $11200 or more than $14,000 per annum, and (3) shall be fixed subject to the approval of the Civil Service Commission in those cases in which they are $13,000 or less per annum and subject to the approval of the President in those cases in which they are more than $13,000 per annum.

5. The Administrator is authorized to employ experts and consultants or organizations thereof, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of section 15 of the act of August 2, 1946 (5 U.S.C. 55a), at rates not in excess of $50 per diem. While away from their homes or regular places of business, on the business of the Administration, persons so employed may be paid actual transportation expenses and an allowance not to exceed $15 per diem in lieu of subsistence and other expenses.

6. Those activities with respect to civil defense heretofore performed by employees of the National Security Resources Board which are within the scope of this order shall hereafter be performed by the Administration; and the employees now primarily engaged in performing the said activities shall be transferred from the national Security Resources Board to the Administration. The records of the National Security Resources Board relating to the said activities shall be made available to the Administrator pursuant to the provisions of Executive Order No. 9784 of September 25, 1946.

7. As used in this order, the terms "State" and "States" include the Territories and possessions of the United States and the District of Columbia.

8. Pending the appropriate of funds for the use of the Administration, its expenditures, including the compensation of personnel, shall be financed out of an allotment or allotments to be made by the President from the appropriation under the heading "Executive Office of the President-Emergencies (National Defense)" appearing in the Supplemental Appropriation Act, 1951 (Public Law 843, 81st Congress, approved September 27, 1950).

HARRY S. TRUMAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

December 1, 1950