Planned Parenthood Reaffirms Support of Potentially Lifesaving Research Using Fetal Tissue Donated By Women
NEW YORK, March 9 /PRNewswire/ -- Planned Parenthood Federation of America President Gloria Feldt reinforced concern about the alleged profiteering of fetal tissue donated by women for medical research in Kansas, which was a subject of the ABC News show "20/20" last evening. The ABC "20/20" segment detailed alleged abuses by private sector tissue and organ procurement companies that receive and distribute donations of fetal tissue for research. "Where there is wrongdoing, it should be prosecuted and the people who are doing that kind of thing should be brought to justice," said Gloria Feldt to ABC's Correspondent Chris Wallace during their conversation for the "20/20" show. In a separate letter sent to ABC's Chris Wallace, Feldt reaffirmed that Planned Parenthood believes that fetal tissue research is an important endeavor with the potential to save lives and ameliorate disease. "Planned Parenthood supports research using fetal tissue in accordance with legal and ethical guidelines and are deeply concerned about the attempt by some to profit from the humanitarian contributions of courageous women," said Gloria Feldt. "We are confident those Planned Parenthood affiliates offering women the option to donate tissue are doing so in accordance with the law and medical ethics," added Feldt. In a related proactive step, several leading women's reproductive healthcare and policy organizations, including Planned Parenthood, have sent a letter to the U.S. Department of Justice calling attention to the private sector tissue and organ procurement companies implicated in the news program. In addition, Planned Parenthood is urging the Chairman of the House Health and Environment Subcommittee of Commerce, Rep. Michael Bilirakis (R-FL), who is planning to hold hearings on the matter, to seek enforcement of the existing statutes, including the National Organ Transplant Act and the NIH Revitalization Act of 1993. In a letter to Chairman Bilirakis, Feldt affirmed the critical status of the issue, but expressed concern that "the public nature of Thursday's inquiry may undermine the important research being conducted by scientists looking for cures to debilitating diseases, and may potentially stigmatize the donation of fetal tissue." Feldt concluded: "We will not stand silent while anti-choice zealots engage in offensive and perhaps illegal behavior, so lacking in compassion that they would sacrifice potentially lifesaving medical research to further their political goals, which is to deprive women of the fundamental right to choose abortion."



SOURCE Planned Parenthood Federation of America

NEW YORK, March 9 /PRNewswire/ -- Planned Parenthood Federation of America President Gloria Feldt reinforced concern about the alleged profiteering of fetal tissue donated by women for medical research in Kansas, which was a subject of the ABC News show "20/20" last evening. The ABC "20/20" segment detailed alleged abuses by private sector tissue and organ procurement companies that receive and distribute donations of fetal tissue for research. "Where there is wrongdoing, it should be prosecuted and the people who are doing that kind of thing should be brought to justice," said Gloria Feldt to ABC's Correspondent Chris Wallace during their conversation for the "20/20" show. In a separate letter sent to ABC's Chris Wallace, Feldt reaffirmed that Planned Parenthood believes that fetal tissue research is an important endeavor with the potential to save lives and ameliorate disease. "Planned Parenthood supports research using fetal tissue in accordance with legal and ethical guidelines and are deeply concerned about the attempt by some to profit from the humanitarian contributions of courageous women," said Gloria Feldt. "We are confident those Planned Parenthood affiliates offering women the option to donate tissue are doing so in accordance with the law and medical ethics," added Feldt. In a related proactive step, several leading women's reproductive healthcare and policy organizations, including Planned Parenthood, have sent a letter to the U.S. Department of Justice calling attention to the private sector tissue and organ procurement companies implicated in the news program. In addition, Planned Parenthood is urging the Chairman of the House Health and Environment Subcommittee of Commerce, Rep. Michael Bilirakis (R-FL), who is planning to hold hearings on the matter, to seek enforcement of the existing statutes, including the National Organ Transplant Act and the NIH Revitalization Act of 1993. In a letter to Chairman Bilirakis, Feldt affirmed the critical status of the issue, but expressed concern that "the public nature of Thursday's inquiry may undermine the important research being conducted by scientists looking for cures to debilitating diseases, and may potentially stigmatize the donation of fetal tissue." Feldt concluded: "We will not stand silent while anti-choice zealots engage in offensive and perhaps illegal behavior, so lacking in compassion that they would sacrifice potentially lifesaving medical research to further their political goals, which is to deprive women of the fundamental right to choose abortion." SOURCE Planned Parenthood Federation of America