Jimmy Carter: Legal Services Corporation Nomination of Five Members of the Board of Directors. Tweet Legal Services Corporation Nomination of Five Members of the Board of Directors.

The President today announced five persons whom he will nominate to be members of the Board of Directors of the Legal Services Corporation for terms expiring in 1980. They are:

CECILIA D. ESQUER, 35, of Tempe, Ariz. Esquer is assistant attorney general of Arizona. She is a 1976 graduate of Arizona State University College of Law, where she was on the Committee on Legal Education Opportunity and the Chicano Law Students Association. Her special areas of interest are school law, poverty law, and civil rights.

STEVEN L. ENGELBERG, 35, of Chevy Chase, Md. Engelberg is a partner in the Washington law firm of Price, Grove, Engelberg & Fried. From 1969 to 1973, he was legislative counsel to then-Senator Walter Mondale.

HILLARY RODHAM, 30, of Little Rock, Ark. Rodham practices law in Little Rock and Fayetteville, Ark. She was an assistant professor of law at the University of Arkansas Law School from 1974 to 1977. Her special area of interest is children under the law.

RICHARD A. TRUDELL, 34, of Oakland, Calif. Trudell is the executive director of the American Indian Lawyer Training Program. In 1972 and 1973, he was director of the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial's Fellowship Program. He is a member of the American Indian Bar Association.

JOSEPHINE WORTHY, 43, of Holyoke, Mass. Worthy is youth director of Bethlehem Baptist Church and president of the TOETFERT Housing Project Tenants Association. She is on the advisory board of the Office of Children's Services of the State Department of Social Services. From 1974 to 1976, she was a family life counselor at Holyoke Street School. Citation: Jimmy Carter: "Legal Services Corporation Nomination of Five Members of the Board of Directors.," December 12, 1977. Online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project. http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=7006.