Crayola Announces the Retirement of Dandelion on National Crayon Day
"The essence of the Crayola brand is color, creativity and fun and our mission is to spark the creative spirit in children," said Smith Holland, President and CEO of Crayola. "With Dandelion retiring, we are very excited to celebrate this day and to share these unique creative experiences with our fans."

Joining the event was the Pentatonix, the three-time Grammy Award-Winning and Multi-Platinum selling a cappella group, who colored the event with their one-of-a-kind arrangements and unparalleled harmonies celebrating creativity and honoring the color Dandelion.

Erik Wahl, an internationally recognized graffiti artist and #1 best-selling author, helped Crayola further celebrate by creating his signature and inspiring "Art of Vision" artwork, and by talking about the power and importance of creativity.

To celebrate the color Dandelion, Crayola will be sending the Dandelion crayon character on a retirement tour around the country. Consumers can keep track of his whereabouts by visiting an interactive map at www.Crayola.com/Tour.

There will also be a surprise tour stop along the way that consumers can influence – By tagging a post with #CelebrateDandelion along with a geotagged location on Instagram, Dandelion might just show up in your backyard!

"As we celebrate National Crayon Day and Dandelion, we are also extremely excited to share what color comes next," said Melanie Boulden, Senior Vice President, US & Global Marketing at Crayola. "Not only are we introducing a new Blue to the world to take Dandelion's place, but we will invite our fans to be a part of Crayola history by naming it."

For more information on Dandelion, visit www.Crayola.com/Retirement. To see a highlight reel of Dandelion's top moments, www.Crayola.com/Tour.

Dandelion crayons will continue to appear in Crayola crayon boxes while supplies last

Stay tuned for the announcement in May, when Crayola will ask fans to help them name this new shade of Blue. For more details, visit www.Crayola.com/NewColor.

About Crayola

Crayola LLC, based in Easton, Pa. and a subsidiary of Hallmark Cards, Incorporated, is the worldwide leader in children's creative expression products. Known for the iconic Crayola Crayon first introduced in 1903, the Crayola brand has grown into a portfolio of innovative art tools, crafting activities and creativity toys that offer children innovative new ways to use color to create everything imaginable. Consumers can find the wide array of Crayola products in the "Crayola Aisle" at all major retailers. For more information visit www.crayola.com or join the community at www.facebook.com/crayola.

Dandelion crayons will continue to appear in Crayola crayon boxes while supplies last.

About Pentatonix

In just five years, Pentatonix has sold more than 6 million albums in the U.S. alone, won 3 Grammy Awards, are currently nominated for a Daytime Emmy and performed for hundreds of thousands of fans at their sold-out shows across the globe. Their YouTube channel boasts close to 13 million subscribers, yielding over 2 billion video views, and their 2015 self-titled album has been certified gold after debuting #1 on Billboard's 200. In October 2016, Pentatonix released their third holiday album - A Pentatonix Christmas - which has been certified platinum, spending two consecutive weeks atop Billboard's 200 Chart as well as became the 5th best-selling album of 2016. The album includes a cover of the Leonard Cohen classic "Hallelujah," which reached #2 on the iTunes singles chart and has been certified gold. The group's newest release - PTX Vol. 4 - Classics (out April 7th) - features their Grammy Award-winning performance of "Jolene" with Dolly Parton, as well as an arrangement of the John Lennon classic "Imagine."

About Erik Wahl

Erik Wahl is an internationally recognized artist and No. 1 bestselling business author. His breakthrough experience as an artist has translated into making him into one of the most sought-after speakers on the corporate lecture circuit today. His breakthrough strategies has earned praise from top influencers in the realms of both art and business. Erik's bestselling business books, THE SPARK AND THE GRIND, and UNTHINK, have been hailed by Forbes Magazine as THE blueprint to actionable creativity, and by Fast Company Magazine as "provocative with a purpose." His sought-after artwork has raised millions of dollars for charity and can be seen hanging prominently in executive offices all over the world.

Erika Merklinger

Crayola

eamerklinger@crayola.com

(610) 253-6272 ext. 4625

Jackie Miller

Golin for Crayola

jmiller@golin.com

(212) 373-6042

SOURCE Crayola