Pantheon Arms - DOLOS
I never do reviews good or bad. mostly when I buy a part and it fails to meet expectations I chalk it up to experience and cry myself to sleep hoping no one hears my sobs of anguish. I had to for this product. I wanted something compact. Was tired of lugging my gear to places. "Hey that looks like a rifle case!" I thought the DOLOS would work. I searched all over youtube and forums seeing if anyone had anything to say bad about this. I found nothing. May I didn't look hard enough. all I found were cool reviews about how easy it is to install and blah blah...First watch out for the female lock collar it may not fit onto your upper. I figure eh I just sand some down to get it on. no prob. we'll get back to this...Second the hand guard lock collar it didn't dawn on me until I started attaching the hand guard on. This does allow for those awesomely beefy YHM anti-rotation set screws to be used. If you compare the YHM barrel nut to the Dolos hand guard mount you'll see what I mean.Mine does ratchet with that cool clicking sound you hear in other youtuber vids. plus I find there is a stacking tolerance that causes interference fits. Maybe I am installing this on wrong. but short of really monkeying the shit out this thing which I kind of already have I don't trust it. the barrel still has play in it. the ratchet is difficult to engage. the handguard DOES not repeat position with confidence. In my defense I wasn't even doing the install. its a trusted friend with years of putting together reliable rifles for me. We are both CNC programmer/machinist and shooting enthusiasts. Maybe I got a lemon. Even if it went on easy the definite fail is that you cannot use the YHM anti-rotation screw that come with the hand guard. you prolly should cake on a lot of Loctite onto the threads of the handguard if you don't want it to move. The instructions even fail to address using the YHM hand guards and there seems to be no support. At least none I could find. Its a good idea. I want it to work. But I have no confidence in its repeatability. I have not tested it at the range. but when the handguard doesn't line up after several function tests I don't want to take the change of a catastrophic failure. I hope others have better luck than me again its a good idea. I would not recommend this to anyone who has to rely on their weapon for anything other than a range toy or only if you're a tactically armed circus bear who has to have the coolest new hoobie doobie on your rifle. And I am not gun guy I just play one on Tee Bee..