About
Mission

The mission of the AGC of Greater Milwaukee is to promote, educate and interact with our membership by delivering exceptional value through innovative programming and the highest quality service. This mission is accomplished by responding to our members needs and working to optimize their business success. AGC is also committed to building member involvement and loyalty by providing the highest quality service efficiently and effectively. Additionally AGC seeks to develop new initiatives that assure association growth and improvement. Finally, AGC is committed to cultivating new association leaders to provide for future continuity and assure association growth and improvement.

History

Representing over 40 general contractors and 300 subcontractors, suppliers and service suppliers the AGC is the largest and most influential construction trade association in the State of Wisconsin. As a full service construction association the AGC operates with a governing structure of ten Board Members, which includes a leadership team of three officers. They are charged, along with the CEO and the AGC staff, with championing the needs of the AGC membership with innovative programming and services, and is dedicated to strengthening its role in the construction community

1913 the Concrete Contractors of Milwaukee founded

1919 name changed to the Associated General Contractors of Milwaukee the same year that the Associated General Contractors of America was born

1967 the AGC of Greater Milwaukee founded the Milwaukee Construction Industry Safety Council (MCISC). The MCISC leads the nation in construction safety and has won numerous awards for its innovative construction safety programs.

1976 AGC establishes the AGC Education & Research Foundation which has awarded of $400,000 in scholarships and grants to college students, many of which currently are employed by our Chapter’s member firms.

1980 the AGC of Greater Milwaukee merges with the Builders Exchange of Milwaukee which was established in 1887. The Builders Exchange is a depository for the review of plans and specifications from throughout Wisconsin, Northern Michigan and Illinois.

2002 the AGC establishes the first ever electronic plan room in the state of Wisconsin.

2004 Formed the AGC - Construction Leadership Council

President’s Message

Dear AGC Members,

I am honored and delighted to serve as the 2017 President of the Associated General Contractors of Greater Milwaukee (AGC-GM). The AGC has been the leading association in the construction industry for over 100 years. Representing members throughout southeastern Wisconsin, the AGC-GM provides tools and resources to advance our industry and enhance our members’ businesses. I look forward to the opportunity to partner with the board of directors and talented AGC staff to continue the AGC’s success in 2017. The AGC is committed to our over 300 members, representing their interests on matters that impact and advance the construction industry in southeastern Wisconsin. Our members, including construction managers, general contractors, specialty contractors, and suppliers, share a focus on workforce development and outreach, as well as involvement in public policies that affect our industry. Together, we are building for the future by developing and educating our construction professionals and workforce – with an unrelenting emphasis on safety, quality, and lean techniques. Safety Programing & Services Construction safety clearly impacts our industry, as well as the success of our members’ companies. That is why the AGC-GM has two specialized full-time safety professionals to provide a variety of safety services. From 15 different safety training programs to our OSHA violation advocacy efforts, the AGC is committed to helping our members become safer contractors. Labor Relations & Collective Bargaining For decades, the AGC has set the standard for representation in collective bargaining and labor relations. Services include, in part, representation on trust funds, interpretation and administration of labor agreements, representation at grievance hearings, the creation of the Construction Lawyers Committee, and periodic updates. Last year, we enhanced our already successful Labor Relations Program by hiring Attorney Nathan Jurowski as the new AGC General Counsel. This ensures that the AGC is prepared for the increasing complexities of collective bargaining. With the addition of General Counsel, our Labor Relations Program is now without equal. Workforce Development Workforce development has never been so important for our industry. Working with our partners at WRTP/BIG STEP and Employ Milwaukee, we continue to build and educate tomorrow’s workforce. Our partners at the Construction Building Trades Council and the Construction Labor Management Council (CLMC) continue to develop new tools to grow and develop our workforce. Education & Networking The AGC has long been an invaluable education resource for our industry. The Construction Leadership Council (CLC) supports the next generation of leaders via networking opportunities and local project tours. AGC’s Superintendent in Training Program (STP) provides education in leadership, communication, planning and scheduling, contract documents and construction law, productivity, project cost management, and risk management. Public Policy Following our recent success implementing the new Sales & Use Tax Exemption Applied to the Purchase of Materials for Non-Profits, we are now looking to expand its application to other areas (i.e. Tech Colleges, University of Wisconsin Hospitals/Clinics, etc.). Revising this new legislation to include all public works contracts will simplify these systems, help eliminate confusion, and increase the utilization of the new law. Also, we will fight vigorously to prevent any further erosion of the Prevailing Wage, as well as work to avert any efforts by legislators to limit the capacity for contractors to engage in referendums for school construction. I am sincerely thankful and humbled to have been elected to lead the AGC-GM, and look forward to working with our members in 2017. Sincerely, Tim Jones Mortenson Construction 2017 AGC-GM President 2017 AGC-GM President

AGC of Greater Milwaukee Education & Research Foundation

The Associated General Contractors of Greater Milwaukee Education & Research Foundation was founded in the 1970's to promote construction industry related education and training efforts. Throughout the years, Foundation grants have funded professional growth programs for our contractor members, the development of technical education programs and scholarships to local scholars totaling well over a quarter of a million dollars in giving.

Thanks to visionary volunteer leadership, the AGC Education & Research Foundation continues to provide a solid base of educational and research programs that will allow deserving students the chance to pursue their dreams of a career in construction. In addition to funds provided through voluntary donations, the AGC Education & Research Foundation hosts several fundraisers each year to help secure additional funds to support the Foundation's scholarship program, and student competition participation.

For more information on the AGC of Greater Milwaukee Education & Research Foundation and how you can lend your support, please contact Heather Stair, Education Director at 414-778-4100.

The current Education & Research Foundation Board includes:



Chairman: Rupert Kotze, Kotze Construction Co., Inc.

Jim Parks, Berghammer Construction Corp.

Angie Benike, J.F. Ahern Co.

Rick Schmidt, Jr., C.G. Schmidt