McAuliffe says he'll raise teachers' pay, reform SOLs as governor
McAuliffe promises teacher pay raises if elected

"As governor I'll make sure that your pay reflects the work that you do," McAuliffe said, drawing a standing ovation from the roughly 700 delegates to the VEA's annual conference.

HAMPTON – Terry McAuliffe, the Democratic nominee for governor, told members of the Virginia Education Association Thursday that if elected he would work to raise teachers' pay.

The VEA is the statewide organization the represents public school teachers and school support staff in the commonwealth.

McAuliffe pointed out that when comparing the average teacher's salary to the average worker's salary in the state Virginia has the worst ratio in the nation. Virginia ranks fourth in the nation in educational quality and 33rd in average teacher salary.

During the last General Assembly session Gov. Bob McDonnell pushed through a 2 percent pay raise for teachers and support staff – their first in five years.

The Northern Virginia entrepreneur also promised to cut back on the emphasis put on the state's Standards of Learning tests; and strengthen teachers benefits.

McAuliffe said if the state wants to attract new businesses to the commonwealth it is important to have the strongest education system possible.

"If your willing to shake it up I'm willing to shake it up with you to make sure Virginia is number one," McAuliffe said.

While never mentioning his opponent by name McAuliffe did take a swipe at presumptive Republican nominee for governor Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli, who did not attend the VEA's candidates forum.

"We do not need a governor who is focused on a divisive social agenda that divides people," McAuliffe said.

Cuccinelli campaign spokeswoman Anna Nix said McAuliffe was at the event to curry favor with organized labor.

"It's no surprise that Terry McAuliffe has ventured to another labor boss soirée to solicit their support in his latest endeavor," Nix said. "McAuliffe's 2009 campaign was enriched by union bosses and for years he's personally profited from his Big Labor contacts."

McAuliffe ran for the Democratic nomination for governor and lost in 2009 – which he joked about in his address Thursday night.

Rather than attend the VEA candidates forum Cuccinelli spoke at an afternoon panel at the pro-life group Susan B. Anthony List's summit in Washington, D.C. titled "Protecting the Conscience of Pro-Life Taxpayers" with U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, and Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer, and attended the organization's gala reception that evening.