Welcome Aboard
Page Content

Welcome to the USS Mustin Family!

Hello and thank you for choosing USS MUSTIN. We look forward to working with you. Our sailors are proud to serve here and we are sure that you will be equally proud.

If you are transferring to us from another Command here in Yokosuka, Japan, you need to ensure you route your Continued Station Allowance (CSA) and Continued Logistical Support (CLS) authorizations so that there will be no issues with housing or the DOD school system arising from your transfer.

If you are coming from the Continental United States or an overseas assignment outside Japan, you need to initiate the overseas screening process as soon as you receive your orders. Once your overseas screening is complete your Family Entry Approval message (for accompanied service members) will be completed, which will enable you to apply for government no-fee passports for your family and schedule you household goods (HHG) moves.

If you do not already have a tourist passport, you should acquire one before coming to Japan because, while you can travel with only your Military ID card if you are under orders, a passport may be required for emergency leave travel from many of the countries the ship visits.

If you are married, ensure that you have powers of attorney for your spouse. Many services, including setting up phone service, registering a vehicle, accepting your household goods delivery, and housing office business require your spouse to have a power of attorney, with raised seal, to execute them in your absence.

An unexpired American driver’s license is required to obtain a Status Of Forces Agreement (SOFA) license to drive in Japan. As such, you should ensure that your American driver’s license will not expire for at least a year after your report date to provide a buffer in case the ship is deployed when you arrive and it take several months before you get enough time in port to obtain the SOFA driver’s license.

If you have a pet, you need to begin the process of micro-chipping and vaccination against rabies. This process can take several months. Check the information available at HTTP://WWW.CNIC.NAVY.MIL/YOKOSUKA/INDEX.HTM. Bringing your pet here affects your eligibility for certain on-base housing units, and may affect your ability to rent a house off-base. Please plan ahead!

The schools on base all have websites that can be accessed from the Commander Fleet Activities Yokosuka (CFAY) website HTTPS://WWW.CNIC.NAVY.MIL/YOKOSUKA/INDEX.HTM. Pay attention to the immunization requirements for your children and know that you will need copies of their immunization records in order to enroll them in school. Most of the immunization requirements for school attendance can be acquired during your overseas screening exams.

If you will be traveling with dependants, make reservations at the Navy Lodge as soon as you know your travel itinerary. The Navy Lodge fills up fast, so acting well in advance is important.

The CFAY website (HTTPS://WWW.CNIC.NAVY.MIL/YOKOSUKA/INDEX.HTM) also has information on housing. There is housing on the main base and at two other remote housing areas, Ikego (about 25 minutes away) and Negishi (about 45 minutes away). There is also housing off-base in the local community. Unaccompanied sailors who are at least E4 over four years (unless you are a geo-bachelor) are eligible to receive an Off-base Housing Allowance to live off-base.

The MUSTIN Command Ombudsman is a very valuable resource for married and single, accompanied and unaccompanied Sailors. The information and referral services that the Ombudsman provides not only helps to ease the transition for you and any family members you may be bringing with you but also provides support and comfort to those friends and family members you may be leaving behind. Your spouse, parents, and friends can contact the MUSTIN Command Ombudsman via email at MUSTIN_OMBUDSMAN@YAHOO.COM or via phone at 011-81-80-6667-9026.

Yokosuka is 14 hours ahead of Eastern Standard Time (13 during daylight savings time).

Once again, welcome aboard.