Idaho Observer: Barrister uncovers root of national schizophrenia
From the December 2001 Idaho Observer:

Barrister uncovers root of national schizophrenia

People born in the USA have dual citizenship

By Don Harkins

SPOKANE, Wash. -- Florida Barrister Austin Gary Cooper of Taking Back America (TBA) presented what appears to be a flawless line of logic to nearly 150 people at the Ramada near the airport here November 7, 2001. Cooper provided convincing evidence that suggests all persons born in the United States have dual citizenship: American and U.S. -- one by birth and the other by contract.

“American Citizens are to abide six laws; U.S. citizens are subject to 60 million statutes,” Cooper explained and then added, “What would you rather do -- obey six laws or try to obey 60 million statutes?

According to Cooper, the dividing line came with the ratification of the 14th Amendment in 1868. Until that time Americans were sovereign state Citizens under the Constitution. Upon passage of the 14th Amendment, we closed the southern plantation and freed the Negro slaves; opened the federal plantation, created U.S. citizens -- all of whom are slaves.

What Cooper uncovered to prove that we are born with dual citizenship is that a little known law was passed by the 40th Congress July 27, 1868 -- the day before the 14th Amendment was ratified.

“An Act concerning the Rights of American Citizens in foreign States...Be it enacted by the Senate and the House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, that any declaration, instruction, order or decision of any Officers of this government which denies, restricts, impairs or questions the right of expatriation, is hereby declared inconsistent with the fundamental principles of this government.” ~United States Statutes at Large, Volume 15, Chapter 249, page 223, 40th Congress.

Cooper then explains the concept of foreign states. Under the definition, the United States is the proper name for the federal government and its territories and possessions and is, therefore, a state foreign to a person born into American citizenship. “The 40th Congress, knowing what was coming the following day, gave us the ability to expatriate ourselves from the U.S. side, and repatriate ourselves back into the American side.

As an American Citizen, “the law gives you all the power in the world to do anything you want so long as you don't injure a person or his property, or take the rights of others,” Cooper explained.

“As a U.S. citizen, you are a possession of the United States government and therefore are subject to its 60 million statutes.”

The goal of TBA is to teach Americans the fundamentals of citizenship and the difference between laws and statutes: “Laws are given to us by God and are described in English Common Law; statutes are abrogations of law,” said Cooper who added that Congress was authorized by the Constitution to make laws, not pass statutes which are actually bylaws for the corporation that U.S. citizens must obey.

Cooper has a lot of disdain for attorneys and the Bar association which he believes is running the government of this country. He also commented that BAR is an acronym for British Accredited Registry. A look at Cooper's documentation would support his claim that all attorneys are guilty of treason. “They are officers of the court first; government agents next. Their job is take from you and give to the crown,” Cooper said.

Note: There are a lot of “programs” out there with regard to this subject matter. Most of them require quantum leaps in logic to accept as valid. This is the first time I have ever heard anyone mention the expatriation/repatriation act of the 40th Congress. The rest of Cooper's material fits with other research to which I have been exposed.

For those who are on a mission to discover their true status as people living in this bizarre time, I suggest you take a look at the ad on page 23.