A Peace Plan for Syria IV: A Bottom-Up Approach, Linking Reconstruction Assistance to Local Government Formation
This Perspective is the fourth in a series in which the authors argue for practical steps aimed at reaching a durable cessation of hostilities and separation of forces in Syria. As the international community continues to search for ways to resolve Syria's civil war, RAND researchers argue that an approach to reconstruction offered on a community-by-community basis could foster a bottom-up political process, help consolidate the peace, reduce the regime's reliance on Russia and Iran, and make the reemergence of a terrorist movement less likely. Such an approach offers a better prospect that at least some areas will see increased economic activity and political development, some refugees will return, and some progress can be made toward reform of the Syrian state.

This project is a RAND Venture. Funding for this venture was provided by philanthropic contributions from RAND supporters and income from operations. The research was conducted by the RAND National Security Research Division.

This report is part of the RAND Corporation perspective series. RAND perspectives present informed perspective on a timely topic that address the challenges facing the public and private sectors. All RAND perspectives undergo rigorous peer review to ensure high standards for research quality and objectivity.

Permission is given to duplicate this electronic document for personal use only, as long as it is unaltered and complete. Copies may not be duplicated for commercial purposes. Unauthorized posting of RAND PDFs to a non-RAND Web site is prohibited. RAND PDFs are protected under copyright law. For information on reprint and linking permissions, please visit the RAND Permissions page.

The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit institution that helps improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.