"Andy Kaufman Returns" Was My Hoax, Admits Fan
(PRWEB) On May 19th 2004 a Press Release from New York was issued claiming that infamous comedian and prankster Andy Kaufman was apparently back from the dead after allegedly faking his own death in 1984. The outlandish release had explained that Kaufman was in fact alive and well, and had been living in secrecy for the past 20 years. The report was met with scepticism by the mainstream media, but it did not prevent some news sources reporting it at as fact.

Although many have speculated that Kaufman, a notorious prankster, could have indeed faked his death, a press release was issued today from 26 year old Enrique Proust of Burbank, CA, claiming he was responsible for the recent reports.

"I faked the whole thing", Proust explained, "it was very easy to do. I am deeply sorry for any distress I have caused to the Kaufman family and any of Andy's closest friends". He continued, "it was my intention to continue the spirit of Andy Kaufman alive and to provoke debate about his possible whereabouts, but I did not anticipate the feelings of those closest to him, and for that I'm very sorry."

On his website Proust, as Kaufman, had made several defamatory remarks about the Kaufman family, claiming that they themselves part of an elaborate hoax and were not actually related to Kaufman. It is rumoured that these remarks may have prompted their recent "cease and desist" order against Proust.

Kaufman's life-long friend and charity event organizer, Bob Zmuda, made the following statement regarding Proust's press release.

"I'm very glad to hear that Mr. Proust has decided to stop his recent activities which had deeply upset Andy's family," he said. "I understand Mr. Proust's intentions, and I'm sure Andy would have loved the idea for people to believe he was still alive, but this has been a rather destructive and upsetting event for family, friends and fans of Andy's alike."

"If Andy was coming back," added Zmuda, "believe me, I'd know about it, and he's definitey not".

According to Proust, his website, "Andy Kaufman Returns" will be taken down within the next few weeks and it is expected that he will post an apology and explanation shortly. "I still hope that Andy will one day make a triumphant return", he said.