Our Management Team
Barbara K. Peel - President and Chairman of the Board

In 1960 Barbara K. and William F. Peel founded Red Coats, Inc., a commercial office cleaning company. Barbara is active in the management of Red Coats, both operationally and financially. Her particular expertise in the management of costs and receivables has been instrumental in Red Coats' success.

William F. Peel -Corporation Vice Chairman

A native of Washington, William was a founder of Red Coats, Inc. in 1960. Prior to that, he was a Division Manager of Franklin Research Company (a subsidiary of Purex). He is Past President of the Capitol Association of Building Service Contractors, and served as Treasurer in 1974, and Host Chairman of their 1973 convention. William is a member of the Board of Realtors and obtained the designation of Certified Building Service Executive (CBSE) from Building Service Contractors Association International (BSCAI) in 1976. In 2009, William was awarded the Montgomery County, MD. Man of the Year.

W. Mack Wells – Executive Vice President

Mack is the Executive Vice President of Red Coats Inc., after starting with the company in 1966 as a Building Supervisor learning all facets of the commercial office cleaning business before leaving in 1975. He then worked in public relations with Rockville Crushed Stone, Inc., and was elected to the Board of Directors of the Rockville Chamber of Commerce. In 1979 Mack moved to Puerto Rico to become the General Manager of Caribbean Air Services, Inc., (freight airline serving Miami and the Caribbean), a subsidiary of Red Coats, Inc. After the sale of the airline in June of 1981, he rejoined Red Coats, Inc., as a Sales Manager. In December of 1982 he opened the Florida Division office in Tampa, and in 1985 was promoted to Vice President of the Corporation and then in 1988 was promoted to Executive Vice President.

Bob Butorac – Senior Vice President of Operations

Bob is the Senior Vice President of Operations and in conjunction with Scott Kydd oversees the entire Red Coats Inc. Operations Department for all regions serviced. With 30 years of executive management experience including 20 years in the building service industry in the Washington Metropolitan area, Bob joined Red Coats, Inc. in 1999.

Scott Kydd – Senior Vice President of Operations

Scott graduated from George Mason University with a Bachelor of Science in Economics. He obtained experience as an Area Manager and Director of Operations for a major contract cleaning company before joining Red Coats, Inc. in 1997. He has a comprehensive understanding of operations and management of both commercial and residential accounts. After working in operations at the site and regional level he was promoted to Vice President of Operations with additional responsibilities for ensuring adherence to contract specifications. He also facilitates the customer satisfaction process as well as overseeing the Operations Department and customer service in conjunction with Bob Butorac.

Jack Ball – Vice President Southern Virginia and North Carolina Divisions

Jack is responsible for all sales and operations in the Southern Virginia and North Carolina Divisions. A long time resident of the Richmond area, Jack joined the Red Coats Management Team in June of 2006 and brings with him years of Management and Sales experience in Manufacturing and Distribution for the custodial industry. As a distribution Regional Director, Jack was in charge of Red Coats accounts from the beginning of our Richmond Branch in October of 2001. He has received several honors in his 22 year Sales and Management career. They include Presidents Circle, Hall of Fame and District Manager of the Year and Sales Person of the Year.

Todd Dayton LEED AP O & M – Vice President Florida

Todd graduated from Rollins College with a BS and has an MBA from Jacksonville University, Davis College of Business. He has over 30 years of industry experience and is active in the USGBC, IFMA, ISSA, and BOMA.

Erick Ireland – Senior Vice President, Marketing and Sales

Erick is responsible for the Red Coats Inc. Marketing and Sales Department, overseeing our LEED compliant Global Care Program and managing the corporate office Operations Administrative staff. He is an experienced Area Manager, Marketing Analyst, VP of Administration and Vice President. Erick joined Red Coats, Inc. as part of the Potomac Services acquisition in 2004 and offers over 25 years of Service Industry experience.

Ralph G. Blasey – Vice President, Business Development

Ralph is responsible for identifying and cultivating strategic business relationships for the Red Coats Family of Companies. He offers over 40 years of executive management experience in finance and manufacturing and is a Rutgers University graduate.

Heath Chilcoate – Director Of Business Development

Donald Cherry - Business Development



Mairet Corzo - Business Development



Steve Flax - Business Development

Julie Gasque - Business Development

Greg Ward – Business Development



Blaine Wilson – Vice President Corporate Human Resources

Studied at NVCC and George Mason University for finance and business prior to joining our family of companies in 1994. Blaine has more than 30 years of management experience and has served as our organizations Senior Risk Manager for the past 19 years, acquiring numerous certifications from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, National Fire Protection Association, and the National Safety Council for regulatory compliance and training. Blaine directs our Corporate Administration Division which is responsible for Human Resources and Risk Management.

Greg Cunningham – Safety Manager

Greg is responsible for all aspects of Corporate Safety. A graduate of James Madison University with over 15 years of Risk Management experience Greg is OSHA certified in Workplace Safety, Hazardous Materials, CPR/First Aid, Confined Space Entry and Excavation.