KSU dispels killer rumor Psychic predicts mass murder on Halloween
Home | Back KSU dispels killer rumor Psychic predicts mass murder on Halloween Print Story | Comments |

By Dave O'Brien Record-Courier staff writer There's a killer rumor going around Kent State University: Apparently, television psychic Sylvia Browne recently predicted on Montel Williams' television talk show that a mass murder would take place at KSU on Halloween. More specifically, the killer would target a specific building on the Kent campus. Horrible, surely. But untrue, and extremely unoriginal. It's called an "urban legend," the same urban legend that struck fear in the hearts of students and caused a ruckus at KSU in 1998, when rumor had it a psychic appearing on Oprah Winfrey's television show predicted a mass murderer would target a Midwestern university with an H-shaped building and an X-shaped building. KSU's Eastway residence halls -- Allyn, Clark, Fletcher and Manchester -- are shaped, more or less, like the letter H. Terrace Hall, before the university tore it down last year and put up a parking lot, was X-shaped. The same rumor also surfaced at Bowling Green State University in 1998, the year the Hollywood movie "Urban Legend" featured a cast of young people being systematically slaughtered by a masked killer at a liberal arts college. Not leaving anything to chance, KSU officials were concerned enough about the rumor this past week to start a KSU Police Department investigation and eventually to post an e-mail message to the KSU community. In the message, Pete Goldsmith, vice president for enrollment management and student affairs, said an investigation to determine "the source and validity of the rumor" revealed it to be an urban legend and mentioned the events of 1998. Goldsmith wrote that "safety is a top priority at Kent State, and during the Halloween weekend there are increases in police staffing on and off campus due to increased campus and off-campus activities." Margaret Garmon, a doctoral student and instructor in the School of Communication Studies, said at least 20 of her students reported hearing the Sylvia Browne rumor after she brought it up in class. Another permutation of the rumor told to the Record-Courier had it that the murders would occur in an L-shaped building. If so, the "murderer" would have his or her choice of Stopher, Johnson, Harbourt, Heer, Dunbar or Prentice residence halls, a number of the Small Group residence halls at East Summit Street and Loop Road, all of the Allerton Apartments and any number of L-shaped academic buildings. For the full explanation -- and debunking -- of the serial killer rumor, its history and different versions, and many other dubious urban legends, visit www.snopes.com.







Login above or Register to comment.

10 Total Comments 10. Posted by peach November 10, 2007

the thing is that when you do that, it tells you that this is an urban legend and NOT TRUE.

there was even an update about the 2007 KSU rumor, and i read that update in the middle of october.

there was never any psycic prediction, and maybe if it wasn't advertised in the media, nobody would have gotten any ideas. yeah, at the end of the article it tells you to visit www.snopes.com for more information.the thing is that when you do that, it tells you that this is an urban legend and NOT TRUE.there was even an update about the 2007 KSU rumor, and i read that update in the middle of october.there was never any psycic prediction, and maybe if it wasn't advertised in the media, nobody would have gotten any ideas.

9. Posted by shelly October 27, 2007 Yes writting about this sure does give some sicko ideas. Look at what is going on in just the schools. This is just giving more Ideas for someone.

8. Posted by cashmoney October 27, 2007 Let's just plaster this in news and give some sicko an idea for the Halloween Holiday.

7. Posted by opinion4U October 25, 2007 and this would be why plough's name is slammed nothing better to talk about let see why don't you go to the portage county web site and lets start pulling some other people records lets see what we can really find out.



wonder what the other politicians kids cousin bothers sisters aunts uncles ya know whatever are doin in town??? nobody's perfect muuuhaaaaaa hahaha to funny

6. Posted by geoff varvy October 18, 2007 Newsflash!!! Eating pop rocks and then drinking soda causes stomach to explode!!!

5. Posted by SCOOP420 October 16, 2007 No shortage in Portage? What are you guy's smoking in your pipes? I predict that Giant Eagle is looking at video tapes

4. Posted by jimbo1350 October 15, 2007 Another great slow news day filler story.



zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz

3. Posted by AndrewP October 13, 2007



Even when I went to Kent in the mid-late 90s, we heard this stuff every year like it was a big deal. Don't people know how to look things up? KentBiz, I really think its my long-lost cousin from Nigeria.Even when I went to Kent in the mid-late 90s, we heard this stuff every year like it was a big deal. Don't people know how to look things up? http://snopes.com is a good place to check on whether a "story" like this is real or just another Urban Legend.

2. Posted by jwbiii1_inactive October 13, 2007 Let's get the RC to use some of their anonymous sources to get to the bottom of it. I'm surprised they haven't solved it already considering how fast they got to Plough and and the owner of Bar Ten!

1. Posted by KentBiz October 13, 2007 Maybe next we could use our Police resources to find out about this Zimbabwe millionaire who wants to deposit money into my bank account. Or perhaps this rumor that if I forward an email to 20 friends Bill Gates will send me $237.58.

Home | Back