Heads turn as Mexican troops roll into US with aid
General

Heads turn as Mexican troops roll into US with aid

by Sam Savage

NUEVO LAREDO, Mexico (Reuters) - A Mexican army convoy

rolled into the United States on Thursday with food, water and

medicine for Hurricane Katrina victims, the first Mexican

military operation on U.S. soil in 90 years.

Part of an aid package that includes ships and rescue

teams, the convoy of 45 olive-green vehicles and some 200

troops went over the Rio Grande into Texas from the city of

Nuevo Laredo, witnesses said.

Mexicans, who often have a love-hate relationship withtheir northern neighbor, are surprised and proud at being ableto help in the hurricane aftermath. Mexico has often been therecipient of foreign aid for earthquakes and other naturaldisasters.

People cheered, waved, honked car horns and rang bells in

villages as the convoy snaked up to the border this week.

While millions of Mexicans have trekked north in pursuit of

the American dream, many at home are still sore at having lost

half their territory to the United States in the 19th century.

Mexico is one of dozens of nations, including some as poor

as Cuba and Bangladesh, to offer aid to the United States as it

grapples with one of the worst natural disasters in its history

in hurricane-swamped New Orleans and surrounding areas.

The Mexican army trucks, filled with of thousands of

ready-to-eat meals, drinking water and medical equipment, were

searched like regular vehicles as they crossed the border early

on Thursday headed for San Antonio, Texas customs officials

said.

"It's a good thing because they're taking aid to the

victims," said Beatriz Gonzalez, 26, who gave the troops free

soft drinks as they stopped for gasoline on the Mexican side of

the border.

Troops inside the trucks were given malaria tablets and

vaccinations against diseases like Hepatitis, Cholera and

Tetanus -- ironically the same shots wary American tourists

might get before visiting parts of Mexico.

Mexican forces under revolutionary Gen. Francisco "Pancho"

Villa, angry at U.S. support for a rival, staged a small raid

into New Mexico in 1916.

They were the bedraggled remnants of an army faction on the

losing side of the Mexican revolution but their action is seen

by historians as the last military incursion into the United

States.

The Villa troops killed several people on a raid on

Columbus, New Mexico, prompting Washington to send a larger

force into Mexico in retaliation.

The two countries fought a full-blown war in the mid-19th

century, when the United States took what are now its

southwestern states from Mexico.

Mexico and the United States are now trade partners and

President Vicente Fox told Reuters this week that the military

convoy was a sign of how close the two nations now are.