Peter M. Zollman

Peter M. Zollman brings more than 35 years of media experience to his role as founding principal of the AIM Group / Classified Intelligence Report.He has worked with a wide range of media companies, dot-coms, technology providers and start-ups to develop and expand successful interactive-media services. He is based in Altamonte Springs, Fla., near Orlando.



Founding principal: As founding principal of the AIM Group, Peter built a global consulting boutique firm which achieved revenues of more than $1 million annually. It publishes the continuous advisory service Classified Intelligence Report, known as “the bible of the classified advertising industry.” Zollman serves as publisher and executive editor of CIR.

Leading expert on classifieds: Zollman is internationally known as a dynamic speaker, and has served as keynote or presenter at hundreds of industry and proprietary conferences. He is one of the world’s leading experts on Craigslist and free classifieds; self-service ad placement; recruitment / automotive / real estate advertising, and interactive media strategies for traditional media companies. He has spoken on five continents, in more than 30 countries, and has visited 46 of the 50 United States.

The groups Zollman has presented for include the World Association of Newspapers’ Beyond the Printed Word conference, where he was co-chair; IFRA, the newspaper technology association (note: WAN and IFRA have now merged); the Newspaper Association of America; Canadian Newspaper Association; Pacific Area Newspaper Publishers’ Association, and hundreds of dot-coms, media companies and similar organizations. As a journalist, Peter won 13 awards for his reporting and photography.



Workshops, strategic summits: He regularly leads strategic executive workshops, trains sales reps, supports product launches, and publishes and writes proprietary research projects. He trained dozens of sales reps for United Press International and Reuters news service, and has led training workshops and Webinars for regional press associations and newspaper groups.



Quoted: He has been quoted as an expert on traditional and interactive media by the CBS Evening News, The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, Reuters, Business Week and many other media organizations.



Hands-on print, broadcast, online: Zollman has extensive experience in all facets of media — newspapers, television, radio, magazines and cable television. He started his career at a small daily paper, the Tonawanda (N.Y.) News, during the Watergate era, and worked for United Press International and Reuters news agencies in sales, management and editorial positions. He has also worked as a managing editor at a “big three” television network station; on-air anchor and assignment editor at a radio station, and Director of News at the world’s most advanced interactive-media project, the Full Service Network operated by Time Warner Cable.

Languages:

English

Fun Facts about Peter

Lover of New Orleans cuisine and once reviewed restaurants in the area

Collects ties with “things” on them — whales, dolphins, weathervanes, animals, planes …

Has mad barbecue skills