How much would Medicaid expansion save the state?
Gov. McAuliffe walks a fine line on Medicaid expansion in Virginia

As stalemate extends, McAuliffe splits hairs to pitch expansion's impact

He and his staff have said repeatedly that Virginia will save $1 billion over eight years if House Republicans agree to expand the federally funded health insurance program for the poor.

RICHMOND — Gov. Terry McAuliffe walks a fine line when he pitches Medicaid expansion as a cost-cutting measure for the state budget.

But more than $420 million of that savings will accrue whether Medicaid expands here or not, according to figures from Virginia's Department of Medical Assistance Services, which oversees Medicaid. It's part of a trickle-down effect from other aspects of the Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare.

Expansion is just one part of the ACA, and most of the law isn't subject to the state-by-state decisions that must be made on Medicaid.

McAuliffe and his staff haven't made that distinction, leaving the impression that the full billion is tied to a Medicaid vote that the Republican majority is blocking in the House of Delegates.

"It's a significant difference," said House Appropriations Chairman S. Chris Jones, R-Suffolk.

"Do I think there's been some double counting?" Jones asked. "Yes. … The math has been fuzzy at times."

McAuliffe spokesman Brian Coy dismissed the issue Wednesday, saying the figure McAuliffe has used repeatedly is accurate. Without Medicaid expansion — or implementation of a compromise plan backed by the state Senate — the budget savings won't amount to $1 billion.

The governor shouldn't have to itemize things every time he mentions them, Coy said, calling Daily Press questions on the matter "nit-picky" and "ridiculous."

House Republicans see plenty of problems with the plan, though, and the General Assembly is headed toward a Saturday adjournment without agreement in sight. The deadline is likely to pass without a finished state budget, since the Senate spliced its proposal, a federally funded privatization plan called Marketplace Virginia, into its version of the budget.

The sniping has been increasing ever since. House Republicans say the issue has no place in the state budget. It's gumming up the works and delaying a crucial piece of planning for schools and local governments that need to know what they'll get through the budget, they say.

They want to separate Medicaid from the budget and deal with it in a special session later.

It's House Republicans who are being obstructionists, the governor and other Democrats counter. The Senate plan has some Republican support. Why won't the House move toward compromise instead of simply saying no, no, no? they ask.

Little changed Wednesday, though there were developments. Three high-ranking members of former Republican Gov. Bob McDonnell's administration released a letter, saying they support a solution along the lines of the Senate plan.

Newport News Mayor McKinley Price sent Speaker of the House William Howell his own letter this week, expressing support for expansion and asking the House to act.