Fox News Complains Because DNC Rejected Gift Baskets From Group Affiliated With Operation Rescue
Photo: Mediaite.

Conservatives have been repeatedly hammering the "Democrats hate God" talking point ever since the beginning of the Democratic National Convention. Leading the charge has been Fox News, with innumerable false claims and information. However, the outlet goes beyond misleading and into downright deception as they "report" that the Democratic National Committee refused gift baskets from local churches because:

[Charlotte714 spokesman David Benham] said 56 churches wanted to “Adopt-a-Delegation.” They put together gift baskets featuring Carolina Pralines and a letter welcoming them to the city and offering assistance in transportation, childcare or spiritual matters. “We were just trying to display Southern hospitality,” he said. “We wanted them to know we were happy to serve them.” However, DNC officials conveyed to city leaders that the Christians would not be allowed to present their gift baskets. “I got a call from the mayor’s office speaking on behalf of the convention and they asked us not to participate,” he said. “They told us our views on women’s rights are contrary to the platform.” Benham said he was shocked because all the churches involved are mainline denominations ranging from Baptists and Methodists to Assembly of God. “I was blown away and could not believe it,” he told Fox News. So instead of gift baskets, Benham asked if they could send welcome letters to the delegates. Again, he said the DNC refused – because the churches hold pro-life values. “They responded back and said no because our views on women,” he said. “They would not allow it.”

So who is Charlotte714 and its founders? David Benham is the son of Flip Benham, formerly of Operation Rescue and currently the man behind Operation Save America and the effort to create "abortion-free" states.

Flip Benham created "wanted" posters of providers and was convicted of stalking a Charlotte doctor who provided abortions. There is little wonder why his name would have been left out of the press materials for his sons' religious endeavor, especially as part of their "gift basket" request included asking for physical access to delegates and supporters.

Sponsor Churches will coordinate volunteers during the convention to be available to pray with delegates, help in case of a medical emergency, or even provide transportation if they have discovered they need anything during their stay in Charlotte. Specific prayer topics will be sent out daily during the 40-day-fast through Twitter, Facebook and our SMS text messages to those signing up for these services. Churches are free to use these suggestions and/or develop their own prayer points for their adopted delegation. If your church would like to Adopt-a-Delegation please consider the size of the delegation and the hotel closest to your church.

Did the DNC "reject" gift baskets because they came from "Christians" and their views "differed from the Democratic Platform?" Only in Fox-News-world is politely declining "assistance" from a domestic terrorist group a sign of "hating God."

Follow Robin Marty on Twitter, @robinmarty