Fact Checker: Black-on-black killing claims examined
FILE - In this Feb. 1, 2013 file photo, protesters at an anti-gun violence rally in Chicago hold up copied photos of 15-year-old Hadiya Pendleton at the scene where she was killed Jan. 29 about a mile from President Barack Obama's home on the city's South Side. Several murders near Obama's home this year made crime in the city a national issue and highlighted the urgency for the Obama administration's selection of attorney Zachary Fardon to head the U.S. attorney's office in Chicago to do more to target guns, gangs and drugs. (AP Photo/Charles Rex Arbogast, File) (Photo: Charles Rex Arbogast, AP)

* UPDATED: See corrections/updates at bottom of story.

The claims

• Almost 11,000 black people were killed by other black people between the time unarmed teen Trayvon Martin in Florida was killed and his shooter, George Zimmerman, was acquitted.

• Despite the large number of killings, it's hard to name a single case where a black person killed another black person during this time.

• The United States ranks third in the world for murder.

• If Chicago; Detroit; Washington, D.C.; and New Orleans were removed from the United States' murder statistics, the U.S. would drop to fourth from the bottom for murders.

The background

Ron Knecht, who is running for Nevada state controller and is a member of the University of Nevada Board Regents, was forwarded an email that he sent along to Fact Checker, asking if it was true. The email states (all punctuation, capitalization, etc. maintained):

"During the 503 Days Between the Trayvon Martin Shooting And The Zimmerman Verdict … 10,865 BLACKS WERE KILLED BY OTHER BLACKS. NAME ONE.

"Also: The United States ranks 3rd in Murders throughout the World. But if you take out Chicago, Detroit, Washington DC and New Orleans .... the United States is 4th from the Bottom for Murders. These 4 Cities also have the toughest Gun Control Laws in the United States. All 4 are controlled by Democrat mayors (and legislators). It would be absurd to draw any conclusions from this data...RIGHT?"

More Fact Checker: A look at claims in Trayvon Martin case

Still more Fact Checker: Further claims in Trayvon Martin case: tattoos, Jesse Jackson, more

Let's tackle the four main claims one by one.

• Black-on-black murders: From 1980 through 2008, 93 percent of black victims were killed by black offenders, according to a 2011 report on homicide trends by the Bureau of Justice Statistics. It also says 84 percent of white victims were killed by white offenders.

In short, more often than not, people kill their loved ones, friends and neighbors — and since people of different racial backgrounds tend to live clustered together, they are far more likely to kill someone of their own race than someone of another race.

The number of 10,865 came from soopermexican.com. PolitiFact.com contacted the site to learn the source of the claim. (It was rated "mostly false" in a report last year.)

PolitiFact found that it was a back-of-the-napkin estimate based on the number black homicide victims in 2005, adjusted with the fact that 93 percent of black murders are intraracial. This reslt was divided by 365 to get an average for black-on-black killings per day. Finally, this was multiplied by 513 for the number of days between Trayvon's shooting and Zimmerman's acquittal.

Two problems: It was 503 days between the shooting and the verdict. And the murder rate, including for black victims, dropped plunged by almost two-thirds between 2005 and Trayvon's 2012 shooting so the average per day is lower.

Fact Checker re-created soopermexican's formula using the corrected timeframe and the appropriate 2012 FBI data showing 2,412 black homicide victims killed by black offenders in 2012. This results in an estimate of 3,224 black people killed by black offenders during the Trayvon Martin case — or just over 70 percent less than the email stated.

• Name one case: The email challenges the reader to "name one" black victim killed by a black perpetrator. The implication here seems to be that media or public attention never falls on such cases.

More Fact Checker: Is police brutality toward blacks rare?

Unfortunately, it's easy to "name one" — Hadiya Pendleton. Fact Checker will reserve a definitive statement because the two young black men charged in her shooting have pled not guilty. That said, one reportedly confessed to police he hadn't intended to kill Hadiya and that the shooting was part of a gang retaliation.

You may remember Hadiya because she was shot to death in a Chicago park soon after performing at President Obama's inauguration — about one month before the Zimmerman verdict. First Lady Michelle Obama attended her funeral, and demonstrations were held calling on the Justice Department to do more about gun, drug and gang violence because of her killing.

• U.S. murder ranking: The email claims the United States is third highest.

The more accurate way of comparing countries is to examine the rate of homicides — how many there were for every 100,000 people.

For 2012, the U.S. had a homicide rate of 4.7, according to a 2012 report by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Fact Checker didn't have the patience to figure exactly where this landed the U.S. in the world rankings because it wasn't even in the top 100.

By contrast, Honduras had a rate of 90.7 — almost 20 times higher (it was No. 1 in the world). The U.S. is even a fair amount below the global homicide average of 6.2.

Since the email is so vague and doesn't provide sources for its claims, it could be referring to the number of murders rather than the rate.

But even if we look at raw numbers, the United States is not fourth. For 2012, it was eighth, behind Brazil, India, Nigeria, Mexico, Congo, South Africa and Venezuela, according to the UN report.

• Four cities: The email lastly states that if just four cities with Democratic mayors were removed from the tally of U.S. murders, this would plunge the country from third highest to fourth lowest in the murder rankings.

In 2012, Chicago had 500 homicides, Detroit 386, New Orleans 193 and the District of Columbia 88 — for a total of 1,167.

That same year, the United States had 14,827 homicides. If we subtract those four cities, the murder total becomes 13,660. This would've given a homicide rate of 4.35, for a drop of only 3 or 4 spots in the world rankings — nowhere near the bottom four. (The bottom fourth and fifth spots are held by Japan and Iceland with a homicide rate around 0.3 per 100,000.)

If the number of murders rather than the rate is also adjusted by removing those four cities, the U.S. would drop only two spots — past Colombia and Pakistan — but would still rank in the top 10. Again, this is nowhere near the bottom four, as the email claims.

Side note: Someone out there might like the email's other vague claim examined, namely that tough gun laws are linked to more murders (or maybe just Democratic mayors?). It would require it's own column so write in if you're interested. But before doing so, Fact Checker would suggest first checking a 2013 study in the Journal of the American Medical Association that found the opposite: states with tougher gun laws have fewer gun-related homicides.

The verdict

The email's author finishes by stating "Any conclusions drawn from this would be due to profiling, therefore you would be a bigot, so do not draw any conclusions."

Actually, it would be easier to draw conclusions if the claims weren't so unfounded.

Truth meter: 0 out of 10

UPDATE: A reader pointed out two errors made by Fact Checker.

One, the murder rate dropped by 17.54 percent, not two-thirds, between 2005 and 2012. This was caused by an error in the editing process made by Fact Checker.

Two, the number of black-on-black murders in 2012 is better estimated at 6,002. Fact Checker had used Table 6 of the FBI's 2012 expanded homicide statistics, which gives the exact number of single victim/single offender homicides by race. It showed 2,412 black homicide victims where the offender was black. As pointed out by a reader, this shows only a subset of homicides. It excludes cases where the race, age or sex of the offender is unknown. As stated in the original story, the percentage of total homicides with black victims where the offender is also black has remained fairly stable for years at 93. If we apply that 93 percent to the total 2012 homicides with black victims in the United States (6,454), that gives a number of black-on-black homicides of 6,002. The first number is what can be proven, but the second number is more likely to approximate reality. It should have been used instead. Fact Checker screwed up, and better information from the reader is much appreciated.

This means that the paragraph where soopermexican's formula was re-created needs to be done again. Because of the previous errors, Fact Checker will give the exact formula so others can verify the work. If 6,002 is the best estimate of the number of black-on-black homicide victims in 2012, then we divide that by 365 to get the average per day: 16.44. Then this is multiplied by 503 (the days of the Trayvon Martin case from shooting to acquittal) to get 8,271. This is only 24 percent off, not just over 70 percent off as originally stated. That's still off, but way less off.

The truth meter rating is raised to 2 out of 10.

P.S. It's no fun being wrong, especially as the Fact Checker, but what matters is getting the facts right so we all have a common starting point to discuss issues. Please don't hesitate to email factchecker@rgj.com if you see anything that seems hinky.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rgj.com/1sEEIZQ