RV-Dreams Journal: HUD Proposed Rule Clarifies Definition Of RVs For A Limited Purpose
On February 9, the Department of Housing & Urban Development announced a proposed rule clarifying the definition of recreational vehicles AS IT RELATES TO "MANUFACTURED HOME PROCEDURAL AND ENFORCEMENT REGULATIONS". I was just going to let this pass as, in my opinion, it wasn't that big of a deal. Then the Escapees RV Club sent out an email yesterday.

My hunch is the attention from Escapees is a result of the opinion piece entitled "HUD Action Could Eliminate Full-time RVing" put out by the RV Daily Report on the day the proposed rule was published. Several people picked up this over-zealous headline/editorial and ran with it. Perhaps Mr. Gerber, the editor of RV Daily Report, was just hoping to get a strong reaction, and he did. There have been several press releases attempting to set the record straight, and RV Daily Report has posted those in recent days.

But "HUD Action Could Eliminate Full-time RVing"? Really? That headline is just ridiculous. The article made it sound like a federal government power grab and an attempt to kill off full-time RVing, when in fact the RVing industry has been trying to get this clarification for years so it would be clear that HUD requirements aren't imposed on PARK MODELS, a type of recreational vehicle designed mostly for seasonal use and typically not moved often or at all. It's that simple.

Manufactured homes (formerly known as mobile homes) are built on a permanent chassis and are a special class of "house" subject to HUD Code which imposes higher standards of construction than is required of RVs. In fact, in 1982 RVs were specifically exempted from the HUD Code for manufactured homes and they were defined as a vehicle ....

Built on a single chassis.

400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections.

Self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck.

Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

However, with the increase of park models and fifth wheels being placed on permanent lots, the advent of slide-outs, and the RV industry pushing the size limits, the lines have become blurred between those RVs and manufactured homes. So, the RV industry has been trying to clarify HUD's definition of RVs in their HUD Code exemption language to make sure HUD stays out of the RV business.

The new proposed definition is as follows:

"A recreational vehicle is a factory built vehicular structure designed only for recreational use and not as a primary residence or for permanent occupancy, built and certified in accordance with NFPA 1192-15 or ANSI A119.5-09 consensus standards for recreational vehicles and not certified as a manufactured home."

Folks have been freaking out about the part of the definition that says " .... designed only for recreational use and not as a primary residence for permanent occupancy". Well, that's been part of the definition since 1982, and similar language is included in just about every RV owners manual. So that part of the definition isn't new, and the new language is actually broader and officially exempts more RVs from the HUD Code. The "400 square feet" language in the prior definition was what was throwing some fifth wheels into question.

Now, the proposed rule also requires that there be a prominent notice in RVs (primarily park models) that makes it clear to consumers that RVs are different from manufactured homes. Here's the exact language from the Federal Register where the proposed rule is published :

"Finally, to ensure consumer awareness of the difference between manufactured housing and recreational vehicles and the construction standards used to build each, HUD is proposing to require that each ANSI A119.5-15 certified structure seeking an exemption include a notice to be prominently displayed in a temporary manner in the kitchen (i.e., countertop or exposed cabinet face) until the completion of the sale transaction that explains that the manufacturer certifies that the structure is a recreational vehicle designed only for recreational use, and not for use as a primary residence or for permanent occupancy. The notice shall further explain that the manufacturer certifies that the unit has been built in accordance with ANSI A119.5-15. This notice shall be placed prominently to ensure consumers are made plainly aware of the distinction between recreational vehicles that are not self-propelled and manufactured housing, reflecting the intent of the MHCC in its recommendation to draw a clear distinction between the two products."

This is a small concession from the RV industry to keep HUD out of the RV construction business, and more specifically, the park model construction business. It's just not that big a deal. In fact, the notice may not even be required in anything other than park models where confusion is most likely.

In Mr. Gerber's follow-up article yesterday, "Fore Clarifies Reasons Behind HUD RV Definition", Gregg Fore, President of DICOR, who was on the committee that drafted the new definition is quoted as saying this about the notices.

" ..... Fore said the rule applies only to units “claiming this exemption” from HUD standards, and the only RVs that were even close to being regulated by HUD were park models. Therefore, the notice requirement does not apply to fifth wheels, motorhomes, travel trailers, truck campers or folding campers because they are already classified as vehicles."

Certainly, the notice isn't required in motorhomes, and I assume that people in the RV industry close to the situation would have more inside knowledge about the interpretation of the notice rule. Even if Mr. Fore is wrong about whether the notice applies to fifth wheels and travel trailers, it still won't have the negative impact that many are fearing.

While there are a lot of full-time RVers (nobody really knows the numbers), full-timers are still a very, very small niche in the RV world. While we are an independent, vocal bunch that doesn't want government interference, this proposed rule certainly isn't targeting full-timers. For those that are interested, here is a link to the Joint Statement from the Recreational Vehicle Industry Association (RVIA), Recreational Vehicles Dealer Association (RVDA), and the National Association of RV Parks and Campgrounds (ARC).

RV-Dreams only exists because of full-time RVers and those that are considering full-time RVing. Our livelihood is based on there being a desire of people to become full-time RVers and our desire to help them reach that goal. There may be laws, rules, or regulations in the future that severely curtail the ability of people to live in their RVs, but this minor rule, buried within manufactured housing regulations, isn't one of them. Hopefully, this entry provides some facts and perspective.