San Diego’s bid for Amazon HQ2: Can it win?
This week, a massive beauty contest kicks off among North American cities competing to land Amazon’s second headquarters and its 50,000 job prize that promises to reshape the winning region’s economy for years to come.

Initial proposals are due no later than Thursday. San Diego aims to get a jump on competitors by delivering its bid to Amazon on Monday – complete with potential locations in downtown, Mission Valley, South Bay and Chula Vista that meet the Seattle-based e-commerce giant’s benchmarks for a second headquarters.

“Our key here in San Diego is going to be trying to compete on the talent front,” said Mark Cafferty, head of the San Diego Regional Economic Development Corp., which is piecing together the region’s proposal. “We heard definitely from Amazon here that the talent is what matters to them, in particular engineering and technical talent.”

Does this region have a chance? Competition will be fierce. Amazon estimates the average pay for workers at its second headquarters site will top $100,000 a year. The company expects to spend $5 billion on construction alone and attract tens of billions in additional investment in the community akin to the $38 billion of additional investments in Seattle’s economy over the past six years.

Some cities have set up war rooms where volunteers watch videos of Amazon Chief Executive Jeff Bezos in hopes of better tailoring their proposals to his tastes. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie said the state would offer $5 billion in tax breaks over a decade. Arizona business leaders in Tucson sent a 21-foot saguaro cactus to Amazon’s Seattle headquarters, which the company politely acknowledged on social media but declined to accept.

“The fact that they have announced this and given us very little information to go on invites everybody and their mother to make a proposal, and they will,” said Gary London, a principal at London Moeder Advisors, a real estate consulting firm.

Two key questions loom large when handicapping San Diego’s prospects for landing Amazon’s HQ2: Is the company aiming to diversifying its geographic footprint away from the West Coast? How large a role will tax breaks, free land and other incentives play in its decision?

“Everybody I talk to in the region is a naysayer, so I am going to stay positive and say San Diego as a region meets and exceeds all their requirements,” said Eric Crockett, director of the economic development department for the city of Chula Vista. “Then it comes down to their corporate culture and whether or not other states are going to throw billions of dollars at them.”

Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos in Seattle in a June 2014 file image. Amazon announced it is planning to build a second, 'equal' headquarters in another city. Ken Lambert/Seattle Times

This summer, the state of Wisconsin offered Apple contract manufacturer Foxconn $3 billion in tax breaks and incentives to lure a new flat screen display plant to the state that’s forecast to generate 3,000 to 13,000 jobs.

Pundits are pointing to Wisconsin’s $250,000 to $1 million per job incentive package as a benchmark for what some states might offer Amazon to land HQ2.

Amazon probably won’t get huge incentives in California, though state economic development officials have met with leaders from communities expected to submit bids – such as Los Angeles, the Bay Area, Orange County, Sacramento and San Diego – to discuss what can be done.

While incentives likely won’t match those of competitors, California can compete on other measures – namely a highly skilled work force, strong universities and quality of life.

In San Diego, Amazon recently increased its existing footprint by leasing more than 100,000 square feet of office space in University City, where it’s expected to employ more than 500 technical workers.

“Amazon’s experience in this market has been a good one,” said Cafferty. “They have said in no uncertain terms that they have been able to find the talent they need here.”

RANKING SAN DIEGO’S CHANCES:

Amazon’s request for proposals for its HQ2 project is just seven pages. But it does set down targets for what the company is looking for, and San Diego hits all of the minimum requirements.

Amazon prefers metro areas with more than 1 million people, a business friendly environment and a strong technical workforce. It also wants to be near major highways and within 45 minutes of an international airport with direct flights to Seattle, the Bay Area, Washington, D.C., and New York.

Amazon aims to occupy at least 500,000 square feet at its second headquarters site by 2019. Over the following decade or so, it expects to expand to 8 million square feet of buildings – roughly equivalent to what it occupies in downtown Seattle.

The company is seeking environmentally sustainable buildings, direct access to public transportation, recreational and education opportunities for employees and the right “cultural community fit.”

Amazon expects to announce the winner next year.

About 55 cities in the U.S. and Canada meet that criteria. Of those, 20 are best positioned to win Amazon, based on the criteria laid out by the company, said Joseph Parilla, a fellow at the Brookings Institution’s Metropolitan Policy Program.

San Diego is included in the top 20. But it ranks in 20th place, said Parilla. One reason: The technical labor pool – while high quality – is not as large as the technical workforce in the more populous places such as the Bay Area, New York or Chicago.

Parilla believes Amazon will ultimately base its HQ2 decision on a location where it can hire quality technical workers at scale.

“San Diego has a highly educated and particularly strong STEM workforce,” he said. “But it is not a huge place compared to others on this list in terms of the size of its technology labor pool.

“If you’re a highly educated place but don’t have the scale to absorb 50,000 workers potentially over a period of time, then you would be at a bit of a handicap,” he said.

An artist rendering of Manchester Pacific Gateway on Harbor Drive south of Broadway, which includes hotels, office buildings and retail space Pacific Gateway

Anderson Economic Group, a Chicago-based research firm, also ranked top candidates to win Amazon’s HQ2 based on access to quality talent, ease of transportation and cost of doing business.

San Diego came in 10th place – trailing New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Boston, Atlanta, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, Dallas and Salt Lake City.

San Diego ranked roughly average for the cost of doing business relative to the 34 other cities that hit Amazon’s baseline requirements, said Jason Horwitz, director of public policy and economic analysis for Anderson Economic Group. San Diego was better than average for the amount of time commuters spent in traffic per capita.

As for workforce, San Diego was above average for relevant degrees in technical fields but lagged in “business services” jobs such as employment placement, computer services, consulting and so on that are important for a corporate headquarters.

“The size of the business services sector, at least right now, is not that large,” said Horwitz. “It is possible that can be overcome if San Diego were to emphasize its quality of life. You could argue that if Amazon were to locate in San Diego, a lot of business services would spring up. It’s a beautiful city with great weather, and people like to move to San Diego for those things.”

LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION:

Four locations – each made up of multiple parcels – are included in San Diego’s proposal to lure Amazon.

Downtown represents an urban option akin to Amazon’s current campus in the South Lake Union area of downtown Seattle. The Manchester Pacific Gateway project on the waterfront and the Tailgate Park in East Village could be developed in time to meet Amazon 2019 time frame for its initial phase.

As for the 8 million square feet of future buildings, there is land and redevelopment parcels – both privately and publicly owned – available throughout San Diego’s core that could create an “innovation trail’’ for Amazon, said Cafferty. They include city-owned parcels where incentives could be offered.

Unlike downtown Seattle, where Amazon worked mostly with a single developer on its urban campus, the company would have to deal with multiple parties in downtown San Diego.

London, the real estate consultant, said Pacific Gateway “is arguably the best piece of coastal real estate on the West Coast right now that has a green light to be developed. But I’m not sure it is a fit for Amazon. I am not sure it’s big enough.”

London, who is working with clients in East Village, contends the southeastern part of East Village can offer enough contiguous land to accommodate Amazon’s long-term development plans.

The view of East Village with the MTS yard in the foreground, with Tailgate Park and Petco Park beyond. John Gibbons, Union Tribune

“But more importantly, that is where all the new residential is being built,” he said. “That is what we sell to Amazon. We sell the ability for people to live and work in the same place -- within walking distance. I think that is what is attractive to Amazon.”

In Mission Valley, the 167-acre former Qualcomm Stadium site is included as an option. Because it is city owned, San Diego could provide incentives to meet Amazon’s needs. The site is near freeways, housing and trolley lines.

But meeting Amazon’s 2019 time frame for an initial building could be a problem. The ballot measure for FS Investors proposed SoccerCity project won’t be voted on until mid-2018 at the earliest. And San Diego State University supporters are working on their own ballot initiative to gain control of the property.

Cafferty of the San Diego Regional EDC said FS Investors believes it has the wiggle room to build 500,000 square feet for Amazon by 2019 should the initiative pass.

“But I get concerned about some of the challenges of having a ballot measure in the middle of the dialogue with a company like Amazon should they decide this is a region they want to look at,” Cafferty said.

In Chula Vista, Chestnut Properties and the city are offering to build a suburban campus for Amazon along Highway 125 near Birch Road. It has received city approval for millions of square feet of office space, with 500,000 square feet expected to be ready by the third quarter of 2019.

That meets Amazon’s development time frame for the first phase of HQ2.

“We can deliver what they are asking for,” said Crockett, the city economic development director. “Not only do we have the 8 million square feet entitled, we have a developer that has building plans ready to pull that can actually deliver a brand new 500,000-square-foot building by the 2019 deadline.”

An artist rendering of Chestnut Properties' Chula Vista office campus in the Millenia project. Chestnut Properties

The final site is in Otay Mesa. It includes a handful of lots straddling Highway 905 in the general area of the Brown Field Technology Park. Being developed by Murphy Development, the greenfield property serves up access to the growing tech talent pool in Mexico, proximity to the boarder terminal and the Tijuana International Airport.

BUCKING A REPUTATION:

For San Diego, good weather, schools, beaches, trails and amusement parks are clear selling points. But the region needs to be careful not to overhype quality of life “because it gets you into a discussion very quickly about whether people can afford to live here,” said Cafferty. “That presents a challenge” given San Diego’s expensive housing.

San Diego also may have to fight a reputation for being a difficult place to pursue large-scale development projects.

“Look at what happened with the Chargers. Nobody could get anything together,” said Bill Sannwald, a management professor at San Diego State University. “Even Petco Park. Think about what Petco Park has done for East Village. And people fought that for years.”

There are plenty of reasons for San Diego to throw its hat in the ring for Amazon, according to several people interviewed. The region is light on Fortune 500 companies relative to its population – with only Qualcomm and Sempra Energy headquartered here.

So even if Amazon goes elsewhere, the region’s bid could get the attention of other technology companies looking to establish a West Coast footprint.

“If we compete well enough, even if we don’t get it, it does generate some interest from other companies that might be waiting around the hoop for the rebound when they see who Amazon doesn’t choose,” said Cafferty.

Business

mike.freeman@sduniontribune.com;

Twitter:@TechDiego

760-529-4973