United States of America: angel giving tree fact sheet
You are in: angel giving tree fact sheet

angel giving tree fact sheet Send this page to a friend

Holiday Angel Tree Program

The Salvation Army's Angel Tree program provides new clothing or toys for children of needy families. A sponsoring company or corporation places a Christmas tree in a secure, high-pedestrian traffic area or lobby. The tree is decorated with numbered paper angel tags with the first name, age and gender of a child who will receive the gift. Contributors remove one or more tags from the tree and purchase appropriate gifts for the child or children described on the tags.

Sponsors: Each year, sponsors ranging from neighborhood associations to private companies volunteer to place Angel Trees in high-traffic areas within their community, organization or office. Many sponsors provide a tree as an added donation along with promotional materials to inform their community, members or staff of the program along with confidential information about the children, who will benefit from their generosity. The sponsoring organization also serves as a collection point for the gifts, and provides secure storage until a volunteer from The Salvation Army can collect the gifts for distribution along with food and meals to help needy families enjoy the holiday season.

Volunteers: In many locations, The Salvation Army needs volunteers to help distribute the gifts along with food for holiday meals to the participating families. Often times, employees and family members of the sponsoring organization help distribute their group's gifts throughout their community. Community volunteer and service groups; church groups and retired senior volunteer programs often aid The Salvation Army during the holidays and throughout the year, but more volunteers are always needed.

How to Help: If you would like to sponsor an Angel Tree in your community, or would like to volunteer during the holidays or anytime during the year, please contact your local Salvation Army offices. Information about The Salvation Army and contact information for local offices are available on the Internet at If you would like to sponsor an Angel Tree in your community, or would like to volunteer during the holidays or anytime during the year, please contact your local Salvation Army offices. Information about The Salvation Army and contact information for local offices are available on the Internet at www.salvationarmyusa.org.

About The Salvation Army: The Salvation Army, an evangelical part of the universal Christian church, has been supporting those in need in His name without discrimination since 1865. Nearly 33 million Americans receive assistance from The Salvation Army each year through the broadest array of social services that range from providing food for the hungry, relief for disaster victims, assistance for the disabled, outreach to the elderly and ill, clothing and shelter to the homeless and opportunities for underprivileged children. About 83 cents of every dollar raised is used to support those services in nearly 9,000 communities nationwide. For more information, go to The Salvation Army, an evangelical part of the universal Christian church, has been supporting those in need in His name without discrimination since 1865. Nearly 33 million Americans receive assistance from The Salvation Army each year through the broadest array of social services that range from providing food for the hungry, relief for disaster victims, assistance for the disabled, outreach to the elderly and ill, clothing and shelter to the homeless and opportunities for underprivileged children. About 83 cents of every dollar raised is used to support those services in nearly 9,000 communities nationwide. For more information, go to http://www.salvationarmyusa.org

Contact: The Salvation Army National Headquarters

National Community Relations and Development Office

615 Slaters Lane, Alexandria VA 22314

(703) 684-5500