As protests continue, restrictions tighten
While hundreds continue to protest every Tuesday outside Rep. Darrell Issa’s office in Vista, the city is cracking down on where people can stand and has suggested organizers consider moving the protest to another site.

Under the new rules — which city officials said were prompted by complaints and safety concerns — the protesters must gather on a dirt path across the street from Issa’s office on Thibodo Road, instead of along the sidewalk in front of the building, which houses a number of other business tenants.

The crowd must also limit the use of amplified sound. If somebody calls police to complain, any costs would be levied against the person organizing the protests, which target Issa’s voting record as well as the policies of President Donald Trump.

That organizer, Ellen Montanari, said she fears the restrictions could squelch free speech rights.

City officials say that’s not the intent.

“We know they have the right to demonstrate,” Vista city spokeswoman Andrea McCullough said. “We are coming at it from a safety angle.”

Sheriff’s Capt. Chuck Cinnamo, who is in charge of the Vista station, said a number of concerns have come up, most notably with regard to traffic safety. The crowds are big, and Thibodo Road features a large curve not far from the building that houses Issa’s office. The area has limited visibility for drivers, and the crowds can cause distractions simply by being there, Cinnamo said.

McCullough said there have also been several complaints from the building management, citing people being on the grass or spilling over into the driveways. Cinnamo said a sprinkler head or two has been damaged by people in the grass, and also said his office has fielded numerous complaints about illegal parking.

“… We are focused on creating a safe environment for those who want to express their political views, regardless of which side they are on, in a safe and prudent manner,” Cinnamo said in an email. “This means we must ensure the safety of everyone, often times to the chagrin of protest organizers.”

The protests have drawn roughly 300 people a week since the president’s inauguration, and are part of a general movement across the nation known as Resist Trump Tuesdays. During the roughly one-hour rallies, attendees line the sidewalk, where they chant, cheer and occasionally sing.

The largest Vista crowd was on May 9, when roughly 800 people showed up to protest Issa’s vote in favor of a House bill to repeal Obamacare and replace it with a plan that could mean sweeping changes in health coverage for millions of Americans.

On May 9, more than 800 anti-Issa and Trump protesters assembled along Thibodo Road in front of the office building where Darrell Issa's offices are located. Charlie Neuman

Issa’s spokesman Calvin Moore said his office has not levied any complaints about the protests, “but given what we have heard from others in the building, I wouldn’t be surprised” that others have complained.

Moore said he’s heard concerns from other tenants that the protests are disruptive, and that clients feel uncomfortable or find it hard to get to the office building.

In Vista, city permits are required for events drawing more than 50 people. Montanari secured a permit in February good through the end of April, planning to hold the events during Trump’s first 100 days in office.

When she later asked the city to extend the permit through the end of the summer, Vista officials decided to tweak the requirements. They also suggested the protesters consider moving to a roomier site more than a mile away, on Melrose Drive just south of Rancho Buena Vista High School.

Montanari said that would be counter to the goal, which is to send a message to Issa. “It’s all about him,” she said.

Plus, she said, even if she did ask people to move — her email list is growing to nearly 1,000 recipients — many would still show up at Issa’s office.

“If I stopped, people are still going to come,” she said.

The city also initially asked Montanari to get insurance to cover the protests — roughly $300 a week, Montanari said — but has since agreed to waive that requirement.

The attention focused on Issa isn’t likely to wane. The nine-term congressman, who endorsed Trump, only narrowly won re-election in November against Democratic opponent Doug Applegate and Democrats have targeted the 49th District in hopes of flipping it in 2018. Republicans are also putting in extra money to keep Issa in office.

Montanari said the protests initially began when she organized them in connection with a national group called Move On, but are no longer affiliated with any particular organization. Most people who come are constituents in Issa’s district, she said.

The local American Civil Liberties Union chapter said it is monitoring the weekly rallies, but declined further comment.

Meanwhile, the protesters have worked to keep problems under control. Volunteers dubbed the “peace patrol” wear yellow safety vests, and remind their fellow protesters to stay on the sidewalk and out of the road and driveways.

Last week — the first in which the rally was moved across the street — organizers also set up cones and roped off the crowd, she said.

teri.figueroa@sduniontribune.com

Twitter: @TeriFigueroaUT