Alvarez asks mayor to declare homeless state of emergency; mayor's office says he already has
San Diego City Councilman David Alvarez has asked Mayor Kevin Faulconer to declare a state of emergency on homelessness, which would cut through regulations and allow the city to use public buildings as shelters.

An aide to the mayor late Thursday said Faulconer already has in each of the last two years.

“Mayor Faulconer declared a state of emergency on homelessness last year that was approved by the City Council, including Councilmember Alvarez,” Jonathan Herrera, the mayor’s senior advisor on homelessness coordination, said in an email.

“...We received Councilmember Alvarez’s memo earlier today and while we appreciate his concerns, we are already taking steps to address our city’s homelessness crisis to protect the most vulnerable people in our city.”

The resolutions declared a “shelter crisis.”

Alvarez said the mayor has the authority to make the declaration without council approval. Herrera cited a municipal code he says requires such emergency action to be approved by six of he nine council member.

If enacted, Alvarez said the city could bypass several codes that have prevented it from opening the old downtown library and Golden Hall as shelters.

Alvarez cited a January count of the area’s homeless that showed the number of unsheltered people countywide at 5,621, up from 4,940 in 2016.

“There is a need for additional shelter beds to accommodate the number of homeless individuals in the city," he said. “People are dying. We must do everything we can to protect the public. This crisis has gone on for too long.”

Alvarez said he has been pushing for the city to open up the vacant downtown library as homeless shelter for years, but safety concerns about asbestos and other arguments have kept it from happening.

As Alvarez explained, a state code allows cities under a state of emergency immunity from liability or ordinary negligence while housing people.

The government code also allows the city to suspend state or local regulations for housing, health and safety during the emergency, further bypassing obstacles to helpi the homeless, he said.

Alvarez said he was spurred to make the request after reading a recent Voice of San Diego article about county regulations that have delayed the installation of hand-washing stations that could help prevent the spread of hepatitis A, which has killed 15 homeless people.

The state code applies to cities that can prove a significant number of people are not able to find housing.

“I think it’s quite clear we meet that requirement,” he said.

The Los Angeles City Council declared a state of emergency on homelessness in November 2015, and Los Angeles County Supervisors asked Gov. Jerry Brown to declare homelessness a statewide emergency in June 2016, but Brown declined.

CAPTION From San Diego to Sacramento and across the nation, homelessness in urban areas has increasingly presented officials with an intractable problem that often results in a cycle of shuffling people from block to block without any clear long-term solutions. From San Diego to Sacramento and across the nation, homelessness in urban areas has increasingly presented officials with an intractable problem that often results in a cycle of shuffling people from block to block without any clear long-term solutions. CAPTION From San Diego to Sacramento and across the nation, homelessness in urban areas has increasingly presented officials with an intractable problem that often results in a cycle of shuffling people from block to block without any clear long-term solutions. From San Diego to Sacramento and across the nation, homelessness in urban areas has increasingly presented officials with an intractable problem that often results in a cycle of shuffling people from block to block without any clear long-term solutions. CAPTION Homeless advocates like Dave Ross, also known as the "Water man" say the epidemic was predictable based on the increase of the homeless population. Homeless advocates like Dave Ross, also known as the "Water man" say the epidemic was predictable based on the increase of the homeless population. CAPTION Alpha Project outreach team takes us to the streets as they encourage the homeless to protect themselves by getting Hepetitas A shots. Alpha Project outreach team takes us to the streets as they encourage the homeless to protect themselves by getting Hepetitas A shots. CAPTION The eighth installment of editorial cartoonist Steve Breen's homeless portrait project. Holly L. is 63 years old and from St. Augustine. The eighth installment of editorial cartoonist Steve Breen's homeless portrait project. Holly L. is 63 years old and from St. Augustine. CAPTION Dave Ross, also known as Water Man, purchases bottles of water and drives the streets of San Diego looking for homeless people in need of some water and possibly a hug. Dave Ross, also known as Water Man, purchases bottles of water and drives the streets of San Diego looking for homeless people in need of some water and possibly a hug.

gary.warth@sduniontribune.com

Twitter: @GaryWarthUT

760-529-4939