Internships
More Information Below How much are interns paid?

When is the application deadline?

What materials do I need to apply?

Can I apply if I am not from Vermont?

Can I apply if I am not a student?

Interns are an integral part of our Senate operation and contribute greatly to the senator's work on behalf of Vermont and the nation. Senate interns have the unique privilege of gaining an insider's perspective on the legislative and representative process. Our Washington and Burlington offices offer paid full- and part-time internships tailored for recent graduates and current students at the undergraduate or graduate level.

Internship experiences are generally consistent with the descriptions below, but change from term to term in accordance with the Senate calendar, office legislative and casework priorities, and intern performance.

Questions? Please call the Senator's Internship Coordinator at (202) 224-5141 or (800) 339-9834.

Deadline to Apply

The application for the summer session of all internships (including Washington, D.C. and Burlington, Vermont) will be available on February 15, 2019. The deadline to apply is March 16, 2019.

Washington, D.C.

Vermont Legislative Internship: Legislative interns in the senator's Washington office may assist legislative staff by handling constituent phone calls and requests, processing mail and voice mail, attending briefings and committee hearings, providing research memos, leading U.S. Capitol tours and drafting responses to constituent letters and inquiries. Apply here. Press/Video Internship: Press/Video interns in the senator's Washington office work closely with the communications team to produce original creative content for digital platforms and track daily news coverage. Experience with video shooting, motion graphics and editing is strongly recommended. Apply here. General Internship: Based in the Burlington office, interns help track news stories in the local media, organize and staff public meetings, respond to constituents’ requests for information and assistance, join outreach staff when visiting constituent groups, update constituent databases, and more. Apply here. Multi-media Internship: Based in the Burlington office, interns assist with photography and videography, producing short videos, graphic design, and drafting social media content. Apply here.

Frequently Asked Questions

When is the application deadline?

Spring Session (January to May)

Application deadline: November 18

Summer Session (May to August)

Application deadline: March 16

Fall Session (August to December)

Application deadline: June 22

How much are interns paid?

Interns are paid $15 per hour.

Is housing provided?

Interns are responsible for their own housing near their employing office.

What materials do I need to apply?

You will need a copy of your resume and a cover letter in Adobe PDF or Microsoft Word format. The online application will prompt you for contact information and details about your availability.

Can I apply if I am not from Vermont?

While preference is given to students and graduates from Vermont, all prospective applicants are encouraged to apply.

Can I apply if I am not a student?

The internship programs in the office of Sen. Bernie Sanders are tailored for recent graduates and those currently pursuing a degree. That said, we do consider a variety of backgrounds. We do not accept high school applicants.