State Farm Insurance Company Cancels Policyholder with Home Range
Ask Gary (FAQ)

Gary has received hundreds of emails requesting details about his cancellation. He welcomes yours, but please review the FAQ section to see if your questions will be answered.

For those who've been told by State Farm that Gary's Range was a Shooting Club Click Here

Gary's original statement to GrassRoots detailing the events leading to State Farm canceling his insurance can be viewed by Clicking Here

Gary has been receiving requests for radio interviews. Gary gladly accommodate any and all media requests. Please Email Gary for information.

From Neal Knox: "Tell Gary that we're starting to put State Farm's name up in lights, and they won't like the color."

From Angel Shamaya: "I can't apologize for State Farm's stupidity, shortsightedness, or extremely poor business sense, of course, but I can help chop their head off, and I shall. We'll use 'em as bait for the next ignorant company that thinks they can infringe on our God given rights.

Keep shootin', partner. Let's see how many customers we can take away..., and give 'em to the intelligent person who covered you as a responsible, lawful, peaceable gun owner, yes? Like shootin' fish in a barrel.

Thanks for telling your story. We needed another sacrifice - for the movement - and it might as well be a former good neighbor.

State Farm is going to regret this move for a very, very long time. Unless we see a formal apology, this one is going to be like getting kicked in the xxxx.

I guess some companies just gotta learn the hard way." -Angel

Q: After reading your story regarding State Farm, I will be changing my insurance carrier tomorrow. Those people have no right, whatsoever, to dictate to us how we should be living our lives. As long as we are not breaking laws, it is no concern of theirs. -Best Regards, Amin.

A: Thank you for your support. When you mention this to your agent be ready for some bigtime backsliding. It's all likely to be postured as a big misunderstanding. There is none. Everything in the GRSC / RKBA web articles are as they happened. FACT. My range is 100% in compliance with all local, state and SCDNR regulations. It is absolutely private... not commercial. All I look for in this is a clear, written statement of State Farm policy on hunting and shooting on policy holder property. We'll let our free enterprise system take its course after that. -Gary

Q: I spoke with Renee Wilder who claims that there is another side to the story which she cannot disclose because of litigation... she apparently needs your authority to disclose the actual facts to us. She mentioned several times that State Farm does not cover commercial gun ranges, however, no specifics as your file is confidential.

She further claimed that she is pro-Gun, owns several firearms, insures her secretary who own firearms & shoots on their private property, & that State Farm has never been nor will it ever be Anti-Firearm.

I've asked my agent for State Farm's official policy on this, but he had no idea about your case or what had happened. I faxed him the article from RKBA. No reply as of yet.

I also faxed a copy of your email to Renee Wilder. No reply from her either... I doubt I will hear from her again. Good Luck to you & keep the Faith!

A: Thank you for the input. My range is NOT commercial and never has been. I did form a six-member club after threat of cancellation by SF to secure shooting liability coverage through NRA-endorsed underwriter. However this was done only AFTER after threat of cancellation from SF and because it was necessary to meet the guidelines for NRA Club Insurance. -Thanks, Gary

Q: I just read an article on a shooters forum that I frequent about your problems with State Farm. As a SF policy holder and an avid shooter/hunter, I am very interested in getting more details regarding their handling of your situation. I intend to contact my SF agent and confront them with this information. My policies are due for renewal soon and if I am not satisfied with the answers my agent can give, then I will be canceling all of them. I would also like any information on the "gun owner friendly" companies that you chose to move your policies too. I refuse to do business with organizations that do not support my rights as a law abiding gun owner. Keep up the good fight.

A: You will probably do all right with Allstate, Farm Bureau or American National. As for State Farm, just get your agent to give you written confirmation that you can hunt, shoot, target practice, etc. within legal constraints on your present property, or that which you might obtain, without jeopardizing your good standing with the company and their coverage of your homeowner policy. That's all I ever wanted from State Farm. Certainly a "Good Neighbor" shouldn't have a problem with a simple request like that. If State Farm can't grant us us that simple request, in writing, then let's see if our free enterprise system will reveal a prominent insurance carrier that can. -Best Regards, Gary J. Atkinson

Q: I host a radio program in Portland , Oregon. Can I get you on the air? How about Thurs 10/ 5 @ 2:30 Pacific or 10/6 Fri. @ 3:30 pacific? -Thanks, M

A: This is the second invite I've had this week. One is for tonight at 11:00PM. I'd be happy to talk with you on the air. I've had some practice. Friday at 3:30 Pacific would be fine. Please call me at home XXX-XXX-XXXX

Q: "I have some more information from Mr. White of State Farm and my own agent in Texas. In summary, if my shooting range is for personal use only (for example, I do not teach self-defense classes on the range), I will be covered under my homeowner's policy. State Farm has no position either way on guns; for them, any coverage related to firearms is strictly a business decision. There is no blanket prohibition at State Farm against personal, private shooting ranges. Each individual situation is assessed on a case by case basis by the underwriting agent. In my specific case, my agent welcomes the business I bring her, including my homeowner policy for the property that has the shooting range. Out of respect for Atkinson's privacy, the specifics of his account won't be discussed by State Farm, which I understand. However, at this point I retract my intention to cancel my business with State Farm. Unless Atkinson steps forward to release more details about his situation, I cannot conclude that State Farm is against gun owners per se; perhaps the only thing he needed to do was find another State Farm agent."

A: I don't know what more "specifics" anyone needs that haven't been discussed. But, will add that I personally sat in Renee Wilder's office on July 20th when we called another SF agent who is a shooter. I believe his name is Roe Young. He advised that there is NO way SF would cover a shooting range on my property. He told me and Renee that he would look into what options I might have. He never called me back. Subsequent calls to SF headquarters' Mr. Ted Loy confirmed that SF would not cover shooting ranges on policy holder property. He did say that it was handled on a case by case basis. Renee Wilder went on to say that SF precludes hunting on a policy holder's land, as well, except very occasional use. Again, nothing in writing. My supervisor called his State Farm agent in West Columbia to confirm my story, as well. The answer, absolutely no shooting range, private or otherwise, on a SF policy holder's property. PERIOD. So let's cut to the chase. Anyone got a tape measure? Bring it and yourself to Chapin for a guided tour of my place. I DID NOT get that review from anyone at SF or any such offer to the effect. -Gary

Q: My SF agent here in TX was very concerned about what happened to you. He said if you had a public range that he could understand what happened to you. I've called State Farm and no one seemed to want to talk to me about what happen and all I ever got was you need to talk to so & so and I never was able to talk to anyone. I will drop SF in the future,because of what happen to you and the way I was treated by SF representatives that I called. In other words all that I received from SF was the "shuck and jive". Keep their feet to the fire! -Owen, Madisonville TX

A: Brother, I really appreciate your support. Get your agent to tell you what type and volume of shooting / hunting is OK and drop me a line. -Thanks, Gary

Q: Subject: Re: Is it True? Hi Gary, Thank you for your prompt reply! I just sent this information to Game Wardens in every state and several other countries by email. Good luck and God bless you! -David, Iowa Conservation Officer

A: The information, as supplied by me and appearing at scfirearms.org is factual. Look at GrassRoots South Carolina website and click on the attachments in FAQ. No need for apology, if you shoot or hunt on your own land... this is YOUR issue. I would only ask that you stay tuned to GRSC and support our cause with as much enthusiasm as possible. Please spread this story to your hunting and shooting friends and anyone else who places a value on freedom.

Q: State Farm canceled our insurance in Pennsylvania because of guns. We had their insurance on our home and our in home business. We had a federal firearms license and the agent who issued the business liability policy in 1983 knew that. No problem. In 1995, due to a regulation in the Brady Bill that you have a letter from your local zoning board to renew your ffl, the borough tried to take that ffl away from us (partly because we were within 1000 feet of an elementary school).

Well, we won the court case. Cost us $25,000 in legal fees and we lost at least that in lost business. The ATF was nicer to us than anyone else, believe it or not... And once we won the case, State Farm canceled our insurance. We appealed it to the PA State Insurance commission, who sided with State Farm saying due to all the publicity, we were a "risk".... State Farm also has stopped insuring gun dealers and home businesses because of "risk". Somehow, I thought "risk" was why we were buying insurance!! Without "risk", we wouldn't need it! -Karen, WV

A: Karen, I deeply appreciate the time you've taken to write me. There is a growing group in SC that is winning the battles in our state, GrassRoots South Carolina. Please check their website at scfirearms.org Best Regards, -Gary

Q: Hi Gary, my name is Brad Robertson and I am a concerned gun owner who also has multiple policies underwritten by State Farm Insurance . However, I'm also concerned about BS emails and spam so before I act on this information and forward this email to others, I'd like to verify that this actually transpired the way it was written. It is for this reason that I am writing to you.

Did this actually happen as written? Who do you use for insurance coverage now? (if you don't mind me asking)

A: Go to scfirearms.org That site has the information I supplied to GrassRoots South Carolina. If you see the photo of a guy in a green chamois shirt, blue jeans and holding a GLOCK 24C, you can trust three things as follows:



1) The info is accurate

2) I'm not smiling about State Farm

3) I look better in person



Get SF to tell you their policy on SHOOTING / HUNTING.... not merely gun ownership.... and put it in writing. Let me know for sure what you get back. Thanks for your time.- Best Regards, Gary J. Atkinson

Q: Gary, My agent said that about anything that I want to do within the law and it's not a public firing range is OK. That means myself and friends can come over here to my house and sight in our rifles for Deer season, or shoot BP rifles and pistols or whatever as long as its not a public range. I've called the main offices and they tell me a different story than what I read in your web page! I'm not disbelieving you! I want something in writing also as my carrier is SF also and has been for 40 years. However I'm ready to drop the $%&#@ and find another carrier. I had a company man call me this afternoon and I got him going hard. I belong to the Special Forces List on the internet and this thing has gone to the Special Forces Assoc. also. I think they're going to be hurt badly by this incident with you. Give them Hell -Owen

A: Thanks for your support. See if you can get SF to put it in writing and drop me a line with the result. Their responses appear to be all over the map. Beware... there is a big difference between covering guns for loss of theft or fire. Get policy in writing regarding legal discharge. -Thanks, GJA

Q: What do you want from State Farm now that you have secured coverage elsewhere?

A: "All I want is State Farm to clearly state in writing what their policy is towards legal, safe non-commercial hunting and shooting activities on policy holder property. It makes no particular difference to me whether State Farm's WRITTEN policy is pro- or con- towards our sports and the Second Amendment. That is their business decision to make. I have EVERY confidence that the shooting / hunting / gun owner populace will then choose the companies that best suit their needs based on fully informed decisions. We will simply let our free enterprise system sort this matter out in the market place."

That's all I need unless someone else has something I'm missing. It might take them a day to put this entire matter to rest.

But, here's a little reality check to make your day, from my son, Tom, 10.

Tom learned to shoot on our range when he was five, along with other "braves" in his Indian Guide tribe. Tom and his 9-year old brother, Yates, love to shoot. But, Tom has a lot on his plate these days. He has a healthy concern with earning straight-A's. This fall he is sharing the quarterback duties of his 3-0 football team. They are facing another 3-0 team from Irmo, tonight. Tom also is wrestling with how to address one of his fifth grade classmates next week. Seems that boy's dad killed himself and estranged wife in a murder / suicide last weekend.

From my phone conversations, Tom is also puzzled about what State Farm has done. Last night, he asked me why they don't like our "rifle range?" I said State Farm thinks it's dangerous. A puzzled look.

Tom asked, "Dad, are we were going to loose the rifle range?" I said, "Tom, is it important to you that we keep the rifle range?" "Yes, Dad, we HAVE to keep it!" "OK, Tom, then don't worry. We won't loose the rifle range."

So there it is, gentlemen. That's what we're working for. Thanks for your support. -Best Regards, Gary J. Atkinson

Now let's post some remarks GrassRoots has received and our responses Note color changes for change in person speaking:

From a State Farm Agent:

Just so all State Farm Agents don't get painted with the same brush, you need to know that I, for one, have a SC Concealed Weapons Permit, as does my wife, my son, my daughter and her husband, AND, I'm a member of Grassroots, HOWEVER, the title of your article is misleading, as are the conclusions you draw, and you need to clear the air.

Gun ownership and discharging fire arms in a populated area are two quite different issues. There is an ordinance on the Richland County books which requires that any shooting be at least 100 yards from the closest residence. Is that the case in this situation?

More to the point, your article and it's title seem to suggest that gun ownership is an issue with State Farm. I have been with State Farm for 33 years and NEVER has gun ownership been a factor in determining if an individual qualifies for State Farm Insurance. Whether or not you own firearms simply has nothing to do with being insured by State Farm. In fact, State Farm has a variety of low-cost options whereby a gun owner can adequately insure his guns--hardly something an anti-gun insurance company would do.

Grassroots has already done much good, and can do much more, but frothing at the mouth and making unfounded statements that are inflammatory at best, and outright lies at worst simply do not help our cause. Are there issues involved in this case? You bet. But gun ownership is not one of them!

Again, the title of your article is flat out untrue, and the conclusions it tries draw are misleading and a manipulation of the facts. At a minimum, you need to print my response and then you need to get the facts by getting up with someone in State Farm Management to find out what really happened in this case. I suspect you will find that reality is more than the fiction that you just printed.

Incidentally, if Grassroots is going to be as dishonest and misleading in our pro-gun efforts as are our anti-gun fanatics, then I will need to look for another organization.

GrassRoots Response:

I'll pass this on to leadership. Perhaps the title should read: State Farm Dumps Gun Owner in South Carolina for Shooting on Rural Property

As for ordinances. Gary checked. He was in compliance will all ordinances. His activity was completely legal and allowable on his property.

The article was not intended to harm State Farm agents at all. We understand that agents are not the issue here. This is apparently a State Farm policy. Can you provide us with more info from State Farm regarding the issue of shooting on property on which they carry the coverage?

Gary has said nothing but good things about his agent. He is not upset with her. He is upset with State Farm Policy and wants everyone to be aware of this policy. His primary interest is preventing this type of exclusion from becoming the "standard" for insurance companies.

Again, the point of this article is not to malign State Farm Agents.

I am willing to take a suggestion from you for the appropriate title of the piece. Thanks,

State Farm:

Without being too repetitive, I want to point again that this issue is not about gun ownership and I think your article should have so stated. Our membership--many of who are insured with State Farm, some of whom may by my clients--should not be confused by thinking that their insurance company has taken sides on the gun ownership/control issue. That simply is not the case.

GrassRoots:

I can attempt to make changes to the article to reflect that we are not upset or attacking agents nor are we referring to anything other than the activity of shooting on one's property.

Your logic is what we repeatedly hear from Merchants that post against Concealed Carry. They say they are not anti-gun, frequently say they own guns, hunt, shoot, and may have a CWP. However they post against CWP because the law allows them that privilege. Basically our position is to acknowledge that they are right on all points - however our membership wants to know about businesses that take their position.

State Farm:

Without speaking for State Farm, but only as an insurance agent, I can understand what has happened in this situation. If I were your insurance agent and came to your house and saw a broken front step, I would ask that you repair it. There is certainly nothing illegal with your having a broken step. It is your right as a homeowner to either repair that step or not. No one, not the local or even the federal government is going to make you repair it. BUT, your insurance company, any insurance company, will ultimately cancel your insurance if you don't fix it. Why? Simply speaking, you have a substantially increased risk of loss over folks with homes just like yours where the steps are in good repair.

GrassRoots:

I agree with all you say. I am sure every insured has an inherent degree of risk even with steps in good repair. State Farm has decided it doesn't want to insure a property where a personal range is located, shooting takes place, or hunting. Okay, fine. Maybe a great idea from a risk standpoint. Shouldn't our membership know that? Shouldn't they be given this information and the option to take their coverage to an insurance company that IS willing to insure the activity they enjoy on their property. I am not angry with State Farm - it just seems they don't want to insure properties that involve shooting activities. This definitely IS relevant and something members of an organization such as ours would want to know about.

State Farm:

Does having an unlicensed shooting range on a piece of property in a highly populated area increase the risk of loss? Yep, absolutely. Is it legal? Just like the step, it is (if it's over 300 feet from the nearest residence it is in Richland County. And, by the way, good journalism would dictate that YOU measure the distance before writing the article).Will any insurance company cancel your insurance for any substantial increase in potential liability loss? Yep, absolutely. And, it is in your best interest, as it is in mine as a homeowner to support this stance since our rates depend upon losses which are paid.

GrassRoots:

Reread the article. Contact Gary. Gary agreed to give 100% exclusion to SF for the property in question. As for your "if" situations above, I am not an insurance agent and I do not have a trained eye to look at what they are looking for. I could spend hours looking and measuring Gary's property and still a trained eye like yours would ask yet another question of me. Perhaps Renee or State Farm can give us a more detailed answer why his policy was canceled. I would look forward to publishing their statements. Then we could revise and say State Farm doesn't want to insure policyholders what meet such-and_such criteria. I have contacted State Farm and have not received a response to the article one way or the other. Can you help?

State Farm:

If I were a betting man, I would be willing to bet a fair sum that the COMPANY who now insures this individual does not know of the existence of the shooting range. The agent may know, but without a doubt any major, responsible company simply will not be willing to accept this substantial increase in exposure.

GrassRoots:

Reread the article. Gary has gladly given out the name of the company that holds his insurance. He has advised me that this was his first question to alternate companies after State Farm gave him 7 days to find alternative coverage. Also, Gary now has coverage specifically for the range in the amount of 1,000,000 through NRA referred insurance company. Yes, they know they are insuring a range.

State Farm:

Here's the major point. If a stray shot hits and injures someone else on their own property, the fact that this individual who has done nothing illegal and was simply plinking away as he has many, many times before will probably loose everything he has--the insurance company will certainly loose the limits of the liability, and whether or not he had the "right" has absolutely nothing to do with it.

GrassRoots:

You are correct. No argument here. Don't you think GrassRoots members that have State Farm should know that State Farm would rather not be their carrier if they are shooting on their property? Doesn't State Farm want these types of risky folks off their policyholder list?

State Farm:

So, if you were the insurance company and you know all of this, would you continue to accept the exposure?

GrassRoots:

If I was the insurance company I would insure anyone and everyone based on financial actuarial risks. If there is increased risk then your premium increases such that it matches the risk involved. Isn't this what insurance companies do?

State Farm:

Like I said in the beginning, it has nothing to do with gun ownership. And it really doesn't have anything to do with whether or not shooting a gun on your own property is legal or not.

GrassRoots:

It has a lot to do with gun ownership if you want to exercise shooting your gun on your property. If you just like to look at them and clean them on your property you'd be correct.

I agree it has nothing to do with legalities. It is solely a decision of State Farm.

State Farm:

Finally, just for perspective: insurance companies require that swimming pools be fenced, will not allow homeowners to own trampolines, refuse to let you keep junked cars on your property, require that you remove discarded refrigerators, and regularly inspect homes to be sure that--horror of horrors--your home is maintained and kept in good order--none of which is required by law, or written into your policy. You can also keep a bad dog--its perfectly legal--but just as soon as your insurance company--any company--finds out, they will cancel your policy. I'm glad that they do, and so are you, but you just have never thought about it, because if the companies were not about reducing their exposure, which means that they often must "infringe on your rights as a homeowner," all of our rates would substantially higher than they are now. Any insurance company is required to do all it can to limit exposure. The states require it, the stockholders require it, and good business requires it.

GrassRoots:

Yes, you are correct. I don't argue this point. State Farm has decided it doesn't want to cover certain activity it considers risky. Okay. Both our membership as well as State Farm should be happy we are getting the word out.

State Farm:

If you would like to talk more about this, give me a call at x-xxx-xxx-xxxx.

GrassRoots:

I'm late with the newsletter. Please feel free to call Ed Kelleher. I'll cc: him on this as well as your last correspondence. His number is your newsletter.

State Farm:

A good title for your article might be: State Farm Continues Try to Keep Homeowner Rates Affordable and Cancels Gunowner Who Has Unlicensed Shooting Range. That's a lot more truthful than first title.

GrassRoots:

How about "State Farm Cancels Gunowner Who Has Shooting Range." Gary was not given the option of paying more so keeping rates affordable doesn't apply - he would have paid more - money wasn't an issue here. As for "Unlicensed" there is no such thing as a "Licensed Range" so how can there be an "Unlicensed Range?" Gary's range was covered under the current Range Protection Law in South Carolina so as far as it goes towards some sort of "licensing" he was in compliance with current standards as set forth.

State Farm:

"State Farm Cancels Homeowner Who Has Gun Range" is a truthful title.

By the way, I would be writing you if the same article had been written about Allstate, Nationwide, Farm Bureau, etc.

Not to be flip with you, but what part of 100 yards is hard to understand. The article states that the range is in compliance with all laws. Do you know that fact, or have you just accepted the word of the homeowner? There is nothing else necessary to be in compliance with the law--EXCEPT that if it is open to the public as the homeowner has stated that it is, there is a WHOLE BUNCH else.

GrassRoots:

Gary has stated that this is NOT open to the public and is not a commercial range. If he is violation of the law he show be arrested and charged accordingly. Since he has not I would not put the cart before the horse and find him guilty beforehand.

State Farm:

Hey, I'm trying to help our organization here. The shooting range is no different from the trampoline and we are going to look pretty silly when you do find out that all insurance companies manage risks and a gun range, a swimming pool and a bad dog are all the same to them. Take time and do the homework. This homeowner gets canceled by every major insurance company in America. But it's not a vendetta against gun ownership.

GrassRoots:

I agree. I'm not trying to make it out as such. State Farm simply does not want to insure this particular risk. Okay, fine. Gun owners should know. State Farm should be happy as mud pies that we are separating the wheat from what they consider the chaff. If State farm has 1,000 gun owners come forward and say, "Hey this applies to me" then our article has saved State Farm a bunch of money and headache since they don't want to be involved in these types of risks.

State Farm:

Now, if there are insurance companies who openly advertise that's it is OK to conduct public shooting on your home property, then, by all means we need to let our members know. I'll still bet that the insurance company doesn't know all of the details.

GrassRoots:

The Insurance Company that Gary signed on with within the few days following notice of intent to cancel was Insurance Specifically for Ranges. Gary said he had to jump a few hurtles to qualify the range according to the group range insurance plan in accordance with NRA but that once done the Insurance was written like all the other Range Insurance plans. I am a member of Mid-Carolina Rifle Club. MCRC has similar coverage in the amount of 2,000,000. This isn't strange, just straightforward actuarial coverage for a given risk known, no doubt, to insurance companies. Call the NRA and ask about Range Insurance. They will direct you to the Insurance carrier.

I have the option of obtaining similar insurance coverage specifically for Firearms Instructors and the inherent risks associated. It's easy, call the NRA training department and get the number. Call the carrier and tell them you want Firearms Instructor coverage and off you go.

Insuring ranges, instructors, etc. isn't objectionable to all insurance companies.

Thanks,

Now for some general comments received...

My father has been a State Farm Agent for 35 years. Like many large companies, his company has seen many changes over the years. Most old agents talk about the "old days." It's not just State Farm, many large companies have seen significant changes over the past decade.

I've always thought of State Farm as the people's insurance company. I have very strong doubts that that particular agent was acting within company guidelines. I think the problem was with the AGENT, not the company. The fact that she even came out there to see where you practiced is HIGHLY unusual and shows how obsessed she is with your gun ownership. My dad wouldn't have done that in a hundred years! My father and I both own guns. I further feel that there are STRONG grounds for a discrimination lawsuit. The silliness must be stopped. Law abiding citizens must not be persecuted.

Lately our society has been changing quite a bit; rather notably as a culture intolerant of guns. Clinton's insane propaganda has done wonders depict any possible gun related incidents as fuel for his anti-gun rhetoric and to criminalize responsible gun owners. He even went on national television and claimed the Oklahoma City bombing as a reason for tighter gun control when the place was blown up with fertilizer! THERE WERE NO GUNS INVOLVED! Hillary Clinton began her nationally televised unveiling of her proposed healthcare reform policy with a case against handguns. It was the first thing out of her mouth, as if handguns were the number one problem with healthcare. The whole rest of her healthcare plan took a backseat! Does any one remember that!?? Wake up America!

Your former insurance agent should cough up the any print that prohibits gun use/ownership or find a different occupation. No one must EVER criminalize or discriminate against responsible gun ownership for lack of a more creative solution to crime and violence. Please contact me if I can be of any service. I'd love to see this resolved.

More...

Gary, I am sorry you were treated so badly by State Farm, hopefully your story will be forwarded to all the gun rights organizations and we can make it hot for them. I also have State Farm here in NC. I read that you had a list of "gun friendly" insurance companies. If you get a chance I wouldn't mind a copy. I will be changing insurance companies just as soon as I find a reasonable alternative and after I write State Farm and talk with my local agent. -Ken, Shelby N.C.

State Farm's Response to an inquiry from South Carolina Policyholder...

Dear Carol:



It is State Farm's policy not to discuss individual policyholder situations unless they have given us permission in writing to do so. State Farm Insurance has no political stance on the gun issue. We do not take issue with a person's right to own guns. We do offer insurance on guns.

State Farm is in the business of selling insurance to protect people against the risks of everyday life. We are the nation's leading homeowners insurer because we strive to provide the best mix of coverage, service and price. In order to provide a competitive product, we have to carefully consider all risks we are undertaking when we choose to provide coverage. We recognize there are some cases that provide exposures that fall outside of typical homeownership. Liability for these cases cannot affordably be included in the cost of homeowners insurance.



Thank you for your inquiry.



Sincerely,

Jairon L. Wills

State Farm Corporate Customer Service Supervisor



GrassRoots:

Maybe someone needs to tell State Farm it's about more than gun ownership unless you just like to hold them, clean them, and watch them collect dust! Personally I like to SHOOT THEM! Too bad State Farm draws the line at actually shooting them!

State Farm:

From our friends in Illinois:

CCRA contacted State Farm Insurance and was referred to the Executive offices to speak with Dan Hadaway, a company spokesman (309 766-6674). Hadaway tried diligently to return a voice mail message and when contacted he clarified "the other side of the story," so to speak.

Hadaway said, "State Farm doesn't really care what you do on your private property, as long as it's legal and doesn't increase the risk of a loss." Recreational shooting on your property, by yourself, or with friends and guests is just fine and is not at all considered to increase the risk of a loss.

Hadaway said the Atkinson cancellation was based upon the policyholder (Atkinson) forming a "formal" gun club, complete with dues paying memberships there on his property. "All kinds of people were out there," the State Farm representative said, including police departments doing training, neighborhood groups and others. Apparently Atkinson was very liberal about who used the range.

Homeowners insurance was never meant as gun club insurance, Hadaway said. For this reason, the policy was terminated.

GrassRoots:

Thanks, Looks like the State Farm people are all over the place again. If one excuse doesn't work then let's try another. Of course maligning the victim always works for... should I say it? Geez! Ask Mr. Hadaway for a written statement from SF on paragraph two above and we'll be getting somewhere. Just call him back and say, "Hey, I'm having some friends over this weekend for a dove shoot out back. Can you fax me a statement or copy of my coverage that covers me?" I'll hold my breath.

Mr. Hadaway, you're either 1) Not telling the truth OR 2) In Violation of Customer Confidentiality Guidelines. Neither is a good position.

I'll not ask you to fax me Gary's specifics because I know you wouldn't ever risk your job on violation of customer confidentiality. But I will ask you to start coming clean with gun owners. Let's start by seeing how long it takes you to fax GrassRoots a written statement that says State Farm policy holders are covered if they choose to have a few friends over this weekend for some plinking on the back forty. Do that and I'll put it up here immediately and eat crow for all to see! My fax number is 803-755-1201. I'm holding my breath!

WANTED!

Any State Farm Employee to Fax GrassRoots a Copy of any internal policy, internal memo, or other documentation indicating State Farm discriminates against lawful use of firearms on policyholder's property.

Fax to: 803-755-1201

Your identity may remain anonymous at your discretion.

Gary may be contacted for further information including the termination letter from State Farm (with reason sited) as well as a detailed events write-up describing how State Farm handled this case start to finish. There's no hidden agenda here. Gary's letter of cancellation is available for concerned policyholders who believe they may also be at risk for non-coverage by State Farm. Gary's range was a private range, not commercial, and not open to the public. Gary was in compliance with all local, county, and state laws regarding shooting ranges and the use of his property. Contact Gary at: pcsport109@msn.com

How High will State Farm Let this Counter Get

Before Coming Clean with Gun Owners?

GrassRoots South Carolina

P.O. Box 2446

Lexington, SC 29071

http://www.scfirearms.org