New Shakespeare Theory
THE OXFORDIAN

Volume XI

2008

Hudson

66

Amelia’s brother-in-law Nicholas Lanier, worked on at least seven masques involving actors from the King’s Men, for which he sang the songs, designed the sets, or wrote music.

stage-music’ (Izon 335) to the plays and masques that were staged at Court. But the Bassanos’ activities were probably not limited to pr oviding stage-music at Court. When the playhouses were built outside the northern city walls—about 200 yards away from their home in Spitalfields—the Bassanos were well-positioned to supply them with musical services. From the age of seven, after her father’s death, Amelia was brought up in the Willoughby household, at their country house in Greenwich, and at their mansion in the city of Londo n. She was educated by Countess Susan Bertie (a former handmaiden to on e of the highly educated Grey sisters). Bertie’s elde rly mother, the Duchess of Suffolk was a proto-feminist known for advocating that women should read the Bible for themselves. Then in the early 1580s, perhaps around the age of thirteen, Amelia became the teenage mistress of the elderly Henry Carey, Lord Hunsdon, the Lord Chamberlain. He was the most important man in Lon- don’s theatrical life, and would become the patron of the Lord Chamberlain’s Men. Before she gave birth to his illegitimate son Henry, he had her removed from Court and married off for the sake of appearances to a first cousin, Alph- onso Lanier, in late 1592. By the early 1600s some of Amelia’s closest relatives had become firmly established in sen- ior positions in the provi- sion of technical services —music composition, orchestral directing, performing and set design—for the King’s Men, both at Court performances and in the Blackfriars indoor theatre. This was a lucrative business for them. Amelia’s brother-in-law, Nicholas Lanier, worked on at least seven masques involving actors from the King’s Men, for which he sang the songs, designed the sets, or wrote the music. Her sister-in-law’s husband, Alphonso Ferrabosco II, also wrote music for seven of the masques. Ben Jonson praised him in the introduction to one of them, making a pledge to their friendship (Wilson 31-2). Her maternal cousin, Robert Johnson, worked on Jonson’s

Masque of Oberon

(1611) and over a decade specifically wrote music for the playwrights who worked with the King’s Men, including Middleton, Webster, Beaumont and Fletcher, as well as for several Shakespearean romances. Overall, Robert Johnson created half-a-dozen pieces o f music or dances that appear in the late Shakespear- ean plays. For

The Tempest

, he wrote ‘Full Fathom Five’ and ‘Where the Bee Sucks,’ for

Cymbeline

‘Hark hark the lark,’ and for

The Winter’s Tale