Maker of Oreos fires back at Trump
Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump ruffled the feathers of a major American baking company during his Rochester appearance Thursday night when he told the audience he no longer eats Oreos.

ROCHESTER — Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump ruffled the feathers of a major American baking company during his Rochester appearance Thursday night when he told the audience he no longer eats Oreos.

Mondelēz Global LLC, the parent company of Nabisco, makers of Oreo cookies, is firing back at a Trump assertion that the global company plans to vacate cookie making facilities in Chicago and will be baking the quintessential American treat in Mexico.

"I love Oreos, but Nabisco is closing their factory in Chicago and moving it to Mexico, so I don't eat Oreos anymore," Trump said. The comment was part of a response to a question from an audience member about why Trump thought Mexico would be able to pay for a wall to keep out undocumented workers.

The Oreo statement was not the only controversial issue to surface at the Rochester event, which attracted 2,832 people to the city's Community Center.

Trump made national headlines after the town hall-style meeting during which an audience member called President Barack Obama a Muslim and said the United States had a Muslim problem. Critics took Trump to task for failing to correct the questioner's misstatement and allowing him to make racist, prejudicial remarks.

On Friday, a representative for Mondelēz Global LLC, said Trump's statements about the company are untrue. "We announced in July a new investment in our supply chain in an already-existing facility we have in Mexico. We are NOT closing our facility in Chicago," wrote Laurie M. Guzzinati, senior director for corporate and government affairs in North America for Mondelēz Global LLC.

"Though there will be an impact to some positions in Chicago, given that the investment is being made in a different facility in our manufacturing network, our Chicago bakery will continue to be an important site within the North American biscuit manufacturing network," Guzzinati wrote in an email to Foster's.

Guzzinati said that the Chicago bakery produces a variety of Nabisco cookies and crackers, and will remain important due to its geographical location.

"The Chicago bakery will remain one of the largest plants within the network from an overall head-count perspective," she said.

Guzzinati added that Oreos are made in several manufacturing sites within the United States, including Fair Lawn, N.J., Richmond, Va. and Portland, Ore.

She also said the the factory in Mexico was an already-existing biscuit manufacturing facility that supports the Americas, not a new facility.

"The investment made in July was for new, state-of-the-art manufacturing lines (meaning equipment) to produce cookies and crackers," she wrote.

Guzzinati said in addition to its U.S. locations, Oreos are produced in 18 countries around the world.

"It's America's and the world's favorite cookie," she said.

Attempts to reach Trump's campaign on Friday afternoon about Mondelēz Global LLC statements were unsuccessful.