Board of Directors
Carles Ferrer - General Partner of Nauta Capital.



Carles leads the Enterprise Software/Security vertical for Nauta. Carles has extensive Venture Capital experience, having actively managed different VC funds since year 2000. Carles has been Director of the Venture Capital Division at Grupo Financiero Riva y García. His previous experience includes also management poisitions in corporate strategy and finance divisions with blue chip companies in the telecommunications and technology sectors. Earlier in his career, Carles also was an Auditor with Ernst & Young. Carles currently sits on several Boards of technology companies (software and security) and Media players (Videogames and Publishing) both in Spain and the USA. Carles is a member of the Board of Directors of Agnitio, Scytl, Kinamik and Abiquo (portfolio companies). Carles is very much present in the entrepreneurial/VC ecosystem as active Board member, judge or panelist in leading events such as the Global Security Challenge, The European Tech Tour, The European Venture Contest, SeedCamp, and the IBM SmartC, among others He holds a Business Administration degree from Universitat de Barcelona, Graduate Programme in International Management from Harvard University and an MBA from SDA Bocconi (Milan, Italy).





Bernard Liautaud - Partnerof Balderton Capital.





Bernard Liautaud founded Business Objects in 1990 and was CEO for 15 years then Chairman until January 2008. With 6,700 employees, 45,000 customers and $1.5 billion of revenue in 2007, Business Objects was the world leader in Business Intelligence and one of the 15 largest software companies in the world. Business Objects was the first European software IPO on Nasdaq in 1994. In January 2008, Business Objects was acquired by SAP for $6.8 billion, making it the third largest software acquisition at the time. Bernard is now a member of the SAP Supervisory Board and its strategy committee. He is also a member of Cap Gemini’s board and its strategy committee. He has received a number of distinctions including “Chevalier de la Légion d’Honneur” in 2007 in France, Time Magazine Europe's Digital Top 25 and BusinessWeek Stars of Europe of 2002, Top 10 CEOs in North America by Chief Executive Magazine in 2001. Education: Diplôme d'Ingénieur, Ecole Centrale de Paris, and Master of Science, Engineering Management, Stanford University.





Albert Ferrer Oliveras - Investment Manager of Grupo Financiero Riva y García.



Graduate in Business Administration and Management and MBA from ESADE Business School, CEMS (Community of European Management Schools) Master's Degree in Management from the HEC - Hautes Études Commerciales (Paris, France). He joined RIVA Y GARCÍA in March 2001. Prior to this he worked in the financial department of Inlander Communications, an Internet provider company and consultancy firm in new technologies. He has also worked in the marketing department of various companies, such as Hilti and Antonio Puig. Since joining Riva y García he has worked on the analysis and evaluation of business projects in various sectors, with particular emphasis on the audiovisual and entertainment industry, in wholesale/retail sectors and in traditional industrial companies. He has been directly involved in investment operations and in monitoring different investee companies as a member of their Board of Directors.





Peter Holmes - Director of Intellect.



Peter is a director of Intellect, the UK trade association representing 750 member companies in the information technology, telecommunications and electronics sector. Since April 2008 he is also the chair of its Operations Board.

Peter Holmes joined Scytl's Board of Directors as an independent director after retiring from a successful career with Accenture. He spent the last 12 years with Accenture where he was Managing Director for Public Service - Europe, Africa & Latin America in which he was responsible for overseeing 17 countries with revenues in excess of $1 billion and over 5,000 professionals. Prior to Accenture, Mr. Holmes spent 19 years with Sema Group (now Atos) in which he became Managing Director of their UK systems integration and consulting business and a board director of their global outsourcing business. Mr. Holmes currently Chairs the Operations Committee of Intellect, a trade association representing the UK information technology, telecommunications and electronic industry, and he is also a Non-Executive Member of the Insolvency Service Executive Agency Board in the United Kingdom.