Boys' Life Magazine

The mission of Boys' Life magazine is to entertain and educate America's youth and to open their eyes to the joyous world of reading. This is accomplished through a proven mix of news, nature, sports, history, fiction, science, comics, and Scouting. A special edition is published for Cub Scouts, with age- and program-specific content and feature articles.

Why Scouts (and Parents and Leaders) Like Boys' Life

Good reading . Boys' Life is an entertaining mix of exciting stories and valuable information. Boys like reading Boys' Life. Parents can always be confident that the content of the magazine is wholesome, entertaining, and educational.

. is an entertaining mix of exciting stories and valuable information. Boys like reading Parents can always be confident that the content of the magazine is wholesome, entertaining, and educational. Faster advancement . Boys' Life follows the Cub Scouting-recommended program themes each month. Boys' Life subscribers achieve rank advancements faster and more often than nonsubscribers.

. follows the Cub Scouting-recommended program themes each month. subscribers achieve rank advancements faster and more often than nonsubscribers. Increased family support . Leaders appreciate that Boys' Life goes into the home and stimulates support for Scouting from parents and brothers and sisters. Many family members read all or part of Boys' Life.

. Leaders appreciate that goes into the home and stimulates support for Scouting from parents and brothers and sisters. Many family members read all or part of Longer tenure . Scouts who subscribe to Boys' Life stay in Scouting longer than nonsubscribers—on average, two and a half times longer than nonsubscribers.

. Scouts who subscribe to stay in Scouting longer than nonsubscribers—on average, two and a half times longer than nonsubscribers. "Just part of Scouting." Boys' Life is an essential element, helping leaders and parents foster the development of young people in Scouting. Boys' Life shows the outcomes of the BSA's values-based programs. It brings a positive Scouting image to readers and alumni.

How Do I Learn More About Boys' Life?

The Boys' Life Web site (www.boyslife.org) contains information about the current issue, games to play, projects to download, and more. There's even a form you can download to subscribe. However, youth members qualify for a special subscription price. So if your son is already in Cub Scouting, contact your local council to subscribe.