Mt. Soledad cross case seems settled

A plan to move it gets tentative OK STAFF WRITER The Mount Soledad cross would be taken down and moved to a church or other privately owned land under a tentative agreement presented to the San Diego City Council in a closed meeting yesterday. The proposed deal to end a 15-year legal fight has the support of the American Civil Liberties Union, the lawyer for the self-described atheist who filed the federal lawsuit challenging the cross' presence on city-owned land and the Mount Soledad Association, which maintains the 43-foot-tall cross and a veterans memorial around it. Federal courts have repeatedly ruled that the cross violates the California Constitution's "no preference clause," which prohibits religious symbols on public land. City Attorney Casey Gwinn said the City Council voted unanimously in closed session yesterday to consider the proposal in a public hearing along with two other options. No date has been set for the hearing. The other choices, Gwinn said, are for the city to continue what has been a losing court fight to keep the cross in place or to try for a third time to sell the land around the cross to a buyer who could keep or remove the cross. Gwinn said he has not decided which action to recommend, but said he would advise against further litigation because the city would likely lose. Relocating the cross is favored by the Mount Soledad Association and lawyers for the ACLU and atheist Philip Paulson because it would allow the association to retain ownership of the land and the nearly $1 million in memorial walls the group has erected at the foot of the cross. "That is the most viable, most intelligent and most reasonable resolution," said James McElroy, Paulson's lawyer. Relocating the cross removes the constitutional issue, he said. "I hope the City Council wholeheartedly endorses this." Jordan Budd, managing attorney for the ACLU of San Diego and Imperial Counties, said relocating the cross and allowing the association to keep the land as a nonsectarian memorial is the least complicated option. The ACLU joined McElroy in handling court appeals of the cross litigation. "We would prefer that the city not destroy the cross but remove it to some other venue, somehow place it in the hands of a private party that would like to display the cross on private land," Budd said. William Kellogg, the association's president, said his group would prefer to keep the cross in place, "but that appears to be impossible at this point. "Our goal is to honor veterans, whatever happens," he said, and keeping the site as a memorial would make that possible. The association has erected six concrete walls at the foot of the cross. The walls have room for 3,200 granite plaques honoring individual veterans. Each plaque costs from $600 to $1,000. The dispute over the cross began in 1989, when Paulson filed a federal lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the city's ownership of the land under the cross. The city has offered various proposals to resolve the suit, but nothing has worked. After voters approved selling the cross property in a 1992 ballot measure, the city in 1994 sold 224 square feet of land at the base of the cross for $24,000 to the Mount Soledad Association. The association has maintained the cross since 1952 as a memorial to Korean War veterans. A federal judge rejected the sale in September 1997 because it wasn't open to competitive bidding. In 1998, a half-acre of land around the cross was sold to the association for $106,000. The association submitted the highest among five bids, but the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in June 2002 said that sale too was improper because sale procedures gave an edge to the association over groups that would remove the cross and who therefore had to include removal costs in their bids. The case has cost the city $230,000 in legal fees, which it agreed to pay the ACLU and McElroy after losing at the appeals court, Gwinn said. He was unable to estimate how much his office spent internally on the case. If the council approves the latest deal, who will pay to relocate the cross must still be negotiated, McElroy said. Ray Huard: (619) 542-4597; ray.huard@uniontrib.com