Shawn's long journey back from death's door / Surviving pit bull mauling was the beginning -- now boy faces years of surgery and rehabilitation

Shawn's Injuries. Chronicle Graphic Shawn's Injuries. Chronicle Graphic Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Shawn's long journey back from death's door / Surviving pit bull mauling was the beginning -- now boy faces years of surgery and rehabilitation 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

2001-07-08 04:00:00 PDT Oakland -- By the time Shawn Jones arrived by helicopter at Children's Hospital in Oakland, no one knew whether he would make it through the night.

The 10-year-old Richmond boy had suffered the kind of injuries that you would expect to see only during war or from a catastrophic bombing. His face and ears were torn away by three pit bulls that pulled him off his bike on June 18 and dragged him through thistles and dirt.

Three weeks later, he has battled back, fighting off infection and impressing his trauma surgeon, who says Shawn's wounds are the worst he has ever seen in a young mauling victim who has survived.

Now, doctors are doing more than just keeping him alive. They are helping him start to heal and are looking into a future of reconstructive surgery and rehabilitation.

Shawn will never be the same, but doctors say he will have a full life. He will have scars, but his face and ears and arms can be restored through plastic surgery. He will experience the long-term emotional toll of his horrific mauling and the painful recovery, but psychiatrists will work to mend his damaged psyche.

"I feel good about Shawn," said Dr. Heidi Flori, an intensive care unit physician. "In the first few days, and when he had his blood-pressure problems and his bloodstream infections, he was at the highest risk of dying. Since he's been able to get through that, he's improved.

"Every day that he does well and still is alive is definitely in his favor."

Shawn's doctors know his recovery will be nearly as rocky as those few brutal moments in his Richmond neighborhood that forever changed his life. He has already had numerous surgeries, and he faces countless ones ahead, along with long months in the hospital and in rehabilitation and counseling. His short- and long-term medical bills will reach into the millions of dollars.

He is one of about 1 million children in the country who will be bitten by dogs this year, said Dr. James Betts, Children's Hospital's chief of surgery. But Shawn's condition was so severe that it even took an emotional toll on the hospital staff, which is used to dealing with severely injured children.

"It really becomes a challenge to maintain your focus professionally . . . when seeing someone devastatingly injured," Betts said. "There's a little boy in there that we need to nurture. To know that dogs have mauled someone. You step back and say, 'My God, this is what a dog did to this child.' "

Almost immediately after the attack, a team headed by Betts was formed that included plastic surgeons, intensive-care physicians, physical therapists and radiologists. Shawn was put on a ventilator, and a tracheotomy was performed so the breathing tube now goes into his throat. Eventually, that will make it easier for him to mouth words.

He was heavily bandaged around his neck, face and arms and covered by blankets to keep him warm. Intravenous lines were put into arteries in his thigh and under his clavicle, and he was put under heavy sedation with narcotics infused continuously, Flori said. The sedation was to minimize his activity and pain.

"We also don't want him to experience all this horror," Flori said, adding that the medication has some amnesiac effect. "He'll remember some of it, of course, but it sort of takes the edge off it."

In the first couple of weeks, Shawn was going into the operating room nearly every day to clean his wounds. It was a time-consuming process that included about an hour of preparation time and up to four hours in surgery while doctors used high-pressure cleaning devices. As long as 10 days after the mauling, Betts was still finding thistles deep inside the wounds, embedded there as the dogs dragged the boy over a field.

By the middle of last week, Shawn's wounds were very clean. The high- calorie diet he had been put on was doing its job in helping his body heal from the horrifying trauma.

On Friday, encouraged by his progress, doctors upgraded his condition from critical to serious.

Doctors are cutting back on Shawn's sedation, watching for grimacing or tears that could indicate that he is in pain. They want him to regain consciousness, so he can start moving and communicating, but they need to go slowly and make sure his body doesn't show withdrawal symptoms.

There is room for 23 young patients in the intensive care unit, which will be Shawn's home for as long as two months. He is in an isolation room, which has been lined with pictures drawn by his classmates at Peres Elementary School in Richmond. His family and his teacher visit him regularly, reading to him or showing him videos or cartoons on a television.

His aunt, Belinda Arnett, said family members are doing whatever they can to help Shawn.

"We're just trying to take it one day at a time," she said. "We can't think about what's going to happen in the long run."

They spend time encouraging him and watching for signs that he is communicating, either by blinking his eyes in response to questions or moving his legs or arms. Although his ears were torn off, Shawn's hearing appears to be fine.

Flori said doctors will watch for signs of "ICU psychosis," which can happen to patients who are exposed to bright lights that remain on 24 hours a day. They are trying to create a routine, so he will know the difference between day and night, and eventually, when he is more conscious, he will even have school lessons.

"There's no free ride here," she said with a smile.

Physical therapists work with him so his muscles don't waste from his lying down all the time. Relatives also are encouraged to help the staff with some tasks.

Along with getting information at his bedside, Shawn's mother and aunt are meeting weekly with doctors, therapists and social workers to discuss Shawn's condition and treatments.

Although Arnett said last month that relatives have not talked to Shawn about what happened to him, Betts said that at some point they will have to bring it up.

"He may well remember that he was dragged off the bike and mauled. He may not remember any of that," Betts said. "I think it's important to find out what his understanding is."

Plastic surgeons were called in the first night, but their biggest tasks are still to come. Dr. Michael Carstens has started closing some wounds and has been thinking about how to graft muscle, nerves and skin onto Shawn's face.

Although most of the publicity has centered on the severe damage to Shawn's face and the loss of his ears, Carstens and Betts also are worried about deep bite wounds to his arms.

On his right arm, the dogs took out part of the radial nerve, one of the major nerves that could affect motion in the arm and even in the hands, affecting whether he could close his fingers to grasp things. Bone around his right elbow is exposed. Some of the bites on his left arm were very deep and could have damaged all three major nerves.

Shawn's injuries will take a lot of time to repair because they are so extensive and acute, almost like what burn victims suffer.

"This is like a blast injury. This is like a war injury," Carstens said. "If we think about what firearms do in a conflict, this is what they do."

Carstens said the boy is lucky in some ways. He has plenty of healthy muscle and skin for grafts.

"You have to rob Peter to pay Paul," Carstens said. That means he will take muscle, probably from Shawn's chest or thigh, which are similar to facial muscles. Doctors can graft skin over the muscle or use an artificial skin called Integra.

Because nerves were affected along with the muscle, Shawn is similar to a stroke victim who suffers facial paralysis. Carstens will try to reconstruct nerves so that he will be able to move the muscles in his face.

Although many people were horrified by Shawn's ears being pulled off, Carstens said that is not as daunting a task as the other work. Shawn could either get ears constructed in a four-step process from rib cartilage and skin,

or he could get prosthetic ears.

It may take months for doctors to decide what to do about Shawn's arms. Because major nerves were damaged, Shawn may have limited use of both his arms and hands. That will only become evident with time. The plastic surgeons will have to determine if they can graft nerves or do a tendon transfer to offset damage to the radial nerve in his right arm.

It might help to put off some of the procedures, Betts said, to allow Shawn a chance to go home first and recover more before starting a lot of the plastic surgeries.

Carstens said that he and other doctors will have a long relationship with Shawn, and he predicted that it will be "soul-satisfying."

"Kids are wonderful patients. They're very resilient. They've got a great attitude," Carstens said. "You're just there on their side. Doctors don't heal anybody. God does that. We help."