Sheepskin and Shearling FAQS and Facts From Shepherd's Flock, Townshend, Vermont, USA
GENERAL What is shearling? The very basic answer to that question is the skin of a sheep or lamb that has been tanned with the wool left on the hide.

We are going to confuse you for a moment but stick with us as we try to be as factual as possible. "A" "shearling" from what we can gather, is a sheep that has been shorn one time. Since sheep are not shorn in their first year this would be a sheep (lamb) that is over a year old. Mind you, we are not sheep growers but we found a great site from the UK that has a list of sheep terminology that is as complete as any we have seen. It is a nice site to visit as well. If one is determined to be extremely proper, "Shearling" as a leather term is the skin of a shearling lamb only. The skin is tanned with the wool still on the skin and both the leather and the wool are processed for a variety of applications. If someone refers to a "shearling coat" for example, they are really saying "shearling lambskin coat". Yes, it could be a "shearling wool coat" but the retailer should tell you that right up front. Self styled experts will tell you that you can buy a "cowhide shearling coat" but that is just plain BS (pun intended). Confused yet? Just wait, there is more. Shearling is also the proper term for what is commonly referred to as "sheepskin". To quote Stephen Johnson (there was a great 3 part video interview that was formally linked here that is no longer up) who gave Rick the initial tour of AC Lawrence Leathers on his first day at work, "The distinction is basically that a sheepskin is technically just that, the skin of a sheep." Shearling, as a term, has continued to diversify a bit but it always refers to a sheep/lamb hide that is tanned with the wool left on the skin. While we prefer to use the proper term you will find the terms sheepskin and shearling interspersed on our web pages for technical reasons (more "hits"). All our products are shearling regardless of how we refer to our raw material. And, no, we don't resort to calling it "sheepskin shearling" or "shearling sheepskin" or, terminology once used by a Vermont firm no less, "100% wool shearling". Come on, use your head, if it is shearling there is wool involved. Maybe some enterprising farmer (or Monsanto ®) has come up with a 50% wool, 50% polyester blend, genetically engineered lamb but we don't think so. And, if anyone were to do it it would not be a Vermont farm. Well, we hope not. We do, when speaking with suppliers, use the term "woolskin" quite often but it can refer to either the raw skins or finished skins. The Federal Trade Commission currently regulates/identifies shearling under the "Fur Products Labeling Act" see section 301.9 . This is probably a left over from the early/mid 20th Century when most shearlings were produced as something called "Mouton" which was/is a shearling lambskin with highly processed wool that is intended to mimic the appearance of beaver or seal. Mouton is the French word for sheep or sheepskin. It is the wool that was/is important in the processing. Mouton is still a specialized type of shearling and we use mouton in our traditional style ear muffs and for most of the colors in our covered band style ear muffs. However, shearling is probably best known for its use in consumer goods that are made with the leather on the outside and the wool on the inside. US Customs classifies a shearling (skin) as a fur (when it is tanned). However, if one imports a shearling coat, mittens, slippers, etc. with the leather on the outside, it is considered a leather item. But, a raw sheep/lambskin, except for certain types, would be considered in the same classification as cow hide. Told ya it was confusing. It gets worse. Since the FTC classifies shearling as a fur it is the only item we know of that goes through a metamorphosis when it is imported. For example, a pair of shearling gloves comes into the USA as a pair of leather gloves (if the leather is on the outside which is normal) and, after Custom's clearance and introduction to the retail market, they (technically) become fur gloves. Cool, huh? Shearling is a wonderful example of good intentions on the part of regulators gone horribly wrong. Since it is a fur we are supposed to tell you if we use pieces, tails, bellies, or if the product is made from whole skins. Uh, what? Okay, shearling skins are about 8 square feet on average and a pair of mittens made from whole skins would be a bit on the large side not to mention at least $300 per pair. A shearling hat not made from pieces, might as well call it a "hoodie". So, our products are made from pieces, not tiny little pieces from a scrap bag, (except for Kat Knaps) but pieces none the less. We do use bellies but only when that part is suitable for the product and, tails, well, most sheep have their tails docked early in life so we do not see, much less use, any of them. Shucks, we are supposed to tell you that our products are made from "shearling fur". Odd, we always considered ourselves "leather workers" and not furriers. Who knew? We also marvel at the fact that our WW II Air Force personnel were outfitted in fur according to the definition of shearling by the FTC. Bet they had no clue how luxurious a job they actually had. It is also comical to know that thousands of "fur" skins in the AC Lawrence days were sold for buffing pads for new cars rolling off the General Motors production lines. See why cars are expensive? Now, it gets even more fun and confusing. Working on the FTC's list of "furs" West Hollywood banned sales of furs within the city limits. Which means, yes, they banned the sales of UGG boots. Imagine that, you can't buy UGG boots in West Hollywood, California. They had to tweak the law a bit to allow certain furs but still, UGGS, were banned. I know you don't believe us but here is one link. We do not yet know the final outcome of the suit though. Oh, there is also a new wrinkle we just discovered because he have to do some BS paperwork for the Commerce Department, the Commerce Department says shearling, wool in or out, is leather. Time for a one question test to see if you have been paying attention. Shearling "fur" is what? No peaking at the next line now. We do not condone cheating. If you answered "wool", congratulations you get a gold star. Any other answer or no answer at all, go to the blackboard and write "I will pay attention in class" fifty times. Neatly, mind you. We don't condone slack offs either. Each line had best be readable. And, a brief review of classifications:

Customs: If you import a pair of shearling gloves with the wool on the inside they are leather. Wool on the outside, fur.

FTC: The gloves are fur, period, regardless of where the wool is.

Commerce Department: The gloves are leather, period, regardless of where the wool is.

Isn't government wonderful? Now, here we go, enter the "Wool Products Labeling Act". AAUGH!!!!! Shearling, regardless of the mass confusion out there, is tanned and finished for a variety of applications. For applications that principally use the wool side, the leather is completely tanned (if working with a reliable tannery) but finished only slightly. Skin blemishes are of no matter as long as the wool is of high enough quality. The most attention during processing is paid to the wool side. The product is sold based on the wool character and its suitability for a particular application. Mouton for garments and accessories; woolskins for car seat covers, automobile buffing pads, quality paint rollers, applicators for floor urethane, and footwear lining are just a few of the many products that use the wool side of the skin only. We use car seat cover skins for our special style ear muffs and our seat belt covers. In all cases, the wool is trimmed by machine to the appropriate length near the end of processing. The most recognized shearlings on the market are tanned and finished for both the skin and the wool and the skin is what is most visible in the product. In this instance hide/skin quality is extremely important and this is how the finished skins are graded. The wool is finished/clipped as well but it is of secondary importance. Most familiar is shearling suede. (a/k/a doubleface or twinface) Other finishes and embellishments are also common these days. Nappa is a smooth/shiny surface that is applied to the skin and is also fairly well known by the consumer. Distressed finishing techniques are sometimes used as are embossing and glitter processes. The number of different finishes available is rather amazing to us old timers, simply amazing. Consumers need to be very aware that many companies are using the word "shearling" in an inappropriate manner. Under USA consumer protection law the term "shearling" is reserved for a specific type of leather/fur (as above). There is a blur between sheep/lamb hides which is acceptable but, "shearling" if used to describe any type of synthetic material is against regulations. This abuse exploded during the 2011 Holiday Sales season with even major designer labels and retail establishments using the term improperly (illegally). "Caveat emptor", let the buyer beware, is especially important these days. We have to add that if you have purchased an item which you believed to be shearling and it was a synthetic or even just basic shorn wool we highly suggest you file a complaint with the Federal Trade Commission (USA) or the appropriate consumer protection agency in your own country. Are these products from your own sheep? No, we don't raise sheep. That in itself would be a full time job if we wanted to try to make a living at it. (Most people we know who raise sheep would debate whether or not the phrase "making a living" can be used in the same book with "raising sheep".) We purchase our skins from major tanneries here and overseas and continue from there. The pattern designs are ours as is all the workmanship except where it is otherwise noted. Do you tan hides? The business itself was a result of Rick's time working for AC Lawrence Leathers which was once the largest shearling tanner in the USA and the third largest in the world. Many a good person worked there and the "old timers" would gladly grace you with a story about WW II when the tannery was running at maximum capacity for our Air Force needs. So, this is our little eulogy for all those who worked so hard in a difficult job and a note of what fine people most of them were. We will remember you all quite fondly! (Click on the picture for the full size version and a readable caption.)

Rick "has done his time" working in various capacities from dealing with raw skins to serving as tanner and chief dyer, tanning and dying thousands of skins a day, but Shepherd's Flock ® does not tan hides . There are numerous companies that specialize in custom tanning for individuals. Contact with the tanner should be made in advance so that they may tell you how to properly prepare the hide for tanning. Improper preparation will often ruin the skin and make it impossible to tan. Our advice is to try them all out and see which tanner you are most satisfied with. We have heard good and bad comments about all of them. Please note that this list is posted as a service to our visitors. We do not specifically endorse any of these firms. Currently, these are the only ones we are aware of but we are happy to add to the list. Please let us know if we have missed someone. Nugget International

222 Kemper St.

San Antonio, TX 78207

210-224-2361 Bucks County Fur Products

Box 204

Quakertown, PA 18951

215-536-6614 Promised land Tanning

228 Cameron Lake Loop Rd.

Okanogan, WA 98840

509-422-3814 Rocky Mountain Tanners

5965 S. Broadway

Englewood, CO 80113

303-293-2882 Vermont Natural Sheepskins

12 Prince St., Suite 2C

Randolph, VT 05060 Stern Tanning Company

PO Box 55

Sheboygan Falls, WI 53085

920-467-8615 Do you dye the skins/Are the skins dyed? As stated, Rick served as chief dyer in his days at the Lawrence Tannery. Dying properly is a special process that requires two different dyes, one for the leather and one for the wool. (This may have changed. We will see where technology is now and post an update if/when we find out differently.) These are both done in a hot water bath with chemical dyes which is necessary to "fix" the dyes properly. If you purchase an expensive shearling product (working on the base value of our own products which we do consider expensive) the last thing you want is for the dye to transfer when it gets a bit wet or, if you take it to the dry cleaner, have the color vanish. So, no, we do not do any dying here. It would not be practical or permanent.



The second one is a much broader question, one we are actually happy to answer for everyone as it comes up a great deal with our first time customers. Note that we will be "countering" claims from some of the larger retail firms as we do check on what they are posting.

With the exception of the white we use for Ear Muffs, any style, and the long wool white we use for the Foot muff , The Hand Muff, and the trim on the Shaggy Brim Hats, everything we use has been dyed to some extent.

When speaking specifically about shearlings, though it applies to many other leathers as well, modern tannage produces a white leather and a white wool (unless there is natural coloration in the wool or staining from a variety of normal sources). The majority of skins are chrome tanned (second entry in the list of definitions) which actually gives them a blue tint when they are fresh out of tan and wet. Thus the leather term, "wet blue". But, when they are dried they are pure white.

The term "natural", when used to refer to the leather is a product of older, often vegetable, tanning methods which created a tan or brown color in the course of tanning. This leather color is not dyed. The wool is often "tinted" during processing because the tan extract does impact the wool color and the tanneries add the tint to make wool color more consistent. In general, vegetable tanned sheepskin is much less likely to be available on the market in finished consumer goods.



One specific note about wool coloration. In many cases wool is dyed or tinted a solid color or left in its natural color. There as also a process known as "tip dying" which produces a two color effect on the wool side of a skin. The "Tonka" color we use for our products is an example. When a skin is tip dyed the wool is either left its natural color or dyed a solid color first. The wool is straightened and combed and then the skins are sent through a large spray machine that sprays a fine mist of another color wool dye that settles only on the tips of the wool. We have used skins with a wide variety of color combinations over the years and, with modern methods, the dye can be stripped off of a dark color base leaving a silvery/white tip which is very striking. Contrary to some information we have seen posted, the basic reason for tip dying was to simulate the appearance of certain fur skins. When originally introduced, AC Lawrence produced three basic colors of tip dyed skins called Stone Martin, Ranch Mink, and Opossum. After a few years and most likely due to confusion in the market, the colors became known as Stoney, Ranch, and Possum. However, the use of tip dying exploded and many combinations were/are produced solely because it is attractive. As a side note, the color that many, many retailers refer to as "natural color sheepskin" is actually known as "Stoney" in the trade. In 2011, we noted that one very large retailer was not only referring to it as "natural", they were also claiming it was undyed. Untrue, very untrue (shaking head).



So, we don't care what people tell you, if you are purchasing shearling from anyone, unless it is white it has most likely been dyed.

The same holds true for the wool. Yes, there are natural colored breeds. In many cases the wool on these skins is dyed dark brown or black to cover the natural coloration or they are left in their natural state and sold as rugs. The term "natural" when it comes to just wool coloration is normally a reference to wool that has been tinted during the processing so that lanolin staining is not noticeable, a creamy color. When it comes to wool, "natural" to us means white with the possibility of some slightly visible creamy coloration. (Primarily visible in the products that use the long wool shearlings.) Where do your shearlings come from? With the coming of 2007 we started doing business with a wider variety of worldwide tanners. This was not by choice but by necessity. The US is currently down to one shearling tanner of any significance and they control most of the raw skin trade as well. (When we started the business there were, at minimum, seven major domestic tanners.) As anyone in business knows, relying on one supplier is a recipe for disaster. Look at the auto industry after Fukushima. They had so narrowed their supply line that a disaster in Japan had a huge ripple effect. In our case, this was solidly underscored when that one tannery decide not to ship our orders during the holiday season in 2006 and, to be honest, doing business with them at all can be an exercise in frustration. Of course we all know what happens when one company controls the availability of a given product as well, there is no financial incentive to keep quality high.

Since the only place to go is "off shore" for suppliers this is what we do. Please also note that the UK and Australia, that is right, Australia, are both now down to one sheepskin tanner each as well.



Our skins are sourced from a variety of tanners which include that single one in the US but we simply can not afford to rely on them alone any longer. By 2005 the stage was set, overturned one might say, and the demise in the US shearling tanning industry was almost complete. We did hang on as long as we could. For country of origin information on the shearlings we use to make our products "click here". We are, however, pleased to mention that one of the two Chinese tanneries we do business with was recently awarded gold status by The Leather Working Group which is a group that supports good environmental practices in the tanning industry. We do NOT deal with companies that we do not/have not had direct personal contact with. We get many offers to sell us skins and/or products and we never respond to any of them. We do want to know exactly who we are dealing with. It is worth noting that this is really very important. In 2014, even China stepped in and shut down a number of sheepskin tanneries for pollution. So, we never venture outside of our normal supply chain. The suede we use, which covers most of our items, is domestically produced. While we can purchase suede from other international tanners, they tan for the boot industry and much of what they produce is like cardboard in character. Cardboard does not make a nice hat or pair of mittens. (We don't really think it makes a very nice pair of slippers either.) But, we are small, we have to deal with what the big boys want and hope we can retire before we have no choice in the matter.

We post country of origin information based solely on where the skin was tanned. In only two cases do we know, for sure (well 99% sure anyway), the country of origin for the actual skin. The above link offers the best information that we can give our customers. Bet your local gas station does not post country of origin for what comes out of their pumps. Why is shearling so expensive? (Frequently used search term.) Sheepskins are a global commodity, just like oil. However, they are also a by product of the meat industry so supply can be limited by a variety of factors. When the demand is high the price goes up especially when supplies are low (like during the hoof and mouth outbreak in the UK in 2001) and demand in the beginning of this decade was been driven by the good marketing folks at UGG Australia ® and, of course, the people buying their boots as well as the cheap knock off ones. This helps to explain why our skin prices rose 30% to 60% between the spring of 2010 and the spring of 2012. To put it in the words of Decker's Corp. (parent company of UGG Australia®), "........a s the result primarily of higher raw material cost namely sheepskin, which are up approximately 40% over 2011 levels and up approximately 80% versus 2010..... "* But while their stock went down, we just kept on truckin' and producing basic items that are meant not to be fashionable but to do a job and not end up in the closet when the next big thing hits.

* Transcript Q4 2011 Deckers Earnings call. We are not nor do we want to be associated with Deckers Corp or UGG Austrailia® in any manner. This quote just underscores the reality of the market place. Skin prices are relatively cyclical with fashion being the main driving force. We have seen many price spikes in our short history. However, ovine skins are unique in that the demand can come from the shearling side of the industry or the skin only side. Shearling prices can rise even if there is no demand as long as there is a demand for "de-haired" lambskins in particular. Straight lambskin is used for very fine garments. We have also seen instances where we simply could not get supplied from the tanneries because supply was so tight. We have posted a chart of sheepskin cost trends covering our 40+ years so you can see how volatile the market can be. Prices for tanned and finished skins have stabilized for now which is a good thing after having to our raise prices substantially twice a year for a couple of years while still absorbing some of those massive increases. However, and few will ever know this, even Decker's Corp is now using a "sheepskin substitute" in their UGG ® sheepskin products. To quote The Motley Fool, "To hedge itself against volatile sheepskin prices, the company introduced the UGGPure boot, a proprietary process using wool attached to a backing, which the company thinks has a promising future." (Three Cold-Weather Retailers to Warm Your Investing Returns, 12/21/2013) If you don't believe that one, surely you can believe Reuters, 10/24/2013. We remain 100% shearling in all products, no substitutes. Check the "details" section on anything you are looking at "on-line". Do you use Australian sheepskins; they are supposed to be the best? Okay, not to annoy our Australian counterparts, but why not New Zealand skins? Every sheep grower we know wants to visit New Zealand now or in another lifetime. That is on the “bucket list” for so many of the small growers we have come to know and love. We think the NZ folks are getting shafted here.

Marketing, our dear customers/potential customers, plain old marketing, is why Australian skins are understood to be the best and, in many cases, the retailer is doing slight of hand/redirect because the skins may be Australian but they are tanned in China and the consumer item is made in China although Vietnam is becoming a popular country for footwear production now as well. We are going to be non committal here and attempt to give you the facts and let you decide and, no, we really do not want to do anything to damage the reputation of any real Australian tanner or consumer goods producer. Likewise the NZ folks. We are all in this together.

Skins from Australia and/or New Zealand tend to be a bit more breed specific than our US skins. Yes, the denseness of the wool on the skin will likely be more consistent than found in domestic sheepskins and, the wool, in general, does tend to be denser.

Domestic skins are a wide variety of breeds/wool types but it is important to understand that it is all wool. At times we have worked with sheepskins that have such a silky wool people have actually accused us of sending them rabbit (honest). But, we produce the best possible product we can and every skin we work with is different from another. We try to cut the skin based on the most appropriate use. That is what we do here, one skin, one product at a time. In fact, this question is one that has been produced by the current retail market. No one ever asked us this when we started in business. Per an earlier segment, sheepskins are a global commodity. This makes it difficult to ascertain exactly where the skin comes from. The mega retailers who sell you something from sheepskin cannot absolutely guarantee where the skins they use originated. They don’t really care, either . Again, out of respect for our overseas counterparts, we do recognize their claims to be 100% Australian or NZ in nature. But we have our doubts about the mass market claims. US sheepskins are much sought after because of their size, especially with the boot makers. This would indicate that there is a high probability that what you may purchase is actually produced from a US origin sheepskin regardless of the claims being made. (We are going to pat ourselves on the back here. After we posted this little piece of information, years ago, Decker's Corp actually started admitting that they were not making UGG ® labeled products from 100% Australian sheepskins and that they were also using skins from Europe and the USA. Chuckle) Aside from the specialty and easily noticed skins mentioned below, we would also caution you regarding other claims that some firms make. "We use just Merino sheepskin" is a claim that can rarely be backed up though you will find it used to describe slippers and other products offered by many retail establishments. This claim gets even more specific than the country of origin claims and the more specific one gets in origin/breed information claims the less likely it is true. It is also important to note that, in recent discussions with a source in Australia, we have learned there is much more cross breeding happening in the Australian sheep industry so the 100% Merino claim is becoming more and more questionable. We must add that there are numerous specialty types of lambskin that still fall under the leather/shearling category. Most are not really suitable to slipper/boot production but make wonderful mittens, hats, coats, gloves, trim, etc. Some of those, but certainly not all are, “Icelandic”, “Spanish Merino”, “Toscana”, “Tibetan”, and “Slink”. The prices for items made from these skins will generally be much higher than products made from what one would consider standard shearlings.

As for our products, specifically, the only items that may be from Australian origin sheepskins would be seat belt covers, special ear muffs, or insoles. The long wool, natural white skins are also from Australian or New Zealand skins. We do, on occasion, use some non-US shearlings in other items when we are sampling from a new source of supply but these products will only be available at direct retail situations. Do your sheepskins have lanolin in the wool? This question has bothered us for a very long while. It never came up before mass marketing via the Internet. One could also say mass “copying”. Everyone copies what they see on someone else’s site factual or otherwise (and we have seen our notes copied word for word on other sites without appropriate footnotes). But, despite all attempts to get scientific evidence to support the claims regarding lanolin in sheepskin/shearling, we are left with no answers from chemists and those are the only answers that we can trust.

That being said we are going to give the public our opinion. This is opinion based on hands on experience in the actual processing/tanning itself as well as the time spent “table cutting” our products. We do not believe this is a valid claim. In brief, the very first thing to happen after the skins are sorted and trimmed is they are put into what is known as “first wash”. We speak only of shearling skins but expect it is a universal process in all leathers. First wash is a 24 hour bath in very hot water and detergents that must be handled with heavy protective gloves and a face shield. The purpose is to remove as much foreign matter and grease as possible before the tanning process begins. Foreign matter of any kind may/will interfere with tanning. Because of this process it is unlikely that there is enough lanolin left to be of any consequence even at the very beginning of the cycle.

Further down the processing chain the skins will go through a dry cleaning process to absolutely remove any leftover grease and/or foreign material. Any reputable tanner will complete this prior to dying the skins. Note that some believe that first wash alone will be enough and do not do this process. Again, we do not believe that anything other than trace amounts of lanolin would be left after this process, especially after first wash is completed. Between first wash and dry cleaning the skins are subjected to a variety of acids during the tanning process which we would assume would further break down/remove any "natural" lanolin.

At the end of the tanning process and at the end of dying a substance called fatliquor is added in which lanolin may be added. However, the fatliquor is primarily to lubricate the leather fibers and we have found no references to the introduction of lanolin during this phase of shearling production. If the claims about lanolin are true it should be evident at the cutting table since we hand cut everything which requires a great deal of contact with the wool. During the winter season, when we are working many skins a day, our hands dry out to a great extent. This would be considered normal because of the moisture wicking abilities of wool. This is why sheepskin slippers are better than synthetics and plain leather slippers. The wool takes the moisture away from your feet and the air circulation helps them stay comfortable in all temperature extremes. However, if there really was a reasonable amount of lanolin in the wool the opposite should be true and we should feel as though we had put lotion on our hands at the end of a long day.

Again, this is our opinion and we are open to comments/corrections from anyone with a degree and experience in tan chemistry as it relates to shearlings. Note, we have seen so much misinformation on the Internet we only accept a degree and, yes, we actually do have to contacts to check you out. If you are real sure of your position, post "counter intelligence" on our FB wall so all can see it.

As a side note, if you put your hand into a sheepskin product and the wool or the leather feels really greasy, do not buy it. It is probably real grease and the skin has not been tanned properly. You will know what we mean if you do a little comparison shopping the old fashioned way. Ran into that with some seat belt covers Walmart * was selling some time back. (Come on, of course we check them out! We check everybody out.) If one squeezed the leather hard the grease would run down your fingers.

* Not really sure, at this point, what the true name of the corp is but we are covering our rear ends here. They own the trademark, if there is one, we don't. Not ashamed to say that. Besides, we are just making an assumption here. Our attorney told us to always include the registered mark when doing anything for public consumption yet Walmart does not. Hmm, open season on their "trade name" ?? Are sheep killed in order to obtain their skins? We have pretty much explained where the skins come from and we would leave this alone except for all the UGG Australia ®* boot lovers who seem to think that uggs (generic term) are made of shorn wool like that beautiful sweater your Grandma knitted for you.

We also know some groups out there are real busy spreading alternative facts but, here is the real story.

Fact, sheep are raised primarily for food. Fact, sheepskins/shearlings are a by-product of the food/meat industry. Any true leather is animal skin. For years pig skins were tossed in the dumps until someone figured out a way to turn them into a real fine leather. Anyone who knows that some fish skins are tanned, please raise your hand.

Fact, ugg type sheepskin boots, any make or brand, are not simply wool sheared from the sheep no matter what people believe. The skins we use are not like Mink, raised only for the value of the skin. To the best of our knowledge, only Persian Lamb or Broadtail Lamb is a "fur" (raised for the value of the skin) and we do not use either. Mickey D's anyone?? Chemical Free; Organic Tanned; Etc; Sheepskins We get a lot of questions regarding organic tanning, chemical free tanning, etc. and we most certainly understand why people ask those questions. We are more than happy to answer them to the best of our ability. Tanning technology is constantly changing and, not being chemists ourselves, we simply do our best to give people the best and most honest answer we can. First of all, and we tend to get pretty specific in our answers, there is no such thing as "chemical free tanning". Tanning is the process of taking an animal skin and creating a product that lasts, sometimes for generations. It is a chemical process regardless of how it is done. Therefore, there is no such thing as chemical free tanning. The only "chemical free tanning" would be drying the skin without salting. This does not meet the definition of tanning. In addition, as some are looking for "biodegradable", the object with tanning is to take a natural item that would degrade and prevent it from doing so. Biodegradable leather is an oxymoron. Organic tanning is most often understood by the consumer as a vegetable tanning process which is usually touted by companies in an attempt to boost their "green" value. It is important to note that how "green" the leather production is actually depends on a variety of factors, not just what the main tanning agent is. Yes, vegetable tanning, if natural and not synthetic, is a process that uses "chemicals" extracted from vegetable material. This is what the leach houses of tanneries in the past were all about, a place to leach out "chemicals" from plant material. However, often there may be other chemicals involved in processing the skin so finding a "pure" vegetable tanned leather is not really an easy task. In addition, there are other factors involved in vegetable tanning that determine how "green" it is. Is the plant material being grown and harvested in a responsible manner? Mimosa tanning is working its way into shearling now as "environmentally responsible". A colleague in the leather trade in South Africa stated the following, "..... the trees are indeed grown for tanning extract in South Africa, but they are not indigenous and is extremely invasive. In some parts of South Africa the indigenous vegetation are totally decimated by uncontrolled spreading of this plant."

What about tannery wastes? Are they being handled in an environmentally sound manner? The handling of tannery wastes, more than any other factor, is the key to whether or not the processes are environmentally friendly. Put it into perspective. Spreading manure on a field to fertilize the crop is seen as "organic" as opposed to spreading chemical fertilizers. However, if that manure is spread improperly and gets into rivers and streams, it still creates a serious pollution issue. Another quote: " Furthermore veg uses big quantities so you need good effluent disposal facilities to handle the oxygen demand and solids, and there is not enough vegetable material in the world to make more than about 20-25% of the 20 billion Sq FT of leather made annually without destroying forests and mangrove swamps etc as we did in the past. We need to keep researching for alternates but for the moment Chromium, properly managed, remains one of the best methods around and no one should use suspect science to attack it." There is a sheepskin tanner in the UK that advertises that they are the "Only organic sheepskin tannery in the British Isles." They have created an associates program of sorts where their formula is licensed by others for their own use. We nether support nor refute their claims. Their formula is a closely guarded secret so there is no outside verification available. We have queried associates in the UK and understand that the individual involved is well regarded so we accept that as some evidence that the claim is valid. However, they do sheepskin rug tanning and sheepskin rugs are not suitable for what we do. Another quote from a UK associate who is a big proponent of veg tan leather, " Equally veg (tan) is excellent for some types of leather but is not suited for thin soft leathers needed for things like clothing and gloves." Which supports our answer to people who want us to make their hat/slippers.etc out of 100% veg tan. Sorry, you would not be happy at all. The vast majority of skins that we use are chrome tanned. We are careful in our sourcing with the majority of the skins coming from US growers tanned by a US Tanner (all regulated by US law in their handling of the animals, the slaughter process, and the tanning). The few other tanners we use are very reputable and that includes their supply chain as well. We do not do business with anyone outside of our long established supply chain, we don't care how "cheap" they are. The best promise we can give our customers is that we do our absolute best to make sure that what you receive from us is from an environmentally responsible and ethical supply chain. We do wish to note that the leather industry as a whole is working very hard to improve its environmental footprint. The quotes included are from an industry discussion group and private communications and they are comments regarding the habit of "green washing" amongst retailers who have no idea what actually goes into leather production. All of us also know that there are less than responsible tanners out there. The difficulty is in how to force them to improve or force them out of business. As a consumer you can play a big role simply by asking more questions before you make a purchase and stay away from the incredibly cheap items. If you start asking questions, even if the retailer can't answer them now, there will be a reason for those retailers to start asking questions of their suppliers. As for us, ask away. Will the products shed? It takes some time for the loose wool in a new product to work it's way out. This is not shedding but simply wool that was cut when the skins were cut. Once the loose fibers are gone there will be no "shedding" of any kind. The wool in slippers in particular will wear off from constant "rubbing". We also wish to note for people who buy car seat covers (from other firms) that sheepskins do "photo degrade" in time. Constant exposure to conditions in a car's interior will eventually cause the skin to deteriorate. We have seen lots of complaints that people have posted in various forums on the Internet about constant shedding and wool coming off the skins in big clumps when the product is new. Leather is a natural product and problems do occur but what often creates this problem is very substandard tanning. There is a right way to tan and a "cheap" way to tan. We work with tanners that do the job correctly. How do I care for my purchase? Basic rules are quite simple and relate to many leather products in general. If the product happens to be worn in the rain or snow simply allow it to dry at room temperature. Never attempt to dry by a high heat source. Once the product is dry you can brush out most water spots with a soft bristle brush. Please store in a dry place as mildew can form and can never be completely removed. Never encase in plastic for storage, a paper bag or box is preferable. Moths will generally not bother the items unless you have real problems with moths anyway. If so, please store as you would a good wool sweater and think about calling someone who specializes in getting rid of the little critters. How do I clean my purchase? (Very high on the most asked questions list.) All of our products can be dry cleaned. Please choose a reputable leather dry cleaner as there are those who would say, "Oh yes, we can dry clean anything."

If you are careful, you can also wash the products. Cool water and an extremely mild soap, air drying away from heat and sunshine works well. Bleach, hot water, drying on a woodstove, etc. will destroy the product. You can visit our "washing" page for more detailed information. Please note that the washing instructions only apply to our products. We know our suppliers and their tanning methods.

But, if you wash a cotton shirt, it comes out more or less like it did when it was new. When you wash sheepskin it doesn't look "new" when it is dry. Therefore, because of the public's expectations, we tend to discourage washing. In addition, since we can't be around to supervise your wash methods, we cannot be responsible for any damage that occurs should you decide to wash your purchase.

Our absolute answer to the question is, "Consider having your product leather dry cleaned." We think you will be happier with the results. Do you wholesale? Yes, we maintain a limited wholesale clientele. Contact should be made regarding such in the spring, not during the busy season when we are solidly booked already. Mind you, if you are looking for "Chinese Made" prices, you might as well not waste your or our time by even asking for details. Do you have a retail store? No, we tried that and watching a store really interferes with production of the merchandise. The only way to purchase directly from us is by order or by meeting us at a show. We do not do any direct retail business here in Townshend. Will you give us advance notice before you "retire"? Not your typical big corporate frequently asked question, is it? Many years ago a customer gifted us a saying, "Man Plans, God Laughs." So, we are not going to tell you our plans, only our hopes. Here, in the sticks, in Vermont, one simple little tick bite can change all your "plans". We intend to keep going full steam (as much steam as we can muster anyway) through 2018, and through much of 2019. We will stop filling orders no later (possibly before based on orders in hand) than Sept 15, 2019. We are working with a youngster who has much more energy than we do and will send orders from that point on directly to him. His contact information will be posted on the website in place of ours when that cut off date comes. He will, then, also take over customer support like resoling, replacing broken ear muff bands etc. Our intent is to do our regular show schedule through 2019 and then turn everything over to him. Please do note that the business will become his and you should expect some changes which will likely start with a brand new web site. According to some people in Congress, after that date, we will take up our roll as leeches. Getting old is just so wonderful. Work all your life and then they call you a leech. Oops, off track here. So, we do not know if this admission is going to spur business in the next couple of years or hurt it but, we have always tried to be honest with our customers and this question is coming up a lot these days. In July of 2018, it was forty years since Rick walked out of the tannery for the last time, as an employee, and we began this marvelous experiment that, somehow, actually paid off. We owe you all a great deal of thanks for that. Thanks for hangin' with us all these years. Contact us with additional questions.