Death threats made to office of state vaccine bill author

A California senator who co-wrote a bill to prevent parents from opting out of school-required vaccines said one of his Capitol office workers received a death threat Friday.

Sen. Ben Allen, D-Santa Monica, said that a caller directed the death threat at a legislative staffer and that the incident was reported to the state Senate’s sergeant-at-arms.

The co-author of the bill, Sen. Richard Pan, D-Sacramento, has been provided extra security in recent weeks after his office began receiving threatening phone calls, e-mails and social media comments from opponents of the vaccine legislation.

One Facebook post portrayed Pan as a Nazi and said he should be hanged by a noose. The messages were forwarded to Senate sergeants.

“We are having people, calling from other states, speed-dialing and jamming our phone lines,” Pan said Friday. “That’s more intimidation.”

SB277 would require children at public and private schools to be vaccinated unless a doctor determines they should be exempt for medical reasons. The bill was a response to a multistate breakout of measles cases that was traced back to an outbreak at Disneyland in December. Many of the children who became ill had not been fully vaccinated.

Pan said it’s imperative that California raise its vaccination rates in order to protect children and the general public.

SB277 is in the Senate Education Committee, which heard the bill Wednesday but delayed a vote when it appeared the bill did not have the support to pass. On Thursday, Senate leaders added Sen. Bill Monning, D-Carmel, to the education committee to fill a vacancy. Monning had previously voted in favor of the bill when it passed the Senate Health Committee.

Allen said his office is working out details on the bill to ensure that senators’ concerns are addressed before a vote April 22.

Allen said his focus in on the bill, not the name-calling.

“It’s crazy how vitriolic the conversation can get,” Allen said Friday. “It’s hard on our staff. I don’t like putting my staff through this. We are trying to do what’s right.”

Melody Gutierrez is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. E-mail mgutierrez@sfchronicle.com