STATEMENT OF SENATOR CARL LEVIN ON INDEPENDENT COUNSEL LAW

Opening Statement of Senator Carl Levin

Senate Armed Services Committee Hearing

on Worldwide Threats Facing the US

October 6, 1998

Let me first join you in welcoming Secretary Cohen and General Shelton to the Committee this morning.

As you indicated, Mr. Chairman, we are facing a number of very important security challenges. And this is likely to be the last time that we will have an opportunity to discuss these issues with Secretary Cohen and General Shelton before we adjourn.

First, the situation in Kosovo threatens the security of the Balkans, including Bosnia, Macedonia and Albania, as well as threatening to become a massive humanitarian disaster if ethnic Albanians are unable to safely return to their homes. Accordingly, if the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia does not comply with the demands of the U.N. Security Council, the Administration has publicly stated that NATO is prepared to begin air operations both in Kosovo and Serbia against the Yugoslav Army and Serbian Special Police the instruments of Milosevic's reign of terror against the ethnic Albanian population in Kosovo.

There would be two purposes to such air operations. First, to persuade Milosevic to negotiate an acceptable status for Kosovo. And, second, if that fails, to at least reduce his military capability.

Congress has a number of choices. We can express support. We can express opposition. Or we could spend time telling the President that he should ask for our opinion and not just simply welcome it. In my view, Congress should give our advice, one way or the other, not just complain that this President is behaving like his predecessors and merely welcoming support instead of requesting it. I favor supporting air operations if Milosevic fails to act in accordance with the U.N. resolutions as the best of a number of bad options.

Relative to Bosnia, I concur with our Chairman's reminder to the Department of Defense that General Clark assured this Committee in early June that he would give us an estimate within a matter of a month or two, as I remember, as to how long our forces were going to be in Bosnia. And, specifically, General Clark was going to give us his estimates as to how long it would take to reach benchmarks for the departure of our forces from Bosnia. And those estimates of General Clark were really due by now. And I think the Department should act so that we will get those estimates promptly, and hopefully before the recess comes.

As the Chairman has indicated, the situation in Iraq also poses a threat to international peace and security. Once again, Saddam Hussein has halted cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency. Without intrusive inspections, we will not be able to ensure that Iraq's weapons of mass destruction programs are destroyed in accordance with U.N. Security Council resolutions. Without those inspections, the Iraqi people will continue to suffer as a result of international economic sanctions.

And that is why, along with Senators McCain, Lieberman, and Hutchison, I am circulating among our Senate colleagues a letter to President Clinton, urging him, in consultation with Congress, consistent with the U.S. Constitution and laws, to take effective actions, including if appropriate, the use of air strikes, to respond to the Iraqi threat.

The situation on the Korean Peninsula is still one of the most volatile and dangerous in the world. Stability in the region has been further undermined in the last several months by the on-going economic crisis and by North Korea's recent test of the Taepo Dong 1 missile. There are some in Congress who want to end U.S. support for the Agreed Framework with North Korea. In my view, that would be a serious mistake.

The Agreed Framework has resulted in a freeze on North Korea's nuclear materials production program, and holds the possibility of bringing North Korea into full compliance with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. If we terminate the Agreed Framework, North Korea would have access to more weapons-grade nuclear material within a matter of months an outcome that is not in the security interests of the United States or our allies in the region.

So, again, Mr. Chairman, I want to join all of us on the Committee in welcoming Secretary Cohen and General Shelton. As always, we look forward to their testimony before this Committee.