Tim McGraw Concert To Benefit Anti-Gun Group
Post a Photo Sort posts by... Latest Trending Today Trending This Week Master Anglers

Feds Consider Gun Show Spying

The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) took the side of gun owners after it was uncovered that the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) had recently considered spying on gun shows.

Get the The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) took the side of gun owners after it was uncovered that the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) had recently considered spying on gun shows.Get the full story here

Campus Concealed Carry: The Toga Party Fallacy

The group Students for Concealed Carry is making increasingly stronger pushes to allow law-abiding citizens to carry concealed on college campuses. Unfortunately, some still hold the mistaken belief that all college students are wildly irresponsible.

Find out more here. The group Students for Concealed Carry is making increasingly stronger pushes to allow law-abiding citizens to carry concealed on college campuses. Unfortunately, some still hold the mistaken belief that all college students are wildly irresponsible.

Wolverines? Michigan Nixes American Sniper

The University of Michigan temporarily cancelled a scheduled viewing of the film American Sniper following criticism from some of the school's Muslim students.

Get the The University of Michigan temporarily cancelled a scheduled viewing of the film American Sniper following criticism from some of the school's Muslim students.Get the full story here

Front-Yard Pistol Range: Bad Idea

A Florida man built a gun range in his front yard with an impromptu dirt backstop, which would be fine if he lived in a rural area. That simply wasn't the case.

Read the A Florida man built a gun range in his front yard with an impromptu dirt backstop, which would be fine if he lived in a rural area. That simply wasn't the case.Read the whole story here.

Legislator Wants to Ban Silhouette Targets

A Pennsylvania legislator wants to ban the use of silhouette targets on shooting ranges in the state.

Check out the A Pennsylvania legislator wants to ban the use of silhouette targets on shooting ranges in the state.Check out the full story here

Pot Clubs Fund San Francisco Gun Buyback

In what was inevitably dubbed a "joint effort," San Francisco police conducted a gun buyback funded by local marijuana dispensaries.

Find out more here. In what was inevitably dubbed a "joint effort," San Francisco police conducted a gun buyback funded by local marijuana dispensaries.

Maryland Stockpiles Pistol Brass: To What End?

For the past 15 years, every pistol sold in the state of Maryland has had to come with a fired case that is submitted to the state's registry of fired pistol brass for reference. Now the state is running out of warehouse space to store the cases.

Find out more here. For the past 15 years, every pistol sold in the state of Maryland has had to come with a fired case that is submitted to the state's registry of fired pistol brass for reference. Now the state is running out of warehouse space to store the cases.

Students Suspended for Photos with Airsoft Guns

Two students at Bristol-Plymouth Regional Technical School in Taunton, Mass., were suspended for posing with airsoft guns in one of their own homes.

Two students at Bristol-Plymouth Regional Technical School in Taunton, Mass., were suspended for posing with airsoft guns in one of their own homes. Read here for the full story.

Luxury Gun Clubs Becoming More Popular

"Guntry clubs," or luxurious shooting facilities offering the same sort of amenities one would find at a golf course: comfy lounges, food and drink, pro shop, locker rooms, professional instruction, etc., are becoming much more popular. Is this good or bad for the shooting community?

"Guntry clubs," or luxurious shooting facilities offering the same sort of amenities one would find at a golf course: comfy lounges, food and drink, pro shop, locker rooms, professional instruction, etc., are becoming much more popular. Is this good or bad for the shooting community? Read here for more.

Young Girl Loses Control of an Uzi, Kills Firearms Instructor

A Lake Havasu City, Ariz., firearms instructor was killed when a nine-year-old girl lost control of an Uzi submachine gun and a bullet hit him in the head. How young is too young when it comes to automatic firearms?

A Lake Havasu City, Ariz., firearms instructor was killed when a nine-year-old girl lost control of an Uzi submachine gun and a bullet hit him in the head. How young is too young when it comes to automatic firearms? Read here for the full story of the incident.

Guns & Pot: An Uneasy Combo

Is there any overlap between gun owners and those in favor of legalizing marijuana?

Check out the Is there any overlap between gun owners and those in favor of legalizing marijuana?Check out the full story here.

New House Bill Targets SMG-Toting Bureaucrats

Rep. Chris Stewart (R-Utah) has introduced the Regulatory Agency De-militarization (RAD) Act, a bill intended to force agencies not involved in law enforcement as that term is generally understood to disband their police forces. Do non-law enforcement agencies such as the USDA really need automatic firearms?

Read the Rep. Chris Stewart (R-Utah) has introduced the Regulatory Agency De-militarization (RAD) Act, a bill intended to force agencies not involved in law enforcement as that term is generally understood to disband their police forces. Do non-law enforcement agencies such as the USDA really need automatic firearms?Read the full story here.

Only the Polarized Are Actually Polarized?

Are politics too polarized, or is polarization what you get when people actually believe in something?

Are politics too polarized, or is polarization what you get when people actually believe in something? Read here for more.

Why You Can't Always Trust the Police

A police scandal in the British city of Rotherham, where a gang abused more than 1,400 girls while authorities looked the other way, illustrates why you can't rely solely on the police for your protection.

A police scandal in the British city of Rotherham, where a gang abused more than 1,400 girls while authorities looked the other way, illustrates why you can't rely solely on the police for your protection. Read here for the full story.

The Straight Dope on Kalashnikov Sanctions

Kalashnikov Concern products have been banned from further importation into the U.S. as part of sanctions against Russia for its actions in Ukraine. What do the new sanctions mean for gun owners?

Kalashnikov Concern products have been banned from further importation into the U.S. as part of sanctions against Russia for its actions in Ukraine. What do the new sanctions mean for gun owners? Read here for the full story.

Smart Guns: What the Antis Won't Admit

A California gun store that had planned to offer pistols with so-called "smart gun" technology scrapped the idea after receiving backlash from gun owners.

Read the A California gun store that had planned to offer pistols with so-called "smart gun" technology scrapped the idea after receiving backlash from gun owners.Read the full account here.

Anti-Gun Initiative 594 Passes in Washington

While the November 4 election was somewhat of a victory for gun owners with (mostly) pro-gun Republicans gaining seats in the Senate and the House, anti-gunners have scored a big win in Washington. What does this new initiative mean for gun owners in the Evergreen State?

While the November 4 election was somewhat of a victory for gun owners with (mostly) pro-gun Republicans gaining seats in the Senate and the House, anti-gunners have scored a big win in Washington. What does this new initiative mean for gun owners in the Evergreen State? Read here for the full story.

Open Carry Protests: Our Internal Dilemma

Open Carry Texas (OCT), a group campaigning for gun rights in Texas, has stirred controversy among pro-gun groups such as the NRA and left the issue of open carrying of rifles up for debate. Where do we draw the line on what is reasonable in terms of achieving political goals?

Check out the Open Carry Texas (OCT), a group campaigning for gun rights in Texas, has stirred controversy among pro-gun groups such as the NRA and left the issue of open carrying of rifles up for debate. Where do we draw the line on what is reasonable in terms of achieving political goals?Check out the full story here.

The Scourge of Toy Guns