Sherman's Wilderness
The gospel of Matthew is the only gospel that shows Jesus teaching disciples a process of how to live together in deep, spiritually enriched community.

Matthew’s Jesus is clearly a companion, a presence who can help those disputing right and wrong by encouraging a powerful and clear process for conflict resolution based upon examination of one’s value system.

To put it simply:

Jesus asks if you are going to live following Caesar as your god, and the values of Empire; or the only true God, and the ethical teaching of the gospel.

It is impossible to do both, and the parable of the laborers in the vineyard Jesus tells is one powerful illustration.

Deborah and I discussed this on an early morning walk last week. Reflecting about how the world has changed since we were children we talked about what appears to be a growing loss of compassion, community, and cooperation in many places.

As a Christian community it is critical that we allow Jesus to lead us, and that we follow Christ’s teaching about how to live in right relationship with God and one another.

Let’s begin by answering a basic question about our text: Is this a story about economic equity and money?

On the surface, yes; but the real issue is stated in one sentence: “Are you envious because I am generous?”

Generosity is the value being expressed and encouraged by Jesus; surely economics is one aspect of generosity, but it is one indicator of an underlying attitude.

I was reminded of the contrast between following the value of the Empire and that of Jesus while reading two Facebook posts last week.

One was a by now well-known statement by Papa John pizza entrepreneur John Schnatter. Schnatter, who lives in a 24,000 foot home valued at 7.58 million dollars in Anchorage, Kentucky (where the median value of a home is $150,000) and owns mansions in Florida and Utah as well stated in an interview:

“If our business is successful and achieves excessive profits we’re under no obligation to share that with our workers.”

The other quote, also from a successful capitalist, comes from Franklin Delano Roosevelt in a speech given during the Depression in 1937:

“The test of our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those who have much; it is whether we provide enough for those who have too little.”

The contrasting attitudes expressed by these two statements explain exactly what Jesus is talking about in the parable of the laborers in the vineyard; and at the same time reveal as deep a split and conflict in values in our nation and world today as they did more than two thousand years ago.

Clearly the landowner hiring those workers throughout the course of a hot summer day cared about what we call “a living wage.”

In the story Jesus tells, the point is that God is like the owner of the vineyard: generous towards us.

The workers who were chosen first to work and who express outrage at the generosity of their employer are typical of unredeemed human nature; i.e. those following the values of Empire.

The challenge is for us to become as generous ourselves towards God and other people.

This is neither a one-time decision nor an easy path to follow; it is a process of development and a spiritual practice.

As your new pastor, I observe and experience much generosity here:

Sunday school leader and volunteers who give of their time, gifts, talents, and even supplies materials for our children

Your decision to become a Reconciling Congregation and welcome lesbian, gay, transgender, bisexual, and intersex people into the life of this congregation; and a willingness and determination to stand together against all forms of prejudice and oppression

People who volunteer and provide refreshments for our gathering following worship

Relationships that lead you to extend help to one another with childcare, transportation, shopping, physical chores

Involvement with groups and organizations that address the needs of others in the form of providing clothing and other material goods (Wellspring) financial support (Haitian project), propane heat in the winter for Native Americans living on the poorest, coldest reservation in our country in South Dakota (Lakota Kids), the elimination of Malaria (No More Malaria campaign)

Participation in ecumenical events like the 911 Memorial Service, and the Monday evening Bible study

Sometimes we need to acknowledge and celebrate where and when we are doing our best to follow Jesus, and this Communion Sunday seems like a perfect time both to celebrate and recommit ourselves to the values Christ taught.

As in the time when Jesus first told this story, we live in a world where Empire and the gospel collide on many levels.

There is ample evidence of this. A few examples leapt immediately to mind as I was writing this message: in the last twelve years we have spent most of our nation’s resources on war to the total of between 4-6 Trillion dollars while the infrastructure of our society crumbles; every elected Republican voted against equal pay for women; many in governing leadership have suggested that poor Americans do not “deserve” healthcare–or, if they have it, should be subject to atrocious mandates such as forced sterilization.

The morals and values expressed by such actions and statements fly in the face of generosity as Jesus teaches in this parable.

So this morning let us celebrate our choice, our decision personally and as a congregation to follow the generosity of God that Jesus so powerfully illustrates.

Generous/Generosity

Although there are many different types of generous people, there are some common traits that the most generous people share. Whether they give their time or their money, these qualities are largely shared by the individuals most devoted to giving back to their communities and families.

Although the Latin root of the word means “of noble birth,” by no means is generosity limited to people in positions of power: anyone can become more generous simply by paying attention to one’s attitude and actions. According to Emmanuel Levinas, the French philosopher, a generous person will display these qualities even if they know the people or group they are helping is not able or going to do the same in return.

Altruism

First and foremost, generous people are altruistic. They give without hopes of receiving compensation for their good deeds. Personal gain may occur, but it is not a motivating factor for the most generous people.

Optimism

Generous people are idealists. They have a certain image of the way the world should be, and strive to achieve that end. Although the world is not a perfect place, these people do not stop giving their time, energy or money. As optimists, they see the world in a different light than others. They truly believe that the world, although not perfect, can be made into a much better place.

Trust

Trust is a major quality amongst the most generous people. They trust completely that their cause is a worthy one, and they trust that the people involved with that cause will do their best to help achieve the goal. For those who give, this means a trust that the others involved with the cause will be using their time and resources appropriately.

Energy

When you think of people being generous, energy is one of the first things that come to mind. Generous individuals devote their energy to the good that they want to do. They also gain energy from their cause. When the most generous people spend their time working on a goal, they are revitalized and energized to do even more good.

Ability to lead

This quality might seem to be an odd one at first, but the most generous people are not afraid to stand up and lead for their cause. Although not everyone can actually lead their group or cause, getting involved is in itself a form of leadership.

The most generous people share these qualities to differing degrees, and you will find Jesus teaching each of them in the gospel.

So this morning, let us celebrate our decision to follow Christ; it is a choice, not chance If you are concerned with increasing your own level of generosity, reflection on this parable and these values will get you started in the right direction.

Life demands a call for selectivity.

It is the choices we make, not chance, that determines the course of our personal and community life.

My prayer is that we continue to make choices that reflect the gospel of Jesus, our Christ.

Amen.

Originally delivered September 21 2014 by Rev. David Weekley at St. Nicholas United Methodist Church.