UPDATED: Beetlejuice Part 2 Rumors Have Been Confirmed By Tim Burton?! ⋆ SHOWBIZ SPY
Ever since the cult classic Beetlejuice hit theaters in 1988 there has been talk of a sequel and now ShowbizSpy can put all those rumors to rest as Tim Burton himself has confirmed the movie is a go with Warner Bros.

Rumors really started heating up Aug 11, 2015 after Winona Ryder was a guest on the Late Night With Seth Meyers show and when asked about a possible sequel she led everyone to believe that the film is a go after talking with Tim Burton though this was never confirmed. Winona said: “I think I can confirm it,” started Ryder. “It was very hush-hush top secret … but then (Tim Burton) was doing some press for ‘Big Eyes’ and and he did an on-camera interview and he said, ‘Oh yeah, we’re doing it, and Winona’s going to be in it.’ … If he said it, I can say it.” Even though Michael Keaton himself said shortly after the interview that he has not heard anything about it yet.

Ok, fast forward to the now and ShowbizSpy finally got a comment from Tim Burton through one of our spies based in London in the same biz as Tim on the movies future. Tim: “The film is a go and has been approved by the Warner Bros. team, we have talked with the cast members we wanted for the film and they are all on board, this includes both Winona and Michael. We have the script in hand everything is in place all we need to do now is get ready to start filming.” SCORE ONE FOR THE GOOD GUYS!

Tim would not give any insight to how the film will play out and the script is being held like Fort Knox as it should be. All we know is that there will be a lot of fans both young and old that are going to be happy campers for sure!

[UPDATE] – A rep has gotten in contact with us and stated “Tim Burton did not confirm Beetlejuice 2 as the movie is not in development. Tim’s focus is entirely on Miss Preegrine’s Home For Peculiar Children set for a September 30 2016 release and developing Dumbo“. That is all fine and we complied with the reps request to post their comment, however we did not say it was in development. We would also like to note that Warner Bros. hired writers David Katzenberg and Seth Grahame-Smith to work on a sequel, and over the past year, both Ryder and Keaton have confirmed their participation according to Variety. Now, with all of this craziness going on, because we have the absolute highest respect for Tim Burton we are going to put this post to sleep (until after Dumbo). ;)

After being called by Tim Burton’s rep and being told that there is no script, no plans, no development and Tim never said what our spy reported, we where able to find this video thanks to the great guys at MovieWeb of Tim himself discussing that the script was in fact being worked on as early as 2012.



Here is a clip from the famous original Beetlejuice from 1988:



Here is video of Winona talking about the film on Late Night With Seth Meyers back in August of 2015: