Nevada “firewall” protecting Clinton’s campaign showing cracks
Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton takes a selfie with service workers at the Rio All-Suite Las Vegas Hotel and Casino as she campaigns days ahead of Nevada’s caucus.

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton takes a selfie with service workers at the Rio All-Suite Las Vegas Hotel and Casino as she campaigns days ahead of Nevada’s caucus.

LAS VEGAS, NV - FEBRUARY 14: Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton (L) looks on as U.S. Rep. John Lewis (D-GA) speaks on her behalf at a get-out-the-caucus event at the Mountain Shadows Community ... more

LAS VEGAS, NV - FEBRUARY 14: Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton (L) looks on as U.S. Rep. John Lewis (D-GA) speaks on her behalf at a get-out-the-caucus event at the Mountain Shadows Community Center on February 14, 2016 in Las Vegas, Nevada. Clinton is challenging Sen. Bernie Sanders for the Democratic presidential nomination ahead of Nevada's February 20th Democratic caucus. (Photo by Ethan Miller/Getty Images) less

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speaks with an employee of Caesars Palace during a visit to the casino Sunday, Feb. 14, 2016, in Las Vegas. (AP Photo/John Locher)

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speaks with an employee of Caesars Palace during a visit to the casino Sunday, Feb. 14, 2016, in Las Vegas. (AP Photo/John Locher)

LAS VEGAS — The Hillary Clinton vs. Bernie Sanders race is close in Nevada, and both candidates so covet Latino voters that it is dividing even the most prominent Latino families.

Dolores Huerta, the matriarch of the farmworkers movement for the last 50 years and a Clinton supporter, told an audience in a Las Vegas Latino neighborhood this week that “I love Bernie Sanders, but I’ve never seen him at a Latino event.”

Moments later, her stepson, Federico Chavez, a nephew of movement patriarch Cesar Chavez, looked at Huerta and told the same East Las Vegas Community Center audience that “families can have differences.” Chavez, a Berkeley resident who was in Nevada to stump for Sanders, said afterward, “I think she was using a lot of hyperbole there.”

Hyperbole often substitutes for cold, hard metrics in Nevada these days as the conventional wisdom and traditional alliances once used to forecast Democratic caucuses have gone dead like a car’s GPS on a drive through the state’s hinterlands.

Photo: John Locher, Associated Press A woman reacts to meeting Democratic presidential candidate Hillary...

Many voters say they won’t know until the last minute whom they’re going to support at the caucuses, which begin at noon Saturday.

That wasn’t what conventional wisdom predicted. A state once believed to be part of Clinton’s “firewall” because its population is about 46 percent people of color — unlike lily-white Iowa and New Hampshire — is now up for grabs.

Staffers for Clinton, a former U.S. senator and secretary of state, started working in Nevada last summer and built a double-digit lead in early polls by reaching out to every slice of the Democratic family. They hosted traditional kamayan dinners to woo members of the growing Filipino community, and organized poetry slams to reach out to young and African American voters.

Clinton’s national campaign manager, Robby Mook, knows the turf — he was her Nevada state director in 2008 when she won the popular vote in the caucus, but lost the delegate count, against then-Sen. Barack Obama. He’s built a strong, statewide ground game.

Dead heat

But that’s a distant memory as Sanders volunteers, including 200 nurses who are members of the National Nurses United union based in Oakland, swarm the state. The latest RealClearPolitics.com average of polls puts the race at a dead heat — 48.7 percent for Clinton to 46.3 percent for Sanders, the junior senator from Vermont.

One of the state’s most powerful forces — the 57,000-member Culinary Workers Union, which is 56 percent Latino — will not endorse a candidate. In 2008, it endorsed Obama over Clinton. Union leaders say they’re not avoiding the issue, but are focusing on registering 12,000 new voters for November and negotiating contracts with Las Vegas hotels for the housekeepers and cooks who make up the bulk of its membership.

Still, they notice something different.

“It’s much more unpredictable this time,” said Yvanna Cancela, the union’s political director. “The average person is not as engaged as 2008, at least not here. It’s not so much an either-or choice, it’s more of which person’s approach do you think is better.”

Photo: John Locher, Associated Press Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, second from...

Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., is another powerful force who won’t endorse. He doesn’t want to tip the scales and risk alienating one side so much that they stay home on caucus day and — even worse — in November.

Reid is so tight-lipped that when The Chronicle asked him this week in Las Vegas to name one positive thing that each candidate did in the Senate, he snapped, “I’m not getting into that.”

Reid, who is retiring this year, fought hard to move Nevada’s caucuses to an earlier spot on the presidential election calendar in the hope that its “first in the West” perch would make the state of 2.8 million residents more politically relevant. Republicans hold their state caucus Tuesday.

“It was wrong,” Reid said this week to a rally of Latino voters in East Las Vegas, that Iowa and New Hampshire had outsize influence on the presidential race. “Iowa is 97 percent white — no diversity. Then you whip off to New Hampshire, which has no people. This is a state that is representative of what America is.” About 28 percent of Nevada residents and 19 percent of the electorate is Latino, according to U.S. census figures from 2014.

But the two candidates are taking different approaches in attracting Latino voters.

Clinton has flooded the state with Beltway officials who speak Spanish (Sen. Tim Kaine, D-Va., a Harvard Law School graduate who learned Spanish during a year in Honduras); Latino former politicians (Henry Cisneros, Housing and Urban Development secretary during Bill Clinton’s presidency); and boldface progressive names like Huerta.

Emphasizing resume

They talk up her experience and fluency on multiple issues, instead of focusing on the economic populist message that Sanders “repeats and repeats and repeats,” said Cisneros, who is also a former mayor of San Antonio. “While it is critically important — maybe one of the dominant themes of American life today — there are probably 10 other messages that a president has to master.”

In a state that bore an outsize impact from the 2008 housing meltdown, Cisneros defended Clinton’s Wall Street connections, like the more than $600,000 in speaking fees that she has received from Goldman Sachs. Of the $25 million that one of the super PACs supporting Clinton raised in the last six months of 2015, $15 million came from Wall Street sources.

“I take her at her word that she weighs it all,” Cisneros said this week after speaking on Clinton’s behalf at a bipartisan Hispanics in Politics breakfast in Las Vegas. Cisneros, who continues to work on creating affordable housing, also joined an investment house last year as an equity partner.

Sanders, who has no endorsements from his Senate colleagues, opts to be endorsed by people like Cesar Vargas, whose mother brought him to the United States without documentation from Mexico when he was 5 years old. Earlier this month, Vargas, 32, became one of the first immigrants without legal status to be admitted to the New York State Bar. Now, he’s on Sanders’ national campaign team and helped draft the senator’s position on immigration reform.

“This election isn’t about senators and congressmen, it’s about the hopes of everyday people,” Vargas said. For many Latino voters, they see “me as one of their children. I’m what they can become. It’s disrespectful to dismiss Latino voters as part of a demographic ‘firewall’” that supposedly protects Clinton.

Sanders’ army

Still, for many, the choice is difficult. While the campaigns are showing TV ads and contacting voters via phone, e-mail and text, many new voters like Edgar Garcia say they’ve remained blissfully off the campaign radar. That is until he was swarmed by a half-dozen Sanders volunteers outside the University of Nevada Las Vegas student union. The 20-year-old got a Sanders sticker and placard, and said he will support him Saturday.

He likes Clinton, but thinks she’s flip-flopped on issues like her support of same-sex marriage while “Sanders has been consistent for 30 years.” But the rest of Garcia’s extended family, who lives in Las Vegas, “haven’t made up their minds yet. They know who she is.”

Sandra Gamez, 24, the only citizen in her family and a recent UNLV graduate, is leaning toward Clinton, but had second thoughts after hearing Vargas’ compelling personal story this week. “I’m still leaning toward Hillary, but we’ll see when we get there,” she said.

On the Strip, Carmela Perez has been a housekeeper for 11 years at the MGM Grand. She crossed the U.S.-Mexico border when she was 16. For several years, she worked two jobs to support them as a single parent before landing her union job, which provides her with free health care and a $17.33-an-hour wage. Two years ago, she became a citizen, and on Saturday she will cast her first presidential vote.

One of her sons is a Marine serving overseas. She hasn’t heard from him in eight months. She empathizes with all of the Latino families who have been split apart after one or more of them was deported. Hearing Republican front-runner Donald Trump say that Mexico sends rapists and drug dealers across the border, “hurt me to the bottom of my soul.”

“My son is fighting for this country, and that’s what he thinks of us,” Perez, 42, asked.

She hasn’t been contacted by either Democratic campaign. But the other day, the digital display on her phone flashed — it was Trump’s campaign calling. Uh-oh, her 10-year-old son told her, Trump must have heard what you’ve been saying about him and is calling to talk to you.

Perez smiled. She didn’t pick up the phone. Instead, she will vote Saturday. She just doesn’t know for whom.

Joe Garofoli is The San Francisco Chronicle’s senior political writer. E-mail: jgarofoli@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @joegarofoli