Issue of illegals roiling Arizona / New law denies public services to such immigrants













Photo: Sherrie Buzby/Arizona Republic Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 Day laborers gather at the Home Depot near 36th St. and Thomas looking for a day's worth of work, as cars pass by. When one stops to show interest, each worker tries to be the lucky one that is chosen. Photo by Sherrie Buzby/Arizona Republic less Day laborers gather at the Home Depot near 36th St. and Thomas looking for a day's worth of work, as cars pass by. When one stops to show interest, each worker tries to be the lucky one that is chosen. Photo by ... more Photo: Sherrie Buzby/Arizona Republic Image 2 of 4 Photo of Luis Ibarra, president and CEO of Friendly House, pauses for a moment Tuesday in Phoenix. Photo by Tom Tingle/Arizona Republic Photo of Luis Ibarra, president and CEO of Friendly House, pauses for a moment Tuesday in Phoenix. Photo by Tom Tingle/Arizona Republic Photo: Tom Tingle/Arizona Republic Image 3 of 4 Chronicle Graphic Chronicle Graphic Image 4 of 4 Chronicle Graphic Chronicle Graphic Issue of illegals roiling Arizona / New law denies public services to such immigrants 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

2005-02-28 04:00:00 PDT Phoenix -- Ten years after Proposition 187 bitterly divided California over illegal immigration, Arizona has become the new battleground, closely watched by other states where immigration from Mexico is on the rise.

Since November, when Arizona voters approved a measure that would deny public services to undocumented residents, many immigrants here live in fear of being deported and believe the policy is mean-spirited and divisive. Immigrants' advocates are trying to blunt the law.

Supporters of the initiative, Proposition 200, deny any bigoted motives, contending that the measure is the best way to tighten the border and shore up the state's budget.

The arguments were almost identical in California, one of the first states to experience the sweeping demographic changes brought on by large- scale immigration from Mexico and Central America. Though the courts eventually struck down Prop. 187, the frustration with illegal immigration that prompted it still simmers.

And the spirit of the groundbreaking yet polarizing initiative in California seems to be alive and well as increasing numbers of foreign-born newcomers arrive in other states.

"It's deja vu all over again," said Prof. Wayne Cornelius, director of UC San Diego's Center for Immigration Studies. "The concerns fueling the debate in Arizona are the same as in California with 187."

As the Arizona measure gets tested in the courts, groups in Colorado are pushing a new ballot measure to restrict illegal immigrants' access to public benefits and driver's licenses. Similar campaigns could be on the horizon in such states as Georgia, Mississippi, Louisiana, Washington and Oregon. In addition, the U.S. House recently passed a bill that will deny driver's licenses to undocumented immigrants and authorize bounty hunters to round up those facing deportation orders.

Whatever the outcome of Prop. 200 in the courts, the rhetoric has been heated on both sides.

"There's a tremendous, growing, grassroots movement throughout the country," said Virginia Abernethy, an adviser to the Proposition 200 campaign. "It's a groundswell of opposition against the flouting of our law, which is what this illegal alien invasion is. People don't like what's happening to their communities."

Arizona state Rep. Ben Miranda, a Latino Democrat, said a Proposition 200 hot line has gotten hundreds of calls from concerned immigrants, including a few women who said that their husbands had been assaulted and feared calling police.

"We may be in a situation today in Arizona," he said, "where there's an undercurrent of people being encouraged to abuse and attack immigrants."

Why is this happening in Arizona now?

Arizona's foreign-born population is much smaller than California's -- 1 in 8, or about 750,000 Arizonans, as opposed to 1 in 4, or about 9 million Californians.

But almost 44 percent of these immigrants in Arizona are undocumented, compared with approximately 26 percent of those in California.

And at the remote, rugged terrain of the Sonora-Arizona border, the U.S. Border Patrol in the past year has arrested more illegal immigrants than were arrested in Texas, New Mexico and California combined.

A decade ago, San Diego County was the most popular crossing point for unauthorized migrants from Mexico. But as the Border Patrol beefed up enforcement in California, as well as around El Paso, Texas, the flow of migrants moved to Arizona.

As a consequence, Arizona residents now see a steady stream of troubling news reports about migrants dying in the desert, border patrol car chases ending in fatal crashes and people being held hostage in smugglers' safe houses.

Meanwhile, Arizona's Latino population has nearly doubled in the past decade, from 700,000 to 1.3 million. The state has become a magnet for low- wage immigrant workers as construction booms with new retirement homes -- all filled with retirees who need services.

"There's a lot of Mexican labor in Arizona right now, and people don't like it," says Maria Blanco, executive director of the San Francisco-based Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights. "They feel like it changes their way of life. Many immigrants don't speak English. It's unfamiliar."

Luis Ibarra, director of a Phoenix community service agency and a lead plaintiff in one of the lawsuits against Prop. 200, said: "We're a border state. We've always had people going back and forth" from Mexico. "Since 1985, a lot of affluent suburbs have grown up with affluent retirees from the East or Midwest, and along with them comes this attitude."

The issues are starkly drawn around the state's capital, where the irrigated golf courses and gated luxury homes of suburban Scottsdale are a short drive from the cinder-block barrios and hen-scratched dirt yards of South Phoenix.

Prop. 200 supporters say the ballot measure was necessary because the foreign-born arrivals were defying U.S. immigration law and putting a drain on the public coffers.

But the question of whether illegal immigrants hurt the state's finances is hotly contested. Though the workers do use some public services, such as hospitals, some academics point out that the workers also stimulate the economy with their labor and consumption of goods and services.

Phoenix attorney Daniel Ortega, one of those battling to invalidate Prop. 200, said the majority of the measure's supporters are not hostile to immigrants or Latinos in general, but simply frustrated by the U.S. government's inaction on immigration reform.

"We're all frustrated, but we can't do it at the expense of denying people's civil liberties," he said. "The proponents of this are feeding on the frustration of the general public, but their agenda is one of division, one of separatism."

Supporters of the measure vehemently deny charges of racism, but Kathy McKee of Protect Arizona Now, the original drafter of the ballot measure, last June tapped Abernethy as a spokeswoman, citing her long experience opposing immigration.

Abernethy, an emeritus professor of psychiatry and anthropology at Vanderbilt University, is affiliated with the Occidental Quarterly, a publication described by Max Blumenthal in the American Prospect as the "premier voice of the white-nationalist movement." Abernethy rejects the term white supremacist, with which she has been labeled, preferring to call herself a "European American separatist."

At Phoenix's official day labor center, dozens of immigrant workers -- most of them undocumented -- gathered recently in the chill of dawn, hoping to land a day's work gardening, painting or cleaning houses.

Cristofer Rosete, 22, who hails from Mexico but lacks legal status, said it had not even occurred to him to apply for welfare or other benefits for himself, but he knows his 2-year-old son is eligible for medical care because the toddler was born in the United States.

Now, however, Rosete and his wife are nervous about taking the boy to doctor's appointments, for fear someone will report them to immigration authorities.

"When Prop. 200 first passed, South Phoenix was empty," said Rosete in Spanish. "Everyone kept their kids home from school. They were scared. I think everyone's waiting now to see what will happen."

Prop. 200 will not affect emergency health care and K-12 education, because federal law guarantees such benefits to everyone, regardless of legal status. But some illegal immigrants aren't buying it.

"What if I get hurt on the job, and I go to the hospital?" asked another day laborer, Antonio Laguna. "Will they deport me from there?"

Regardless of how complex it will be to implement the new law, "Prop. 200 is in effect already," said Laguna. "The fear is in effect. If that's what they wanted to accomplish, they've succeeded."

Prop. 200, which won 56 percent of the vote, went into effect Dec. 22. In addition to barring illegal workers public benefits, the initiative mandates that public servants report illegal residents to immigration authorities, that new voters show proof of citizenship and that all voters provide ID at the polls.

But the legal interpretation of the measure is still evolving.

Immigrant rights groups have filed suit, arguing that the measure pre- empts the federal government's exclusive power to regulate immigration -- one of the legal findings in California that invalidated Prop. 187.

Proponents bill Prop. 200 as an unassailable version of 187, arguing that the new measure does not try to regulate federal benefits such as education.

In the meantime, there has been a scramble to figure out which state public benefits fall under the new law's purview.

State officials have identified just four public programs they say are affected: cash assistance for the disabled and their caregivers, a program for the visually impaired, and two utility assistance programs.

But McKee of Protect Arizona Now says there are more than 50 state welfare programs that should fall under the law, ranging from assistance to single mothers to food for the needy.

Another group, Yes on Proposition 200, has gone a step further, filing a lawsuit asserting that the measure covers benefits well beyond those in the welfare statute, including everything from postsecondary education to hunting licenses.

Prop. 200 may be on vulnerable ground when it comes to its requirement that state employees report illegal immigrants, legal experts say. Furthermore, opponents contend that the voting provisions of the measure violate the federal Voting Rights Act, though the U.S. Justice Department approved the provisions in January.

"There may be parts of 200 that survive, but I don't think it's all going to survive," said Blanco, who helped litigate the Prop. 187 case in California during the 1990s.

Louis DiSipio, a political science professor at UC Irvine, said that if Prop. 200 intends to slow immigration, it won't work. "Immigrants don't come to use social services," he said. "Instead, they come here to work. There's nothing in 200 that reduced the incentive for employers to hire undocumented workers."

In addition, he said, "there is absolutely no evidence to support claims of voter fraud. Of all the nation's problems, voting by noncitizens is not one of them."

Rick Oltman of the Federation for American Immigration Reform, which helped finance the Yes on 200 campaign, said the main effect of state measures like Prop. 200 is to force federal elected officials to deal with immigration, even though low-wage immigrant workers benefit many U.S. businesses.

"The reason politicians of either stripe don't want to do anything about immigration reform is because they fear more alienating the end-users of cheap labor who are funding their campaigns, than they fear alienating any voter bloc," he said. "There is pandering going on, but it isn't to Hispanic American voters -- it's to users of cheap labor from south of the border."

Despite a tripling of spending on border enforcement over the past decade, there are roughly 10 million illegal immigrants in the United States.

During his State of the Union address in January, President Bush reiterated the call he made last year for a guest worker program. But the plan has gone nowhere, because it is so politically contentious, especially within the president's own party.

Analysts say that until Congress tackles comprehensive immigration reform, measures like Prop. 200 are likely to continue -- though organizers in California recently failed to gather enough signatures for a measure that would bar illegal immigrants from obtaining driver's licenses and other public benefits.

The Republican Party in California is hesitant to embrace such a plan again, because the party suffered a backlash from angry Latino voters during the Pete Wilson era.

"Republicans have learned there's dynamite in advocating immigration restrictions at that level," said DiSipio, the UC Irvine professor.

Bill Whalen, a research fellow at the Hoover Institution, believes there is still broad public frustration with illegal immigration, but unless California allows illegal immigrants to obtain driver's licenses, he doubts there is enough momentum to propel a measure like Prop. 187 back into the state spotlight.

"Here it is a decade later, and this debate is still greatly unresolved in California," he said. "Could another measure be put on the ballot and would it pass? Probably. Do political leaders want it on the ballot? Probably not. Is it still a headache for them? Absolutely. It just sits out there. It's very controversial."

CHART:IMMIGRATION IN CALIFORNIA AND ARIZONA

Figures are estimates for 2003, the most recent year for which data are available.

-- Total Population

California: 34,650,690

Arizona: 5,470,843.

-- Number Of Immigrants

California: 9,187,222

Arizona: 757,271.

-- Number Of Illegal Immigrants

California: 2,400,000

Arizona: 325,000

.

Major provisions of California's Proposition 187

(Passed by voters in November 1994, invalidated by federal judge in September 1999)

- Ban illegal immigrants from attending public schools, state colleges and universities.

- Ban illegal immigrants from receiving public health care or social services, other than emergency medical care.

- Require every school district and governmental, health or social service agency to verify the legal status of students, parents, patients and other applicants; require such agencies to report suspected illegal immigrants to state and federal authorities.

- Require state and local law enforcement agencies to verify the legal status of every arrestee suspected of being an illegal immigrant and report suspected illegal immigrants to state and federal authorities.

- Create new state crimes for making or using false documents to conceal true immigration or citizenship status.

.

Major provisions of Arizona's Proposition 200

(Passed by voters in November 2004, enacted in January 2005, still facing court challenges)

- Require voters to present identification before receiving a ballot and being allowed to vote.

- Require people registering to vote in Arizona to provide proof of U.S. citizenship at the time of registering; exempt any person currently registered to vote in Arizona from this requirement, unless they are moving from one county to another.

- Ban illegal immmigrants from receiving nonfederally mandated public benefits, interpreted by Arizona's attorney general to cover welfare benefits.

- Require governmental agencies to verify the legal status of applicants and report suspected illegal immigrants to state and federal authorities; make it a crime for government employees to fail to report suspected violations of federal immigration law.

- Allow any state resident to sue any government employee or agency for failing to carry out the provisions of Proposition 200.

Source: U.S. Census Bureau; Jeffrey Passel, senior demographer, Pew Hispanic Center