Fact check: Don't expect wild animals fleeing fires to show up in your yard

Do not leave out buckets of water for Bambi, says California Fish and Wildlife spokesperson Peter Tira, despite the advice of a post making the rounds on Facebook.

You may have seen it on your timeline in some variation or other (often accompanied by a photo of a deer and flames). It reads:

"Northern Californians, please be aware that wild animals are fleeing the fires and they may show up in your yards. The Forestry Department is urging you to bring your domestic animals in at night and let the wild ones pass through. Please put out buckets of water for them – they are scared, exhausted, and have also lost their homes – they need to refuel."

In tragic times such as these, the urge to help however you can is natural, but the same rules apply to wild animals as always. That is, let the wild remain so.

"If you encounter a wild animal in your neighborhood, leave it alone," says Tira. "Fire or no fire, just let the animals be."

Tira says wild animals, like deer, foxes, coyotes and other creatures likely affected by the Wine Country fires, have the ability to adapt and survive, and leaving buckets of water out for them is not only unnecessary, but unadvisable.

"Fire is something animals have to deal with constantly," said Tira. And after a wet fall and winter, the region's waterways should provide ample drink to Mother Nature's creatures. If you do see an animal in distress, contact San Francisco Animal Control at (415) 554-9400.

As for domestic animals, Tira says they're not at increased risk of predation. The odds of an animal showing up "in your yards" is low in urban places.

"They'd have to cross the Golden Gate Bridge to get there," Tira noted. He expects the fleeing animals to head for more natural places.

The origin of the now-debunked Facebook post isn't Northern California at all. A post with near-exact wording and the same photo began circulating in early September in the Pacific Northwest, which was contending with its own wildfires. One such post had been shared over 14,000 times.

Cal Fire did not immediately respond to requests for comment, though the phone line operator admitted she'd seen – and shared – the post, too.