Sanders brings his campaign to Northern California

SACRAMENTO — Presidential hopeful Bernie Sanders told a raucous crowd Monday that Donald Trump will not be elected to lead the country and that despite his unlikely road to the Democratic nomination, he does not plan to back down.

An estimated 15,000 people packed a Sacramento stadium to hear the senator from Vermont, whose criticism of fracking and corporate greed drew as many cheers as did his jabs at Democratic front-runner and rival Hillary Clinton.

“It is a steep hill to climb, I acknowledge that, but we have the possibility of walking into the Democratic convention with a majority of pledge delegates,” Sanders said. “We are going to fight for every vote until June 14.”

Sanders said that includes fighting in California — with its prized 475 pledged delegates — ahead of the state’s June 7 primary election.

The event was free to the public, with doors opening four hours before Sanders took the podium just before 9 p.m. Lines to get in Bonney Field wrapped around the stadium, with 1,200 people listening to the rally from outside, according to the stadium’s field manager.

Stump speech

Sanders largely kept to his regular stump speech, calling for raising the minimum wage across the country, saying colleges and universities should be tuition-free and urging leaders to do more to address climate change.

“I don’t have to tell anyone in California what the scientists all over the world are telling us,” Sanders said. “That is that climate change is real. ... If we are to do what has to be done, we need a tax on carbon. That is my view. That is not the view of Secretary Clinton.”

Sanders said Congress is responsive to big-money campaign contributors, not the needs of ordinary Americans. He said something must be done to address a system that allows the wealthy and major corporations to buy and sell politicians in secret.

“This campaign is doing well because we are doing something very unusual in contemporary politics,” Sanders said. “We are telling the truth. And the truth is that not only do we have a corrupt campaign finance system, the truth is that we have a rigged economy.”

Latest news videos

Sanders is trailing Clinton, who appears poised to be the Democrats’ nominee. Clinton has 93 percent of the 2,383 delegates needed to win the nomination and has already begun to focus her attention on Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee.

Over the weekend, Clinton held a pair of Oakland campaign events, where she largely looked past Sanders and focused her ire on Trump.

Sanders said he will continue to campaign, vowing a floor fight at the party’s July convention in Philadelphia.

He was scheduled to appear in Stockton on Tuesday morning for another rally and then meet with The Chronicle’s editorial board.

“I believe in Bernie Sanders,” said Jazz Gascon of Sacramento. “I believe in what he stands for. He’s the only presidential candidate that has been speaking for us.”

Student loan debt

Gascon said she’s “up to her neck in student loans” and without a degree she can’t advance in her state job.

She was among the thousands of hands that shot into the air when Sanders asked the crowd who was dealing with student loan debt.

“I’m so excited to be part of history,” said Molly Hogan of Sacramento, who attended the rally with her 2-year-old. “I brought my daughter so I can tell her she was here.”

Hogan said she had expected to see a large turnout for the rally.

“But seeing it is shocking,” she said

Although Sanders does not typically weigh in on local issues, he will announce Tuesday his support for a California ballot measure that would restrict California health programs from paying more for prescription drugs than what’s paid by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. Sanders said the initiative addresses a pivotal issue of soaring drug prices.

The initiative, the California Drug Price Relief Act, is supported by the AIDS Healthcare Foundation.

“Americans living with HIV/AIDS and cancer should not live in fear that they will go bankrupt because of the outrageously high cost of their prescription drugs,” Sanders said.

Melody Gutierrez is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: mgutierrez@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @MelodyGutierrez

Online extra

Watch a live-stream video of Democratic candidate Bernie Sanders’ interview with The Chronicle’s editorial board at 2:30 p.m. Tuesday: www. facebook. com/ sanfranciscochronicle