Ramsey Orta, man who filmed Garner death, admits guilt in drug, weapons cases
STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- -- Ramsey Orta, a former Tompkinsville resident who was thrust into the national spotlight when he filmed Eric Garner's police custody death, will soon head to prison after admitting guilt to felony drug and weapons charges.

Orta, 24, entered guilty pleas in state Supreme Court, St. George on Thursday morning to satisfy several outstanding cases against him.

In exchange for his pleas, Orta, who remains free on $100,000 bond, will be sentenced to four years in prison on Oct. 3.

Orta pleaded guilty to third-degree criminal sale of a controlled substance to satisfy a drug case stemming from Jan. 3, 2015, in which he admitted to selling heroin to an undercover police officer.

He also pleaded guilty to third-degree criminal possession of a weapon to satisfy a case from August 2, 2014.

Orta admitted to possessing a .25-caliber semiautomatic pistol. Authorities had accused him of stuffing the weapon down a 17-year-old woman's pants outside the Hotel Richmond on Central Avenue in St. George.

Kenneth M. Perry, one of Orta's lawyers, said the defendant would also plead guilty Thursday in Criminal Court to disorderly conduct, a non-criminal violation, in two separate misdemeanor cases stemming from incidents May 4 and July 13 of 2014.

Under his agreement, Orta will be sentenced as a second felony offender to four years in prison and 18 months' post-release supervision for the drug conviction. He'll receive a concurrent term of two to four years for the felony gun plea.

Orta was previously convicted of a felony count of attempted criminal drug sale, arising from a 2011 indictment and sentenced to six months in jail in January 2012, according to statements made in court.

Orta also has a misdemeanor obstruction case pending in Manhattan Criminal Court, which William Aronin, another lawyer for the defendant, said would be resolved shortly.

Orta had been arrested numerous times since his video of Garner's fatal confrontation with police on July 17, 2014 in Tompkinsville became national news.

Orta had claimed he was being targeted by cops, and supporters set up an online fundraiser to pay for his legal bills. But Perry told the court he warned his client against making any further statements of that nature.

"We have strongly and repeatedly advised him that getting in any trouble whatsoever, including talking to the press and claiming he was railroaded, could subject him to increased penalties," Perry told the court.

The lawyer received permission for his client to spend some time in Las Vegas with his wife before sentencing.

Prosecutors did not object, and the judge said he would not oppose the request, provided the city Probation Department agreed to it.

Orta potentially faces up to 12 years behind bars on the drug conviction and three and a half to seven years in prison on the gun conviction if he fails to appear for sentencing or violates probation between now and Oct. 3.

A short, razor-thin man garbed in a plaid shirt and dark trousers, Orta stood with his hands clasped behind him during the proceeding. He stated his name for the record and responded "Yes" and "No" in a low voice to Justice Stephen J. Rooney's questions. He made no other statements.

Outside court, his attorneys declined comment.

Also on Thursday, Orta's mother, Emily Mercado, 43, pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor count of criminal possession of a controlled substance. She admitted to illegally possessing oxycodone on Jan. 16, 2015.

In exchange for her plea, Mercado will be sentenced Sept. 9 to three years' probation.

Her lawyer, Mark Geisser, declined comment outside court.

Assistant District Attorneys Adam Silberlight and Natalie Barros are prosecuting the cases on behalf of District Attorney Michael E. McMahon.