'No justice, no peace': Emotions erupt as man who filmed Eric Garner is sentenced
STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- Ramsey Orta, the man who filmed Eric Garner's death in police custody two years ago, declined to make a statement Monday before a justice sentenced him to four years in prison on a drug and gun conviction.

But the former Tompkinsville resident's supporters had plenty to say.

About 30 family members, friends and backers stood in unison in the gallery as court officers escorted Orta to a holding cell behind a side door after the sentence was imposed.

"No justice, no peace," they chanted. "F--- the racist police."

"Jail killer cops, not Ramsey," shouted one person, in an apparent reference to Officer Daniel Pantaleo, who a Staten Island grand jury previously declined to indict in connection with Garner's death on July 17, 2014, when police tried to arrest him for allegedly selling loose cigarettes in Tompkinsville.

Despite the high emotions, there were no episodes of violence as court officers cleared the crowd.

In July, Orta, 25, pleaded guilty in state Supreme Court, St. George, to third-degree criminal possession of a weapon stemming from an Aug. 2, 2014, arrest in St. George.

Orta admitted to possessing a .25-caliber semiautomatic pistol. Authorities had accused him of stuffing the weapon down a 17-year-old woman's pants outside the Hotel Richmond on Central Avenue.

He also pleaded guilty then to third-degree criminal sale of a controlled substance to satisfy charges arising from a Jan. 3, 2015, incident in which he sold heroin to an undercover officer.

A teary-eyed Orta entered the courtroom at about 11:50 a.m. Monday.

He was garbed in a black hoodie, which bore the word "Copwatch" on the front and back, and black pants.

Some supporters wore similar shirts.

The slender, goateed defendant hugged several people in the gallery before walking up to the defense table.

Kenneth M. Perry, one of Orta's lawyers, told the court the defendant was ready to proceed.

However, Perry said he wanted to make a record of several issues.

Specifically, he said there was an indication in the Probation Department's pre-sentencing report that Orta questions his guilt.

Perry also said two other law firms had contacted him and requested he adjourn sentencing to give them time to investigate the case.

Perry said Orta wanted to "re-affirm" his guilt to the court and go forward with sentencing.

In addition, his client did not know from whom the Probation Department obtained its information, said the lawyer.

Perry also said Orta had not abused drugs or alcohol during the three months he was on probation between his plea and sentencing proceedings.

Orta said, "Yes," when asked if Perry's statements were accurate.

After his initial arrest, Orta claimed cops had targeted him for filming the Garner incident on his cell phone.

Supporters echoed those sentiments Monday.

"Drop all retaliatory charges against Ramsey Orta," read two signs on the street outside court.

Orta was sentenced to concurrent prison terms of four years for the drug conviction and two to four years for the gun conviction. He is also subject to 18 months' post-release supervision.

As sentence was imposed, the defendant's mother, Emily Mercado, who was sitting in the audience, wept openly.

Perry and his associate, William Aronin, declined comment outside court.

Which left it for Orta's supporters to have the last word.

"You should have done a better job," one woman yelled and then hurled an expletive as the two attorneys walked away from the courthouse.