Corpus Christi

By Terrence McNally

Preview November 21 (Donations will be accepted for the TAG Scholarship Fund)

November 23 - December 16

Thursdays-Saturdays @8pm

Sundays @ 6pm

3225 California Street, Omaha, NE

Box office: 341-2757 Reviews

Photos

About the playwright

"Beautifully Staged...A thought-provoking work, "Corpus Christi" offers its own kind of reverence" - Omaha World Herald "The characterization of "Corpus Christi" could draw tears of empathy from the eyes of Christians and nonbelievers alike. The play's effective use of inner and external struggle humanizes Jesus and his disciples as well as or better than the Bible does." - The Daily Nebraskan

SNAP! Productions presents Corpus Christi, one of the most controversial plays of all time. Terrence McNally's controversial play about growing up gay in a Texas Gulf Coast town is about a miracle-working, love-preaching healer named Joshua. His story presents an update of the Bible in thoughtful, vividly human ways. The nativity takes place in a roadside motel, during Joshua's wandering in the desert. The devil appears in the form of movie star James Dean, and the apostles don't face easy decisions devoting their lives to this guy with a halo; they have to leave behind law firm partnerships. Time magazine called the play "one of McNally's best, most moving and personal works. His updating of the Christ story is witty but not patronizing, as sober and cleansing as a dip in baptismal waters." The play's form is story theatre: 13 barefoot male actors perform a play within a play, starting with the birth of Joshua/Jesus in a Texas motel. Soon evils emerge, such as wife-beating, loveless sex, gay-bashing and clerical humiliations. The playwright uses this parallel story of Christ to tell a contemporary, colloquial tale of the fight against cruelty, division, hatred and, above all, hypocrisy. Love and acceptance are the antidotes.

The dramatic early attempts to prevent the play from being produced raised a flood of controversy on both sides - freedom of speech versus religious censorship. The New York Times, in an article headlined "Censoring Terrence McNally," wrote, "What we are witnessing, once again, is the peculiar combat between freedoms that is repeatedly staged in America. The practitioners and beneficiaries of religious freedom attack the practitioners of artistic freedom - freedom of speech - without seeing that the freedoms they enjoy cannot be defended separately." The play is directed by Don Nguyen. The cast includes Nick Zadina, Michal Simpson, Mitch Fuller, Tom Lowe, Ed Baye, Jerry Evert, Michael Taylor Stewart, Damion Potter, Matt Yohe, Jeremy Earl, Tony Schik, Daniel Saucedo, and Rick Gobble. About The PlaywrightOne of the best and most prolific playwrights of contemporary postmodern theatre, McNally has won numerous awards and is one of the most recognized current writers in American theatre. He has received Tony Awards, Drama Desk Awards and Outer Critics Circle Awards, along with a New York Drama Critic's Circle Award and an Emmy Award. He has received two Guggenheim Fellowships, a Rockefeller Grant, a Lucille Lortel Award and a citation from the American Academy of Arts and Letters. His past works have included "Master Class," "Love! Valour! Compassion!" "Frankie and Johnnie in Clair de Lune," and books for the musicals "Ragtime," and "Kiss of the Spider Woman."