FACT CHECK: Slave Statement
FACT CHECK: Did Ben Carson say slavery was the “best thing that could have happened” to blacks?

Claim: Ben Carson said slavery was the “best thing that could have happened” to blacks.

FALSE

Example: [Collected via Facebook and Twitter, August 2015]

What do you think about Dr. Ben Carson’s statement that slavery was the “best thing ever to happen to blacks” and that #Blacklivesmatter protesters are all ungrateful whiners? Join Fox News this week as we discuss race relations in America.Don’t miss a minute this week on Fox! #blackfair Ben Carson as an African-American has a very interesting perspective about slavery! http://t.co/BK8zObfeRZ — William Mazzulla III (@PastorBill3rd) August 31, 2015

Origins: On 29 August 2015, the Facebook page “Fox News the FB Page” published a photograph of Dr. Ben Carson (a former neurosurgeon seeking the Republican presidential nomination for 2016) alongside a purported quote about the benefits of slavery:

Actually slavery was the best thing that could have happened to us. Because of slavery blacks were brought to America we met the Christian faith. We met Jesus Christ. If it were not for slavery we would all be in Africa,hanging from trees and worshiping Allah. God always get’s it right!

The quote bore passing resemblance to earlier comments made by Carson (such as a 2013 comment that Obamacare was “the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery,” and an op-ed penned by Carson in which he criticized Black Lives Matter protesters), but the words attributed to Dr. Carson were never spoken by him.

“Fox News The FB Page” is a parody group that is not affiliated with Fox News Channel and primarily shares altered versions of current news stories or entirely fabricated content. Prior posts by that group include a claim that NASCAR was replacing their flag with a rainbow gay pride version and a faked news screenshot suggesting Donald Trump offered to pay legal fees for the dentist who killed Cecil the Lion.

Last updated: 31 August 2015

Originally published: 31 August 2015