FACT CHECK: Brad Pitt Endorses Donald Trump, Slams Money-Hungry Liberals
On or around 23 October 2016, several fly-by-night web sites published articles asserting that actor Brad Pitt had “shocked” liberals by voicing his support for Donald Trump:

“We need more and more jobs. Unemployment is way up here,” he said. “He’s hired more employees, more people, than anyone I know in the world.” I believe in him first of all because he’s a businessman. I think jobs are badly needed … Hollywood star, Brad Pitt is usually catching some heat through supporters of President Obama after calling his agenda “anti-Christian.” Pitt talked out about his own Christian beliefs during the 1999 interview. During the interview, he shared his story of how he or she uncovered religion … As other celebrities live a liberal and free life-style, Pitt has explained that he is proud of his religion. Because of this, Brad has finally come out in support of Donald Trump and his run for Presidency. WOW! Let’s share this EVERYWHERE in support of Brad Pitt! This is a MAJOR shock for the liberal run Hollywood!

The articles were nearly identical to one another and provided no links to any interviews, videos, or other media documenting Pitt’s having endorsed Trump either recently or in the more distant past. In an interview with the New York Times‘ T magazine on 7 September 2016, Pitt discussed Trump’s candidacy without expressing any support for the Republican candidate:

I ask him about Brexit. “Man, I never thought that would happen. Same way I can’t bring myself to think that Trump will be in charge. In the simplest terms, what brings us together is good, and what separates us is bad. We have this great line in ‘The Big Short,’” he says, referring to the Oscar-winning film about the global financial crisis of 2008, which he produced. “When things are going wrong and we can’t find the reason for it, we just start creating enemies.” I mention that when creating those enemies, we often look no further than what’s right in front of us. Gays, for example. “Or illegal immigrants,” he says. “What I’m most hopeful about is that we’re a global neighborhood now, and we start to understand each other more and more — and yet, you see this reactionary push for isolation and separation again.” Pitt shrugs, and says that he thinks a lot of people feel alone, and on a certain level, again because of his background, he knows what that’s like. “A Trump supporter is fighting against just about everything,” he says. “What does he even mean, take our country back? Would someone please explain that to me?” Pitt looks at me, impish and totally serious at the same time. “Where’d it go?”

In addition to the incongruity of Pitt’s endorsing Donald Trump and blaming liberals for taking his money, the clickbait articles replete with grammatical errors that announced the unlikely news matched a similar earlier fabrication involving actor Denzel Washington:

“We need more and more jobs. Unemployment is way up here,” he said. “He’s hired more employees, more people, than anyone I know in the world.” I believe in him first of all because he’s a businessman. I think jobs are badly needed. Hollywood star, Denzel Washington is usually catching some heat through supporters of President Obama after calling his agenda “anti-Christian.” Washington talked out about his own Christian beliefs during the 1999 interview. During the interview, he shared his story of how he or she uncovered religion.

Given that Denzel Washington’s earlier imaginary endorsement was attributed verbatim to Brad Pitt (who, contrarily, had recently aired anxieties about a Trump presidency), it’s safe to say the false report hasn’t become any more true the second time around.