FACT CHECK: Alice Day
According to a widely-circulated warning on social media, parents should be extra careful on the unofficial holiday of “Alice Day” (April 25), also known as Pedophilia Pride Day, since predators will be stalking their neighborhoods for child victims.

Although there may be no harm in keeping extra careful watch over your children on April 25, it should be noted that warnings about “Alice Day” are largely based on an unofficial, very small idea that was spread on a few Internet forums several years ago and does not appear to represent an organized phenomenon meriting the attention of law enforcement.

There is no mention of “Alice Day” or “Pedophilia Pride Day” on the web sites of the FBI or the Department of Health and Human Services’ Children’s Bureau. The Facebook group “Police Alerts UK & News reports” did post a warning about “Alice Day” on 7 April 2014, but that alert actually originated with the blog Time to Start Caring and not a police department:

It’s called Alice Day, named after Alice Liddell and Alice In Wonderland, originally Pedophile Pride Day. There is a whole story circulating the net that this holiday was named after the story that we all love so much. Wow, show you what twisted minds will do. This holiday for pedophiles is this upcoming week. On this holiday the pedophiles celebrate, rape and molestation of little girls. It is okay to celebrate by loving a female child that day. Ugh, how disgusting is this, that we live in a society that allows this sick animals to go around saying these things about our loved ones. April is Child Abuse Awareness month and coincidentally (or karmically), it is also the month in which child rapists/molesters/”lovers” reserve for their special “it’s okay to sexually assault children” day — “Alice Day.” Alice Day is to sexual predators of children what Christmas is to Christians. April 25th. Please watch your children. This is the best defense against any predator out there. They are looking for latch key kids, kids neglected, kids from chemically abused parents, single parents, kids without rules.

Law enforcement and government protective agencies have not found “Alice Day” threatening enough to issue a warning about that alleged pedophilia pride holiday, and many commenters have scoffed at the suggested notion that child molesters are a relatively well-behaved lot until the occurrence of an annual “it’s okay to sexually assault children” day provides them sanctioned license to give into their urges.

In 2009 blogger Lindsey Ashford reproduced what she presented as comments made by dozens of alleged pedophiles talking about Alice Day in various Internet chat rooms, but since the forums referenced in her blog posts about Alice Day are no longer online, it is impossible to verify their authenticity. It should also be noted that Ashford, who conducted her research for the now-defunct Wikisposure web site, provided no evidence that the comments she published were issued by real sexual offenders.

Regardless, the hacking collective Anonymous found the concept of “Alice Day” sufficiently provocative that they reportedly planned a distributed denial-of-service (DDOS) attack on the web site of NAMBLA (the North American Man/Boy Love Association) and several other pedophilia-related web sites in 2013:

In corners of the Internet that will make you ill, pedophiles wait to receive an onslaught of attacks. It’s Alice Day, a public “pedophile pride” day inspired by the relationship between the author Lewis Carroll and his young muse, Alice Liddell, for whom Alice in Wonderland was written. April 25 is supposedly the day in 1856 that Carroll met 4-year-old Alice, sparking a lifelong infatuation. In one pedophile’s own words, republished on a predator watchdog site, April 25 is a day to “rejoice in the gift of girllove and affirm the ideal so aptly typified by this special relationship.” In 2013, it’s also the day the hacker group Anonymous plans to bombard a long list of online targets with DDoS attacks, leaking suspects’ personal information and defacing their websites.

As for the nomenclature of this “holiday,” the notion that Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland author Lewis Carroll (the pen name of Charles Dodgson) was himself a pedophile is a highly debated one, fueled by a modern reinterpretation of 19th-century social behaviors that are difficult for many contemporary readers to comprehend: