Gun Law Loophole Allows Immediate Delivery, No Background Checks : Arms: Private owners can sell their weapons legally anytime, to anyone. Shows are a common sales venue.

Private gun owners can and do sell their weapons legally to anyone. No questions asked, no background check, no registration and no cooling-off period.

The Brady measure and most superseding state laws have a loophole large enough to sneak a crate of 9-millimeter pistols through--because they apply only to licensed dealers.

But at least they dictate that all handgun sales be registered.

Then they must require a government background check on all buyers.

MIAMI — The Brady law and similar gun controls on state books mandate a cooling-off period before anyone can buy a handgun, right?

The guns in this so-called secondary market are often sold through classified ads. But an increasingly popular outlet is the gun show, where licensed dealers and private owners often compete side by side.

"Easily millions of gun sales can be transacted at gun shows," says Jack Killorin, a spokesman for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in Washington.

ATF estimates that Americans own 200 million guns of all kinds, including 67 million handguns. Licensed gun shops sold 7.5 million guns last year.

At a Ft. Lauderdale show this month, a woman who gives her name only as Karen displays a used Colt .38-caliber police special next to a sign: "Private Sale. $195. No forms. No waiting period."

The Colt sale is legal, she says, because the gun is hers.

ATF says that Karen is correct. No law prevents a private citizen from selling handguns to anyone who answers an ad or walks into a gun show. And no clear-cut definition separates private sellers from licensed dealers, such as earnings or number of guns sold. Generally, the ATF says, it requires licenses if gun sellers are running a regular, profit-making business.

"These shows have gotten as common as garage sales, and all this is a problem for us," Killorin says. "It's known that guns have moved out of these shows into criminal hands."

Texas and Florida are particularly worrisome, he says, because they offer frequent gun shows, relatively lax laws and ease of transit for out-of-state buyers.

David Koresh's Branch Davidian cult built up its arsenal with purchases from Texas gun shows, he notes.

"In Texas, traditionally, our agents indicate that a lot of people slide up from Mexico and buy at gun shows, where there are fewer questions asked," Killorin says.

Miami ATF spokesman Bruce Snyder says a 1990 coup attempt in the Caribbean island nation of Trinidad and Tobago was armed through purchases at Florida gun shows. Residents of Northeastern states with tougher gun control laws buy many of the pistols sold legally at Florida gun shows.

But neither ATF nor state and local police agencies can patrol the shows routinely--there are simply too many, Killorin says.

That leaves the shows open not only to legal private sellers, but also to arms dealers who abuse the law by claiming to sell private gun collections.