FACT CHECK: Hillary Clinton Files for Divorce in New York Courts
On 10 November 2016, the entertainment web site Christian Times Newspaper published a hoax news article which reported that Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton had filed for divorce from former president Bill Clinton just after conceding the election:

Bill Clinton just got served — by his own wife. At approximately 9:18 a.m. on Thursday, attorneys for Hillary Rodham Clinton filed an Action For Divorce with the Supreme Court of the State of New York for Westchester County, according to documents obtained by Christian Times Newspaper. Citing irreconcilable differences, the former Democratic nominee for President apparently is seeking a divorce from her longtime husband former President Bill Clinton. Bill Clinton is named as the defendant in the legal filing, and Hillary’s signature appears beside her listing as the plaintiff. The plaintiff’s signature is often included in these types of filings to certify and expedite the legal process.

This story has no truth to it. While the Christian Times Newspaper presents itself as if it were a genuine news organization (by imitating the name of the genuine newspaper the Christian Times), this web site nearly exclusively publishes hoaxes and fake news.

The web site does not explicitly label itself as a fake news publication. However, they do carry a disclaimer exempting themselves from responsibility for their efforts:

Christian Times Newspaper is your premier online source for news, commentary, opinion, and theories. Christian Times Newspaper does not take responsibility for any of our readers’ actions that may result from reading our stories. We do our best to provide accurate, updated news and information.

The web site has previously published several other politically-themed fake stories, including one report that the New York Police Department was investigating Bill Clinton for being involved with a child sex ring, that a leaked video showed widespread voter fraud in the United States, and tens of thousands of fraudulent ballots — pre-marked for Hillary Clinton and other Democratic candidates — were discovered in a warehouse in Ohio.