FACT CHECK: Was Hillary Clinton Seriously Injured in a Secret Plane Crash?
Back at the end of 2012, the notorious conspiracy-mongering WhatDoesItMean.com web site published a fabricated article holding that then Secretary of State Hillary Clinton had been injured, and a “top US Navy Seal Commander killed,” when her military plane crashed while she was on a secret mission to Iran to meet with Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad:

A new Foreign Military Intelligence (GRU) report circulating in the Kremlin today is saying that United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was injured, and a top US Navy Seal Commander killed when their C-12 Huron military passenger and transport aircraft crash landed nearly 3 weeks ago in the Iranian city of Ahvaz near the Iraqi border. Iranian intelligence agents quoted in this GRU report confirm that the C-12 Huron aircraft is still in their possession in Ahvaz, but will only admit that the plane was “forced to land because of technical problems.” The US Navy Seal member reported killed in this bizarre incident, this report says, was indentified as Commander Job W. Price who as a leader of this highly specialized American Special Forces unit protects high-ranking diplomats traveling in Middle Eastern and Asian combat zones.



As usual, this was just more of the typical WhatDoesItMean.com conspiracy nuttery, spun around the recent tragic suicide of Commander Job W. Price, the 42-year-old leader of U.S. Navy SEAL Team 4, who had killed himself with a pistol while deployed in Afghanistan a few days earlier. And, as usual, the equally notorious and unreliable (but more professional looking) conspiracy-mongering European Union Times web site reprinted WhatDoesItMean.com’s fabricated article about the secret plane crash.

The European Union Times‘ version of the fake article gained enough traction that it was eventually shared by a few U.S. military personnel and U.S. Department of State staffers via e-mail, prompting some confusion and chuckles among its recipients:

That likely would have been the end of this fake article’s brief lifespan, except for the fact that its having been forwarded via the Department of State’s e-mail system meant it ended up being included among the archive of 30,322 e-mails sent to and from Hillary Clinton’s private e-mail server while she was Secretary of State that were released online by WikiLeaks on 16 March 2016.

Shortly after Hillary Clinton collapsed at 9/11 memorial service and spurred the renewal of rumors that she was suffering from, and concealing, a major medical ailment (purportedly of a neurological nature), several fringe political sites picked up on the confluence of the 2012 article’s having recently appeared in a State Dept. e-mail leak and ran with the notion that the original four-year-old WhatDoesItMean.com fake news piece was true, that it proved that Clinton was covering up a serious plane crash injury that had left her “unconscious and bleeding profusely,” and that all of this had been “verified” by WikiLeaks:

For years we have been given the story over and over again that Hillary Clinton is fine and she is perfectly healthy. The story line gradually morphed into Hillary “fell” and suffered a concussion, which then, in turn, led to brain clots. Well, color me NOT surprised but apparently that was all a lie told by a couple that wouldn’t know the truth if it bit them! WikiLeaks has released another round of emails exposing some MAJOR bombshells surrounding Hillary. In this latest batch of emails, WikiLeaks reveals that Hillary Clinton was apparently in a C-12 Huron aircraft that was forced to make an emergency landing at Ahwaz International Airport. This airport happens to be located on the border of Iran and Iraq … [a crash landing] left Hillary “unconscious and bleeding profusely” according to the reports released by WikiLeaks. The report indicates that Hillary was on some sort of secret mission and traveling with the members of Seal team 4. One of the members of that team was reportedly killed when the aircraft crash-landed. The government had previously claimed that Commander Job W. Price died of a possible “suicide.” His death was listed as a non-combat related injury. Commander Price was a leader of this highly specialized American Special Forces unit. Their mission was to protect high-ranking diplomats traveling in Middle Eastern and Asian combat zones. US military flight logs recorded by Russian air and space forces confirm that Commander Price, and other members of US Navy Seal Team 4, left their base in Urozgan Province, Afghanistan on a flight to US Naval Support Activity Bahrain where they met up with the then-Secretary of State, Hillary, and all of them transferred to the C-12 Huron and proceeded to fly to Baghdad.

As we noted at the head of this article, the fantastic “secret plane crash” tale was a complete fabrication, and it appeared on WikiLeaks only because some State Department staffers had forwarded the article among themselves via-email. The article’s supposed “bombshell” contents originated with (and were reported by no source other than) WhatDoesItMean.com, of whom RationalWiki says:

Sorcha Faal is the alleged author of an ongoing series of “reports” published at WhatDoesItMean.com, whose work is of such quality that even other conspiracy nutters don’t think much of it. Each report resembles a news story in its style but usually includes a sensational headline barely related to reality and quotes authoritative high-level Russian sources (such as the Russian Federal Security Service) to support its most outrageous claims. Except for the stuff attributed to unverifiable sources, the reports don’t contain much original material. They are usually based on various news items from the mainstream media and/or whatever the clogosphere is currently hyperventilating about, with each item shoehorned into the conspiracy narrative the report is trying to establish.

Whatdoesitmean.com actively advanced many invented Clinton conspiracy theories in mid-2016, including fabricated claims that hacker Guccifer, Democratic National Committee (DNC) staffer Seth Rich, UN official John Ashe, and the father of a physician purportedly responsible for leaking Hillary Clinton’s (falsified) health records were murdered by her shadowy operatives. The bulk of the site’s conspiracies are built upon actual events or tragedies (such as the deaths of Rich and Ashe) and layered with baseless embellishments.