FACT CHECK: Sarah Palin Wants A President With A Regular Name?
Claim: Sarah Palin said that it’s time to get someone with a regular name back in the White House.

FALSE



Example: [Collected via email, May 2015]



Did Sarah Palin say on 5/11/15 on the SarahPalinChannel.com, “It will be nice to have a president with a normal name back in the White House. Ted or Scott or Donald. I mean, how can you claim to be an American and have a name that sounds like you have camels for pets?”



Origins: On 13 May 2015, the entertainment Facebook group Stop the World, the Teabaggers Want Off posted a photo of Sarah Palin along with a fictitious quote ostensibly uttered by her about President Obama’s irregular name:

The Facebook group Stop The World, The Teabaggers Want Off frequently posts fictitious quotes from politicians and conservative TV personalities. The group has previously published dubious diatribes attributed to Congresswoman Michele Bachmann, former Presidential candidate Mitt Romney, and Duck Dynasty star Phil Robertson.

Of course, Sarah Palin is also a frequent target. The fictitious quotes that Stop The Word, THe Teabaggers Want Off have falsely attributed to Sarah Palin include messages about “white privilege,” an endorsement of Benjamin Netanyahu, and a warning about vaccinations causing homosexuality.

While the Facebook group Stop The World, The Teabaggers Want Off often claims that these fictional quotes have a source (the above-displayed quote allegedly came from Sarah Palin’s website), this is hardly ever the case. A disclaimer on the group’s Facebook page states that all posts are for entertainment purposes only:



This page is for entertainment purposes. It is NOT meant to be taken seriously. It is primarily satire and parody with a mix of political memes and messages.



Fake news spreads across the internet in several different ways. While some readers may be familiar with satirical sites like The Onion or The National Report, many people are fooled by these lesser-known Facebook groups. See our article, “Six Ways to Spot Fake News for help identifying these sites.