FACT CHECK: Semen Found in Starbucks Drinks Nationwide
Claim: Starbucks drinks have been found to contain semen samples.

FALSE

Example: [Collected via e-mail, October 2014]



Semen in Starbucks coffee, true or false?



Origins: On 18 October 2014, the Huzlers web site published an article claiming “semen samples” were discovered in Starbucks stores. The site also claimed Starbucks admitted using semen in its drinks to infuse them with “more flavor.”

Huzlers said Starbucks used the bodily fluid for three months before the Food and Drug Administration uncovered the practice:





“We can not believe this” says FDA inspector Jamison Fields, “this is disturbing, if i wanted to consume semen I would just do gay pornography, who would’ve known i was consuming semen through Starbucks” concluded Fields. However, not everyone thinks semen in their coffee is exactly a bad thing; according to Starbucks daily consumer Jackie Sultana, “if they’re using semen then they should keep using it because it’s so God d*mn good, I might just try semen alone to see if it’s that good”. Starbucks is yet to send out a public apology, however, we are expecting it really soon. “We can not believe this” says FDA inspector Jamison Fields, “this is disturbing, if i wanted to consume semen I would just do gay pornography, who would’ve known i was consuming semen through Starbucks” concluded Fields. However, not everyone thinks semen in their coffee is exactly a bad thing; according to Starbucks daily consumer Jackie Sultana, “if they’re using semen then they should keep using it because it’s so God d*mn good, I might just try semen alone to see if it’s that good”. Starbucks is yet to send out a public apology, however, we are expecting it really soon. It is also speculated that the seasonal Pumpkin Spice Latte, which is only sold at Starbucks in the autumn, is not only loaded with semen, but cockroaches as well. The FDA plan to shut down Starbucks production tomorrow across the nation. We will update you on Starbucks here on huzlers.





The poor quality of the article copy might tip one off to the fact that Huzlers is not a genuine news outlet but rather a fake news site. Previous Huzlers hoaxes included Justin Bieber’s coming out as bisexual and claims that the 2014 Super Bowl was rigged. The Huzlers site displays a disclaimer on its pages noting that “Huzlers.com is a combination of real shocking news and satire news to keep its visitors in a state of disbelief.”