FACT CHECK: President Obama Allows Hot Food to be Purchased with Food Stamps
On 18 October 2016, the web site FAMMTV published an article claiming that President Obama had “passed a law” allowing beneficiaries of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), commonly known as “food stamps,” to purchase hot food (a long-debated restriction prohibits the use of SNAP benefits for most food items in that category).

The claim as presented was not very credible, nor did it link to news of any such law “passed by President Obama”:

It’s has been told to us here at FAMMTV That President Obama has pass a new another law. All families who receive SNAP/food stamps can now purchase hot food with EBT. All products that pertain food can be bought with EBT. The president said it can be a family with no lights or gas to cook that can get dinner to feed there family so he want to help out by passing the law. Everybody babymomma is going to be living in 5 star restaurants now. Instagram is going to be lit on the beginning of the month with women posting picture of them out eating. Look like a lot more IHOP fights will be posted in the upcoming months and if you know what I know, stay away from there because everybody babymomma eat at IHOP after clubbing.

Even if such an assertion had been presented in a marginally believable manner, it wouldn’t pass muster with those possessed rudimentary knowledge of how executive power works. U.S. presidents can neither create nor pass laws on their own:

The president does not have the power to create or rewrite legislation — that is Congress’s job. He is not authorized to dispense with or suspend the law. British kings made this practice familiar to the Framers of the Constitution, who deliberately chose to deny such a power to the president … let’s start by referring to the Constitution. Article II charges the president with the duty to carry out the law — to “take care that the laws be faithfully executed.”

FAMMTV features no disclaimer we could find warning their readers that articles such as the “hot food” one are not on the up-and-up, although there is clearly no truth to the claim. The site previously spread a similar falsehood holding that all unemployed “baby mamas” would be jailed if they failed to find jobs.