FACT CHECK: Breast Rash
Claim: Photograph shows a breast rash caused by South American larvae.

FALSE

Examples:



[Collected via e-mail, 2003] After anthropologist Susan McKinley came back home from an expedition in South America, she noticed a very strange rash on her left breast. Nobody knew what it was and she quickly dismissed it believing that the sores would leave in time. Upon her return she decided to see a doctor after she started developing intense pains. The doctor, not knowing the exact severity of the case, gave her antibiotics and special creams. As time elapsed the pain did not subside and her left breast became more inflamed and started to bleed. She decided to bandage her sores however as Susan’s pain grew more intense she decided to seek help from a more certified doctor.

Dr. Lynch could not diagnose the infection and told Susan to seek the aid of one of his colleagues who specialized in dermatology whom was sadly on vacation. She waited for two weeks and finally was able to reach the dermatologist. Sadly, a life changing event was about to unfold during her appointment. To Miss McKinley’s surprise, after she removed the bandages, they found larva growing and squirming within the pores and sores of her breast. Sometimes these wicked creatures would all together simultaneously move around into different crevices. What she didn’t know was that the holes were in fact, deeper than she had originally thought for these larvae were feeding off the fat, tissue, and even milk canals of her bosom. The holes were 5 cm deep. She was operated on and the larva was removed from her breast. Therefore always take a slight rash serious and have the eggs removed before it is to late. Cheers and may the creatures leave you in peace.





[Collected via e-mail, 2005] Read the article first before looking at the picture and film. This

looks horrible. Oh my God!!!!!!! Ladies this could happen to you and Guys this could happen to your

wife, girlfriend, partner so please BEWARE,and also warn others. ( see the 2

files attached ) It has been reported that this is happening in Zimbabwe as well,

please make sure you iron your undergarments before you wear them and make

sure that your clothes are ironed when they are dry and not damp. The

picture is horrible but I felt that I should share with you.



[Collected via e-mail, 2006] ALL , PLEASE WASH ALL BRAS, UNDERWEAR WHEN YOU BUY BEFORE WEARING THEM.

WE DO NOT KNOW WHAT PARASITE IS IN OUR CLOTHES WHEN WE BUY THEM. FORWARD

TO EVERYBODY YOU KNOW. LET ME FORE WARN YOU THIS IS SO SQUIMISH, I FEEL

LIKE SOMETHING IS CRAWLING ALL OVER ME EVEN AS I SEND THIS TO YOU. BE

AWARE. IT IS SO GROTESQUE.PLEASE WASH YOUR UNDERWEAR BEFORE WEARING.

PREFERABLY IN BOILING HOT WATER.

This is not for the weak, I have never seen anything like this.

Read the article first before looking at the picture and film. This

looks horrible. Oh my God!!!!!!!



[Collected via e-mail, March 2007] YOU MUST READ BELOW BEFORE OPENING THE PICTURES. SHARE THIS WITH, DAUGHTERS, SISTERS, FRIENDS…ANY WOMAN My brother was recently telling me of a news story he heard regarding a flesh-eating bacteria found in new clothing shipments to the USA. These are the first pictures I have seen regarding that very subject. After seeing the attached photos, I understand the gravity of what he was telling me. This is something that is a very real and very serious concern as you will see. Ladies / gentelmens please make it a habit from this point forward to wash your just purchased undergarments before wearing them.Or spinning them in the dryer. This is sensitive. Please share with as many women and men that you know. Our undergarments are made in different parts of the country, sit in boxes and go through many hands and exchanges before we purchase

them for ourselves. TO ALL , PLEASE WASH ALL BRAS, UNDERWEAR ( ALL CLOTHING ) WHEN YOU BUY BEFORE WEARING THEM. YOU CAN THROW THEN IN THE DRYER FOR A QUICK SPIN TO KILL THE PARASITES TOO !! WE DO NOT KNOW WHAT PARASITE IS IN OUR CLOTHES WHEN WE BUY THEM. FORWARD TO EVERYBODY YOU KNOW. The attached photos are not for the weak hearted.



Variations: In June 2014 a similar fabricated image was used in conjunction with a survey scam that lured users with a link headed “You Will Not Use Head & Shoulders Shampoo After Watching This Video.”

Origins: This item is another example of a common Internet phenomenon: Someone makes an image available on-line, the picture begins to circulate through e-mail forwards, the original

attribution or explanation for the image gets lost along the way (or was never provided), people begin to make up stories to explain the origin of the now-sourceless picture, and those fabricated explanations become attached to the image as it continues to circulate. We’ve seen this phenomenon before in the maggot photographs ( disturbing image warning ), only in this case it isn’t just the explanation that’s fabricated; the image is a phony one created through digital manipulation as well.

This image appeared on the Internet back in June 2003 (on a web site with a collection of other manipulated photographs); at that time it carried no explanation at all and was soon attributed by others to some new type of “body modification.” Not until a couple of months later did it pick up the story about an anthropologist named “Susan McKinley” who returned from a South American expedition to notice a “very strange rash” on her breast caused by “larvae” which were “feeding off the fat, tissue, and even milk canals of her bosom.” No known medical condition causes a result like the one depicted here, and the breast tissue around the supposed “larvae infestation” (larvae of what ?) is too healthy (no redness, inflammation, or necrosis) to be believable. This image appears to be the product of the melding of a photograph of a woman’s breast and a picture of something similar to a lotus seed pod:





















In 2005 someone combined the picture and text quoted in the “Example” box above with an existing video clip that seemingly shows maggot-like creatures being removed by forceps from a woman’s infected breast, and in November 2005 we began seeing versions that claimed the patient had developed her condition due to the flooding of New Orleans caused by Hurricane Katrina in August 2005





My aunt, Head Nurse at Tulane Memorial hospital in New Orleans Louisiana

sent me this email. The attached video is that of a female patient who,

due to the flooding of her home wore the same clothes for days. The

contamination in the water was so bad she first broke out with a rash on

her breast and then she had a lump on her breast and she popped it and

puss excreted from the lump. After treating it herself for days she

finally went to seek medical attention and when she did they found

serious infection! They later sedated the patient and found that these

insects were within the fatty tissues of her breast and within the milk

producing glands (sorry not a TRUE medic), she is also 3 months

pregnant! And to think, we though Rita was bad on us! If you pay

attention you can see them moving in and out, gross, but one of the

issues they are now dealing with in New Orleans with patients.





This is a genuine video, but it has no connection to Hurricane Katrina. It shows the treatment of a Nigerian patient with breast lesions and multiple sinuses containing Tumbu fly larvae. (Fourteen separate larvae were eventually extracted from the breast.) The authors of a 2004 medical journal article on the case noted at the time that only “one case has been reported in the English literature.”



In 2006, someone combined the following text with a series of photographs of patients experiencing what look like severe rashes, infections, and necrosis of the upper chest and breasts. The specific origins of these photos are unknown to us, but they likely depict the advanced stages of breast cancer. ( WARNING: Viewers may find the pictures displayed in this link disturbing.)