Texans Challenge Absentee Voting by Military Personnel

Elections: Hispanic candidates who lost races sue over 800 out-of-state ballots that altered results. The feud could have far-reaching effects for families on the move.

A closer look at the 800 mail-in ballots revealed that almost all were cast by military members and their dependents--most of them whites who were once stationed at Laughlin Air Force Base but hadn't lived in Val Verde County for years. Val Verde County is 70% Hispanic.

DEL RIO, Texas — Something strange happened on Election Day in this dusty border county: The Hispanic candidates for sheriff and county commissioner who were leading all night ended up losing when absentee ballots came pouring in for two whites, one of them a former Ku Klux Klansman.

"We all thought that this was a fraud and that democracy was not being respected," said Jovita Casarez, who filed a federal lawsuit over the election. "When this type of fraud is committed, it's embarrassing for all the nation."

The feud could have far-reaching effects, determining once and for all what military families on the move can list as their legal residence and where they can mark their ballots for local elections.

Military families retain residency in one place for the sake of convenience, so that they don't constantly have to get new driver's licenses and registrations.

Texas, with 18 military bases, is particularly attractive as a place of residency because there is no state income tax and because public college tuition for residents is among the cheapest in the nation. Even George Bush claimed a Houston hotel suite as his official residence while he was president.

The "phantom voters," as some people in Val Verde County call those who reside here on paper only, helped bring about Republican sheriff candidate D'Wayne Jernigan's 267-vote victory over Democratic interim Sheriff Oscar Gonzalez Jr., and Republican Murry Kachel's 113-vote win over Democrat Frank Coronado for county commissioner.

A federal judge has barred Jernigan and Kachel from taking office until residency questions are settled in a separate state lawsuit filed by the Democratic losers. That case is set for April 21.

The Republicans' victory would give the GOP its first majority on the commissioners court in the 111-year history of Val Verde County, a place of 42,000 residents, 2,900 of them at the Air Force base.

"I followed the law," said Val Verde County Clerk Maria Elena Cardenas, who oversaw the November election.

Texas has a "flexible definition" of residency that largely depends on the voter's intent, said Ann McGeehan, deputy assistant secretary of state for elections.

The Texas secretary of state's office says service members can apply for a ballot by supplying a Texas address for a place the voter plans to return someday. The voter doesn't actually have to have a home at that address.

"We are allowed legally to do this," said absentee voter Carol Belongia, 44, of Colorado Springs, Colo., whose husband is an Air Force attorney and had his first assignment at Laughlin.