FACT CHECK: Obama Sold Vote Processing Rights to SCYTL?
(SOE software does have a more expansive roster of U.S. customers, but their products are aimed at providing ancillary services to local governments such as helping constituents communicate with government offices or displaying election results , not systems to record and tabulate votes.)

He added that the students were also able to see the electronic signatures of hackers based in both China and Iran probing the D.C. site. The District of Columbia scrapped the plan and has no plans to resurrect it in 2012.

“Not only were they able to penetrate the system, but also they were monitoring what was going inside the system itself,” Alexander Shvartsman, professor at the University of Connecticut’s Center for Voting Technology Research, said.

During a one-week test period, the D.C. Board of Elections and Ethics asked the public to test its integrity. Students from a University of Michigan class obliged and within 36 hours had posted the Michigan fight song on the website.

One of the nation’s first online voting experiments was a big failure. In October 2010, officials in Washington, D.C., set up an Internet-based system for overseas and military voters to cast their ballots.

One of the nation’s first online voting experiments was a big failure. In October 2010, officials in Washington, D.C., set up an Internet-based system for overseas and military voters to cast their ballots. One of the nation’s first online voting experiments was a big failure. In October 2010, officials in Washington, D.C., set up an Internet-based system for overseas and military voters to cast their ballots. During a one-week test period, the D.C. Board of Elections and Ethics asked the public to test its integrity. Students from a University of Michigan class obliged and within 36 hours had posted the Michigan fight song on the website. “Not only were they able to penetrate the system, but also they were monitoring what was going inside the system itself,” Alexander Shvartsman, professor at the University of Connecticut’s Center for Voting Technology Research, said. He added that the students were also able to see the electronic signatures of hackers based in both China and Iran probing the D.C. site. The District of Columbia scrapped the plan and has no plans to resurrect it in 2012.

Moreover, it’s highly unlikely any states will be choosing to use systems like Scytl’s to implement online voting on anything more than a very limited basis in the 2012 general election. Scytl’s current list of customers includes only a few U.S. states plus the District of Columbia, all of whom have so far limited their use of Scytl systems to providing a means for overseas (i.e., military and absentee) voters to cast their ballots remotely. According to Discovery News , even those scant initial uses of online voting failed to pan out in some cases, and those systems will not be re-used in 2012:





Voting, alas, has unique characteristics that make internet implementations all but impossible given current technology. The big problem is that we make two demands of it that cannot be met simultaneously. We want voting to be very, very secure. And we want it to be very, very anonymous. Voting, alas, has unique characteristics that make internet implementations all but impossible given current technology. The big problem is that we make two demands of it that cannot be met simultaneously. We want voting to be very, very secure. And we want it to be very, very anonymous. Internet security is difficult under the best of conditions. But voting has the additional complication that it is very difficult, if not impossible, to remedy a breach. Most of the time, all that is at stake is money, and we know how to fix that. Identity theft is more complex but still there are remedies. A stolen vote is gone forever. Anonymity complicated the problem immensely. The usual way to secure an internet transaction to make certain that both the server and the person at the other end and who or what they claim to be. To cast a ballot at a polling place or vote an absentee ballot, you have to produce identification or, at a minimum, a signature that matches one on file. It’s not perfect. but it’s generally better than we can do on the internet. Then you are given a ballot or a card that activates an electronic voting machine, but there is no link between the ballot and your identity, guaranteeing anonymity. This is really, really hard to simulate online. The more that is done to assure your identity, the harder it is to separate that identity from the vote that is cast. Furthermore, trust is central to elections and people, rightly, have their doubts about trusting online voting. We will see more trials in this year’s voting. But widespread internet voting is still waiting for a day that may never come.





Other experts in electronic voting security concur that such systems are very unlikely to be implemented in U.S. national elections for a long time yet: