NationsBank to Buy Barnett in Record Deal

Acquisitions: The $15.5-billion takeover, the industry's largest ever in the U.S., would create the nation's third-largest bank.

"Barnett gives them the No. 1 bank in the No. 1 state for banking," said analyst Deborah Beylus of JW Charles Securities in Boca Raton, Fla.

Now the country's fifth-largest commercial bank, NationsBank earlier this year paid $10 billion for Boatmen's Bancshares of St. Louis, a deal that extended the Charlotte, N.C., company's operations into the Midwest.

The takeover of Barnett Banks Inc., one of the 25 largest U.S. banks, would make NationsBank the third-largest U.S. banking company and the second-largest in terms of stock market value, the companies said.

MIAMI — NationsBank Corp. on Friday agreed to buy Florida's biggest bank, paying $15.5 billion in the largest banking acquisition in U.S. history.

Jacksonville, Fla.-based Barnett holds a 20% share of Florida's fast-growing banking market, while NationsBank now holds 12%, analysts said. Together the banks do business with 3.9 million Florida households, the companies said in a news release.

The combined company would have about 1,040 branches in Florida before an expected pruning, NationsBank executives said at a news conference.

Barnett was Florida's last remaining independent bank of significance, all others having been bought up in the early 1990s by NationsBank, rival First Union Corp. and others.

"This merger vaults us to a commanding position in the best growth markets in the United States," said NationsBank Chief Executive Hugh McColl Jr. "It reinforces our position as the banking industry's premier growth franchise."

Analysts described the stock-swap purchase price--valued at $15.5 billion, or $75.18 a share--as high. Each Barnett owner would receive 1.1875 shares of NationsBank stock for each Barnett share, the companies said.

"Everyone said for a long time Barnett wanted $70 to $75 a share," Beylus said. "It's always been a takeover candidate, but people couldn't afford it until now, when valuations [of banking stocks] have come up and there's a currency."

Bank stocks now typically trade for 20 times next year's expected earnings, up a third or more of historical valuations of 12 to 15 times annual earnings, she said.

Barnett's stock surged $13.31 to close at $68.125, while NationsBank fell $3.56 to $59.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.

Analysts said NationsBank, a leading acquirer in a consolidating industry, would shut branches, cut staff and make other reductions in Barnett Bank's operations. The company would perhaps also be forced by regulators to divest a few banks, analysts said.

McColl and other executives said the merged company would sell deposits worth about $3.5 billion to meet possible state government objections and would be likely to shut some branches. He said he expected no regulatory opposition on antitrust grounds.

"They will consolidate heavily," said analyst George Salem of Gerard Klauer Mattison. "Three-quarters of NationsBank's branches are within shouting distance of Barnett banks. You shed a lot of expenses and keep the bulk of revenue."