FACT CHECK: Natives of Nativia
FACT CHECK: Did Sarah Palin say that Native Americans should go back to their homeland of Nativia?

Claim: Sarah Palin said that Native Americans should go back to their homeland of Nativia.

FALSE

Example: [Collected via Twitter, September 2015]

Origins: On 7 September 2015, the fake news web site The Daily Currant published an article reporting that Sarah Palin had called for Native Americans to go back to their homeland of Nativia:

“Sarah Palin claimed today that Native Americans should leave America and go back to their homeland ‘Nativia’. In an interview with Fox News this morning, the former Alaskan governor was asked about her support of Donald Trump and his controversial views on immigration. “I love immigrants,” she told Fox and Friends host Steve Doocey, “But like Donald Trump, I just think we have too darn many in this country. “Mexican-Americans, Asian-Americans, Native-Americans – they’re changing up the cultural mix in the United States away from what it used to be in the days of our Founding Fathers. “I think we should go to some of these groups and just ask politely — would you mind going home? Would you mind giving us our country back?” “Sarah you know I love you,” Doocey interjected, “And I think that’s a great idea with regards to Mexicans. But where are the Native Americans supposed to go? They don’t really have a place to go back to do they?” “Well I think they should go back to Nativia or wherever they came from,” Palin replied — as the show’s co-hosts sat in stunned silence.”

While the Daily Currant is a well-known fake news site, the above-quoted story received a touch of credibility when it was tweeted by @Recode executive editor Kara Swisher.

Swisher later claimed that her tweet was a “parody,” but her disclaimer still left some readers (Swisher has over a million followers) confused about Palin’s purported comment. For the record, Sarah Palin never said that Native Americans should go back to “Natvia,” and the notion that she did originated with the Daily Currant, a fake news web site whose “About” page notes that they do not publish real news stories:

The Daily Currant is an English language online satirical newspaper that covers global politics, business, technology, entertainment, science, health and media. Q. Are your news stories real? A. No. Our stories are purely fictional. However they are meant to address real-world issues through satire and often refer and link to real events happening in the world.

Last updated: 8 September 2015

Originally published: 8 September 2015