FACT CHECK: Dash Scam
FACT CHECK: Did a leaked audio recording capture actress and Fox News contributor Stacey Dash admitting Fox News hired her to attract “old, white dudes” who are “horny”?

Claim: A recently leaked tape captured actress and Fox News contributor Stacey Dash admitting Fox News hired her to attract “old, (horny) white dudes.” FALSE

Example: [Collected via Twitter, August 2015]

Origins: On 1 August 2015, the web site The Business Standard News (tagline “BS News, keeping it real”) published an article titled “Leaked Tapes Capture Stacey Dash Saying FOX Hired Her to Attract Horny, Old Men.”

It claimed “conservative hero Stacey Dash” (a Fox News contributor who previously appeared in the film Clueless) was “just in it for the money,” adding:

The Business Standard News has acquired audio files of a conversation between Stacey Dash and her friend Rashika Johnson. Dash is heard on tape breaking down why she decided to come out as a conservative. “Girl, it’s all about getting paid,” Dash said. “I’m in my 40s going up against bitches half my age for roles. It was getting tough. This conservative gig is about cash money. I got a mortgage and kids to put through college.” “They hired me because I make old, white dudes horny,” Dash told her friend. “Take a look at the other women on FOX News, they all look like models. Hell, I get emails from old white men in the South, saying they never thought of f**king a black woman until they saw me.” “Ann Coulter told me there is good money to be made selling lame books to dumb rednecks,” Dash said. “Like her, I don’t believe half the crap I say. I’m an actress, give me a script and I’ll give you a performance.”

However, The Business Standard News features the following disclaimer on its site, indicating its content (including the claim about Stacey Dash) is not intended to be taken seriously:

The Business Standard News is a satirical site designed to poke fun at the absurdity of the modern-day news cycle. The stories are outlandish, but reality is so strange nowadays they could be true.

In addition to the article about Stacey Dash, The Business Standard News featured similarly fabricated and “outlandish” pieces including “FOX News Hires Ex-Porn Star Jenna Jameson as Pundit,” “GOP Serves Fried Chicken, Watermelon to Black Conservative Group,” and “Bill Cosby Loses His Illuminati Membership, Parking Rights.”

Last updated: 3 August 2015

Originally published: 3 August 2015