FACT CHECK: Woman Gives Birth to a Human-Goat Hybrid?
A web site that generally deals in hoax news is making the claim that an Alabama woman was impregnated by a goat named Nibbles, and a goat-human hybrid baby named Nibbles Jr. was the result of the affair.

The web site, Taiviral.com, claims the woman, 22-year-old Janice Gilbert, was impregnated by the goat after becoming forlorn that her new husband was infertile:

Scientists are scratching their heads trying to figure out how this was even possible. “I told ya’ll that me and Nibbles been real close since I was four,” said Gilbert. “But no one believed us. All we needed was Nibbles semen and a turkey baster. And just so ya’ll know, I ain’t had no sex with a goat. We just use the turkey baster that’s all. Now I have a beautiful baby boy and that’s all I care about.”

Other stories that appear on the web site are clearly false, including one that claims to show newborns with full heads of hair but instead shows older babies who are clearly not newborns. Bestiality also appears to be a running theme, too, with a 23 August 2016 feature about a woman who had sex with a dog. The picture employed by Taiviral.com in the role of Nibbles Jr. can be seen here:

The photograph, which shows what appears to be a fur-covered baby, is apparently from a strange story out of Indonesia, not a woman in Alabama. Singapore-based newspaper Straits Times published a 25 April 2016 story describing an Indonesian farmer by the name of Ibrahim Basir who discovered that one of his goats had an oddly-formed baby, but it died shortly after birth. He gave the baby goat, known as a kid, to federal authorities so they could figure out why it looked so unusual. Straits Times reports that because of the kid’s unusual appearance, Basir had people placing bids to buy the body, which he refused. The April article appears to be the first time the picture of the goat appeared on the Internet.

For the most part, it is biologically impossible for different species to interbreed with each other, particularly if they come from different genera. One long-standing exceptions are mules, which are the offspring of horses and donkeys. Other similar animals, like zebras and horses, and lions and tigers, have been known to produce offspring through human manipulation — but these species are closely related, coming from the same genus. Animals that come from completely different genera can’t mingle without aggressive scientific manipulation.

It is possible for scientists to create chimeras, or embryos composed of different animal DNA for the purpose of medical research — but this is done under supervision in laboratories, and does not occur in nature.