FALSE: Woman Arrested in Walmart for Trying on Tampons in the Feminine Care Aisle
FACT CHECK: Was a woman arrested for “trying on tampons and sanitary pads in the feminine care aisle” of Walmart?

Claim: A woman was arrested at Walmart for “trying on tampons and sanitary pads in the feminine care aisle.”

FALSE

Example: [Collected via e-mail, October 2015]

I found this page .. and i could not believe the article when i read it .. can you please check into this?

Origins: On 13 October 2015 the web site Now8News published an article titled “Woman Arrested In Walmart For Trying On Tampons In the Feminine Care Aisle, which began:

A 44-year-old Arkansas woman is now behind bars after Walmart employees found her trying on tampons and sanitary pads in the feminine care aisle. Cheryl Woolery, a Springdale, Arkansas resident, was led out of the store in handcuffs after her resisting arrest turned into a bloody mess. Eyewitnesses say Woolery entered the Walmart store on Monday and approached the customer service desk for a return. Woolery complained that the Tampax ‘Lites’ were causing her to “leak” and the cardboard applicator was just too “rough” for her “woowoo” and she wanted to exchange them for something else.

Now8News doesn’t include a disclaimer marking its content as fake news, and its layout could easily be mistaken for that of a regional news affiliate. However, the web site is has been the source of a number of outlandish, falsified claims. In July 2015 alone the site spread a fabricated tale about a man purportedly arrested for having sex with a pig in a Walmart bathroom, another claiming aborted fetuses were used in making Chicken McNuggets, and a third falsely reporting that bananas from Walmart were infested with parasitic worms.

Moreover, the mug shot used by the site (purportedly taken following a 12 October 2015 arrest) appeared on a gallery of humorous arrest photos on The Smoking Gun. The individual depicted wasn’t named, but the photo dated back to at least August 2010.