SportfishWorld © 2003, 2017 WorldWide Sportfishing :: View topic
Western Black Legged Deer Ticks



I went for a short walk yesterday, along a gravel track near Dry Creek... I was getting some much needed and doctor recommended post-op exercise (after the damn hernia repair surgery) ...







That was yesterday... Had a shower this morning and felt a soreness under my arm. There was bruising surrounded by a redness - and a little black thing in the center...



I asked the missus to have a look and after a closer inspection with glasses, we both agreed that it was a tick and that it should simply be pulled out with a pair of tweezers.







I've had many Kangaroo ticks in Australia and I've had Deer ticks in the USA before. We always just pull them out... Not this fella, he was buried right in there and now the missus has broken him off trying to get him out...







My biggest concern initially was Lyme Disease... now it's infection as well... (Lyme disease is typically characterized by a red circle around the bite)







I know that back in Australia the mosquitos can carry diseases. Here in the states the mosquitos can carry West Nile Virus and the ticks can carry Lyme disease (which is pretty serious). We get a lot of ticks and a lot of mosquitos around our house.... Then there's the poison oak growing all around us too but that's another story...



(Attached photos: ticks are arachnids, they have 8 legs, the head and the front two legs of this tick are buried under my skin. This little fella was in there having a feast!)



Cheers,



And hey, enjoy the photos!!! I went for a short walk yesterday, along a gravel track near Dry Creek... I was getting some much needed and doctor recommended post-op exercise (after the damn hernia repair surgery) ...That was yesterday... Had a shower this morning and felt a soreness under my arm. There was bruising surrounded by a redness - and a little black thing in the center...I asked the missus to have a look and after a closer inspection with glasses, we both agreed that it was a tick and that it should simply be pulled out with a pair of tweezers.I've had many Kangaroo ticks in Australia and I've had Deer ticks in the USA before. We always just pull them out... Not this fella, he was buried right in there and now the missus has broken him off trying to get him out...I know that back in Australia the mosquitos can carry diseases. Here in the states the mosquitos can carry West Nile Virus and the ticks can carry Lyme disease (which is pretty serious). We get a lot of ticks and a lot of mosquitos around our house.... Then there's the poison oak growing all around us too but that's another story...Cheers,And hey, enjoy the photos!!!



Deer-Tick-Photo-01.jpg Description: Western Black Legged Deer Tick

Under-arm Deer Tick Photo (of Bob) by SportfishBabe. Tick bite photo copyright SportfishWorld. Filesize: 18.79 KB Viewed: 10903 Time(s)





Deer-Tick-Photo-02.jpg Description: Western Black Legged Deer Tick

Under-arm Deer Tick Photo (of Bob) by SportfishBabe .... hmmm fishmaster taste good! Tick bite photo copyright SportfishWorld. Filesize: 39.47 KB Viewed: 10903 Time(s)





DEET.jpg Description: A product with DEET is recommended as a deterrent. I do have a number of bottles of this stuff but I always forget to use it. You're supposed to wear tight fitting, light colored clothes too. Problem is we LIVE in the woods so this always applies to us. Filesize: 25.89 KB Viewed: 10884 Time(s)





Deer-Tick-Photo-06.jpg Description: The morning of the first day after the tick removal. The photo doesn't show the true extent of the swelling. It is also quite painful. Copyright SportfishWorld. Filesize: 18.54 KB Viewed: 10804 Time(s)





Deer-Tick-Photo-07.jpg Description: Western Black Legged Deer Tick

Tick-Photo-07. June saved the body of the tick. I am attempting to identify it. Remember that it broke off as she tried to pull it out. Copyright SportfishWorld. Filesize: 24.82 KB Viewed: 10791 Time(s)





Deer-Tick-Photo-08.jpg Description: Western Black Legged Deer Tick

Tick-Photo-08. June saved the body of the tick. I am attempting to identify it. Remember that it broke off as she tried to pull it out. Copyright SportfishWorld. Filesize: 19.99 KB Viewed: 10791 Time(s)





Deer-Tick-Photo-11.jpg Description: Western Black Legged Deer Tick

Remaining body part of the tick in top left hand corner. Photo shows the size of the tick in comparison to a penny. Copyright SportfishWorld. Filesize: 32.11 KB Viewed: 10789 Time(s)





Deer-Tick-Photo-10.jpg Description: Tick bite at lunch-time the following day. My arm is swelling and it feels painfull. Copyright SportfishWorld. Filesize: 13.53 KB Viewed: 10786 Time(s)





Bobs-Deer-Tick-Bite-1.jpg Description: Western Black Legged Deer Tick

Under-arm Deer Tick Photo (of Bob) by SportfishBabe. It's under my skin feeding on my blood! It's saliva contains bacteria, my arm gets infected. Tick bite photo copyright SportfishWorld. Filesize: 33.82 KB Viewed: 10372 Time(s)





Bobs-Deer-Tick-Bite-2.jpg Description: Western Black Legged Deer Tick

Under-arm Deer Tick Photo (of Bob) by SportfishBabe. Remember that ticks are arachnids (8 legs). The head and two front legs are under my skin and it's feeding on my blood. Tick Bite Photo Copyright SportfishWorld. Filesize: 30.21 KB Viewed: 10372 Time(s)







_________________

Capt. Aussie Bob Fisher

SportfishWorld, LLC.



Last edited by Bob Fisher on Thu May 15, 2008 11:30 pm; edited 35 times in total