On Iraq, Kerry Appears Either Torn or Shrewd
The World | NEWS ANALYSIS/ SHOWDOWN WITH IRAQ On Iraq, Kerry Appears Either Torn or Shrewd

Kerry says his position has been consistent -- he's argued that the United States should seek as broad an international coalition as possible to confront Hussein, but not foreclose the possibility of acting alone if necessary.

In a speech last week, Kerry dramatically said to President Bush: "Mr. President, do not rush to war." But meeting with reporters this week after a critical report from the chief United Nations weapons inspector, Kerry said he could support a U.N. resolution that gave Iraq 30 days to disarm or face invasion.

Of all the Democratic presidential contenders, Kerry seems the most tortured about the possibility of a military confrontation with Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.

But virtually all of Kerry's rivals for the 2004 Democratic nomination believe he is trying to straddle the issue by shifting his emphasis at different times and for different audiences. In unison, strategists for the other leading Democrats charge that Kerry is trying to appeal to peace groups influential in the primary by criticizing Bush's approach while maintaining his general election viability by accepting the eventual use of force.

"It doesn't really pass the smell test," said a top advisor to a Democratic contender. "It sounds like he is trying to protect himself so he can point back and say I supported the military action, but signal to all the peaceniks that all this is wrong, the president has been handling it abysmally and I am really with you."

Former Vermont Gov. Howard Dean, a 2004 contender who has been among Bush's loudest critics on Iraq, said Thursday that he considered Kerry's shifts in emphasis "problematic."

Dean said he did not want to single out Kerry for criticism because he believes several of the other contenders also are sending mixed messages. But Dean added: "You can't continue to change your positions back and forth. We can't win with somebody who does that."

Not all Democrats are so critical. David Loebsack, a Democratic activist and political scientist at Cornell College in Iowa, says he is more unequivocally opposed to a possible war than Kerry. But he said he considers Kerry's "nuanced, some would say ambiguous," view representative of the ambivalence many Americans feel about the Iraqi situation.

"I think it's unfair to be highly critical of Kerry along these lines," Loebsack said. "I think he's struggling with it, but I think he is struggling with the way a lot of the American people are struggling with it."

This may all be a distant echo of the struggles Kerry went through a generation ago: He volunteered to serve in Vietnam and won a Bronze Star and a Silver Star as a naval officer, but when he returned to the United States, he became a leader among veterans opposed to the war.

Kerry's conflict about Iraq has produced, at the least, a view more shaded and more subject to variations in tone than any of his rivals.

In the Democratic field, three likely contenders have lined up most emphatically with Bush on the possible use of force against Iraq: Rep. Richard A. Gephardt (D-Mo.) and Sens. John Edwards (D-N.C.) and Joseph I. Lieberman (D-Conn.). All three voted for the congressional resolution last fall authorizing Bush to use force against Iraq with or without U.N. authorization.

At times, each has urged Bush to present the case against Iraq more aggressively to audiences at home and abroad, and to release more specific intelligence information supporting his allegations that Hussein is continuing to hide weapons of mass destruction.