Social Security History
Greenspan Commission

Appendix A

Dec. 16 / Administration of Ronald Reagan, 1981

National Commission on Social Security Reform

Executive Order 12335.

December 16, 1981

By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution of the United States of America, and to establish, in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App. I), the National Commission on Social Security Reform, it is hereby ordered as follows:

Section 1. Establishment (a) There is established the National Commission on Social Security Reform. The Commission shall be composed of fifteen members appointed or designated by the President and selected as follows:

(1) Five members selected by the President from among officers or employees of the Executive Branch, private citizens of the United States, or both. Not more than three of the members selected by the President shall be members of the same political party;

(2) Five members selected by the Majority Leader of the Senate from among members of the Senate, private citizens of the United States, or both. Not more than three of the members selected by the Majority Leader shall be members of the same political party;

(3) Five members selected by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among members of the House, private citizens of the United States, or both. Not more than three of the members selected by the Speaker shall be members of the same political party.

(b) The President shall designate a Chairman from among the members of the Commission.

Sec. 2. Functions. (a) The Commission shall review relevant analyses of the current and long-term financial condition of the Social Security trust funds; identify problems that may threaten the long-term solvency of such funds; analyze potential solutions to such problems that will both assure the financial integrity of the Social Security System and the provision of appropriate benefits; and provide appropriate recommendations to the Secretary of Health and

Human Services, the President, and the Congress.

(b) The Commission shall make its report to the President by December 31, 1982.

Sec 3. Administration. (a) The heads of Executive agencies shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide the Commission such information as it may require for the purpose of carrying out its functions.

(b) Members of the Commission shall serve without any additional compensation for their work on the Commission. However, members appointed from among private citizens of the United States may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707), to the extent funds are available therefor.

(c) The Commission shall have a staff headed by an Executive Director. Any expenses of the Commission shall be paid from such funds as may be available to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.

Sec. 4. General. (a) Notwithstanding any other Executive Order, the responsibilities of the President under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended, except that of reporting annually to the Congress, which are applicable to the Commission, shall be performed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services in accordance with the guidelines and procedures estate fished by the Administrator of General Services.

(b) The Commission shall terminate thirty days after submitting its report.

Ronald Reagan

The White House,

December 16, 1981.

[Filed with the Office of the Federal Register, 2:22 p.m., December 16, 1981]

National Commission on Social Security Reform

Appointment of the Membership. December 16, 1981

The President today announced his intention to appoint/designate the following individuals to serve on a 15-member bipartisan National Commission on Social Security Reform. Alan Greenspan will serve as Chairman.

Establishment of the Commission fulfills a pledge made by the President in September to create a bipartisan task force to work with the President and Congress to reach two specific goals:

-- To propose realistic, long-term reforms to put social security back on a sound financial footing, and

-- To forge a uncorking, bipartisan consensus so that the necessary reforms can be passed into law.

Robert A. Beck, chairman of the board and chief executive officer, Prudential Insurance Co. of America, Newark, N.J. He is a member of the President's Export Council.

Mary Falvey Fuller, vice president, finance, Shaklee Corp, San Francisco, Calf. Previously she was senior vice president and director, Blyth Eastman Dillon & Co., Inc., New York, N.Y.

Alan Greenspan, chairman and president, Townsend-Greenspan and Co., Inc., New York, N.Y. He is a member of the President's Economic Policy Advisory Board.

Alexander B. Trowbridge, president, National Association of Manufacturers, Washington, D.C. He is a member of the President's Task Force on Private Sector Initiatives.

Joe D. Waggonner, Jr., consultant, Bossier Bank & Trust Co., Plain Dealing, La. He represented the Fourth Congressional District of Louisiana during the 87th to 95th Congresses.

Senate Majority Leader Howard Baker, in consultation with Senate Minority Leader Robert Byrd, selected the following individuals to serve on the Commission:

William Armstrong, United States Senate (R-Colo.), chairman of the Subcommittee on Social Security of the Senate Finance Committee.

Robert Dole, United States Senate (R-Kans.), chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.

John Heinz, United States Senate (R-Pa.), chairman of the Senate Special Committee on Aging

Lane Kirkland, president of the American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial

Organizations.

Daniel Patrick Moynihan, United States Senate (D-N.Y.), ranking minority member of the Subcommittee on Social Security of the Senate Finance Committee.

House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill, in consultation with House Minority Leader Robert Michel, selected the following individuals to serve on the Commission:

William Archer, United States House of Representatives (R-Tex.), ranking minority member of the Subcommittee on Social Security, House ways and Means Committee.

Robert M. Ball, was Commissioner of Social Security in 1962-73. He is senior scholar, Institute of Medicine, National Academy of Sciences.

Barber Conable, United States House of Representatives (R-N.Y.), ranking minority member, House Ways and Means Committee.

Martha E. Keys, former Assistant Secretary of Health and Human Services. She served in the 94th and 95th Congresses.

Claude D. Pepper, United States House of Representatives (D-Fla.), chairman, House Select Committee on Aging.

Presidential Documents

Federal Register

Vol. 47. No. 249

Tuesday, December 28, 1982



Title 3- Executive Order 12397 of December 23, 1982

The President National Commission on Social Security Reform

By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, and specifically the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as emended (5 U.S.C. App. I), it is hereby ordered that Section 2(b) of Executive Order No. 12335, establishing the National Commission on Social Security Reform, is hereby amended to provide as follows:

"The Commission shall make its report to the President by January 15,1983."



Ronald Reagan

THE WHITE HOUSE,

December 23, 1982



{FR Doc. 82-35230

Filed 12-23-82: 1:21 pm}

Billing code 3195-01-M

THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary

For Immediate Release January 15, 1983

EXECUTIVE ORDER

NATIONAL COMMISSION ON SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM

By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, and specifically the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App. I), it is hereby ordered that Section 2(b) of Executive Order No. 12335, as amended, establishing the National Commission on Social Security Reform, is hereby further amended to provide as follows:

"The Commission shall make its report to the President by January 20, 1983."

RONALD REAGAN

THE WHITE HOUSE,

January 15, 1983.

# # # #

Executive Order 12402 (January 15, 1983)