St. Anthony's is Now Mercy Hospital South
St. Anthony’s Medical Center and Mercy officially affiliated on June 1, 2017, based on their shared mission, values and heritage as Catholic health care providers and their commitment to providing quality, compassionate care. On Oct. 1, 2018, St. Anthony’s hospital adopted the name Mercy Hospital South. Following are answers to some questions you may have about the affiliation.

When the affiliation was originally announced, it was stated that St. Anthony’s would keep its name for five years. Why was the name changed so much sooner?

In the original affiliation agreement, announced February 2017, St. Anthony’s Board of Directors was given the option to keep the St. Anthony’s name for up to five years, unless they decided to change the name sooner. When the affiliation became official that summer, Mercy leadership conducted listening sessions with community leaders, physicians and co-workers. They overwhelmingly voiced the desire to change the name to Mercy sooner. Almost one year after the affiliation was announced, St. Anthony’s Board of Directors made the decision to change the name to Mercy Hospital South effective Oct. 1, 2018, demonstrating a commitment to provide a unique, consistent and high-quality experience everywhere Mercy serves. Moving forward with the name change signifies that we stand together as a united ministry, both in mission and now in name.

The specific date for adoption of the new Mercy Hospital South name was chosen to coincide with the transition to Mercy’s electronic health record system, which supports Mercy’s ability to provide coordinated, seamless care to patients across all Mercy facilities.

St. Anthony’s has a rich heritage in the community. How will that history be preserved?

Mercy is committed to preserving St. Anthony’s rich heritage through permanent displays both inside and outside the hospital. Historical panels are now on display in the main lobby of Mercy Hospital South, highlighting important aspects of St. Anthony’s history and mission, as well as the service traditions of the Franciscan Sisters and their similarities to the Sisters of Mercy. Photos and artifacts also are being collected for potential display in future construction projects, such as the new cancer center.

Will my insurance still be accepted at Mercy?

Mercy and St. Anthony’s are generally in-network with the same insurers. To find out whether we accept your specific insurance, call Mercy Customer Service at 855-420-7900.

How do I find my physician’s information on Mercy.net?

Information about all St. Anthony’s physicians is available at mercy.net. Click here and enter your zip code in the top right corner to locate your physicians – as well as all Mercy physicians and clinics in your area and throughout the Mercy system.

Has my doctor’s office name changed?

If your physician was a member of St. Anthony’s Physician Organization (SAPO), then yes, effective Oct. 1, your physician’s office name has changed to Mercy Clinic. All physician office phone numbers remain the same. You can find out more information about your Mercy Clinic physician by clicking here.

Who will bill me for hospital services?

The St. Anthony’s Medical Center name will be on your bill for hospital services rendered before Oct. 1, 2018. The Mercy name will be on your bill for services provided on or after Oct. 1.

Can I pay my hospital or physican bill online?

Bill payments for St. Anthony's Medical Center services received prior to 9/30/18 can be paid online using this link.

Bill payments for services received after 9/30/18 can be paid online using this link.

When will my medical records become available throughout the Mercy system?

Records generated on or after Oct. 1 will be included in the Mercy electronic health record system and will be accessible to providers everywhere within Mercy’s four-state service area, including Arkansas, Oklahoma, Missouri and Kansas.

How do I log onto my patient portal(MyChart, eClinical Works Health Portal or InteliChart Patient Portal - Heart Specialty Associates)?

Effective Oct. 1, 2018, use of all three of these portals have been merged into MyMercy. This free, secure online tool and mobile app lets you request an appointment, begin an e-visit, view lab results, refill prescriptions and much more. You will need to create a new account with MyMercy. If you are looking for information about a visit prior to Oct. 1, you can still log into these. These portals will be available until Dec. 31, 2018.

What changes will I notice when I visit the Mercy Hospital South campus?

We are improving and growing to better serve you! Our exterior will feature new Mercy signage. Inside, our lobby is under renovation and many of our co-workers will be wearing Mercy attire. Elsewhere on our campus, construction of our new cancer center is underway, and some rerouting of campus roads is taking place as a result of construction and to get you where you need to go more easily.

How do I sign up for classes and events that are held at Mercy Hospital South?

To find all the classes and events held at Mercy Hospital South or other Mercy facilities in the St. Louis area, click here.

Who can I contact if I have questions?

For any questions you may have, you can contact us by phone at 314-268-4669, or through our Patient Feedback form and someone from our patient relations team will be in contact.