Donald Trump set for Valdosta visit
CLOSE Skip in Skip x Embed x Share GOP presidential front-runner Donald Trump will visit Valdosta, Georgia, on Monday, Feb. 29. Randi Atwood/Democrat

Buy Photo Donald Trump speaks during a rally last month in Dubuque, Iowa. (Photo: Democrat files)Buy Photo

Donald Trump, the billionaire developer and reality TV star turned GOP presidential front-runner, is making a campaign stop next week not far from Tallahassee.

Trump is expected to appear in Valdosta, Georgia, on Monday, Feb. 29, the day before voters in Georgia and 10 other states cast ballots in Republican primaries as part of Super Tuesday.

“I’m very, very excited,” said Michael Rosenthal of Tallahassee, who’s planning to make the roughly 90-minute drive. “I’m a huge fan of Donald Trump, and as he’s had these last two primary victories, it’s even more exciting.”

Trump on Saturday scored a decisive win in the South Carolina primary, after an earlier overwhelming victory in New Hampshire and a second place finish in Iowa. Gov. Jeb Bush dropped out of the race after finishing a distant fourth.

CLOSE Skip in Skip x Embed x Share Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump is lashing out against his rivals, and again floating a potential third-party run in the lead-up to South Carolina's first-in-the-South primary. AP

Georgia has the second highest number of delegates, with 79, at stake in the Tuesday contests, behind only Texas, with 155. Florida, which has 99 delegates, holds its primary March 15.

“I think there’s a group of our party that is excited about Donald Trump,” said Evan Power, chairman of the Leon County Republican Party. “And I’m happy that Republican candidates are coming to our area. I think we’ll see more of them in the run-up to the Florida primary.”

The rally is scheduled for 6 p.m. at the Valdosta State University athletic complex, a basketball arena that seats more than 5,300 people. VSU officials told the Tallahassee Democrat the Trump campaign rented the facility, known as The Complex, but had no other details. The Trump campaign, which set up reservations for the rally on the Eventbrite website, did not immediately respond to an email.

Contact Jeff Burlew at jburlew@tallahassee.com or follow @JeffBurlew on Twitter.

Donald Trump rally

A rally for GOP candidate Donald Trump will be held 6 p.m. Monday, Feb. 29, at The Complex at Valdosta State University, 401 Baytree Road. Doors open at 4 p.m. People can register to attend by going to www.eventbrite.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1TAhQaa