Syracuse Trump rally: At least 10 protesters ejected
SYRACUSE, N.Y. -- Chris Blessing of Skaneateles was in the front row at the Donald Trump rally, with a sign and a Bernie Sanders shirt hidden from view.

When Trump took the stage at the OnCenter, Blessing pulled out the sign and yelled, "Donald Trump's a con artist and has you all fooled!"

The sign said, "Trump funded Hillary in '04 and '08."

Blessing, 24, was among the first of at least 10 protesters who were escorted out of the rally by Trump's security guards and Syracuse police.

"I've never protested before in my life, but I've never felt so compelled to exercise my First Amendment rights," Blessing said. "Everything he says is predicated on lies and racism."

Blessing kept the sign tucked in his pants and under his button-up shirt. He didn't want Trump's supporters to tip off security before the candidate took the stage, he said.

Laura Jaffee and Hasmik Djoulakian, both Syracuse University graduate students, waited with Trump supporters to get inside.

"It was hard nodding along for three hours and to be discreet, to not get kicked out," she said.

But once they were inside, there was an announcement before Trump arrived for his supporters to point out protesters in the crowd.

A pre-recorded announcement asked supporters not to place their hands on protesters, but to chant "Trump, Trump" to alert security they were needed.

After Jaffee and Djoulakian were outed, Trump supporters took their signs and security guards escorted them out, the two protesters said.

"It's important to interrupt things like this," Jaffee said. "Trump isn't just Trump, he's a symbol of white supremacy, colonialism, sexism and homophobia. That was so clear with the racist, sexist, homophobic comments we heard today."

Evan Weissman and Erin Murphy were the next to be escorted out.

"We waited for the opportune time to say, 'We are not welcoming of hate in Central New York,'" said Weissman, of Syracuse. The rally seemed poorly attended, he said. And he refuted Trump's claim that thousands of supporters were lined up outside waiting to get in.

On her way out, Murphy chanted over and over: "Hey, ho! Donald Trump has got to go!"

Protestors popping up like whack-a-mole for #Trump in #syracuse A video posted by Devin Dwyer (@devindwyerabc) on Apr 16, 2016 at 9:40am PDT

T-shirts, signs and more from Trump rally