FAMU Zing!s

Gerald Ensley looked like Andy Gibb!



Thank you for surrounding ball field at Messer park with a jail, and 2 shelters. The half time shows are very entertaining!



Two killed by sword at Swedish elementary school by man wearing Darth Vader mask! Liberals demand banning of all Darth Vader masks and non-gay versions of Princess Leia action figure.



Would have high school kids be lessed tired, stressed and bored in school if they had been allowed to be tired, stressed and bored in competetive sports? Participation trophey version of jet lag?



Weather models failed to forecast the monstrous overnight growth of Hurricane Patricia but did predict that the whole mess would be a result of global warming cooling climate change and limited parking.



Don't get all tingly, Jan Drew, but even sworn uniformed police officers have no obligation to defend you or any other particular person unless they obligate themselves in some fashion.



FSU chooses to require their president to live on campus; replaces old president's house with a new mansion. FAMU chooses to require their president to live on campus. Does some restoration of the old president's house. Cost vs. cost, please.



FSU grad thinking about walking the campus would like a map of the "free speech zone" so if I happen to hear a sneeze and say "Bless you!" I won't get arrested for verbal trespassing, promoting religion, flinging microaggressions or targeting the sensativities of what today passes for a "young adult." Whan I was enrolled, free speech was "allowed" everywhere.



Ben Carson said he opposes a Muslim as president but, more precisely, no more Muslims as president.



Russia is pushing in the back door of Europe, ISIS is running amok in the middle east, China is "creating" Chinese territory in the South China Sea, and Obama is vetoing our defense spending bill?



I am a proud Gator fan in Seminole country. I wear my Gator shirt, my show my Gator flag. I am not however a "Seminole hater". I am happy for each Seminole victory, whatever sport, unless it is against UF. I am continually saddened by the vitriol expressed between the two universities. I don't understand why we cannot recognize that these are sports competitions - not wars. There are so many more serious issues in our world.



Don't know what kind of two-step Will Dance is dancing, but he did NOT start his law enforcement career as an investigator at FSUPD.



Bulletproof vests? T'ain't no such thing -- if I know what type of vest you are wearing I can find a bullet that will zip right through it.



Biden bowed out after Debbie Watsername Schultz told him the DNC did not want any sane candidates on their ballots.



Within 3 hours of your reading this Zing!, someone will be shot in Chicago, the COT's role model in stopping "gun violence." And, no, banning Zing!s or reading is not the answer to the problem.



Over 600 Banghazi security requests made before attack and Hillary knew nothng about them? Right. That's what we call a "knew or should have known" situation and cries MALFEASANCE!



With as many presidents as FAMU has had in the last few years, there is only one constant--the BOT. Either they don't know how to do their job or they make poor choices. Either way, they appear incompentent



If Obama's "I Killed Bin Laden--The War Is Over" 2012 reelection finale wasn't just weeks away, would Hillary have told us, the victim's families, and the world, the truth about Benghazi?



6:20 am bus crash! Children should not have to go to school that early.



I'm not concerned about the White House, but I would like to clean out that septic tank we call Congress.



I thought about paying big bucks for one of the blockbuster movies today, but with the Elmira & Rufus showdown, I think I'll save my hard-earned money and catch an in-person, homegrown movie for free.



Isn't that just like a bully to stir up trouble and then have a good old-fashioned seat and watch the subsequent fireworks?



Most bullies cause a bunch of confusion, then take their toys and leave the game for others to clean up.



The "Elmira and Rufus Show" is better than anything I could've found on cable tv.



Come on tallahassee support FAMU support Mangum



As a dedicated public servant, I will always bow to the "will of the people" meaning those who "will" slip me bribes under the table.



FAMU Chairman Rufus will NEVER be removed by Scott since he is a Republican and is only carrying the Guv's orders.



Interesting that the Governor favors corporate welfare payments to corporations that don't need the money, to payments for services to underachieving individuals?



Re: The Benghazi Hearings. Apparently Truth, like beauty, is in the eye of the beholder. The Presidency is not an "entitled" office, no matter how long you have been around the White House.



I am a elderly white man, who follows both FAMU and FSU and wants them both to succeed. Please fix the problems at FAMU so that we can be proud.



Rufus Montgomery: Good riddance to bad rubbish! Hopefully, Kelvin will quickly follow suit and Dr. Mangum can get on with the business of building a better FAMU!!



Go figure. Us mean spirited, bigoted, racist, intolerant Republicans are pushing Ben Carson to the top of the polls. Can't wait for him to take on Shrill Hill in a debate.



Is it just because she's a woman, or is it because she's NOT Al Lawson?



Our soldier did'nt get killed in Iraq during combat. According to SPOX he was just helping out. No new dead USA combatants in Iraq under Obama?



Most men who have no military background love Hilliary. Black lives matter more than GI lives?



So disappointing. They did not take Hilliary out in hand cuffs.. Hilliary Betraydus.



Wow, you endorsed NAI TALCOR. Should have been an editorial..



Didn't see the "Paid advertisement" disclaimer on NAI TALCOR advertisement. What gives?



What does it take at FAMU for the Board of Governors to act? Clearly, the FAMU BOT is totally out of control.



If Rufus Montgomery were Pope, he would only expect the FAMU President to kiss his ring.



FAMU BOT micro-managing? Isn't it micro-MISmanaging? No university president can operate effectively under these conditions.



Man terrozies Swedish school with sword. Apparently Sweden is not civilized because, according to critics, the US is the only civilized country where that happens.



No need for another national search if President Mangum leaves. Kevin Lawson's brother Al is waiting in the wings.



FAMU BOT....we have met the enemy and it is us!



Rufus is a Doofus



Just make Lawson president and the FAMU BOT will shut up.



Does anyone else see the strings that Al Lawson is pulling at FAMU?



Rufus is a dufus!



Too much face time with Hillary caused me not to sleep.



Clinton seemed a female Albus Dumbledore being interrogated at the Ministry of Magic by Draco Malfoy and cohorts. She had a few Defense against the Dark Arts defenders. Dark Arts defenders.



Hillary Clinton, be aware. What is happening to Elmira Mangum at FAMU will happen to you if you become the U.S. president.



Do I remember correctly that a Mr. Lawson applied as a presidental canidate at FAMU. Same family ? Different family?



Disgusted with what's going on in Tallahassee. You know what needs to be done on election day!



Scott, I don't know what favor Rufus has done for you, but please find your balls and rectify this situation. Elmira is a strong , smart woman. Let her do her job.



Beware. The machinations of the FAMU board are all aimed at bringing in Al Lawson as the next president.



Okay then; Either Hilary has a racked brain or her brain is a wrack.



Eight congressional committees investigate Benghazi and two investigate 9/11--seems fair.



FSU Flying High Circus, FAMU Flying Low Circus



Headlines: Jeb thinks super girl is hot. Dumb and dumber.



Etters should have mentioned why Pierre is no longer at the Democrat; goes to character



It's time for John Thrasher and FSU to take over control and management of FAMU.



Gov. Scott, please do something helpful for FAMU and replace the entire Board of Regents.

False Start University



Here's hoping the woman who killed the female lactating black bear has nightmares about what's she's done. So brave of you to kill a nursing mother!



Here's your oxymoron for the day: rap artist.



If we had to lose then at least it was to a smart ACC school...



It ain't over til the fat lady sings. Fsu off key tonight.



What's going to happen to the Noles when they play the ranked teams Clemson and Florida after losing to a 2 and 5 unranked team? Jimbo should give back a huge chunk of his compensation for that sorry excuse of coaching the Noles to a loss against a 2 and 5 team. The Noles should be dropped completely out of the top 25 after losing to a 2-5 team.



Can't wait for FSU to play a ranked team.



Jimbo only has one rusher? Who is the coach in waiting?



Coker envy?



Well, how about that. The team we always suspected was the real FSU football team finally showed Saturday night. Luck can only carry you so far.



I think it's pretty obvious why Notre Dame didn't want him.



I guess I missed the election that Gil Ziffer was elected to the School Board - if the City gets involved in schools, oh my!



Way to go Corey Clark, you jinxed Golson, first turnover!!! All your fault!



NYC has Tavern on the Green while TLH has Edison on the Cascade - both are out of reach for the majority paying for the dreams of elitist Blueprint Visionaries.



Jeb! said his favorite super hero is Supergirl so he's for Hillary too.



Don Gaetz can never be held accountable for his devious deeds as he has been anointed to sit on the right hand of the Big Guy.



Florida's executive and legislative branches of the 21st century have been the most corrupt and unethical in all of state history.



There will be no change in FAMU's BOT tactics since Acting Chair Lawson is only a clone of Roofus and an ally of the Guv.



Hillary lies about the video, emails, 600 pleas for security in Benghazi and adoring sycophants cheer her on.



RE: Andy Marlette's cartoon in today's Democrat; Alabama will never allow bear hunting as long as long-time Coach "Bear" Bryant remains an iconic figure in that State's history.



Paul Ryan thinks he has the support of the majority of members of the major factions in the House. Surely he's aware that congressmen have short little spans of attention.



The Bengazi committeeman, Jim Jordan of Ohio, is a jerk trying to act like a macho man.



What? Bill Proctor questioning Mangum's integrity?



UM... If you don't fire your coach today, your going to miss a "Golden" opportunity! The vote is in... Yeahs- 56; Nays- 0!



I imagine had it been your son or husband who had been tortured and murdered in Benghazi then you wouldn't find some pointed questions directed to the person responsible for his safety so disturbing.



Maybe it's time to payback the NRA and Game Commission with a Florida constitutional amendment prohibiting "recreational bear hunting".



The Inquisition: "Madam Secretary, why did you accept emails from a close personal friend on your personal email account?"



After watching the Democratic members of the Benghazi committee practically anoint Hillary to sainthood I am pretty sure she would have jotted down the names of any of them who had asked her a serious or critical question for future reference.



Benghazi investigative committee questions to Hillary Clinton: "Are you still beating your mother? YES or NO!" "When did you stop beating your mother? EXACT DATE AND TIME?"



Football player names don't get any better than the U of Pittsburghs field goal kicker whose last name is Blewit.



Publix has been running a special on Pirate corn this week. It cost a buck-an-ear.



Attention FAMU: Lawson would NOT be a good board chairman as he wanted Dr. Mangum 's job before she got it and he STILL wants it !



Don't worry St. Marks Stone Crab Festival. Neither my dog nor I will ever be attending your festival again.



How fun to drive an hour and a half to the St. Marks Stone Crab Festival only to be told no pets allowed THIS year.



Don't blame me. I wanted Mitt Romney to be the president of FAMU. I recall he wanted to be the president of something or other.



Do the FBI's active investigations into suspected supporters of home-grown extremists include persons donating to the Ben Carson for President campaign? Or joining the NRA? Or baking right-wing cupcakes?



From walking away from an already won voter intimidation case against the black panthers, to having the first Attorney General held in criminal contempt by Congress, to having a politically corrupt DOJ investigate a politically corrupt IRS, to having officials plead the Fifth, the standards for justice in the USA have never been lower than under Barack Obama.



Um, not to quibble with "facts" in the Democrat, but there is no "sixty days in prison" penalty relating to bear hunt violations. Jail perhaps, not prison.



City Commissioners have rebranded the "Special Entertainment Areas" as "Mixed Use Areas" in their new proposed noise ordinance--these huge swaths of Tallahassee are the death knoll of neighborhoods.



Why did the City form a noise ordinance-crafting committee if they had no intentions of using the committee's expertise?



Hillary, the Teflon Queen, still unrepentent and unpunished for multiple Federal Felony crimes. The Resident protects his tools.



Need a prufreeder? I kin spel "Simenolls" iff'n ya spots me tha "S" and the next 8 leters.



Apparently the FAMU BOT has no idea of the protocols of being a BOT.



What restrooms do gender neutral students use?



With all the money spent on renovating the old building to become the Edison, you have to recoup the money somewhere and pay the investors, but don't put that bill on our plates. Everyone loves good quality food, but the cost just doesn't measure up for what you get. This is not a big city with high paying jobs, it's not affordable.



Bear hunting over in one week. Protesters will multiply. Rat hunting starts.



Rufus, never underestimate the power of a woman scorned.



The confederate flag is offensive. The sole purpose for displaying it is to offend!



He was a Scott appointee. Really, did you expect a different result?



I suspect that those 100 anonymous holders of bear permits are affiliated with law enforcement. You probably won't find their names and addresses on the tax rolls either. Simply said, it is protecting those who protect us.



School administrators reject a teacher bonus program that rewards bringing innovation to the classroom. Surveys show that many of our students are bored in class. Notice something in common?



So, when the bear hunt protestors finished, did they go put down a hamburger or did they opt to slay a chicken sandwich?



Ensley may have left the dog but here's still some fleas to go.



She lied, four men died. She played fast and loose with sensitive classified information. Nothing presidential about her.



So Kevin Lawson, brother of former state Senator Al Lawson who expressed interest in the FAMU president's position will become acting chair of the FAMU BOT. Wonder who he will select for the next president if he can force Mangum out?



I there a bag limit on socialists?



FAMU's Vice-Chair Kelvin Lawson upon assuming the acting chair position "...and create some new rules of engagement." Military speak for who can shoot who.



FAMU Board Acting Chair Kelvin Lawson is the brother of former State Sen. Al Lawson, who expressed interest in the job Dr. Mangum has. Ah, transparency!!



MADD didn't donate to the incumbent.



Americans aren't going to replace a divisive leader on race with a divisive leader on sex unless the "progressives" progress.



Shill. political BS.



Shills. The chill of the political season.



State of Florida health care for me $641/month. Legislators, still paying about $50 for your whole families?



An atheist in Lake County wants satanic prayer said before meetings. The enemy of my enemy is my friend describes the atheist and Satanist.



Rick Scott: The Governor who killed Smokey the Bear.



Houses decorated a month before Halloween are creepy.



Dalvin, please no more videos. You degrade my degree. Ya know!



If all the people that don't make a living wage will vote, Bernie Sanders will win.



An atheist's belief lies in the grave and Tallahassee has so many interesting graveyards.



Seems to be a lot of SEC and ESPN hate around here. The truth, like my ex, is a bitch.



My family has been in North Florida for over 200 years, were slave owners, fought for the South, and If the KKK flew the British, Spanish, or French flag, I'd want it gone too.



Republicans on the Benghazi committee asked Sidney Blumenthal more than 270 questions about his business dealings, more than 160 questions about his relationship with the Clinton's, more than 50 questions on the Clinton Foundation. On the attack, 18 questions, 4 on security there and zero on U.S. presence and the ambassador and personnel. Boy, they're really getting to the bottom of this.



Gee, Gerald, maybe if you hadn't been such a little idiot growing up, you might have learned some manners and responsibility from your parents.



Headlines: October 14, 2023, Benghazi Committee Demands President Clinton's Impeachment Based On Testimony of Linda Tripp. Intern denies allegations.



Mr. Roberts, you imply that serving in the Confederate army was serving in the armed forces; well, yes serving the armed forces of an enemy of the U.S.

Hell, we have 5000 manatees, when do we get to start shooting them?



Mayor Andrew Gillum, Representative Alan William and other politicians, stay out of FAMU's business and run your own respective jobs - - - city and state. If FAMU teachers and administrators not hire by the president have not come out in full support of her, there may be reasons.



It is easier to kill 300 bears than to teach pigs to secure their trash.



Sorry our Noles lost, but Tech deserved the win, and, son of a gun -- the sun still came up Sunday morning!!



The Freedom Caucus (Tea Party) are the real RINO's !



From one atheist to another, Godspeed Gerald Ensley, Godspeed!



Is it safe for me to bring my bear suit out of the closet again?



Whatcha wanna bet...Ted Cruz has a picture of Joe McCarthy hanging on his office wall.



Fantastic crab festival and no dog poop to step in. Thanks.



Fracking companies think they'll be able to "fill in" the holes after exploring for oil in Florida? The land of eternal pot holes and sink holes?



Did I hear it right that papa & mama bush recommend that that JEB announce that Dick Cheney is his Vice President running mate?



"Tallahassee Lassie": A woman who can vanish a split second before her husband starts talking.



The Consumers for Smart Solar amendment folks would make Joseph Goebbels very proud.



Just because a fracking well is on one person's property, doesn't mean the toxic chemicals will not move underground to lakes and streams or even to the neighbor's water supply.



After reading about the misbehavior in Wakulla County, it is so obvious that both Creel and Dance are above the law.



That God-forsaken place, Texas, is now sending its damaging rains to LA, MS, AL, and FL. Thanks!



Now Ensley is gone... Then there were none.



Ask the folks in NY and PA how they like fracking?



As long as the Guv's boys, Roofus and Lawson, remain on the FAMA BOT nothing positive will happen.



If our government officials didn't listen to the 75% of respondents against the bear hunt, what makes you think they will listen to those who oppose fracking?



Heard Representative Graham was going to do a work day with the Game Commission at a bear hunt check station, followed by joining protesters ...the North Florida Way!



It's sad that politics has become an inherited trade...and we the voters are to responsible for enabling undeserved dynasties.



Hey, Jimbo. The play you are looking for is 54 Wham.



Water coolers around town just won't be the same with out you Gerald. Thanks for all you have done and have a great retirement!



...and now Ensley is gone.



At least bear hunters won't be able to miss work for sport.



I am an atheist, and I oppose neither Satan nor your deity. I simply don't recognize that either exists outside of the realm of fiction.



Note to FSU fans - go hire Muschamp and you can feel like this all season.



Rubio explaining why he keeps missing Senate votes reminds me of students trying to explain why they didn't do their homework.



School administrators and teachers have enough difficulty trying to keep schools safe and orderly and educate the students. They do not need the newspaper and ACLU telling them what to do!



Say it loud! Say it proud! "we're number 17" and are lucky to be in the top 25!



Am I "anti-car" if I support testing and licensing drivers, and registering cars?



Did little old Florida State lose a football game? Shucks! Signed the Famu Rattlers



Philip Stuart writes an excellent column. Please stop the proofreaders and editors from making him look stupid: "to tight" or too tight?



After losing to GT, the Noles only fall to 17th in the AP poll; they should have fallen out of sight for that stinker.



Tallahassee-the only place where you can't get a good looking date unless you're a high school or pimple faced college kid!



Where's Coker when you need him? Oh, that's right, he's winning games for ALABAMA.



Never heard an atheist oppose (or support) Satan. Never heard an atheist oppose or support Santa Claus, leprechauns, or the tooth fairy either.



You copied off me Gerald. I had back surgery and retired. Doing fine now. Welcome to the retiree club.



I prefer to buy liquor at a stand alone liquor store where my pastor doesn't shop.



Fsu coach Jimbo deserved to loose after the nose to nose blistering he apparently gave his Quarter Back on National Tv. Jimbo is a poor looser



When Rick Scott said he would create jobs, he failed to mention that he would use millions of taxpayer's money to attract (or bribe) companies to move here from other states.



David Mica (Big Oil Spokesman) says it is "irresponsible to have concerns about basic science research..." when it supports big oil's agenda to drill/frack in Florida. But he ignores the environmental impact Science.



Bethune-Cookman University recently honored people like Rick Scott. Slick Rick is on his way to buying a senate seat.



Rick Scott made his fortune in Texas (Hospital Chain). Now a Texas Oil company wants to drill and/or frack for oil in north Florida. Is there a Texas Connection?



Forget "Slick Willie." Now comes "Slickier Hillary."



The biggest unanswered question: Will fracking impact bear hunting?



Looks like Jimbo is going to have to use the big salary he built up in the fat years to make it through the thin years coming up. Jameis is leading the NFL quarterbacks in one statistic: highest percentage of interceptions per attempts--4.6 percent.



Effective immediately I ban myself from Bobby Dodd Stadium. I also was at the goal line fumble which ended in the same result.



" I believe the primary role of the state is to teach, train and raise children. Parents have a secondary role. " - Hillary Clinton, "It Takes A Village"



The flight into Tallahassee isn't expensive, it's the flight out.



Never heard Satan oppose atheists. Not once.



How can an atheist oppose Satan, demons, angels, fairies, or even God, if he doesn't believe these mythical figures exist?



My daughter says I am a "curmudgeon" but I think Gerald wins the prize for that category.



If your legislator votes for guns on Florida campuses, then (1) send your kid out of state to college, and (2) vote that moron out of office.



I see where DeVoe Moore is getting into the pot game. Next dozen editorials: why the state is over-regulating the pot industry.



Can we please edit out the feel-good paternalism. The Roberts family owned black people. Period.



Jeans and a t-shirt have not always been gender neutral. Pants are only a relatively recent attire acceptable for women. Time to break down all barriers or return to the past?



Wow. When Corey Clark jinxes a team the result is REALLY ugly.



We like mud bogging, four wheeling, bass boating, stock car racing, and driving big trucks, but we don't care for any of that drilling, fracking, or pumping oil around here.



I hope that the coach at the U. of Michigan offers his shoulder for Jimbo to cry on.



Nole fans are the greatest to sit through 2 years of nail biters. The streak is over. Time to start another!



The score: bullying men, 0; strong women 1.



Yogi was right. It ain't over till it's over.



Looks like Georgia Tech picked the right team for home coming!



Finally, we can go back to being a normal football team.



Dalvin Cook was the most interesting man in Tallahassee. Stay thirsty, my friend.



The Democrat was never able to replace Ron Hartung, and they won't be able to replace Gerald Ensley.



Think our offense needs some more iron Noles!



Why would an Atheist "oppose Satan"? He doesn't exist anymore than God does.



Jimbo, it was not a hiccup, it was a huge burp.



"FSU stunned by ending at Tech". Great story but what was the final score ?!



That's because we don't believe in supernatural beings like Satan. Not at all.



Note to Rufus - You were chairman of a board, not a dictator to a board. Get over it. The difference between the Michigan debacle and the FSU debacle - Michigan was trying to preserve a lead over the number 7 team, and FSU was playing catch up to a 2-5 team. So we need a study on fracking? Just look at states where it is already allowed, and decide if the money from big oil is worth Florida's future.



Everybody wants to schedule the Seminoles for Homecoming.



The Miami Hurricanes have gone from Fear the U to smell the phew. It truly is a Golden Era.



The Republicans must think Hillary Clinton will eventually admit spooks ran guns through Benghazi to the Muslim Brotherhood.



Will it take Ensley as long to un-retire as it took Cotterell?



Please bring back the quote at the top of the Zing! column. Sometimes that was the best line on the page!



My favorite football team UF and whoever just beat FSU!!



I do not believe our nation's founding fathers intended that Amendment 2 interfere with Amendment 1 of the Constitution, or anything else "for what it's worth!"



A Zinger wrote, "FSU will strengthen its 2016 football schedule by adding the Idaho College of Gynecology and the Institute of Automotive Technology." Don't dis IAT, they'll run you over.



If Tech keeps playing like that, they may even become bowl eligible.

Click to submit your Zing! atTallahassee.com/zing. (Note: Zing!s on this blog are unedited for spelling, grammar and style.)

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1S63BWX