Reporter refuses to apologize for texting during National Anthem: 'It's 2015'
A reporter is under fire for texting during the National Anthem and refusing to apologize.

Helena Andrews, who writes the Reliable Source gossip column for The Washington Post, was caught on video using her cell phone as the "Star Spangled Banner" played Saturday at the 2015 White House Correspondents dinner. Andrews appeared to be typing with her head down, glued to her smartphone's screen, while other attendees stood solemnly with their hands over their hearts until the patriotic song finished.

"Disrespectful & incredibly stupid to play on cell during anthem in front of president #WHCD," one Twitter user complained.

"Lady you had one job and that was be respectful to the national anthem and you couldn't handle that #WHCD," another tweeted.

"National Anthem etiquette is quite simple. Stand up, remove your hat, put your hand over your heart, shut your mouth, & face the flag," a third person wrote.

Andrews later confirmed it was her, but insisted she was taking notes for her job and not texting. She also claimed it happened at dinnertime, not during the National Anthem.

"Apparently someone saw me on TV 'texting' during the dinner. FTR (For The Record) I was taking notes. On my phone. Because it's 2015," she tweeted.

According to Fox News, her refusal to apologize angered critics even more.

"@helen_andrews Have respect and wait 3 minutes to take 'notes'. People died for you," one responded.

"Your snarky reference to 'because it's 2015' makes you look worse; doesn't matter what year it is, patriotism still important!" another tweeted.

Andrews and her newspaper employers have not commented further on the incident.

The annual White House Correspondents' Association dinner, in its 101st year, has become known as "Nerd Prom" for bringing together celebrities, athletes and politicians together. Pres. Barack Obama used the event to crack jokes, calling it the night "Washington celebrates itself [because] somebody's got to do it."

The Daily Mail reports attendees at the star-studded affair included Donald Trump, Bradley Cooper, Naya Rivera, Alan Rickman Katie Couric, and "Modern Family" stars Ty Burrell and Jesse Tyler Ferguson. Keegan-Michael Key also made an appearance as Obama's "anger translator" Luther, from a "Key & Peele" skit.