The Arch of Triumph of Palmyra is recreated in London - 1,800 years after it was built
The decision to build it in Egyptian marble – which they claim will be close to the original in appearance – was also a late one. But an arch here or there is barely the half of it. Michel says he is ‘in discussions right now with folks in Aleppo about reconstructing the minaret of the mosque there’.

He hopes to get into Palmyra – now that Isil has been driven out by Russian-backed Syrian government forces – to begin reconstruction work and, more grandiosely, has already had talks with regional governments about developing a ‘post-conflict plan for the Middle East’.

Trafalgar Square, then, is the display case, and the arch within it ‘proof of our competency to do these things’. Meanwhile, the archaeology establishment has been watching all this not knowing whether to applaud or shake their heads.

‘What I approve of is collecting a record of and documenting vast numbers of sites,’ said Tim Schadla-Hall, reader in public archaeology at University College London, referring to the Million Image Database project.

The replica arch is less to his liking or comprehension. ‘It seems to me it’s a bizarre expenditure of money, possibly with worthy but misinformed aims, to promote something which isn’t a real past, in an entirely reproduced form. I don’t get it; I find it very, very odd. I’ve got better uses for the money.’

As for the IDA itself, ‘I really hope they succeed,’ said Daniel Pett,who runs digital public archaeology projects at the British Museum, ‘but at the moment people are slightly sceptical.’

World of digital archaeology

The IDA is a not-for-profit organisation, which describes itself on its website as a joint venture between Harvard, the University of Oxford and the government of the UAE. It has an impressive advisory board, chaired by Mary Beard.

The Oxford/Harvard claim is based largely on the involvement of individuals. For example, Karenowska, a physicist, is a fellow of Magdalen, and many of the other technical staff are also from Oxford. The UAE provides funding only ‘on a project-specific basis’.