Buying a car in Denmark: even a banger costs a fortune
Having suffered frostbite and fury at the mercy of infrequent buses and trains, the time has come to get a car. My sole experience of vehicle ownership to date is the second-hand Toyota Starlet I bought from an aunt in 1997. I don’t think she struck a particularly hard bargain and there may even have been a tin of Marks & Spencer’s travel sweets thrown in. With a scant-to-woeful knowledge, I set off in search of a motor on Saturday.

This is my first mistake. From noon on the sixth day, most of Denmark shuts down: shops board-up, car parks empty and pedestrians scatter. I wonder whether there’s been some sort of nuclear disaster until we bump into a fleeing neighbour who explains that weekends are ‘family time’. Trading on Saturday afternoons and Sundays became legal here in October 2012. Copenhagen shopkeepers embraced the change straight away but it’s yet to hit Jutland (ditto decent hairdressers and Indian food). Strangely, car dealerships have always been allowed to open on Sundays. “That’s just how we do it,” the Danglish-speaking girl in the local shop tells me: “Saturday for family, the Sabbath for cars.”

In common with everything else in Denmark, motoring isn’t cheap. New cars are taxed at 180 per cent and the impact trickles down to used car prices. This means that a modest second-hand saloon suddenly becomes an indicator of extortionate wealth and most people drive matchboxes.

Inhaling a heady combination of pleather and Little Trees air-fresheners at my first forecourt on Sunday, I tell a salesman my budget. He chuckles, good-humouredly first of all, then gives me a look that says: "Yes, but what’s your real budget?" In the next showroom we wait for half an hour, unbothered by a single salesperson, as they drink lattes and surf the net. The third isn’t much better and my husband can’t help enquiring whether showroom personnel are always so “relaxed”. A short, smiley man, with ridiculously long eyelashes, grins.

“Ha! You have not been in Denmark long!” he waggles his finger. “We don’t get paid commission here so we leave you to it. I’ll be in the office if you need me.” He gives us a wave and returns to a game of Solitaire.

Our price threshold rules out every car in the place but two. The first looks as though several large dogs have recently mated in it before gnawing off the gear stick. The second looks like a cross between a mobility scooter and a tomato. I concertina myself into its immovable driver’s seat, so high up that I feel like an umpire at a tennis match.

Eyelash man passes by and pats the bonnet affectionately: “This is a great choice for the elderly or those with mobility problems. Test drive?”

“You don’t want to come with me? Take my details? Or my husband?” (I was once left at a garage in Kent as collateral by my other half and am ready to return the favour.)

“Nooo! I trust you.”

After a put-put around the block I find that a) the thing goes and b) my lofty driving position means that I can look down on other motorists. I say I’ll take it and Eyelash man welcomes us back into his office.

“Tea? Coffee? Jeans?” I wonder whether something has been lost in translation until he holds up a paper bag, overflowing with denim. “My wife just went to the USA. I got her to bring some back to sell on.” He unfurls some Simon Cowell-style high-waisted 501s “These are super cool. I have them in all sizes….”

“Er, no, I’m OK, thanks.”

“Bootleg?”

“No, thank you.”

He folds them back up, shaking his head and adding wistfully: “Excellent rivets.”

Once we’ve established that it’s just the car we’re after, rather than his more lucrative sideline, our dealer works briskly. He hands me a document in Danish. I can’t read it but see several more zeros than expected.

“What’s this for?” I whisper, feeling the blood drain from my face.

“Oh, there’s also snow tyres.” It’s snowing hard outside and winter tyres, though not mandatory, are advised. Forking out a further 5,000 DK (roughly £580) for wheels that won’t send me headfirst into a ditch seems like money well spent. “This is for the number plate,” he points at another line.

“It’s not included?”

“No. We use different plates each time with numbers and letters generated at random. Otherwise everyone would know how old your car is!”

Top Gear fans, look away now: appearing humble and giving the impression of equality is so important in Denmark that the authorities don’t want anyone judged by their car.

“There’s also registration tax, green tax, countervailing tax….”

I feel a cold sweat creeping over me, so swiftly sign and leave.

Over the next few days, I discover that the car rattles if it goes above 60km an hour, makes a high pitched-beeping noise unless I have Danish public service radio turned up full blast, and has windscreen wipers that just move dirt around.

But it’s mine. The adventures start here.

Helen Russell is a British journalist and the former editor of MarieClaire.co.uk. Follow her on Twitter @MsHelenRussell

Read the rest of our expat guest columns here