Cecil Rhodes statue to remain at Oxford University after alumni threaten to withdraw millions
Oxford University’s statue of Cecil Rhodes is to stay in place after furious donors threatened to withdraw gifts and bequests worth more than £100 million if it was taken down, The Daily Telegraph has learnt.

The governing body of Oriel College , which owns the statue, has ruled out its removal after being warned that £1.5m worth of donations have already been cancelled, and that it faces dire financial consequences if it bows to the Rhodes Must Fall student campaign.

“The overwhelming message we have received has been in support of the statue remaining in place."

A leaked copy of a report prepared for the governors and seen by this newspaper discloses that wealthy alumni angered by the “shame and embarrassment” brought on the 690-year-old college by its own actions have now written it out of their wills.

The college now fears a proposed £100m gift - to be left in the will of one donor - is now in jeopardy following the row.

The donors were astonished by a proposal to remove a plaque marking where Rhodes lived, and to launch a six-month consultation over whether the statue of the college’s biggest benefactor should be taken down.

But Oriel College confirmed in a statement to the Telegraph: “Following careful consideration, the College’s governing body has decided that the statue should remain in place.”

Photo: Reuters/Mike Hutchings

A small but vocal group of student activists had argued that the image of Rhodes, whose legacy still funds Rhodes scholarships for overseas students, should be toppled because the Victorian imperialist was a racist.

Oriel's agreement to enter into discussion about the future of the statue triggered a wider row about free speech in universities and whether students need to be protected from offence.

Oriel has now been panicked into cancelling the proposed six-month consultation and the plaque marking the building where he lived while he was a student at Oriel will also stay, but both will have an accompanying sign providing historical “context”.

At a meeting on Wednesday the governing body was told that because of its ambiguous position on the removal of the statue, “at least one major donation of £500,000” that was expected this year has been cancelled.

In addition, a “potential £750,000 donor” has stopped responding to messages from the college, and several alumni have written to Oriel to say “they are disinheriting the college from their wills”.

One of those who has already cancelled their legacy was going to leave a “seven figure sum” and the college is aware that “another major donor is furious with the College… whose legacy could be in excess of £100m”.

The report warns that there will now "almost certainly" be "one or two redundancies" in its Development Office team because of the collapse in donations. And it has cancelled an annual fundraising drive that should have taken place in April. The report also warns that Oriel's development office could now make an operating loss of around £200,000 this year.

Sean Power, Oriel’s development director and the man in charge of fundraising, told the governors in a report that the college was unprepared for the national and international condemnation of the suggestion that the statue might be removed, described by the classicist Professor Mary Beard as a “completely barking” plan to “erase” history.

Mr Power wrote that: “The overall reaction has been significant, much more than any in the College predicted. It has also been overwhelmingly negative of the College’s position and its actions.

“The likely long-term impact on development and fundraising, assuming our current course of action regarding the statue, is potentially extremely damaging…our alumni do not need many excuses not to give, and for many this will be such an excuse for years to come.

“The current situation is generating a media storm that is right at the limits of what the University can deal with, and support us in.”

Cecil Rhodes statue

Paul Yowell, the University’s Associate Professor of Law, told the governing body that it was unlikely they could obtain legal permission to remove the statue, and that as a charity the college is obliged to “avoid undertaking activities that might place the charity’s endowment, funds, assets or reputation at undue risk”.

The college’s governing body, led by its Provost Moira Wallace, also gave up its plan to remove the plaque of Rhodes. A descendant of Alfred Mosley, who erected the plaque in 1906, “does not believe it is ours to remove”, a confidential memo to the governing body said. It warns that “it is possible she will become involved in the application to have the plaque listed”.

When the college learnt The Daily Telegraph was about to publish its story, the college’s Provost Moira Wallace wrote to all the college’s students.

• Weird statues of the famous, including Cecil Rhodes

In her letter, seen by the Telegraph, she confirmed the decision to keep the statue but insisted the reasons for doing so were “principled”, but didn’t elaborate on what those principles were.

She encouraged the students to “talk to us about any concerns you have”, adding: “Above all we want to re-state our commitment to being at the forefront of the drive to make Oxford more diverse and inclusive of people from all backgrounds.”

A source at Oxford University insisted that financial concerns were not the main reason for keeping the statue.

Oriel College said in a statement: “The overwhelming message we have received has been in support of the statue remaining in place.

“The College believes the recent debate has underlined that the continuing presence of these historical artefacts is an important reminder of the complexity of history and of the legacies of colonialism still felt today.”

Ntokozo Qwabe, leader of the RMF movement wrote on his Facebook page: "The decision by Oriel College to unilaterally reverse its public commitments on Rhodes, without any consultation, basically reminds us that black lives are cheap at Oxford."

Photo: AP

The financial impact on Oriel College revealed

The full financial impact on Oriel College after it spent months dithering over its Cecil Rhodes statue has been revealed in confidential documents seen by The Daily Telegraph.

An assessment of the college’s accounts by its development director shows it underestimated the impact of the international furore over its decision to consider removing the statue and take down a plaque commemorating its most generous benefactor.

Oriel, a registered charity that relies on donations from a small number of donors to balance its books, has discovered to its horror that some of its wealthiest alumni have re-written their wills to disinherit their alma mater, while others have decided to cancel one-off donations they were intending to make this year.

Sean Power, development director at Oriel College, warned staff that the long term impact on fundraising “is potentially extremely damaging”. He acknowledged that the college’s statement last year – in which it said it would consider the removal of the Victorian imperialist and take down a plaque of Rhodes - has both “immediate and long-term impact”.

He wrote: “Pride in the institution is major currency when it comes to fundraising, and this has already been severally diminished.

“The fact that Rhodes was the College’s most generous benefactor only compounds the issue; ‘is this how we treat our donors’ etc.”

The College has already taken a significant financial hit. One expected donation of £500,000 will not be made this year as a result of the controversy, and a potential £750,000 donor to the college is now not returning messages, the documents show.

The college has warned that “lower level gifts”, which include donations of over £10,000, “will almost certainly be adversely too”.

“The overall reaction has been significant, much more than any in the College predicted. It has also been overwhelmingly negative of the College’s position and its actions." Oriel College

A withdrawal from donors could be potentially catastrophic for the college’s finances as its last annual accounts show it relies heavily on a small number of donors.

A total of 24 organisations or individuals made gifts of £10,000 or more between 1st August 2014 and 31st July 2015, according to documents filed to the Charity Commission.

The situation is even more stark when it comes to bequests. The leaked documents reveal that one individual, who had planned to leave £100m for the college in his will is now "furious" with Oriel, which fears he may now change his mind.

A bequest of more than £100m would have transformed Oriel’s finances, as its accounts show that its annual revenue is £12m, with another £84m in long-term investments.

The £100m is likely to be the largest sum to be left to the college. In comparison, it received £300,000 in legacy gifts in the whole of 2015.

The leaked documents show there were 21 new legacy pledges made in the past year, bringing the total number of pledges to 286.

The college has a special club called the Adam de Brome Society for alumni who have included large legacies in their wills, but “several people have already written to the College asking to be removed” from the society after rewriting their wills.

Mr Power wrote: “There does seem to be a real sense of shame and embarrassment over what the College has done…pride in the institution is major currency when it comes to fundraising, and this has already been severally diminished.”

He added: “The fact that Rhodes was the College’s most generous benefactor only compounds the issue; ‘is this how we treat our donors’, etc.”

He said the college had received more than 400 letters, including more than 200 from alumni, of which fewer than four per cent support the college’s situation, with more than half being “outright condemnatory”.

More than one in eight correspondents have “indicated that they intend to cease their financial support of the College”.

Nor do the problems end there.

Mr Power told the governors that instead of pulling in £3m to £4m in donations this year, he only expected to raise £2m, which was a “generous estimate”.

That would put the college in danger of failing to cover its £10.3m annual expenditure, and having to draw on investment income to cover its costs.

His report, written on January 20, said his department would now “almost certainly” have to make one or two staff redundant, as the department would have to cut £200,000 from its £500,000 budget.

The college has also postponed its annual telephone fundraising campaign this year from April because it deems the timing to be “difficult” because "many alumni do not feel well disposed to the college". It plans to hold a much smaller campaign in December instead.

There are also more direct costs of addressing the Rhodes Must Fall campaign. The college has already suffered a “substantial diversion of resource” of £155,000 in addressing black and minority ethnic issues and has budgeted for another £179,000 to cover the costs of legal advice, a consultation exercise, planning advice, an external media advice and £5,000 for “security and protection”.