Russian journalist Dmitry Kiselyov defends 'homophobic' comments in TV debate
Dmitry Kiselyov, a well-known television journalist who presents a weekly news program on state TV, made the comments during a televised debate about a controversial law banning homosexual propaganda to minors in April 2012.

“I think banning gays from distributing propaganda to children is not enough,” he says in the clip.

“I think they should be banned from donating blood or sperm, and if they die in a car crash, their hearts should be burnt or buried in the ground as unsuitable for the continuation of life,” he adds, to a round of applause from the audience.

The comments, which went largely unnoticed when first broadcast, became a lightning rod for campaigners appalled by what they see as the institutionalisation of homophobia in Russia when the clip resurfaced over the weekend.

An online petition titled “No Fascism on TV” calling for him to be fired from the state-owned Russia 24 television channel had gathered over 3,500 signatures by Tuesday afternoon.

Several bloggers have called on prosecutors to investigate Mr Kiselyov’s comments under laws banning extremism and hate speech.

Mr Kiselyov has refused to retract the statement and accused his critics of taking the comments out of context.

“I’m not a homophobe. Lots of my friends are gay,” he told the Izvestia newspaper.

“It is simply global practice, as followed in the United States, the European Union, Japan, and Arab countries. Practically everywhere except Russia,” he said, citing US regulations that ban donations from men who have had homosexual contact in the past 20 years.

But critics say the comments from a prominent television personality who is also a deputy director of the vast state holding through which the government owns dozens of national television channels, is another sign of the creeping acceptability of homophobia in Russia.

Russia has faced calls from gay rights campaigners around the world for a boycott of the Sochi 2014 Winter Olympics because of its adoption of the law banning “propaganda of non-traditional sexual relations among minors.”

The law introduces fines for those who give information about homosexuality to under 16s and obliges media outlets to carry age warnings on articles about homosexuality.

Conservative law makers have characterised the measure as a defence of “traditional values.”

President Vladimir Putin, who signed the bill into law at the end of June, has insisted that “there is nothing homophobic here. This is about protecting children.”

Clarifying his own support for the controversial law, Mr Kiselyov said: “I object to drawing children [into conversations about homosexuality], because according to Freud children are bisexual.”

That is a widespread sentiment in Russia, but the vague definition of “homosexual propaganda” has already led to farcical results.

Last year an anti-gay group in St. Petersburg, the first city to adopt a version of the law, asked prosecutors to investigate a food and drink company owned by Pepsi for putting a rainbow on its milk cartons.

On Tuesday a transvestite comedian apparently became one of the first high-profile causalities of the new law when he was fired by state television channel.

Ukrainian Andrei Danilko, who performs as drag queen Verka Serdyuchka, was dropped from a Saturday night comedy show because of fears about violating the new legislation, according to reports. The broadcaster had not commented by Tuesday evening.