KFC leaves Muslims baffled after branch drops alcohol hand-wipes in halal mix-up
Muslim leaders have voiced bewilderment after a branch of Kentucky Fried Chicken refused to give customers hand-wipes containing alcohol for fear that doing so would cause offence.

The fast food chain blamed a “misunderstanding” at the branch in Leicester, which is part of a trial involving halal chicken, after staff were told not to hand out the wipes in case they were against Islamic law.

Muslim leaders described the move as “bizarre” and warned that even well-meaning decisions could be potentially harmful by creating the impression that the community was making “ridiculous” demands.

The Leicester branch is one of around 100 stores around the UK offering halal chicken as part of a trial to gauge demand for meat slaughtered in accordance with Islamic principles, following requests from customers.

But the branch went a step further and withdrew standard alcohol-based hand wipes in case it could offend strict Muslims.

A batch of alternative wipes containing lemon juice was ordered in but had not arrived before the alcohol wipes were withdrawn.

One customer, Graham Noakes, said that he was told the wipes were against the halal policy.

“They told me it might offend other customers,” he told the Leicester Mercury.

“I’ve never experienced anything like this before, I couldn’t believe it.”

The company apologised to customers, insisted it had not ordered the ban and made clear that the wipes had been reinstated at the branch.

But Muslim leaders said they were baffled by the decision which they likened to moves to remove Gideon Bibles from hospitals on the mistaken assumption that they would offend followers of other religions.

“They have made a mountain out of a molehill,” said Dr Sheik Howjat Ramzy, director of the Oxford Islamic Information Centre.

Pointing out that Muslims had used alcohol for medicine and hygiene for centuries, he explained: “There is no problem as long as we don’t drink it: if it is for medicine it is no problem, if it is a perfume it is no problem and if it is for hygiene that is no problem.

“Scholars are also debating consumption [of alcohol] some say that as long as you don’t get drunk that’s OK.”

Suleman Nagdi, of the Federation of Muslim Organisations, based in Leicester, said: “Sometimes the intention is sincere but they do need to understand the repercussions of this upon the community.

“We have all the bigots coming out and saying ‘there you go again, the Muslims are demanding something’ when it is not the case that we are demanding anything.

“It is ridiculous to suggest that this is some kind of demand from the Muslim community.”

A spokesman for KFC said: “Our alcohol-based hand wipes are approved for use in all our restaurants, including those who are part of the halal trial.

“There was a misunderstanding at the store in question, but the wipes are now being used again.

“We’re sorry for the customer’s experience.”