Ted Kennedy collapses at Barack Obama inauguration lunch
He was suffering from convulsions, a congressional aide said. He was seen being wheeled on a stretcher out of the lunch and taken to hospital. He was assisted by Senator John Kerry and his wife, Teresa Heinz Kerry, who were sitting at the same table.

He is the brother of the late President John F Kennedy and one of the Senate's most respected Democrats.

Mr Obama, who just hours before had been sworn in as the new US president, said his prayers were with Mr Kennedy and his family.

During a talk to members of Congress and others, Mr Obama called attention to Mr Kennedy, saying "I know that while I was out of the room, concern was expressed about Teddy."

Mr Obama said that Mr Kennedy "was there when the voting rights act passed, along with John Lewis, was a warrior for justice."

"And so I would be lying to you if I did not say that right now a part of me is with him," he added. "And I think that's true for all of us. This is a joyous time. But it's also a sobering time. And my prayers are with him and his family and (Kennedy's wife) Vicki."

Mr Kennedy, a senator since 1962 and patriarch of one of the leading families of American politics, had released a statement earlier in the day on Mr Obama's "incredible journey" to the White House.

"At this special moment in our history, as the world witnesses the extraordinary power of our democracy, I'm full of new hope that, as the poet wrote, America will be America again. I have every confidence that our nation will be a stronger, better and fairer land because of Barack Obama."

Republican senator Orrin Hatch, a friend of Mr Kennedy, said: "I'm not a doctor, but it looked like a seizure, and it was painful to him. But he gradually was able to calm down and as he got into the ambulance, he kind of looked over at me and smiled, that old wry smile that I know things are going to be all right.”

Another senator with medical problems, Robert Byrd, 91, the Democratic senator from West Virginia, was sitting next to Mr Kennedy when the Massachusetts lawmaker suffered his apparent seizure, an aide for Mr Byrd said.

Mr Byrd sustained no health problem, but his security detail decided to remove him from the luncheon in his wheelchair, said the aide.

Mr Kennedy underwent surgery on a malignant tumour in June last year after suffering a seizure at his family home in Cape Cod, Massachusetts.

He underwent a three-and-a-half-hour operation at Duke University Medical Centre in Durham, North Carolina, while still conscious.

"I feel like a million bucks. I think I'll do that again tomorrow," Senator Kennedy was quoted by a family spokeswoman as telling his wife immediately afterward.

The second longest serving senator and a dominant figure in national Democratic Party politics, Mr Kennedy has represented Massachusetts since 1962, filling out the term won by his brother, John F Kennedy, who was assassinated in 1963 two years after becoming president. His brother Robert was assassinated in 1968, while eldest brother, Joseph, was killed in a World War II airplane crash.

His presidential ambitions were haunted by an accident at the Massachusetts island of Chappaquiddick in 1969, when his car plunged off a bridge and a young woman riding with him, Mary Jo Kopechne, drowned.

Known as Teddy, he is renowned for his big personality and generous spirit, and has maintained a busy schedule on Capitol Hill and across Massachusetts. Mr Kennedy had a major impact on the current Democratic presidential campaign when he endorsed his junior senate colleague Barack Obama at a critical juncture, helping the young challenger to win 11 straight primary victories in February.

Despite being one of the most liberal Democrats in the senate and the sponsor of several long-lasting bills, he often supported Republicans on key legislation, including Mr Bush's signature education act, No Child Left Behind.

Before the lunch, Mr Kennedy had appeared in good health during the inauguration ceremony, wrapped up in hat, scarf and overcoat against the chill winter air.

Walter Mondale, the former vice president, said Mr Kennedy had been swapping stories with others at their table when “something happened. I don't know what it was, he just stopped.”

”It was really kind of a shock to us all,” he added.

Sen Jay Rockefeller, a Democrat, told reporters the president rushed over to Kennedy's side.

”There was a call for silence throughout the room,” he said. “The president went over immediately. The lights went down, just to reduce the heat, I think.”