Arnis Zalkalns: Alice Gross's suspected killer took his own life, coroner rules
The Latvian builder believed to have killed schoolgirl Alice Gross in a sexually-motivated attack before dumping her body then took his own life, a coroner has ruled.

Convicted killer Arnis Zalkalns's body was discovered hanged in a park just four days after the 14-year-old victim was found weighted down in the Grand Union Canal, in Ealing, last October.

Scotland Yard later said the 41-year-old - who had previously served seven years in prison for murdering his wife in his home country - would have been charged with Alice's murder if he had still been alive.

At an inquest into Zalkalns' death at West London Coroner's Court on Monday, coroner Chinyere Inyama said: "There is no other reasonable alternative explanation. I record that Arnis Zalkalns took his own life."

In a statement read to the court by the coroner, Zalkalns' girlfriend Katerina Laiblova said she was "struggling to accept" his involvement in Alice's death.

Photo: Metropolitan Police/PA

"I'm having great difficulty accepting he had anything to do with her disappearance or her murder," she said. "I cannot think of any motive he had.

"I can only think if he was involved in an accident. He doesn't have a bad core. I saw a photograph of Alice and she looked a bit like his ex-partner in that she's very thin."

Ms Laiblova said Zalkalns - the father to her daughter - was "very quiet" and appeared down shortly before he disappeared, but said it was because he was missing his two other children in Latvia.

In July, it was revealed that Mr Inyama lost the 30-page police file into Alice's death on a train in November.

Police tried to recover the file, which contained evidence against prime suspect Zalkalns, but concluded it had probably been "destroyed as waste".

The schoolgirl's disappearance last August from her home in Hanwell, west London, sparked Scotland Yard's biggest search operation since the July 7 London bombings.

It prompted a massive public search operation before her body was found on September 30.

Alice disappeared as she walked along the Regent's Canal on August 28 and her naked body was pinned to the bed of the River Brent using a bicycle wheel, logs and bricks.

Prime suspect Zalkalns was seen on video footage cycling along the same towpath minutes after Alice. He went missing from his home in Hanwell days later and his body was discovered hanging in Boston Manor Park, west London, days later.

• Alice Gross disappearance: timeline of events

It emerged that before coming to Britain in 2007, he had served seven years of a 12 year sentence for murdering his wife, Rudite, but his past was not known by the authorities here.

He had also been questioned about a sexual assault on a 14 year old girl on the canal in 2009 but was never prosecuted.

Photo: Metropolitan Police/PA

Earlier, Detective Chief Inspector Andy Chalmers from the Metropolitan Police said Alice's cause of death had been identified as “compression asphyxia” or crushing of the chest.

He said: “The post mortem provided no evidence of a sexual assault on Alice Gross … however I strongly believe that was the most likely motivation, that's my gut instinct.”

“I believe Arnis Zalkalns killed Alice shortly after they met. I believe both he and she were dead before they were reported as missing persons.

“The post mortem revealed she died from constant compression of the chest and asphyxiation. A heavy body was lying on top of her weaker body. Alice was a waif.”

Police revealed that when they found her body it was tied in a fetal position, wrapped in a bin bag which had been weighed down with a bicycle wheel with bricks tied to it.

Photo: Metropolitan Police/PA

Zalkalns is then believed to have rolled several large tree trunks from the river bank on top of her body that were so heavy that they pushed her remains down into the thick silt in the riverbed.

DCI Chalmers said it was a matter of regret for all the officers on the investigation that it had taken so long to find her body explaining: “I know I speak for everyone involved in the investigation that I wish we could have found her sooner.”

There were no obvious signs of injury on her body but detectives revealed that her death was likely to have been the result of a larger body lying on top her and preventing her from breathing properly.

Photo: Metropolitan Police/PA

Scotland Yard said there were a number of pieces of evidence that tied Zalkans to the murder including a well preserved cigarette but which was found close to Alice's body and had his DNA on it.

One of the bags used to conceal her body also matched a roll that was seized from his workplace. In addition an iPhone cover was discovered concealed in his garden under the patio.

Police said while it was not possible to positively identify the case through serial number, Alice's sister was confident it belonged to the teenager.

Photo: Metropolitan Police/PA

Zalkalns was identified by his dental records after his decomposed body was found hanged in dense woodland.

The general labourer, who worked at a building site in Isleworth, west London, is believed to have come to the UK in 2007, but authorities here are thought to have had no record of his murder conviction.

In a statement read to the court by the coroner, Detective Sergeant Michael Hartley said: "There is a strong evidence to implicate Zalkalns in the murder of Alice Gross. This may go some way to explain his death.

"The abduction and subsequent murder of Alice could have a completely random, opportunistic attack formulated by Zalkalns when he passed Alice on that day."

Members of the Gross or Zalkalns families did not attend the hearing.