Girl, nine, has iPhone-shaped scar for life after case leaks 'toxic' glitter onto her leg
A nine-year-old girl has been scarred for life with a chemical burn caused by her mobile phone case.

"Toxic" pink glitter leaked onto Olivia Retter's leg while she was in bed, leaving her with a mark in the same shape as her iPhone 5c .

The youngster, from Ware, Hertfordshire, bought the £5.99 phone case - decorated with unicorns and rainbows - from a New Look store in Cambridge.

Now her mother, Karly Retter, has issued a Facebook warning urging other parents to be aware of the danger posed by similar phone cases. It has gone viral, with more than 40,000 shares.

Please share this as much as possible this case is full of acid and if it cracks it will cause 3rd-2nd degree burns this...

The 35-year-old cleaner said: "Olivia is not supposed to have her phone in her bedroom at night, but she sneaked it in and had it in her bed, so she fell asleep with it touching her leg.

"She woke up in the middle of the night and came into my room and said her leg was hurting - I just thought she was being silly and sent her back to bed.

"Then in the morning I saw this awful burn on her leg - I was so shocked a phone case could do that. Doctors have said it is a severe chemical burn and she will be scarred for life. I can't believe it - she will have a scar in the shape of a phone on her leg."

Oliva fell asleep with her phone in the bed next to her on January 2, and woke up the following morning with the painful red burn on her right thigh.

"Imagine if it had leaked when Olivia was on the phone or holding it to her face - it could have gone on her face or her eyes" Karly Retter

The clear liquid inside the phone case had leaked out onto her skin, but Mrs Retter said there was no visible crack that showed where it had escaped from.

She took Olivia to the doctor several days later and it was confirmed her injury was a severe chemical burn caused by acid and gave her dressings to wear.

Mrs Retter - who is also mother to Ruby, 15, and 10-year-old Isabella - claims she has rung New Look's customer service department three times over the incident, but so far has received no response.

But the high street fashion retailer has confirmed in a statement that the phone case is being removed from sale in all stores.

Mrs Retter said: "There wasn't a safety warning or anything at all on the case itself - nothing which warns you what was inside is a chemical which can cause serious burns.

"Imagine if it had leaked when Olivia was on the phone or holding it to her face - it could have gone on her face or her eyes.

"You just don't think something like that could happen. A lot of young girls have similar phone cases and they have no idea how dangerous they are."

A New Look spokesman said: "New Look has spoken with the customer involved and takes complaints of this nature extremely seriously.

"In line with our health and safety procedure, we have now instructed all stores to remove the product in question from the shop floor with immediate effect.

"Our quality team have also begun an investigation with the supplier to understand and prevent this from happening in the future."

• Apple iPhone 4 ‘catches fire’