Travelodge guest finds spy camera hidden in shower at Oxford hotel
Travelodge has apologised after a "disgusted" female guest found a hidden camera in her shower.

Harmony Hachey, 23, was using the cubicle when she noticed a small electronic device hidden behind the vent. On closer inspection, she realised it was in a hidden camera pointing directly at where she was standing naked in the shower.

She immediately informed bosses at the Oxford Wheatley Travelodge, who allegedly traced the device to the caretaker's cupboard that backs onto the room.

The police are now investigating the incident, which has left Miss Hachey feeling "violated". A force spokesman said the camera was not connected to the caretaker's room, with a flex left dangling inside the maintenance unit behind the shower.

Harmony Hachey, 23, discovered a camera in a vent while taking a shower at Oxford Wheatley Travelodge

"I was absolutely disgusted," said Miss Hachey. "I got a fork and stuck it in the vent. You could see so clearly it was a camera. I broke down at one point. I just felt so violated."

Miss Hachey travelled to Oxford from her home in Edinburgh with colleagues last Friday as she was working at an event in the area over the weekend.

She explained: "One of the girls had a shower and then I went in. It was the first thing I noticed. I was trying to convince myself I was crazy and it wasn't really there.

"I had my shower and I just carried on as usual convincing myself I was crazy. I was going through scenarios in my head."

Air vent in the shower of a guest room in the Oxford Wheatley Travelodge where Harmony Hachey discovered the camera

After realising it was a camera, she took several photographs as evidence and alerted hotel staff.

When the receptionist investigated, she went to the janitor's cupboard in the main hallway at the back of the shower.

There, she is said to have found a USB cable attached to the camera, but it appeared to be switched off.

Miss Hachey said: "The boss was called and as soon as he saw the camera he took a plastic bag and took it out. After that the police came, they had a look at my pictures and looked at the camera itself and the vent."

She then received a call from upper management, who told her it was there for maintenance.

Miss Hachey added: "She told me to calm down and there was no footage on there. But no one had looked."

After giving a statement to Thames Valley Police, she tried to find another place to stay for the weekend, but ended up having to switch rooms.

'You could see so clearly it was a camera. I broke down at one point. I just felt so violated...' - Travelodge guest Harmony Hachey

Miss Hachey said: "I didn't want to stay in that room. They moved the bed into another room. Later I got a call from customer services saying I was going to get a full refund and that was it."

A spokeswoman for Travelodge confirmed that what appeared to be a camera had been found in the room and apologised to Miss Hachey.

She added: "The privacy of our customers is a matter of the highest importance to us and the hotel team investigated immediately.

"While the camera appeared to be inoperative, we have reported this matter to the police and we are now supporting them fully with their ongoing investigations.

"We would like to offer our sincere apologies to the customer affected and will remain in contact with them to ensure the matter is resolved."

• Bathroom spy camera landlord escapes jail term

• Video: Doctor installs spy camera in lavatory

Thames Valley Police confirmed a camera was recovered from the Travelodge hotel for examination.

They added the flex from the camera was not linked to the caretaker's room, but was dangling inside the maintenance unit behind the shower.

A spokesman said: "We can confirm that we did receive a report of a webcam being found in a hotel room at Travelodge, Wheatley on Friday night.

"A camera has been recovered for examination. Reports of this nature are very rare, but we always treat them very seriously.

"We are working very closely with Travelodge to secure as much evidence as we can and an investigation is ongoing."