'Wig-wearing CIA officer detained in Russia'
The Federal Security Service (FSB) said in a statement that the man was detained in Moscow early on Tuesday. It said he was Ryan Christopher Fogle, a serving CIA officer working under diplomatic cover as a third secretary of the political section of the US embassy in the capital.

Channel One state television ran images of the alleged spy's kit: two wigs, two pairs of sunglasses, two penknives, a mini-torch, a compass, a map-book of Moscow and a pack of 500-euro notes.

Russian news agencies reported that US Ambassador Michael McFaul would be summoned to the Foreign Ministry on Wednesday in connection to the detention. Mr McFaul refused to comment.

Commentators in Russia said the timing of the FSB statement – which was released just as Mr McFaul began a question-and-answer session on Twitter – was probably not accidental. Some hawks in the Kremlin are thought to be unhappy with a recent mini-thaw in relations with Washington after US Secretary of State John Kerry visited Moscow last week.

According to the FSB, Mr Fogle was carrying "special technical equipment, written instructions for the recruitment of a Russian citizen, a large sum of money and a means of changing his appearance".

The ID of a man claimed by FSB to be Ryan Fogle (AP)

RT posted a photograph on its website of a letter in Russian apparently carried by the alleged CIA agent. It offered a potential recruit "up to $1m per year for long-term cooperation, with extra bonuses for information that will help us". Greater sums could be paid if the recruit "was ready to answer concrete questions", it said.

The letter – which began with the words "Dear friend" and signed off from "Your friends" – instructed the reader to open a new Gmail account in an internet café in order to communicate with a US handler.

A letter withdrawn from the arrested (EPA)

State TV station Channel One showed a brown-haired man identified as Mr Fogle sitting at a desk in FSB detention, as well as images of his diplomatic identity cards. It said he was later handed over to US representatives.

The FSB said: "Recently, American intelligence has more than once made attempts to recruit officers of the Russian law enforcement organs and special services, which were recorded and monitored by FSB counter-espionage." Mr Fogle is thought to be the first US diplomat in more than a decade to be detained in Russia for alleged spying.