The Holiday Quiz 2006
In each pair of pictures, identify what it is that connects them.

1 . Who surprised everyone when he announced that "there is more to life than money"?

2. Who surprised nobody when he confessed that he was more interested in the future of the Arctic Circle than the Arctic Monkeys?

3. Whose diligent questioning has made him New Labour's least favourite policeman?

4. Which former trade unionist was caught playing croquet on the lawn of his country pile when he was supposed to be standing in for Tony Blair.

5. Which MP publicly denied he was homosexual, but was then forced to admit he had had a gay lover.

6. Which married MP had to drop out of the Lib Dem leadership contest after it was revealed that he had had an affair with a rent boy?

7. Which MP repeatedly denied he had a drink problem, but then admitted that he was an alcoholic.

8. They said he was too old, but who became leader of the Lib Dems?

9. Who claimed her husband had neglected to mention a £350,000 gift he received, but kept her job.

10. Which MP pretended to be a cat on a popular television programme and then complained that his constituents did not take him seriously?

Home

1. British Airways tried to ban its staff from wearing them openly. What?

2. Why was 2006 a good year for children's car seat manufacturers?

3. …but a bad year for Britain's corner shops?

4. What was the name of the Piccadilly sushi bar where traces of polonium 210 were found after the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko?

5. Why should we feel sorry for Britain's teenagers?

6. Who tried to storm the Stormont Assembly building in Northern Ireland carrying eight nail bombs but got stuck in the revolving doors?

7. For what did Tony Blair apologise?

8. Which Scottish town could become Europe's first commercial space port?

9. Who turned 80 in April but is still working?

10. How did a loose shoelace cause £500,000 of damage?

Abroad

1. Who quoted a 14th-century Byzantine emperor and got into serious trouble?

2. How did Greece become 25 per cent richer overnight?

3. Which European monarch was accused of shooting an inebriated, tame bear while hunting in Russia?

4. Which European politician collapsed at a rally with a heart complaint?

5. What did Rupert Murdoch decide was a bad idea?

6. Who is Bernardo Provenzano and why did he get into trouble with his laundry?

7. Name two countries that had military coups in 2006.

8. And one country that had a democratic coup.

9. Which is the happiest country on earth?

10. Who spent eight years locked in an Austrian basement after being kidnapped as a child?

War

1. Who said UK troops should leave Iraq "some time soon" because their presence was exacerbating the violence?

2. Which British hostage in Iraq seemed less than pleased to be rescued by the SAS?

3. Why did the war in Iraq prove to be bad for Donald Rumsfeld's career?

4. What did Robert Gates admit, contradicting his boss?

5. Of what crime was Saddam Hussein found guilty?

Lucky escapes

1. Who survived a 300mph car crash?

2. Which Australian climber was found by an American climbing team at the top of Everest after being left for dead.

3. Who spent two hours in a life raft after his yacht's keel broke half way across the southern ocean during the Five Oceans solo round-the-world race?

4. Whose mast broke as he went to rescue his fellow competitor in the Five Oceans race?

Money

1. Who was accused of selling out when she sold her company to L'Oréal for £652 million?

2. Who will be the first Scot to appear on a £20 note?

3. And whom will he replace?

4. Who became the highest-paid presenter on television years after everyone thought his career was over?

5. Who lost his apprentice?

6. Who are the NatWest Three?

7. Translate the following from "corporate speak" into ordinary English:

Shoot the puppy

Vanillacide

Kicking a dead whale down the beach

8. Who was ordered to limit his spending to $46,000 (£23,500) a month while awaiting trial on fraud charges in America?

9. Who was named Britain's richest man for the second consecutive year?

10. By how much has the budget for London's Olympic Park risen so far?

Odd one out

Who is the odd one out of Meg Ryan, Angelina Jolie, Madonna, Sharon Stone, Nicole Kidman, Gwyneth Paltrow, and why?

Celebrity watch

1. Which actress gave birth to a daughter in Namibia and what was the baby's name?

2. Public allegations and accusations threatened to turn this couple's divorce into a spectator sport. Who are they?

3. Who was accused of committing creative suicide after he bounced on a sofa?

4. Which newspaper's royal editor was found guilty of hacking into messages left on mobile phones owned by members of the Royal Family?

5. Which unlikely female celebrity is called "Archie", is 30ft long, has tentacles and was given to the Natural History Museum in London this year?

6. Whose income doubled to £9 million a year after she was accused of drug abuse?

7. Who admitted buying 30 new pairs of underpants a fortnight?

8. Who said: "Borat (left) is a son of a bitch who made us look like savages. If he returns we will stick a stake in his backside and impale him."

9. Who signed up to work for the Conservative Party as an adviser on global poverty?

10. Who was the most "Googled" celebrity in 2006?

Culture clashes

1. Which best-selling author was accused of stealing his plot from a book called The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail?

2. Which poet laureate's daughter revealed that her father regretted the publication of a poem that called for "friendly bombs" to fall on Slough?

3. Who cancelled two concerts in Italy after selling just 345 tickets out of a potential 27,000?

4. Which book, commissioned by William the Conqueror, became available online?

5. Who negotiated a £12 million four-book deal with a new publisher after losing his previous publisher while in prison for perjury.

6. Who stormed out in the middle of a performance at Milan's La Scala opera house after the audience booed him?

7. Which author upset east London's Bangladeshi community?

8. Which prominent British art collector was accused of promoting pornography at the Royal Academy?

9. Which successful rock group became almost as well known for finding tax loopholes for their immense earnings as for their music?

10. Which author denied he had plagiarised passages of a nurse's memoirs?

Who said....?

1. "Yo, Blair. How are you doing?"

2. "I love the uniform, it's so, so sexy."

3. "I won a beauty contest, not a politics degree."

4. "I met someone in the West Indies who could not walk so I put my hands on him and he was able to get up."

5. "If he wasn't my father, I'd spray him with mace."

6. "Real chilli hot stuff."

7. "Everyone thinks, because I receive the Victoria Cross, I get a wall of money, but the VC is just a medal."

8. "If this is not civil war, then God knows what civil war is."

9. "It was like a vomiting bath. Nurses had big black bin liners for them to vomit into."

10. "I think the whole attitude towards climbing Mount Everest has become rather horrifying. The people just want to get to the top. It was wrong if there was a man suffering altitude problems and was huddled under a rock, just to lift your hat, say good morning and pass on by."

11. Who denied having said: "Well that's a lie".

What do they have in common?

Dr Chai Patel, chief executive of Priory Clinics, Barry Townsley, a stockbroker, Sir David Garrard, a property developer, Sir Gulam Noon, a curry tycoon.

Goodbye…

The following 10 individuals died this year. Can you name them?

1. She was known as the "Sparklet" and wrote books, including The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie.

2. A campaigning Russian journalist.

3. A former Chilean dictator.

4. Known as the "great crocodile", he had been prime minister of South Africa and a staunch defender of apartheid.

5. A big king (he weighed 33 stone at his peak) of a small country.

6. A DJ known for his catchphrase: "Greetings, pop pickers."

7. Economist known as the "father of monetarism".

8. Australian "crocodile hunter".

9. Travel writer and adventurer who loved the Hindu Kush.

10. His four legs were described as "the finest since Marilyn Monroe's".