America closed its doors to Anne Frank
The growing desperation of Anne Frank's family to flee Nazi-occupied Holland was revealed yesterday in a series of letters written by her father to officials and friends in America.

Otto Frank, whose daughter's diaries provided one of the most moving testaments to the plight of the Jews under the Nazis, tried to arrange US visas for his family.

Although the immigration restrictions were supposedly to protect national security, critics now claim that they were essentially anti-Semitic.

US officials were allegedly instructed to prevaricate so that even official annual immigration quotas — such as the 27,370 from Germany and Austria — remained unfilled year after year.

"I would not ask if conditions here would not force me to do all I can in time to be able to avoid worse," Otto Frank wrote in April 1941 to his college friend Nathan Straus, who was living in the US.

"It is for the sake of the children mainly that we have to care for. Our own fate is of less importance."

Unable to escape occupied Amsterdam, from July 1942, the Franks hid for more than two years in an annex of a warehouse before being arrested.

Anne died of typhus, aged 15, in the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp in 1945.

Her father returned to the Netherlands to collect his daughter's notes and published them in the Netherlands in 1947.

Anne's diary of their life in hiding went on to sell an estimated 75 million copies.

Her father's letters were released by the New York-based YIVO Institute for Jewish Research which found them in its archives a year and a half ago.

They document how Mr Frank tried to arrange for his family — his wife Edith, daughters Margot and Anne and mother-in-law Rosa Hollander — to go to the United States or Cuba.

Frank, who had lived in New York from 1909 to 1911, wrote to relatives, friends and immigration officials between April 30 and Dec 11, 1941, when Germany declared war on the United States.

He referred to the US restrictions in his letters.

"I know that it will be impossible for us all to leave even if most of the money is refundable, but Edith urges me to leave alone or with the children," he said in another letter to Mr Straus. Frank first applied for immigration visas to the US in 1938, reviving his efforts only in 1941 because he had preferred life under the Nazis to the uncertainties of being a refugee, say experts.

By then, there was a 300,000-strong waiting list of Jews desperate to get a US visa.

Holocaust historians seized on the letters as evidence of official American indifference to the plight of the Jews.

Prof Richard Breitman, a specialist at American University, Washington, said: "Anne Frank could today be a 77-year-old woman living in Boston. That is what the documents suggest. The family could have left the Netherlands in 1941."