Russian politician tells aides to 'violently rape' pregnant journalist
A Russian politician appeared to threaten a pregnant journalist with "violent rape" at a press conference after she asked him about sanctions against Ukraine.

Stella Dubovitskaya, a reporter with the state-funded TV channel Russia Today, asked Vladmir Zhirinovsky, leader of the pro-Kremlin nationalist party LDPR, if Russia would respond with sanctions to a recent Ukranian restriction on Russian men entering the country.

Mr Zhirinovsky unleashed a tirade, which included threats of sexual violence. “You are all bloodthirsty,” he responded, "You women of the Maidan all have uterine frenzy."

The politician is then seen turning to his aides and saying: "When I say, you run to her and violently rape her."

He then pushed the two towards the journalist, who is six months pregnant, yelling: "Go and kiss her. Grab her."

Vladmir Zhirinovsky orders his aides to attack RT journalist Stella Dubovitskaya (Inform 24)

As they approached, several journalists protected Mrs Dubovitakaya. "She is pregnant, why are you attacking her?" one said.

"This is derogatory, humiliating. What are you doing?" asked Yulia Chuchalova, from the Russian news agency Interfax, to which Mr Zhirinovsky replied: "Stop interfering here, you lesbian."

Mrs Dubovitakaya is recovering in hospital from the shock of the incident.

Mr Zhirinovsky’s conduct towards the reporter has been referred to the Russian parliament’s ethics commission, and it is said that he may lose the right to speak in the State Duma for up to one month.

RT general director Margareta Simonyan told the Daily Mail the news agency will take legal action: "Due to the disgusting incident in the state duma, after which our correspondent was hospitalised because of Vladimir Zhirinovsky’s discourtesy, we have decided to use all legal options to punish Mr Zhirinovsky as severely as possible under the law, including by suing him."

RT editor Dmitry Gornostayev told euronews: “Many people have already become used to his extraordinary behaviour but when he allowed himself to openly call for violence within the walls of State Duma all journalists of our agency and colleagues from other media organisations were outraged."

Mr Zhirinovsky has since apologised, saying in a live television interview: "When talking to the press in the Duma on Friday, answering questions at the end, I spoke a bit rudely when I replied to a young woman.

"I offer my apologies to her and to everyone, if I happened to offend someone."

Mr Zhirinovsky, a former two-time deputy speaker of the Duma, is a controversial political figure in Russia - he had a fistfight after a television debate, and was caught on camera making racist and sexist comments about former US Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice.