List of Commonwealth Countries
Commonwealth citizens

Antigua and Barbuda

Australia

Bangladesh

Barbados

Belize

Botswana

Brunei

Cameroon

Canada

Dominica

Fiji

Ghana

Grenada

Grenadines

Guyana

India

Jamaica

Kenya

Kiribati

Lesotho

Malawi

Malaysia

Malta*

Mauritius

Mozambique

Namibia

Nauru

New Zealand

Nigeria

Pakistan

Papua New Guinea

Republic of Cyprus*

Rwanda

Samoa

Seychelles

Sierra Leone

Singapore

Solomon Islands

South Africa

Sri Lanka

St Christopher and Nevis

St Lucia

St Vincent and the

Swaziland

The Bahamas

Tonga

Trinidad and Tobago

Tuvalu

Uganda

United Kingdom*

United Republic of Tanzania

Vanuatu

Zambia

Zimbabwe

*Although also EU member states, citizens of Cyprus and Malta are eligible to be registered to vote in respect of all elections held in the UK.

British Overseas Territories

Anguilla

Bermuda

British Antarctic Territory

British Indian Ocean Territory

Cayman Islands

Falkland Islands

Gibraltar

Montserrat

Pitcairn, Henderson, Ducie and Oeno Islands

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands

Sovereign Base areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia on Cyprus

St Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha

Turks and Caicos Islands

Virgin Islands

British Nationals (Overseas) citizens, British Overseas citizens and British Dependent Territories citizens are all Commonwealth citizens and are entitled to register as electors in respect of all elections, provided that they also fulfil the age and residence requirements for such registration and are not subject to any other legal incapacity. Such citizens are not, however, eligible to register as overseas electors.

British Crown Dependencies

The British Crown Dependencies consist of the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands including Jersey, Guernsey, Sark, Alderney, Herm and the other inhabited Channel Islands.

Citizens of the British Crown Dependencies are considered to be Commonwealth citizens for the purposes of the electoral registration but they may only register to vote in UK elections when they are resident in the UK. As with citizens of British Overseas Territories, citizens of British Crown Dependencies are not entitled to register as overseas electors.

Hong Kong

Following its transfer to Chinese sovereignty on 1 July 1997, Hong Kong was deleted from the list of British Overseas Territories. As a result, former residents of Hong Kong are not qualifying Commonwealth citizens by virtue of their residency in Hong Kong as Hong Kong Chinese is no longer a nationality.

Any previous resident of Hong Kong who holds a British Dependent Territories, British Nationals (Overseas) or British Overseas passport meets the nationality criteria for all elections in the UK.

Any previous resident of Hong Kong who only has a Chinese Special Administrative Region passport is Chinese and may not register.