State Laws Require Burial or Cremation for Aborted and Miscarried Fetuses
That doesn’t mean implementing the law won’t be logistically challenging, though. “There’s going to be a lot of man hours involved,” said Curtis Rostad, the executive director of the Indiana Funeral Directors Association. “I think a lot of funeral homes are going to be doing a lot of man hours to do this, for not a lot of income.”

No matter the disposal method, there’s significant labor involved. Facilities can cremate more than one fetus at a time, which isn’t typically allowed for human bodies, but “a crematory that is designed to cremate adult remains is a lot of equipment and a lot of size to put into operation for something that could be as small as an aborted or premature fetus,” Rostad said. In the case of a burial, “they would dig one grave that would [accommodate] whatever containers or fetuses that they’re going to be burying,” he said. Then workers have to resod and maintain the burial area.

Not that funeral directors are complaining about the law. “We strongly believe that mankind needs to remember and memorialize our dead,” Rostad said. “If the state comes along and makes it imperative that fetal remains of under 20 weeks receive that same treatment, that’s a decision that society makes. We’re simply there to carry that out.”

Rostad, who estimated that his organization represents 80 percent of funeral homes in the state, said legislators on both sides of the bill contacted him for information as debate was getting underway. Casey Miller, Rostad’s counterpart in the state’s cemetery business, said his association supported the law. He didn’t anticipate any big changes or challenges: “We do this everyday,” he said.

Although Planned Parenthood claimed it’s having a hard time finding funeral facilities to work with, even Miller said he supports the new process for fetal burials and cremations—and he’s a staunchly pro-life Catholic. “We don’t ask what the decision of the family was when we accept the remains. It’s not our position to question how the baby died,” he said. “Our role and responsibility is handling those remains in a respectful manner.”

Miller is based in Fort Wayne, a city of nearly 260,000 people. But for smaller towns and municipalities, the law might be more difficult to implement. “Being a municipal cemetery in southwest Indiana, it can be a challenge,” said Christopher Cooke, the superintendent of cemeteries in Evansville, Indiana, which is less than half the size of Fort Wayne. “The financial burden is going to fall on somebody.”

Cooke anticipates an uptick in the number of fetus and infant burials that will come to his cemetery as a result of this law. Long-term, he’s hoping to construct an ossuary for this purpose—a resting place for remains that might be marked with some sort of memorial. Evansville already has plenty of land for cemetery development, and “everybody has what you’d call a babyland area—a part of the cemetery that’s just for babies.” But they don’t necessarily have the infrastructure for an annual memorial service that families can attend, for example, in the way some facilities in Indianapolis do.