Trump visits first responders to devastation in Ascension Parish
ST. AMANT – As the eighth day of flooding in Ascension Parish came upon us, the first sight of national attention was put on the devastation and catastrophe placed on the area Friday at noon with the arrival of a presidential candidate.

With flooding reaching unprecedented levels throughout southern Louisiana, Ascension Parish was one of the hardest hit as the Amite River reached levels of 17.5 feet, almost three feet higher than what was seen in the flood of 1983.

A command post has been set up in the St. Amant area at the Grande Venue for law enforcement and firefighters. The post received a visit from Republican presidential nominee Donald J. Trump Friday.

“He listened to us and was actually talking to the boots on the ground,” said St. Amant Fire Chief James E. LeBlanc, who lost everything he owned in the flood.

“In the community, our hearts are completely shattered but our faith is very strong.”

Trump also met with Ascension Parish Sheriff Jeff Wiley, Parish President Kenny Matassa, OHSEP Director Rick Webre, Gonzales Fire Chief Tracey Normand and many other officials and first responders. The Unified Command Center is also serving as a post for the Louisiana National Guard.

The flood is estimated to have damaged 40,000 homes and placed 11,000 people in shelters in Louisiana. LeBlanc said the St. Amant Fire Department has lost three fire stations and estimated as many as 14,000 students have been displaced as six schools in the St. Amant area took on water.

LeBlanc said that was Trump’s biggest concern – the number of children displaced and number of schools affected. He said the candidate asked many questions about the area and the entire operation at the command post was discussed.

Trump spent approximately 20-25 minutes inside the command center and asked a lot of questions, according to LeBlanc. He also donated a 18-wheeler full of supplies and expressed concern for residents, damage to homes, how much water was in the area and if any assistance had been given by the federal government.

LeBlanc said there was a little heads up that Trump was coming so they were able to be prepared for him. He also said that Trump talked to Pastor Mark Stermer with the Church of St. Amant and was impressed that they were feeding the first responders three meals a day for the past eight days.

“If it wouldn’t be for them we wouldn’t be able to survive,” LeBlanc said.

The Trump visit has “jump-started” other national attention as LeBlanc said he received texts from President Barack Obama and other to come see the devastated areas in Louisiana.

“I didn’t get all that till Trump came,” LeBlanc said. “Now everybody wants to come.”

“It does not matter who you are voting for. What matters to me is this guy came to see our command center,” he added stating Trump was nice, genuine and very concerned about the damage in the area, community and parish.

LeBlanc said the St. Amant community was hit very hard with every fire station, school and grocery affected along with infrastructure hampering the local economy.

“Everyday, it is getting better,” the fire chief added.

Photos courtesy James E. LeBlanc

Share this: Print

Email

Facebook

Twitter

Pinterest

LinkedIn