Meet the Democrats who refused to stand and applaud the widow of a fallen Navy SEAL
President Donald Trump delivered his first address to a joint session of Congress Thursday night, and during the address he discussed various policy issues such as defense spending, his promised wall on the United States border with Mexico, and the repeal of Obamacare. But the standout moment of his speech was his tribute to one of his guests in attendance, the widow of U.S. Navy SEAL, Senior Chief William Ryan Owens, who was killed in January during a U.S. raid conducted in Yemen.

"We are blessed to be joined tonight by Carryn Owens, the widow of a U.S. Navy special operator, Senior Chief William “Ryan” Owens. Ryan died as he lived: a warrior, and a hero — battling against terrorism and securing our nation," Trump said. "Ryan’s legacy is etched into eternity." Lawmakers on both sides of the aisle rose to their feet, giving Owens a standing ovation for several minutes.

But cameras captured top Democrat Reps. Keith Ellison (D-Minn.), Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), and Debbie Wasserman Schultz (D-Fla.) staying firmly seated, seemingly emotionless, and refusing to clap for Owens.

Though it cannot be concluded from the short clip if they clapped at any point during the tribute, those who were in attendance, including Independent Journal Review's Chief Content Officer Benny Johnson, alleged that the while the trio clapped during Owens' intro, they did not clap at all during the 2 minute standing ovation.

Sobbing widow of slain Navy Seal receives 2 minute standing ovation. Debbie Wasserman Schultz & Keith Ellison stay firmly seated, no claps — Benny (@bennyjohnson) March 1, 2017

IMPORTANT: Wassermann Schultz & Ellison whisper to each other "Should we stand?" before most big Trump applause lines. They stand 4 some — Benny (@bennyjohnson) March 1, 2017

FOR THE RECORD: Carryn Owens had 2 ovations. DWS & Ellison stood for her intro. The really long, emotional 2 min one, they did not stand. — Benny (@bennyjohnson) March 1, 2017

The offices of the three Democrats did not immediately return a request for comment.

UPDATE: Debbie Wasserman Schultz denies the that she sat for the applause.

.@dswtweets on @KellyannePolls sharing false story re sitting during widow honoring "These people are not truthful” https://t.co/Hb8a0FfhWf — OutFrontCNN (@OutFrontCNN) March 2, 2017

Benny Johnson responded to the denials by Schultz and fact-checking site Snopes by posting pictures purporting to show that Schultz participated in the first round of applause, but sat for the second, as he originally reported, and as reported by TheBlaze in this story.