How Mexico Became So Corrupt
Just before the 2012 elections, Mexican news magazine Proceso and The Guardian released evidence of a series of shady deals struck between Televisa and the nation's powerful Institutional Revolutionary Party (the "PRI").

In return for multimillion dollar payouts, the network provided the PRI's candidate a special "public awareness campaign" that gave him glowing coverage on its flagship news and entertainment shows; "hushed" criticism on the network's talk shows; and "subliminal" promotion to strengthen his overall image.

In its typically artful way, the PRI had managed to secure a lock on the nation's airwaves.

Although the exposé provoked widespread student protests for weeks leading up to the election, it barely made a blip in the results. The PRI's candidate, Enrique Peña Nieto, won by a landslide.

In the aftermath, Peña Nieto immediately clinched a deal -- again, in typical PRI fashion -- called "Pact for Mexico," a set of 95 vague proposals that gathered together powerful actors from every political party under one broad tent.

***

In the early 1960s a psychologist named Douglas McGregor observed two basic theories of management . Theory X assumes that most people are naturally indolent and seek to get away with something for which they are not entitled. Theory Y assumes the reverse -- that most people are basically honest and hardworking and, if provided with reasonable expectations of satisfactory performance, strive to achieve it.

It may come as no surprise that Mexican companies are overwhelmingly theory X organizations.

Why this is true is deeply rooted in the nation's past. One telling sign is the way business came to rely on government; not just in terms of policy decisions (which affect business in every nation) but personal relations with government officials.

Since the nation's founding, few private fortunes were made without colmillo ("fang" or cunning), the owner's ability to cultivate ties to the right officials and master the art of "mutually convenient" relationships.

In this scheme, the mindset of politicians drove (and was driven by) the mindset of business leaders: wary, secretive, suspicious, and cynical. Each group deeply distrusted the other, yet both intermingled in the same tight-knit social and business circles.

An entire foundation supported this symbiosis: classism, Catholicism, a gulf between pre-Hispanic and European values, strong authoritarian and elitist traditions, and, of course, corruption. On all sides, trust was minimal. Most transactions were made between family, friends and neighbors.

In time, the sense of "us versus them" gave rise to deep-seated paranoia, subtle and often unspoken expectations to keep outsiders outside -- the knowing wink, the sealed lips.

***