Click to Give @ The Breast Cancer Site
At The Breast Cancer Site store, we strive to bring you products that do the maximum amount of good. That's why part of our proceeds always go to the cause you care about.

Our store gives a portion of every purchase to our charity partners.

When you click, we display ads from our site sponsors. 100% of the money from these advertisers goes to our charity partners , who fund programs to provide mammograms to women in need.

Your click on the "Click Here to Give - it's FREE" button helps fund free mammograms for women in need — low-income, inner-city and minority women whose awareness of breast cancer and opportunity for help is often limited. Your click is paid for by site sponsors, and mammogram funding is provided to clinics throughout the U.S. through the efforts of the National Breast Cancer Foundation .

Early Detection: Do You Know The Facts?

The National Breast Cancer Foundation estimates that each year, over 200,000 women will be diagnosed with breast cancer and over 40,000 die. One woman in eight either has or will develop breast cancer in her lifetime. Approximately 1,700 men will be diagnosed with breast cancer and 450 will die each year.

If detected early, the five-year survival rate for breast cancer exceeds 96%. Mammograms are among the best early detection methods, yet 13 million U.S. women 40 years of age or older have never had a mammogram.

The National Cancer Institute and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services recommend that women in their forties and older have mammograms every one to two years. A complete early detection plan also includes regular clinical breast examinations by a trained medical professional. Monthly breast self-exams are suggested in addition.

For more information about breast cancer, see our About Breast Cancer page or this Healthology page.

How You Can Help In Mere Seconds — Every Day

The Breast Cancer Site provides a feel-good way to help promote awareness of breast cancer and provide free mammograms for women in need every day — through easy and quick online activities.

With a simple, daily click of the pink "Click Here to Give - it's FREE" button at The Breast Cancer Site, visitors help to provide free mammograms for women in need. Visitors pay nothing. Mammograms are provided by our charitable partners.

Please remember to click every day to fund free mammograms and give hope to women in need. Every click counts toward the goal of early detection, which allows for the best possible treatment options.

You Can Help Even More

In addition to clicking the pink "Click Here to Give - it's FREE" button, visitors can help more by shopping in The Breast Cancer Site store . With each item purchased, shoppers generate funds that provide free mammograms for women in need. The store offers a wide array of items to show your support as well as fair-traded and handcrafted items from around the world that help families and communities pull themselves out of poverty.

You can also help fund breast cancer research at the Mayo Clinic through our Gifts that Give More program, where 100% of donations will be matched by the Mayo Clinic to fund an endowed breast cancer research position.