Fifty shades of grey tape: B&Q; tells stores to stock up on bondage hardware
Memo urges staff to familiarise themselves with the story behind BDSM film and expect increased demand for cable ties, tape and rope

B&Q staff have been asked to prepare for an increase in demand for rope, cable ties and tape ahead of the release of the film Fifty Shades Of Grey.



A memo tells staff at the hardware store that they may be flooded with “potentially sensitive customer questions” after the Valentine’s Day release. Managers are told to bring in extra stock.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Fifty Shades of Grey - video review

Staff are urged to read the book, an erotic novel by EL James, or watch the film so they can “familiarise themselves” with the story. To help them copies of the book will be delivered to each store and can be lent to staff on “a one-week basis”, according to the memo.

The story follows the relationship between college graduate Anastasia Steele, played by Dakota Johnson, 25, and businessman Christian Grey, played by Northern Ireland actor Jamie Dornan, 32.

Grey introduces Steele to the world of bondage and dominant sexual role play and both the book and the film include a scene in which he visits a hardware store to buy rope, cable ties and tape.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest ‘Do you stock cable ties?’ A clip from the Fifty Shades film.

The memo reads: “As the UK’s leading DIY store we stock many of the products featured in this notable scene and then used later in the film.

“When the book was released in 2012 DIY and hardware stores in the UK and US reported increased demand of certain products and queries from customers as they tried to recreate their own Fifty Shades experiences. We need to be prepared for the same effect when the film is released this month.”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest B&Q front entry. The story says it will loan copies of the book to staff. Photograph: Geoffrey Swaine/Rex

It also states that B&Q’s policy is that products should only be used for their designed purposes but staff should be aware of this new potential.

A B&Q spokesman said: “B&Q remains committed to serving our customers in all their DIY needs and we strive to prepare our staff for any inquiry. Customer satisfaction is always our number one priority.”