Cecil Rhodes statue row: Chris Patten tells students to embrace freedom of thought
Chris Patten, the chancellor of Oxford University, has told students involved in the campaign to remove a statue of Cecil Rhodes that they must be prepared to embrace freedom of thought or “think about being educated elsewhere”.

Patten accused students who had criticised Rhodes, who regarded the English as racially superior, of trying to shut down debate. He said that by failing to face up to historical facts which they did not like, students were not abiding by the values of a liberal, open society that “tolerates freedom of speech across the board”.

The intervention by Patten, who oversaw one of the last vestiges of the British empire as the final British governor of Hong Kong, comes after nearly 200 international students at Oxford signed a statement saying the Rhodes scholarship they share “does not buy [their] silence” over the imperialist’s legacy.

Cecil Rhodes was a racist, but you can’t readily expunge him from history | Will Hutton Read more

Rhodes, who is remembered for beginning the policy of enforced racial segregation in South Africa, attended Oriel in the 1870s and left a large sum of money to the college in his will. Each year, 83 international students are selected to study at Oxford under the scholarship that bears his name.

The Rhodes Must Fall campaign seeks to persuade Oxford university authorities to remove a statue of Rhodes from the building of Oriel college and to spread awareness of his white supremacist views and the historic crimes of the British empire.

In his apologia for Rhodes, Patten evoked the spirit of the South African statesman Nelson Mandela, the country’s first black president after the end of apartheid, who he said endorsed the Rhodes scholarships.

“I think that we are giving them [the students] the respect of listening to their views, even when we don’t agree with them,” he told the Today programme on BBC Radio 4.

“But if people at a university are not prepared to demonstrate the sort of generosity of spirit which Nelson Mandela showed towards Rhodes and towards history, if they are not prepared to embrace all those values which are contained in the most important book for any undergraduate, Karl Popper’s Open Society, if they are not prepared to embrace those issues then maybe they should think about being educated elsewhere. But I hope they will embrace those issues and engage in debate.”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Cecil John Rhodes, portrait c. 1900. Photograph: Culture Club/Getty Images

Patten styled the objections to Rhodes as along the lines of the “safe spaces” policies adopted on many university campuses in Britain and the US, which critics have said are used to suppress debate on a range of issues.

“That focus on Rhodes is unfortunate but it’s an example of what’s happening in American campuses and British campuses,” Patten said. “One of the points of a university – which is not to tolerate intolerance, to engage in free inquiry and debate – is being denied. People have to face up to facts in history which they don’t like and talk about them and debate them.”

He added: “Can you imagine a university where there is no platform? I mean a bland diet of bran to feed people, it’s an absolutely terrible idea. If you want universities like that you go to China where they are not allowed to talk about western values, which I regard as global values. No, it’s not the way a university should operate.”

In response to Patten’s comments, Daisy Chandley, an organiser of Rhodes Must Fall, said: “Patten’s description of us ‘shouting’ summed up exactly how he wants the world to view us. Yes, we have shouted and sung and raised our voices – we wanted our voices to be heard, and I can imagine nothing less intellectually drab and bland than the protest we recently held.

“But we’ve also presented a petition, met with leaders from other groups within the university and researched every aspect of this issue.

“We are demanding debate and free speech, not trying to quiet it. We are not asking for history to be censored, but rather for people to realise that a statue – just like colonialism itself – is not history; it is something very much in the present tense.”

André Dallas, a second-year economics and management student said: “RMF’s aim as a movement has always been the opposite of no-platforming; we have in fact actively called for the platforming of Rhodes, his legacy and his victims in seminar rooms, history books and the curriculum.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Students attack the defaced statue of British mining magnate and politician Cecil John Rhodes as it is removed from the University of Cape Town in April 2015. Photograph: Rodger Bosch/AFP/Getty Images

“We simply believe that the sentimental, glorified memorialisation of Rhodes stands in the way of full engagement with his legacy. That our legitimate engagement with democratic forms of expression has been met with comments that we should ‘go elsewhere’ is a contradiction of the university’s stated commitment to free speech and debate.”

On Tuesday, a group of Rhodes scholars sent a statement to the Guardian condemning what it called an onslaught of attacks in the British media against Ntokozo Qwabe, a scholar who had become a figurehead for the Rhodes Must Fall campaign.



The students wrote that “this scholarship does not buy our silence”, adding: “It is not an instrument of censorship.

“There is no hypocrisy in being a recipient of a Rhodes scholarship and being publicly critical of Cecil Rhodes and his legacy – a legacy that continues to alienate, silence, exclude and dehumanise in unacceptable ways. There is no clause that binds us to find ‘the good’ in Rhodes’ character, nor to sanitise the imperialist, colonial agenda he propagated.”

The new vice chancellor of Oxford, Professor Louise Richardson, used her installation speech on Tuesday to call on students to be open minded and engage with objectionable ideas.

Richardson, the first woman to hold the post at the university, said students must be educated to “both embrace complexity and retain conviction”, while daring “to disturb the universe”, and to understand that “an Oxford education is not meant to be a comfortable experience”.

She added: “How do we ensure that they appreciate the value of engaging with ideas they find objectionable, trying through reason to change another’s mind, while always being open to changing their own? How do we ensure that our students understand the true nature of freedom of inquiry and expression?”

She concluded: “Let’s keep our eyes firmly fixed on the future, without forgetting the traditions that bind us to our forebears and the values and interests that unite us to one another.”