Russian and British troops in tense Pristina stand-off
The tense stand-off with Nato triggered by Friday's dramatic entry of Russian troops into Pristina worsened last night.

Kremlin officials attacked the US for ignoring the Russian claim to a leading role in the Kosovo peace-keeping operations, as leaders of the 200 Russian troops who claimed squatters' rights by seizing Pristina airport began talks with the British Nato contingent which reached it yesterday afternoon.

Negotiations were led by Brigadier Adrian Freer, commander of the 5th Airborne Brigade. Senior military sources expressed their confidence that any problems could be resolved in a 'soldier-like' way.

General Hugh Shelton, the US Joint Chief of Staff, claimed the talks were 'cordial' and predicted 800 British troops would be around the airport by nightfall. William Cohen, US Defence Secretary, claimed the Russian presence was militarily insignificant.

But beneath the stand-off lies considerable Russian resentment. After a day of extreme confusion the Kremlin asserted that the Russians' audacious powerplay had been ordered by President Yeltsin personally.

This undermined claims by Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov that the deployment had been an unfortunate mistake and followed feverish speculation that the Russian military leadership was operating its own foreign policy.

Amid mutual accusations of bad faith, the crisis deepened further when it emerged the Russians were planning to reinforce its detachment in Kosovo. More then 100 Russian soldiers and 60 vehicles in Bosnia moved close to the Yugoslav border planning to resupply the detachment.

In Moscow, US Under Secretary of State Strobe Talbott held a second round of tense and inconclusive talks with Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov in a bid to reach a political agreement on the Russian troop deployment in Kosovo, including the Russians' demand to command a sector independent of Nato command and control.

The Russians claim they were frozen out of their rightful place in the peacemaking force when Nato divided the province into five sectors and handed commands to four European countries and the US. Russian officials familiar with the Moscow talks accused the US of a 'rigid, unconstructive position' by rejecting all plans for the deployment of Russian peacekeepers in Kosovo.

Senior Russian sources said Nato had lied to Moscow about the timetable for the Kosovo deployments.

To an ecstatic reception from Serbs in Pristina, Russian troops moved into Kosovo overnight, a deployment which Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov initially claimed was 'unfortunate mistake' and would be withdrawn.

But later President Boris Yeltsin's top foreign affairs aide, Sergei Prikhodko, said that the president himself had given the order for the deployment.

He said that 'as far as the presence of the Russian contingent in Kosovo is concerned, there are instructions from the president. The responsibility for their fulfilment and timing depends on the military.'

In a clear sign that the deployment had indeed been ordered at the highest level, Colonel-General Viktor Zavarzin, Moscow's military representative at Nato, accompanied Russian troops to Pristina. Last night, at an Independence Day celebration in Moscow, President Yeltsin announced his promotion. Yeltsin was basking in praise from the parliamentary opposition after a week of harsh words in which the Kosovo peace deal had been denounced as treason and a total capitulation to Nato.

Clinton will discuss the crisis directly with Yeltsin by phone today. A group of Russian military experts, accompanied by Pentagon officials, also flew to Macedonia yesterday to discuss a possible Russian zone of influence in Kosovo.

Pristina airport has been earmarked by K-FOR for its central headquarters inside Kosovo.

Speaking at 2pm just as British troops from 1st Battalion Parachute Regiment were expected to meet 200 Russian troops stationed at Pristina Airport, Nato Supreme Commander General Wesley Clark said: 'We need to ask the Russian authorities why they have given contradictory statements.'

He said that General Mike Jackson, as Nato's Commander of KFOR, had 'authority to direct all operations on the ground, to control all facilities and to tell all forces to redeploy or otherwise take adjustments.'