Trump's 'crass' attitude resonates with disgruntled Sun City voters | The State
FLASHBACK: Donald Trump versus Lindsey Graham During a July 2015 campaign appearance at Sun City Hilton Head, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump complained that fellow presidential candidate Sen. Lindsey Graham had earlier called him a jackass. Trump then read out Graham's phone n Up Next × SHARE COPY LINK During a July 2015 campaign appearance at Sun City Hilton Head, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump complained that fellow presidential candidate Sen. Lindsey Graham had earlier called him a jackass. Trump then read out Graham's phone n

Donald Trump's fiery and contentious personality is exactly why some Sun City Hilton Head voters showed up hours early to hear the real estate mogul speak in Sun City on Tuesday.

"He's saying what others are afraid to say, and I like that," said Jan Burke, who has lived in Sun City for 10 years. "He's not afraid to say what others are thinking."

Burke and her husband, John, arrived just before 8 a.m. for Trump's noon speech at Sun City's Magnolia Hall. They were the 12th people in line for event and are sitting in the first row available to residents.

The Burkes appreciate Trump's no-holds-barred commentary on national issues, even the outbursts that have earned him the scorn of other Republicans and immigration activists.

Unlimited Digital Access: Only $0.99 For Your First Month Get full access to The State content across all your devices. SAVE NOW

Illegal immigration is among Jan Burke's biggest concerns, and she agrees with Trump's focus on border security.

"It seems like other people are taking over our country," she said, echoing Trump's comments. "There aren't even Americans anymore and that bothers me."

"I see your senator (Lindsey Graham), what a stiff, what a stiff," @realDonaldTrump says of Graham's Trump bashing earlier on CBS — Zach Murdock (@IPBG_Zach) July 21, 2015

Others in the packed auditorium in Magnolia Hall praised Trump's business credentials and that he doesn't fit the typical politician's stereotype.

"He's brash, he's crass and he has no filter. I like that," said Sheila Weinberg. "He's not a politician, he's not stupid. He's a businessman and he'll hire the right people."

Weinberg and her husband, Michael, also snagged a front row seat for helping volunteer at other Republicans of Sun City events. They are not sold on Trump as their pick for the GOP nomination, but they also feel that his thoughts echo their "living room conversations."

Lines for Trump's speech began forming outside the auditorium at about 7:30 a.m., tweeted Jeff Taillon, Trump's South Carolina political director.

Organizers expected an overcapacity crowd of hundreds to flood Magnolia Hall, so the Republicans of Sun City Hilton Head have arranged a simulcast in Pinckney Hall.

Trump has stood out among a crowded field of Republican contenders with his contentious commentary on immigration and his outspoken personality.

Those comments have attracted the attention of the Lowcountry Immigration Coalition, which announced Friday its members will hold a silent protest of the event between Magnolia and Pinckney halls.

Trump was originally scheduled to visit Sun City in June, but he canceled the trip in the hours after the mass shooting at Emanuel AME Church in Charleston.

The event is free, but is limited to Sun City residents only.

For live updates throughout the event, follow Island Packet reporter Zach Murdock and columnist Liz Farrell on Twitter at @IPBG_Zach and @elizfarrell.

Follow reporter Zach Murdock on Twitter at twitter.com/IPBG_Zach and on Facebook at facebook.com/IPBGZach.