Worst is still to come‚ forecasters warn storm-tossed Cape Town
Capetonians who expected to wake up to a devastated city on Wednesday were warned: the worst is still to come.

Forecasters said the storm predicted to be the worst for 30 years would reach its height between 11am and 5pm.

With the 2.30pm high tide coinciding with spring tide and forecasts of swells up to 16 metres high‚ residents of coastal areas were warned to move to higher ground if possible.

By 8am no flights at Cape Town International Airport had been affected by the storm‚ but while planes were operating normally the same could not be said of trains and automobiles.

The railway line between Wellington and Bellville was closed by Transnet Freight Services‚ disrupting commuter trains. A bus shuttle operated between Worcester and Wellington. Delays and power disruptions were reported on several other lines around Cape Town.

Chapman’s Peak Drive between Noordhoek and Hout Bay was closed‚ there were reports of rockfalls on Clarence Drive between Gordon’s Bay and Rooi Els‚ and power failed at the Huguenot Tunnel‚ leading to a ban on heavy vehicles.

Uprooted trees blocked roads across the city‚ and numerous residents tweeted their appreciation of City of Cape Town emergency teams who quickly removed the obstacles.

A large fire caused by strong berg winds closed the N2 between Knysna and Plettenberg Bay.

The City of Cape Town reported flooding at Imizamo Yethu in Hout Bay‚ Masiphumelele in Kommetjie and Royal Road in Maitland‚ where the primary school hall was opened to accommodate displaced families.

A major power cut hit Claremont‚ and other outages were reported in Strand‚ Steenberg‚ Newlands‚ Southfields‚ Bridgetown and Pinelands. The weather forecast was for thunder showers with gale-force winds throughout the day.

Overnight‚ roofs were blown off in Strand‚ Kalkfontein‚ Delft‚ Mfuleni and Mandalay. Two people were injured when a roof blew off in Lavender Hill.

An uprooted tree landed on a block of flats in Plumstead‚ but no one was hurt.