Stubbornness a lifeline for sole survivor As funerals for Schenectady fire victims near, Safyre, 5, fights on























































































Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 1 of / 23 Caption Close Image 1 of 23 Family, friends and neigbors attend a vigil for Donavan Duell, the youngest victim of Schenectady fatal fire, on what would have his first birthday on Wednesday May 15 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. He, his father, and three siblings all perished in the May 2 blaze, which authorities say was deliberately set. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) less Family, friends and neigbors attend a vigil for Donavan Duell, the youngest victim of Schenectady fatal fire, on what would have his first birthday on Wednesday May 15 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. He, his father, ... more Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 2 of 23 Family, friends and neigbors attend a vigil for Donavan Duell, the youngest victim of Schenectady fatal fire, on what would have his first birthday on Wednesday May 15 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. He, his father, and three siblings all perished in the May 2 blaze, which authorities say was deliberately set. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) less Family, friends and neigbors attend a vigil for Donavan Duell, the youngest victim of Schenectady fatal fire, on what would have his first birthday on Wednesday May 15 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. He, his father, ... more Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 3 of 23 Schenectady police and firefighters at the scene of burned house, center, on Hulett Street on Friday, May 3, 2013, in Schenectady, N.Y. Dave Terry and his three children perished in a fire Thursday night. (Cindy Schultz / Times Union) less Schenectady police and firefighters at the scene of burned house, center, on Hulett Street on Friday, May 3, 2013, in Schenectady, N.Y. Dave Terry and his three children perished in a fire Thursday night. ... more Photo: Cindy Schultz Image 4 of 23 Schenectady police and firefighters at the scene of burned house, center, on Hulett Street on Friday, May 3, 2013, in Schenectady, N.Y. Dave Terry and his three children perished in a fire Thursday night. (Cindy Schultz / Times Union) less Schenectady police and firefighters at the scene of burned house, center, on Hulett Street on Friday, May 3, 2013, in Schenectady, N.Y. Dave Terry and his three children perished in a fire Thursday night. ... more Photo: Cindy Schultz Image 5 of 23 Victims of Thursday's fatal fire on Hulett Street in Schenectady. Michael Terry, 2, left; Donavan Duell, 11 months, center; and Layah Terry, 3, right, died in the blaze. Safyre Terry, 5, pictured center top, is being treated for burns. (Courtesy Elizabeth Dolder) less Victims of Thursday's fatal fire on Hulett Street in Schenectady. Michael Terry, 2, left; Donavan Duell, 11 months, center; and Layah Terry, 3, right, died in the blaze. Safyre Terry, 5, pictured center top, ... more Image 6 of 23 Relatives grieve at the scene of a Hulett Street fire that killed four people - including three children - Thursday morning in Schenectady. (Paul Nelson / Times Union) Relatives grieve at the scene of a Hulett Street fire that killed four people - including three children - Thursday morning in Schenectady. (Paul Nelson / Times Union) Image 7 of 23 Police and firefighters remain at the scene of a Hulett Street blaze in Schenectady that left four people - including three children - dead. A fourth child was badly burned and is undergoing treatment at Westchester Medical Center's burn unit. (Paul Nelson / Times Union) less Police and firefighters remain at the scene of a Hulett Street blaze in Schenectady that left four people - including three children - dead. A fourth child was badly burned and is undergoing treatment at ... more Image 8 of 23 Police and firefighters remain at the scene of a Hulett Street blaze in Schenectady that left four people - including three children - dead. A fourth child was badly burned and is undergoing treatment at Westchester Medical Center's burn unit. (Paul Nelson / Times Union) less Police and firefighters remain at the scene of a Hulett Street blaze in Schenectady that left four people - including three children - dead. A fourth child was badly burned and is undergoing treatment at ... more Image 9 of 23 Police and firefighters remain at the scene of a Hulett Street blaze in Schenectady that left four people - including three children - dead. A fourth child was badly burned and is undergoing treatment at Westchester Medical Center's burn unit. (Paul Nelson / Times Union) less Police and firefighters remain at the scene of a Hulett Street blaze in Schenectady that left four people - including three children - dead. A fourth child was badly burned and is undergoing treatment at ... more Image 10 of 23 Police and firefighters remain at the scene of a Hulett Street blaze in Schenectady that left four people - including three children - dead. A fourth child was badly burned and is undergoing treatment at Westchester Medical Center's burn unit. (Paul Nelson / Times Union) less Police and firefighters remain at the scene of a Hulett Street blaze in Schenectady that left four people - including three children - dead. A fourth child was badly burned and is undergoing treatment at ... more Image 11 of 23 Police and firefighters remain at the scene of a Hulett Street blaze in Schenectady that left four people - including three children - dead. A fourth child was badly burned and is undergoing treatment at Westchester Medical Center's burn unit. (Paul Nelson / Times Union) less Police and firefighters remain at the scene of a Hulett Street blaze in Schenectady that left four people - including three children - dead. A fourth child was badly burned and is undergoing treatment at ... more Image 12 of 23 Relatives grieve at the scene of a Hulett Street fire that killed four people - including three children - Thursday morning in Schenectady. (Paul Nelson / Times Union) Relatives grieve at the scene of a Hulett Street fire that killed four people - including three children - Thursday morning in Schenectady. (Paul Nelson / Times Union) Image 13 of 23 The scene of a fatal fire on Hulett Street in Schenectady, N.Y., on Thursday, May 2, 2013. (Paul Nelson/Times Union) The scene of a fatal fire on Hulett Street in Schenectady, N.Y., on Thursday, May 2, 2013. (Paul Nelson/Times Union) Image 14 of 23 The scene of a fatal fire on Hulett Street in Schenectady, N.Y., on Thursday, May 2, 2013. (Paul Nelson/Times Union) The scene of a fatal fire on Hulett Street in Schenectady, N.Y., on Thursday, May 2, 2013. (Paul Nelson/Times Union) Image 15 of 23 Schenectady Public Safety Commissioner Wayne Bennett, right in suit, surveys the scene after a house fire on Hulett Street that killed a man and three young children. (Paul Nelson / Times Union) Schenectady Public Safety Commissioner Wayne Bennett, right in suit, surveys the scene after a house fire on Hulett Street that killed a man and three young children. (Paul Nelson / Times Union) Image 16 of 23 Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 17 of 23 Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 18 of 23 Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 19 of 23 Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 20 of 23 Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 21 of 23 Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Fire investigators work the scene of a fatal fire at 438 Hulett Street on Thursday May 2, 2013 in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 22 of 23 David Terry and Donavan Duell, 11 months, were among the four people who died in Thursday's fatal fire on Hulett Street in Schenectady. Safyre Terry, 5, is being treated for burns. Layah Terry, 3, and Michael Terry, 2, also perished. (Courtesy Liz Dolder) less David Terry and Donavan Duell, 11 months, were among the four people who died in Thursday's fatal fire on Hulett Street in Schenectady. Safyre Terry, 5, is being treated for burns. Layah Terry, 3, and Michael ... more Image 23 of 23 Stubbornness a lifeline for sole survivor 1 / 23 Back to Gallery

Schenectady

Elizabeth Dolder never imagined Safyre Terry's stubborn ways might one day serve the girl well in her battle to stay alive.

"She was a stubborn child, but that stubbornness is helping her through this," Dolder said of her niece. "She's going to get through this. I can't lose her, too."

The 5-year-old girl, the only child to survive a ferocious house fire in Schenectady during the early morning hours of May 2 that claimed the lives of three of her siblings and her father, remains hospitalized in critical condition with severe burns to her tiny body.

For Dolder, a married Rotterdam Junction stay-at-home mom with children of her own, the past few weeks have been filled with almost inconsolable heartache.

The tragedy has also brought on financial problems because Dolder has been handling funeral arrangements for her younger brother David Terry, 33, and his children — Layah Terry, 3; Michael Terry, 2; and Donavan Duell, 11 months. Funeral services for the victims are scheduled for Saturday, with burial to follow at Saint Cyril Cemetery in Rotterdam.

To mark what would have been Donavan's first birthday on Wednesday, Dolder and about three dozen family and friends held a candlelight vigil in the infant's memory at the site where 438 Hulett St. once stood. The two-family home was recently demolished, and the site now holds a growing memorial of candles, stuffed animals and toys.

More Information Funeral services are slated for 9 a.m. Saturday with burial at 11 a.m. at Saint Cyril Cemetery in Rotterdam. Donations are being accepted at: The Terry Family Memorial Fund SEFCU Bank P O Box 12189 Albany, NY, 12212

Dolder has been traveling to Westchester Medical Center in Valhalla to visit Safyre, and calls the hospital three times a day to check on her condition. She plans to return to the burn center Thursday.

To help with funeral and travel expenses, Dolder has opened a memorial fund with SEFCU. She said some of the donations will also go to a college fund for Safyre.

"We're just simple people," she said.

Dolder, who had custody of Layah, said she had just brought the girl over to be with her father, David, less than 24 hours before the blaze consumed the upstairs Hulett Street apartment in Hamilton Hill.

Police have charged Robert Butler, the 27-year-old ex-boyfriend of the children's mother, with deliberately setting the blaze by using a form of liquid accelerant in the front staircase leading to the second-floor apartment. Two adults on the second floor and nine tenants on the first floor escaped.

Butler, who is from Saratoga Springs, remains in the Schenectady County jail without bail on a charge of arson. Schenectady Police Lt. Mark McCracken said the probe into the fatal fire is ongoing, but he declined to give details.

Dolder said that so far she is satisfied with direction the investigation is going, and expressed confidence that the "truth will come out."

This is not the first time Dolder, 40, has had to bury a child.

In January 2010, her 18-year-old daughter, Kayla Terry-Olson, died of sepsis, a severe blood infection.

Dolder said losing a family member has led to a something of a spiritual awakening. She wants people to keep Safyre in their prayers.

"She is the light in all this darkness," said Dolder. "I hope no other family has to go through this."

pnelson@timesunion.com • 518-454-5347 • @apaulnelson