Renowned Collections
Tiffany’s most well-known and celebrated creations. Jewelry that is legendary in its design and its provenance. Jewelry that transcends time.

Tiffany designs embody sophistication. These iconic creations are collected for their originality and enduring beauty.

Tiffany T The strong, graphic form of the letter T is simplified, deconstructed, extended, and bent into jewelry that has an extraordinarily beautiful clarity Shop the Collection

Tiffany 1837™ Created to honor the date of the company’s founding, Tiffany 1837™ is inscribed with the historic year. In celebration of our 175th anniversary, the collection features Tiffany’s RUBEDO® metal in a limited-edition series of designs inscribed with Charles Lewis Tiffany’s signature. Shop the Collection

Tiffany Keys Keys from the Tiffany & Co. Archives inspired a collection of pendants and charms that are an intriguing invitation, a promise of adventure. Shop the Collection

Atlas® Bold, clean design distinguishes the Atlas® collection. Elongated Roman numerals are incorporated into each piece. Shop the Collection

Elsa Peretti® Open Heart Open Heart is one of the most celebrated jewelry designs of all time. Created over 30 years ago, the tactile, evocative curves spoke to modern women of the 1970s; and its worldwide popularity continues today. Shop the Collection

Tiffany & Co. Schlumberger® Enamel Bracelets Jean Schlumberger rediscovered the 19th-century art of paillonné enamel, a process of layering enamel over 18 karat gold leaf, which he used to create his renowned bracelets. Shop the Collection

Tiffany Victoria™ Marquise diamonds bloom like exquisite flowers. Elegantly featured in platinum earrings, bracelets, pendants and rings, Tiffany Victoria™ is the shape of brilliance. Shop the Collection

Tiffany Locks Introduced in 2011, Tiffany Locks is a versatile jewelry collection inspired by Tiffany archival designs. Shop the Collection

Tiffany Charms For over 150 years, women of all ages have coveted and collected Tiffany charms. In the 1940s, Tiffany crafted patriotic charms that were popular with U.S. servicemen who would personalize bracelets for their girlfriends and wives. Today, the exquisite keepsakes celebrate love, milestones and favorite pastimes in a way that’s quintessentially Tiffany. Shop the Collection