Corporate Profile

Tim Hortons® opened its first restaurant in Hamilton, Ontario in 1964. Since then, the focus on top quality, always fresh product, value, exceptional service and community leadership has allowed the chain to grow into the largest quick service restaurant chain in Canada specializing in always fresh coffee, baked goods and homestyle lunches. Tim Hortons enjoys iconic brand status in Canada and a strong, emerging presence in select regional markets in the U.S.

Tim Hortons' commitment to maintaining a close relationship with franchisees and the communities where it operates has helped generate immense guest loyalty and build Tim Hortons into one of the most widely recognized consumer brands in Canada.

The chain is dedicated to satisfying the changing tastes of guests through continuous product innovation. As consumer tastes grow, so do the choices. The current menu spans a broad range of categories that appeal to guests throughout the day, such as flavored cappuccinos, specialty and steeped teas, home style soups, fresh sandwiches and freshly baked goods including donuts, muffins, bagels, cookies, croissants and pastries.

Tim Hortons' biggest drawing card is the legendary Tim Hortons coffee. To ensure the coffee is always fresh, Tim Hortons serves its coffee within 20 minutes of being brewed or it's not served at all. The premium blend is also available in cans, as are Tim Hortons hot chocolate and flavored cappuccinos, allowing guests to enjoy these great tasting products at home.

Most standard Tim Hortons locations are open 24 hours. Customers can eat in our dining rooms, take out, or use our convenient drive-thrus, which cater to consumers on the go. Combo unit locations, which house both a Tim Hortons and a Wendy's, offer guests the convenience of both restaurants under one roof. Additionally, the 'we fit anywhere' strategy has led to a number of non-traditional locations in gas stations, convenience stores, universities, hospitals, office buildings and airports.

Tim Hortons is one of the largest publicly-traded quick service restaurant chain in North America based on market capitalization, and the largest in Canada. As of June 30th, 2013, Tim Hortons has 4,304 systemwide restaurants, including 3,468 in Canada, 807 in the United States and 29 in the Gulf Cooperation Council.