Economics of Tobacco Control Project
Prof. Corne Van Walbeek

Principal Investigator and Professor, School of Economics, University of Cape Town

Corné is currently a Professor at the School of Economics at UCT. His research interests are primarily in the economics of tobacco control, and in particular how changes in the excise tax on tobacco products can affect cigarette consumption. Within this field, his research has focused on the estimation of price elasticities of demand, how excise tax increases impact the poor, changes in smoking by different demographic groups over time, and the industry’s reaction to changes in the tobacco excise tax.

Dr. Hana Ross

Principal Research Officer and SALDRU Affiliate

Hana received her Ph.D. in Economics from the University of Illinois at Chicago. She has over seventeen years’ experience in conducting research on the economics of tobacco control and in management of research projects in low- and middle-income countries. Her current research projects focus on the economic impact of tobacco control interventions in Africa, South East Asia, and in the European Union. She is also interested in the economic impact of risk factors associated with non-communicable diseases such as obesity, lack of physical activity, and alcohol consumption.

Bertha Bangara

Research Officer



Bertha is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow. Bertha received a BSocSc. Degree in Economics from the University of Malawi, an MSc in International and Development Economics from the Australian National University and a PhD in Economics from the University of Cape Town. Bertha's research interests are primarily in International Macroeconomics and Economics of Tobacco Control. Her current research will focus on the effects of taxation of tobacco related products and earmarking of tobacco taxes, evaluation of the effectiveness of various tobacco policy interventions and also the effectiveness of taxing the production side of tobacco.

Micheal Kofi Boachie

Postdoctoral Fellow Micheal is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Economics of Tobacco Control Project, University of Cape Town. He received his BA and MPhil degrees in Economics from the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Ghana, and a PhD (Economics) degree from Annamalai University, India. Micheal has research interests in Health Economics and the economics aspects of Tobacco Control.

Zunda Chisha

Research Officer and Masters student

Zunda is a Zambian Masters student with an undergraduate degree in economics from the University of Zambia. He spent four years working in the area of malaria control with a focus on surveillance systems in low transmission areas. Currently, he is working part-time with the ETCP project as a Research Officer. He is also working on completing his Masters’ thesis which is focused on inequality in smoking prevalence and its impact on various outcomes in Namibia. His areas of interest include the public health impact of tobacco taxation, understanding the illicit trade of tobacco and the translation of these into policy.

Vanessa Darasamo

Data Clearing House Co-ordinator and PhD student



Vanessa Darsamo holds a Bachelor’s degree in Economics and Demography from the University of Swaziland and completed a Masters Degree in Development Economics from the University of Cape Town. Vanessa studied the societal costs of methamphetamine use in the Western Cape province in partial fulfilment of the degree in Development Economics. Vanessa is the project coordinator in the Tobacco and Alcohol Data Clearinghouse, which is concerned with collection and dissemination of tobacco and alcohol-related data. Previously, Vanessa worked with the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine on HIV costing studies with International Research Exchange Board (IREX) on a media strengthening project.

Sam Filby

Research Officer



Sam Filby is a research officer at the Economics of Tobacco Control Project and manages the websites for the ETCP and Knowledge Hub. She is also a lecturer in the School of Economics. Sam holds a Masters in economics, specializing in economic development from the University of Cape Town. Her dissertation focussed on barriers to FCTC implementation in South Africa, particularly on the economic aspects of the treaty. Sam joined the ETCP as a research assistant in 2016 during her Masters studies. Her current research focuses on the analysing the impact of the FCTC on price and tax measures adopted in countries around the world and the economics of tobacco control more broadly.

Toughedah Jacobs

Programme Director for the WHO FCTC Knowledge Hub on Tobacco Taxation and Illicit Trade



Toughedah Jacobs is the Programme Director for the WHO FCTC Knowledge Hub on Tobacco Taxation. She moved to the ETCP from the Development Policy Research Unit, where she has been the Project Manager for the last 8 years, successfully managing large and complex academic and policy-oriented research programmes. Toughedah obtained her M.Comm in Economics from the University of Cape Town in 2007. She worked at the Western Cape Provincial Treasury before joining the University of Cape Town.

Senzo Mthembu

Research Officer



Senzo Mthembu recently joined the Economics of Tobacco Control Project as a Research Officer. Senzo completed his Masters in Commerce, specializing in Economic Science at the University of Cape Town. His Masters thesis analysed the socioeconomic impact of stock volatility in the fishing industry. Senzo's research interests include data quality, socioeconomic issues and labour economics with a focus on inequality, price elasticity and public policy. His current project in ETCP is on the tobacco tax reforms, within the context of promoting economic and human development in West Africa.

Abel Otwori Nyagwachi

Research Officer



Abel Nyagwachi holds a Master of Economics Degree from Kenyatta University, Kenya. He joined the University of Cape Town (UCT) in 2015 for his PhD studies. His PhD thesis used household survey data to examine some of the effects of tobacco and alcohol control policies that were implemented in Kenya between 2005 and 2015. His research interests are primarily in public health, international macroeconomics and economics of tobacco and alcohol control.

Laura Rossouw

Research Officer



Laura Rossouw is a research officer at the Economics of Tobacco Control Project and is the project manager of the Knowledge Hub. She holds a PhD in Economics from Stellenbosch University (SU), South Africa. Prior to joining the ETCP, Laura worked at Research on Socio-Economic Policy (ReSEP) based at the Economics Department of SU. The group focuses on issues of poverty, income distribution, social mobility, economic development and social policy. Laura's research interests include the economics of tobacco control, economic evaluations of health interventions, the economic impact of tobacco and alcohol use, demand-side factors related to health, and maternal, infant and child health.

Ernest Ngeh Tingum

Research Officer Ernest Ngeh Tingum is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow. He received a PhD in Economics from the University of Dar es Salaam. During his PhD, he was a researcher with the “Tobacco Control Analysis and Intervention Evaluation in China and Tanzania” team at the Department of Economics. From 2012 to 2015, he was the Lead Specialist for WageIndicator Foundation in Amsterdam and between 2015 and 2016, he was a research fellow at the School of Public Policy, Central European University (CEU), Hungary. He has also worked as an independent consultant with the International Labour Organisation (ILO) on issues of youth and women employment in Dar es Salaam and Zanzibar. His current research focuses on tobacco taxation and its interface with industry reactions and responses, effectiveness of tobacco control policies, illicit trade of tobacco products, labour market issues and collective bargaining in the African labour market.

Kirsten van der Zee

Research Officer Kirsten is a Research Officer for the Economics of Tobacco Control Project. She holds a Masters specialising in Applied Economics from the University of Cape Town, where her Masters thesis analyses minimum wages in the South African agricultural sector. She has research experience in development economics with a focus on labour economics, minimum wages, and poverty and inequality analysis. Her current research focuses on the collection of cigarette price data in Africa and tobacco taxation policy in South Africa.