Great Wall of China: Great Wall Tours, Facts, History, Photos
Great Wall of China

Badaling, Beijing

Pictures Video The Great Wall of China, one of the greatest wonders of the world, was listed as a World Heritage by UNESCO in 1987. Just like a gigantic dragon, it winds up and down across deserts, grasslands, mountains and plateaus, stretching approximately 21,196 kilometers from east to west of China.



With a history of about 2,700 years, some of the Great Wall sections are now in ruins or have disappeared. However, the Great Wall of China is still one of the most appealing attractions all around the world owing to its architectural grandeur and historical significance.



Great Wall FAQ

How long is the Great Wall of China?

How tall is the Great Wall of China?

Can it be Seen from the Space? The Great Wall of China, one of the greatest wonders of the world, was listed as a World Heritage by UNESCO in 1987. Just like a gigantic dragon, it winds up and down across deserts, grasslands, mountains and plateaus, stretching approximately 21,196 kilometers from east to west of China.With a history of about 2,700 years, some of the Great Wall sections are now in ruins or have disappeared. However, the Great Wall of China is still one of the most appealing attractions all around the world owing to its architectural grandeur and historical significance.

Chinese Name: 长城/万里长城

Chinese Pinyin: Cháng Chéng/Wàn Lǐ Cháng Chéng

Length: 21,196.18 kilometers (13,170.70 miles)

Construction Period: 2,500 years from the Spring and Autumn Period (770 – 476 BC) to 1878 in late Qing Dynasty (1644 - 1911) Maps

Great Wall Marathon

Who built?

When built?

Why built? (13,170.70 miles)Spring and Autumn Period (770 – 476 BC)



GW01: Great Wall Day Tours: one day / half day to Badaling, Mutianyu, or Juyongguan.

GW02: 2 Days Tour with Great Wall: to Mutianyu, Tiananmen Square, Forbidden City…

See Having a wonderful Great Wall tour is a must for one’s China trip. Along this super long wall, Beijing ranks the top destination for its proper maintenance of the abundant wall relics of the Ming Dynasty. Badaling and Mutianyu are best sections to see neat and complete walls and beacon towers; while Jinshanling and Simatai offer challenging Great Wall hiking routes with open and wild scenery. Want to discover the charm of the wall with TravelChinaGuide? Let’s get started!See Great Wall Tour Tips for making a practical travel plan, including the best travel time, packing list as well as health and safety concerns.

The Wall we see today was mostly built during the Ming Dynasty (1368 - 1644). It starts from Hushan in the east to Jiayuguan Pass in the west traversing Liaoning, Hebei, Beijing, Tianjin, Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, Ningxia, Shaanxi, Gansu and Qinghai. Here lists the famous sections for you to know the incredible diversity of scenery along the wall and practical travel tips.

Excitement abounds regarding the vicissitude of the Wall of the Qin, Han, and Ming Dynasties.



The Great Wall was originally built in the Spring and Autumn, and Warring States Periods as a defensive fortification by the three states: Yan, Zhao and Qin. It went through constant extensions and repairs in later dynasties. It began as independent walls for different states when it was first built, and did not become the "Great" wall until the Qin Dynasty.



Emperor Qin Shi Huang succeeded in his effort to have the walls joined together to fend off the invasions from the Huns in the north. Since then, the Wall has served as a monument of the Chinese nation throughout history.

The mystery of the construction of the wall is amazing. The construction, which drew heavily on the local resources for construction materials, was carried out in-line with the local conditions under the management of contract and responsibility system. A great army of manpower, composed of soldiers, prisoners and local people, built the wall. The construction result demonstrates the wisdom and tenacity of the Chinese people.

Great Wall carries a considerable part of Chinese culture. It has long been incorporated into Chinese mythology and symbolism. The most well-known legend is about the collapse of a section of the Wall caused by Meng Jiangnu, who cried bitterly over the death of her husband after he died while building the wall. This legend has been spread widely through textbooks, folk songs and traditional operas.

Following a 45-day long survey of 101 sections of the Wall in different provinces, the China Great Wall Academy reported on December 12, 2002 that the forces of nature and destruction by mankind are bringing about gradual reduction of extent of the Wall with the result that less than 30% remains in good condition. The Academy has called for greater protection of this important relic.



As a reputable China travel agency, we are recommended by many former clients. You may read our customers' As a reputable China travel agency, we are recommended by many former clients. You may read our customers' China Tours Reviews on Tripadvisor.

See which section to visit Consisting of the wall, beacon towers, and passes, etc, the long-extending Great Wall worked as a complete and solid military defense line in ancient China, protecting the Central Plain from invasions of northern nomadic tribes.