Barron Trump Will Attend St. Andrew's School Near D.C., White House Confirms
Barron Trump's new school, St. Andrew's Episcopal, officially started classes today. When asked whether Barron started today, the White House released the following statement:

"As he is a minor child, we don’t comment on Barron and ask that the media respect his privacy as they have with previous administrations."

Back in May, the first lady's office confirmed to Town & Country that President Trump's youngest son would attend St. Andrew's School in Potomac, Maryland.

"We are very excited for our son to attend St. Andrew's Episcopal School. It is known for its diverse community and commitment to academic excellence," First Lady Melania Trump said in a statement. "The mission of St. Andrew's is 'to know and inspire each child in an inclusive community dedicated to exceptional teaching, learning, and service,' all of which appealed to our family. We look forward to the coming school years at St. Andrew's."

The independent school has 580 students in preschool through twelfth grade. It was founded in 1978 and has a student-to-teacher ratio of 7:1. Eleven-year-old Barron is reportedly finishing his fifth grade year at Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School in New York City, so he will likely enter the sixth grade at St. Andrew's in the fall; tuition for grades six through eight is $38,950.

Barron will be the first presidential child to attend the school. The Obamas, Clintons, Nixons, and Roosevelts sent their children to Sidwell Friends, a Quaker school with campuses in the District of Columbia and Maryland. And Jimmy's Carter daughter, Amy, went to public school in D.C.

While St. Andrew's has "episcopal" in its name, it says it "does not mean that we want to 'make Episcopalians' out of our students." In fact, only 16 percent of its students are Episcopalian. Eighteen percent are Roman Catholic, 23 percent are other Christian denominations, 10 percent are Jewish, and one percent are Muslim and Hindu. "The perspective of the Episcopal Church includes respect for other religious traditions and even for those periods of life when a person is not identified with a particular tradition," the school's website says.

St. Andrew's was on a list of schools that Susan Jones of Dunbar Educational Consultants speculated the Trump family might choose from when T&C consulted her last year, and today she called the choice "perfect, perfect, perfect."

The school "has a terrific way of working with all kinds of children," Dunbar said, emphasizing the "research-informed education" the school describes on its website. "Research shows that the single most important factor in developing each student’s potential is the quality of his or her teacher," the site reads. "At St. Andrew’s, every member of our Preschool through Grade 12 faculty is trained in Mind, Brain, and Education Science. This knowledge of how the brain learns allows teachers to take the latest research and implement it into their classrooms."

"It's solid academically, and I think everyone finds their own way of learning there," Dunbar said. "It's a glass-half-full school as opposed to a glass-half-empty place, and it does not have a one-size-fits-all method of approaching its students."

EBay founder Pierre Omidyar is among the notable graduates of St. Andrew's.

H/T: Daily Caller