Actress Kristen Stewart: Terrorists are Only Human and the Military are Socially Inadequate, Stupid People
Kristen Stewart is perhaps best known for playing Bella Swan in the Twilight saga. The movies had a huge following as many eagerly anticipated the release of the next film. However, after recent comments she made regarding American troops and terrorists, Stewart may find that her Hollywood star and ability to attract viewers has dimmed, if not been extinguished.



In her latest film, Camp X-Ray, Stewart plays an MP who forges an unlikely friends with a Guantanamo Bay detainee, Ali after 9/11. Although the film’s director, Peter Sattler, says he wanted the film to be apolitical in nature, that doesn’t seem to be what Stewart took away from it, especially considering comments she made during a recent interview about the movie with the leftist website The Daily Beast.

Marlow Stern, who conducted the interview for The Daily Beast, chose some interesting questions which could be considered quite leading in an attempt to make a film that was done in an apolitical nature out to be quite political and polarizing. But, it is Stewart’s answers that has generated the most controversy as she trashes the American military while standing by terrorists as simply being ‘misunderstood.’

Stern questions Stewart about her character’s relationship with the detainee, stating that it ‘reminds us of the humanity of these people,” that they are human beings, too. Stewart responds, “As Americans, we should absolutely aspire to more than that. If you label something “bad,” people will justify the most terrible things. Just because you’re following a greater whole, suddenly you take the individual out of it and no one bears responsibility for anything.”

Stern then turns to the patriotism that swept over America on 9/12 and, as if that was a bad thing, asks Stewart about her character getting swept up in it and signing up for Gitmo. But, he said, finding out it wasn’t like she thought it would be.

That’s when Stewart turns on the military, after speaking glowingly of terrorists being ‘humans,’ she trashes the military as simpletons and stupid people with no social skills. (emphasis mine)

She’s [her soldier character] simple, not very smart, and really socially inadequate—but a good person. So, if you can sign up, put a uniform on, and erase yourself, you don’t have to consider yourself anymore. You can take the individual out of it and say, “Well, this dignifies me. I’m good because of this.” And when that doesn’t end up being true, you actually have to contend with who you are. All she wants is to think, “They did 9/11, they’re bad, f*ck that, I’m going to do my job and I’m going to do it well.” But then she gets down there and just can’t accept it; she can’t conform to that.”

The humanizing of terrorists as being people, just like us, continues by The Daily Beast’s Stern to which Stewart then goes off on those that dare to judge terrorists detained at Gitmo. (emphasis mine)

“That is essentially so f*cking evil, it’s crazy. It’s a ridiculous idea for you to think that you know anything for sure in life—other than to take care of your fellow people. Where the f*ck do you get off thinking otherwise? These two people couldn’t be from more different worlds and perspectives, and probably disagree fundamentally on most things, but there’s a through-line for all of us—and that’s what people forget, and that’s what makes people capable of doing terrible things to each other. What makes you different from any other person that walks the earth?”

Is she saying that we’re all capable of heinous acts against other people? That’s what she appears to be saying.

Given the fact that Americans, as well as a British man, have recently been beheaded by ISIS terrorists and a woman was beheaded by a Muslim in Oklahoma as he shouted Arab sayings, it is startling for such views to be espoused and such propaganda to be pushed.



Please share on Facebook and Twitter if you think it is shameful for an American to speak so highly of terrorists and so low about our military.



H/T Breitbart