Toronto Island information website
Toronto Island

Most of the island is open despite the flooding. Ferry service to Hanlan's Point is cancelled. Ferry operates to Centre Island and Ward's Island. Please call 416-392-8193 for updates about the ferry. Centreville is open with only a few rides closed due to the flood. Olympic Island and Snake Island are closed.

The Toronto Islands - also called the Island, or Toronto Island Park - is located in Lake Ontario, a 13-minute ferry ride from downtown Toronto. Boats to the Island leave from the Jack Layton Ferry Terminal at the foot of Bay St. and Queen’s Quay. The Island is actually a group of 15 islands inter-connected by pathways and bridges. You can walk from one end of the Island to the other.

The island is approximately 5 kms long from Ward's Island to Hanlan's Point.

On this website you can find information about topics of general interest such as maps and directions, island ferry schedule, activities for kids, tours, beaches, bicycle rental and more.

Kids and adults of all ages can find something to do or see on the Island. There are beautiful swimming beaches (including a Clothing Optional Beach on Hanlan’s Point!), sports facilities, bike, canoe and kayak rentals, a boating marina, large grassy fields for picnics, a theatre, nature paths, EMS and fire station, an amusement park and a charming 150 year-old community of 600 people living year-round in cottage-like homes.

You can walk, run or take your bike on the island, walk your dog (on a leash), visit the 200 year old lighthouse or the trout pond or have a coffee or beer at one of the restaurants. There are lockers at several busy locations, a pier, boardwalk, formal gardens, playgrounds, artists retreat and even a public grade school.

The park, however, is a seasonal place that comes alive in May and stays buzzing until later September. During the winter months it's eerily quiet and most facilities are closed. Take a look at holidays in Canada to find out when the island gets really busy.

Though the Billy Bishop Airport sits at the western end of the Toronto Islands, it is serviced by a different ferry system (and new tunnel), at the foot of Bathurst St. It is not accessible to visitors to Toronto Islands.

The view to the city is georgeous and the island itself is just as beautiful - it's a photographer's paradise indeed. And the best part? There are no cars allowed! (service cars exempt). If you've never been to the islands be sure to add it to your to-do list!

The island has plenty of garbage and recycling bins to help keep the grounds free of garbage - kudos to city staff for keeping it clean!