Boston, Paris and now injured in Brussels: Injured American survives third brush with terror
SALT LAKE CITY -- Mason Wells is either cursed, or extremely blessed. The Utah teen injured in the attack on Brussels Airport previously survived the attack on Paris and the Boston Marathon bombing.

Wells, a 19-year-old from Sandy, Utah, is expected to make a full recovery from the bombing attack Tuesday, which left him with a surgery scar, severed Achilles tendon, head gash, shrapnel injuries and severe burns.

"This is his third terrorist attack," Chad Wells, Mason's father, told ABC News. "We live in a dangerous world and not everyone is kind and loving."

In Belgium, Wells was standing within feet of a bomb that exploded at the airport.

Three years ago, Wells and his father felt the ground shake and narrowly escaped death from an April 2013 attack in the U.S., when a pressure-cooker bomb exploded a block away from where they were watching his mother run the Boston Marathon.

Last November, the young man was just outside Paris when terrorists blew themselves up and shot up Parisian cafes and a concert hall, killing 130 people.

"Hopefully he's run his lifelong odds and we're done," said Chad Wells about the oldest of their five children. "I think it will make him a stronger person."

The former high school football and lacrosse player had four months left on his two-year Mormon mission, and was planning to major in engineering at the University of Utah next fall. He also wanted to reapply to the Naval Academy after barely missing the cut after high school, his father said.

His father said he woke up to the news on TV before calling his son's mission president in France to learn his son was injured but alive. More than eight hours later, they finally spoke to their son, who was groggy and exhausted after surgery. The teen is in good spirits but his family is still figuring out when they'll get to see him, and if he'll finish his mission.

"I'm completely shocked by the news. It's the kind of thing as a parent you never, ever want to wake up to," Chad Wells said. "We're just grateful that's he lived through this experience."