A special room for Muslims to pray in the high school??
A special room for Muslims to pray in the High School? Can we sit by and let this sort of thing happen without screaming "Stop the world I want to get off" but where would I go to be safe???? This is so blatent and against our citizens.....does no one have any power but this crazy man in our white house....let's evict him.A special room for Muslims to pray in the High School?Did you know that Hilliard, Ohio has a special room for Muslims to pray in the High School?YES, call the school if you aren't believing.Sorry NO CHRISTIAN, Jewish or any other religion available.This was checked out on Politi facts and confirmed.Obama Administration Announces Nationwide Muslim Outreach Program For Children Grades K-12American children gathered around a Muslim learning about the Qur’an... for school credit.Washington, DC — At a press conference Friday afternoon, President Obama announced plans for the first ever federally funded Muslim outreach programThe program will be available nationwide for all elementary school students grade K-12 beginning February 1st, 2014. The program is designed to educate children about the fundamentals of the Muslim religion and Islamic belief. President Obama spoke with reporters to explain why it is so important that these outreach programs exist. “The Muslim community deserves our full understanding and respect,” Obama said. “We have killed millions of Muslims overseas since the September 11th attacksThese folks are not all bad. In fact, most of them are hardworking citizens just like you and me. I encourage every student in America to participate in your school’s Muslim outreach program. Learn about the Muslim community, the beauty of the Sunnah and the magic of the Qur’an.35-year-old Paul Horner, a teacher at Starks Elementary School in Louisiana, told MSNBC he is excited about the new programs. “I think anything a child can learn is good. We need more learning in this country. And, these classes are not mandatory but children can use them as extra credit towards other classes.For example, if Becky has a D+ in math she can simply take a three week after school class on the Qur’an and now Sally has an A in Math. How great is that?”The Muslim youth outreach program is designed to help young people from different cultures work together to break down ethnic barriers. Their goal is to help promote a greater respect for other cultures, understanding while at the same time learning about all that culture has to offerKhaled Matei, who is a member of the Muslim Brotherhood‘s Freedom and Justice Party, told CNN he is pleased with Obama and his actions. “I spoke with President Obama by telephone yesterday and personally thanked him for what he is doing for the Muslim community,” Matei said. “This is definitely a step in the right direction I explained to him. Praise Allah.” If any parents of students would like to volunteer to teach the Muslim religion you can call the United States Muslim Outreach hotline at (785) 273-0325 Do we do this for other cultures and religions? NODo we federally fund religion for other religions? NO