Tax Collections hit Ksh76.8 billion in July 2015
Nairobi, 10th June, 2019

Cooperation between Kenya and Spain especially on Kenya's Big Four Plan and promotion of trade and investments will go a notch higher. This was revealed during a meeting held between The National Treasury and Planning Cabinet Secretary, Henry Rotich and a Spanish delegation led by H.E. Joseph Borrell, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation of Spain at the Treasury Building, today. This is the first visit of a Spanish Minister of Foreign Affairs to Kenya in 40 years.

Nairobi, 7th June, 2019

The National Treasury and Planning Cabinet Secretary, Henry Rotich today held a meeting with United Nations (UN) World Food Programme (WFP) officials led by Stanlake Samkange, Senior Director for Strategic Coordination and Support at the Treasury Building. Their topic of discussion was; "Concept on creating one million jobs in Africa and Globally: Closing the SDG Data Gap and advancing digital literacy" initiative by investigating the Specific Country needs. The Objective of WFP proposal is to support at least one million jobs for youth aged 18-35 in Africa and other parts of the world.

The effort aims to improve the economic situation and livelihoods of these young people and their families, many of whom are vulnerable and food insecure, while filling data gaps for SDG indicators and national and regional development agendas, and creating further opportunities for digital learning and skills development among youth.

Download Press Statement

Nairobi, 30th May, 2019

This is to notify the general public that the Budge Statement for the Fiscal Year 2019/20 Budget will be delivered by the Cabinet Secretary, National Treasury and Planning, in the National Assembly on Thursday, the 13th June, 2019 at 3:00p.m

Dr. Kamau Thugge, CBS

Principal Secretary/ National Treasury

Download Press Release

Nairobi, May 22nd, 2019

The Government outlined four key development priorities (The BIG 4 Agenda) for implementation over a five-year period (2018- 2022). Key among this is Affordable Housing with a target to deliver at least 500,000 affordable housing units in major cities around the country.

Download Notice

Nairobi, May 15th, 2019

1. The Government of Kenya, acting through the National Treasury and Planning, has successfully priced a new US dollar 2.1 billion, dual-tranche Eurobond of 7-year and 12-year tenors on 15th May 2019 in London, United Kingdom.

Nairobi, May 7th, 2019

"The National Treasury will censure state corporations that fail to remit pension deductions to their pension schemes in a timely manner," said The National Treasury and Planning Cabinet Secretary, Henry Rotich during the launch of the Retirement Benefits Authority 5th five-year Strategic Plan 2019-2024 at the K.I.C.C today. Rotich added that the Government is committed to commencing the contributory Public Sector Superannuation Scheme.





Download Speech

Nairobi, April 24, 2019

The National Treasury and Planning Cabinet Secretary, Henry Rotich has commended The African Capacity Building Foundation - ACBF for the role they have played over the last three decades in addressing Africa’s capacity challenges. This was during the Official Opening of the 2019 African Think Tanks Summit held at KICC today.

Nairobi, February 17, 2019

The National Treasury and Planning Cabinet Secretary, Henry Rotich, today led his staff in registering for the Huduma Namba at the building in Nairobi. The CS urged the public to turn up in large numbers during the ongoing registration under the National Integrated Identity Management System (NIIMS). More than 8 million people have registered in the countrywide registration process.

Download Public Notice

Download Draft Policy

Kenya has come a long way in the development of strong governance frameworks for the various subsectors in the larger financial services industry. Specifically, with regard to the unclaimed financial assets regime, the regulatory framework conceived over seven years ago has witnessed considerable achievements that are now reflected in the work of the Unclaimed Financial Assets Authority (UFAA). These achievements, however, need to be accompanied by a robust reunification strategy, which is the most important pillar of the unclaimed financial assets regime. During the period of implementation of the Unclaimed Financial Assets Act, 2011 a lot of valuable lessons have been learnt and gaps identified in the original idea reflected in the architecture of the Act. It is against this backdrop that the Government has drafted this comprehensive policy on unclaimed financial assets. The policy is intended to strengthen the unclaimed financial assets regime in Kenya and guide further review and amendments to the relevant existing laws and regulations.

Download Letter

Download Survey Questionnaire