IS OBAMA ON DRUGS? Written by Dr. Jack Wheeler

Obama's Gaffes Start To Pile Up. Sounds like a headline from this week's newspapers, right? Nope, it's from the Chicago Sun-Times over a year ago, March 28, 2007. One of the most glaring gaffes mentioned is his claim that "because of what happened in Selma, Alabama, because some folks are willing to march across a bridge, [his parents] got together and Barack Obama Jr. was born."



The famous "Bloody Sunday" march over the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama took place on March 7, 1965. Obama's parents "got together" around November, 1960 as he was born August 4, 1961.



Bear in mind that he made that claim in Selma to an audience commemorating the Selma march, the date of which was clear to everyone.



So Obambi has been gaffe-ridden for some time. Another beauty occurred on May 8, 2007: In a campaign speech, he said 10,000 people had died in a tornado that hit Greensburg, Kansas a few days earlier. The death toll was 12.



In the past few weeks, however, the O-gaffes have been proliferating.



On April 28 in Wilmington, North Carolina, he thought the month was "March" and that it was "nine months to November."



On May 13 in Cape Girardeau, Missouri, he claimed the war in Iraq was responsible for a shortage of interpreters in Afghanistan: "We only have a certain number of them and if they are all in Iraq, then it is harder for us to use them in Afghanistan." Iraqis speak Arabic or Kurdish. Afghans don't, speaking Pushtu, Dari, and various tribal languages.



On May 16 in a press conference, he claimed, "When Kennedy met Khrushchev, we were on the brink of nuclear war." The two met in Vienna in June, 1961. The Cuba Missile Crisis, which Obambi claimed was resolved by the meeting, was in October 1962.



On May 18 in an interview to the Lexington (Ky) Herald-Leader, he said: "I'm not very well known" in Kentucky compared to Hillary because of her husband and "her coming from a nearby state of Arkansas." Illinois - the state he's a senator of - borders Kentucky; Arkansas does not (Tennessee's in between).



The champion O-gaffe was committed on May 9 in Beaverton, Oregon. You have to see it to believe he actually said that during his campaign, "I have now been to 57 states with one left to go," then says that one is "Alaska and Hawaii."







No matter how exhausted from campaigning you are, you don't make a mistake like that under any normal circumstances. Saying there are 57 states - actually 58, or is it 59? - is such an egregiously stupid error that it is evidence of brain malfunction.



A neuroscientist with years of research into drug abuse and brain chemistry tells To The Point that the behavior exhibited by Obama is consistent with the use of either amphetamines or cocaine.



"His campaign's almost impossibly high level of activity, mental and physical, unrelenting day after day for month upon month is incredibly hard to maintain," he says. "The temptation to maintain it psycho-pharmacologically is great, especially for someone with a history of drug use. The drugs of choice would be amphetamines or cocaine, which can cause amazing mistakes, errors of incredible stupidity."



In his book, Dreams From My Father, Obambi admitted his drug use when young: "Pot (marijuana) had helped, and booze; maybe a little blow (cocaine) when you could afford it. Not smack (heroin), though."



Teen-age drug use isn't, of course, evidence for its use in one's 40s. But when someone who may be elected President of the United States starts behaving suspiciously, then it's justified to ask that those suspicions be allayed.



Thus, To The Point calls for Barack Hussein Obama to be drug tested.



No urine test, which can be faked and is only good within a few days of drug use. The gold standard of drug testing is done with the testee's hair - for it is good up to 90 days.



Hair drug testing uses a 100-milligram sample of hair cut at the scalp for an ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) test, then confirms the result with gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. There should also be a DNA match by a separate lab between the hair sample and a cheek swab, with independent observers confirming the chain-of-custody for all samples.



If Obambi has been using any amphetamines, methamphetamine, or cocaine within the last 90 days, the test will show it.



It's worth noting here the correlation between narcissism and stimulant drug abuse. Obambi exhibits an almost pathological narcissism, an ego wildly out of proportion to anything he has actually accomplished in his life. Someone with this personality defect is drawn to irrationally risky behavior because of a conviction of invulnerability, or superhuman superiority.



Former New York Governor Eliot Spitzer had such a syndrome. He chose to express it with hookers, but it's more common to see it expressed with drugs, cocaine in particular.



No accusations are being made here. To The Point is not accusing Barack Hussein Obama of illegal drug use. It is saying that he is behaving of late in such a way to cause suspicion that he might. That suspicion must be put to rest.



Barack Hussein Obama's hair must be tested for drugs. If he refuses, it will add to the suspicion - as will every inexplicably stupid blunder he makes from now on.









Discuss this item on the forums. (20 posts) < Prev Next > [ Back ]