Here's a Timeline of Every Time Donald Trump Ran for President
Though Donald Trump's presidential campaign has thus far been a series of unfortunate events, this isn't the real estate mogul's first time at the election rodeo. Since the late 1980s, Trump has threatened, with varying degrees of seriousness, to enter the race.

Here is a timeline of Trump's history in politics:

1987-1988: Trump considers a run for president, while simultaneously juggling large debts stemming from his purchase of the Taj Mahal casino.

2000: Trump enters the presidential race as a Reform Party candidate and receives more than 15,000 votes in the party's California primary.

2003-2004: Trump begins hosting the reality show The Apprentice on NBC, which he also executive-produces. He again mulls a run for president, but ultimately decides not to join the race.

How to run for president, according to Donald Trump

March 2011: A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll shows Trump leading all presidential contenders, including Mitt Romney.

April 2011: Amid more research polls indicating that he would be the preferred Republican presidential candidate among voters, Trump repeatedly calls for President Obama to release his long-form birth certificate, questioning whether Obama was actually born in the United States. (Obama eventually complies and releases the birth certificate.)

May 2011: Trump officially announces that he will not run for president.

February 2012: Trump endorses Republican candidate Mitt Romney for president.

2013: Trump forms a presidential exploratory committee and, despite a strong backing from Republican voters, announces that he has no interest in running for governor of New York in 2014.

February 2015: Trump decides not to renew his Apprentice contract, fueling speculation that he's mulling a run for president.

June 2015: Trump formally announces that he's running for president in a speech delivered from Trump Tower in New York City. Almost immediately, corporations and individuals that have partnerships with Trump - including Macy's, NBC and Univision - begin to sever ties with the mogul because of disparaging comments he made about Mexicans in the speech announcing his candidacy.

July 2015: Trump comes under fire after revealing Republican rival Lindsey Graham's phone number of live TV and criticizing John McCain for being a prisoner of war in Vietnam.