Lowest Cost Tree Removal & Tree Trimming in Redondo Beach, CA
Quality Service • Competitive Pricing

Low Cost, Same Day Tree Service in Redondo Beach, CA

Trees & Bees is the company you can count on whether you need one time trimming or ongoing tree service in Redondo Beach. Our Redondo Beach tree care partners use modern equipment, insured workers and offer competitive pricing. Trees are the most visible accent on your property and taking care of your trees will keep your entire yard looking great. If you put off getting a tree removed in Redondo Beach or ignore a tree with large branches hanging over power lines or property, you could end up with a hazard. When high winds or storms hit, you will be glad you have a professional tree service company in Redondo Beach that has been looking out for you. Get started now and provide a few details about the types and number of trees on your property, any potential obstacles to accessing your trees and the team at Trees & Bees will get to work.

Comparing Redondo Beach Tree Trimming Costs To Help Customers Save

When you look for the cost of tree service in Redondo Beach with Trees & Bees, you know that there won't be any extra fees or markups with our transparent pricing. Many Redondo Beach tree care companies will cut corners by not ensuring their employees or by hiding fees until the tree work is completed. Trees & Bees makes sure there is no bait and switch and our Redondo Beach experts have over two years of experience in the tree care field and can provide:

Same Day Emergency Tree Service in Redondo Beach

Yearly, Quarterly or Monthly Tree Trimming in Redondo Beach, California

Routine Tree Care in Redondo Beach, CA (inspections to check the overall health of your trees, look for diseased or damage that can affect nearby trees)

Do I need a permit to remove a tree in Redondo Beach?

If all or part of a tree is on Redondo Beach land then you will likely need a permit. Generally, homeowners who want to remove a tree in their own backyard or one that is under 10 feet tall do not need prior approval.. Removing larger trees in Redondo Beach can cause problems however, as they have larger and deeper roots that are more likely to impact utility or plumbing lines buried nearby. When in doubt, a Trees & Bees pro can help.

How can I get a lower price on tree service in Redondo Beach?

The most important factor for your yearly costs of tree service in Redondo Beach is the type of trees you have. Certain breeds of tree are more difficult to trim, prune and maintain (palm, willow, etc.) while some grow extremely fast and therefore require more frequent trimming (poplar, empress, willow, sycamore). Scheduling a yearly checkup on the health of your trees will also help you avoid diseases that can result in expensive removal and replacement of your trees.

How much of the tree work can I do on my own?

Most people in Redondo Beach take care of their trees while they are young, but at a certain point the tree height makes it difficult for the average homeowner. Handheld arborist tools will only get you so far, and using a ladder and winging it can be time consuming and potentially dangerous. Also note that Redondo Beach tree trimming is a bit of an art, especially with saplings. Shaping a tree properly during its growth is critical to ensure a beautiful tree years down the road and Trees & Bees are experts at shaping all breeds of tree.

How do I know which tree care company in Redondo Beach is best for me?

We get this question all the time, as it is difficult to tell the difference between Redondo Beach tree care companies without actually using them. You are already halfway there, as Trees & Bees partners in Redondo Beach are licensed and insured and have met our reputation standards for providing great service. We always recommend that you ask for specifics on how a company will service your trees, including equipment used (do they use bucket trucks or heavy equipment for large trees?), tree trimming methods used (make sure they do not use 'topping' or other aggressive approaches that can weaken a tree), and how many clients do they have in Redondo Beach? Asking these questions of Redondo Beach tree trimming companies should give you a good feel of the right fit for your trees.

Calculate Tree Removal Cost in Redondo Beach, CA Tree Height Under 10 Feet 20 Feet 30 Feet 40 Feet 50 Feet 60 Feet 70 Feet 80 Feet Redondo Beach tree heights can vary greatly. Determining the exact height will help get you a better quote. Show me how $168.76 Diameter of trunk 1 to 12 inches 12.5 to 15 inches 15.5 to 18 inches 18.5 to 23 inches 23.5 to 28 inches 28.5 to 32 inches 32.5 to 36 inches 36.5 to 42 inches Measure your tree 4.5 feet up from the base and at this very point, measure the diameter of the tree trunk. It's best to round off to the nearest half inch. Show me how $17.86 Percent of tree overhanging a structure 10% 25% 50% 75% No Overhang (No cost) Measure approximate percentage that overhangs onto any structure, including ones that cannot be reached. Show me how $40.18 Distance from driveable surface 15-29 Feet 30-49 Feet 50-59 Feet 60-75 Feet 100 Feet + Less than 10 Feet (No cost) Determine the distance between tree and a drivable road. $8.93 Utility pole interference Wires running through trees Contact utility company No obstruction (No cost) If there are any power lines or poles near your tree, measure the distance between them. Your Redondo Beach utility company may need to be contacted prior to tree removal. $89.29 Update Estimate Total Tree Removal Cost: $325.02 This cost is based on an average of our suppliers, and may not include cost of operation and disposal fees specific to Los Angeles County. Contact one of our Redondo Beach tree companies for an exact price. × How To Calculate Tree Height From the bottom of your tree, measure 5 feet up and mark the tree with colored tape so it is visible. With a measuring tape in hand, step away from the tree until the line on the tree is equal to the 1” mark on your tape. While keeping your hands in front of you so that 1”=5 feet, raise the tape until it visually reaches the top of your tree. Take note of how many inches you raised the tape and multiply that number by 5. This final number will provide you with the tree height. × How To Calculate Trunk Diameter Measure from ground up and mark your tree at 4.5-feet. At this very spot, take your tape measure from one side to the other to get the diameter of your tree in inches. × How To Calculate Property Overhang If any part of your tree hangs over your home or another building, measure and provide the percentage. Estimate as best you can.