Orthopedic Trauma Surgeon
Christopher Born, M.D.



Division of Orthopedic Trauma

Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery

Fellowship-Trained Orthopedic Surgeon



Biography:

Dr. Born is currently the Intrepid Heroes Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery at the Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University and the Emeritus Director of Orthopaedic Trauma at the Rhode Island Hospital. He is a graduate of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and received his MD degree from Georgetown University in 1979. He completed five years of orthopaedic training at the University of Pennsylvania. From 1984 until 1996 Dr. Born was the Assistant Division Head of Orthopedic Surgery at Cooper Hospital University Medical Center in Camden, New Jersey, and was an Associate Professor of Orthopedic Surgery at the University of Medicine and Dentistry/Robert Wood Johnson Medical School. In 1996, Dr. Born rejoined the faculty at the University of Pennsylvania as an Associate Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery and prior to joining the faculty at Brown University in 2005, he was a Professor of Orthopedic Surgery at Temple University in Philadelphia.

Dr. Born is a Fellow of the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons (AAOS) and is a past Board member of the Orthopedic Trauma Association (OTA). He currently serves as the Chairman of its Mass Casualty Response Committee and is the past Chairman of its Fellowship Committee. Dr. Born is honored to have been a Distinguished Visiting Scholar at the US Military Hospital in Landstuhl, Germany and serves on the combined AAOS/OTA Extremity War Injury and Disaster Preparedness Work Group where he chairs the section on disaster response. He is also a Fellow of the American College of Surgeons and for eight years served on its Committee on Trauma in addition to being the Section Chairman for Orthopaedic Surgery. He is currently a consultant to the College’s Committee on Trauma ad hoc Disaster Sub-Committee and is a past Specialty Society Governor for orthopaedic surgery. He writes and lectures extensively on issues of musculoskeletal trauma and disaster management both nationally and internationally. He has traveled to Iran and to Haiti with the US Government’s International Medical Surgical Response Team to give humanitarian medical aid to earthquake victims. Dr. Born is the immediate past-President of the Foundation for Orthopaedic Trauma and currently chairs its Humanitarian Committee.

Dr. Born also heads the Diane N. Weiss Center for Orthopaedic Trauma Research at Rhode Island Hospital and is the Director of the Stein/Bellet Fellowship for Orthopaedic Trauma Research. His areas of research interest include antimicrobial coatings for orthopaedic trauma implants and biomechanical analysis of a variety of fracture fixation methods.

Dr. Born is currently seeing patients non-operatively as the Director of the University Orthopedics "Ortho Direct" program at the Butler campus.

Offices:

Butler Drive

100 Butler Drive

Providence, RI 02906



Undergraduate Degree:

Received his Bachelor of Arts from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1970 and completed his premedical studies at Columbia University in New York City.

Medical Degree:

Georgetown University, 1979

Residency:

Completed five years of orthopedic training at the University of Pennsylvania.

Primary National Professional Affiliations:

Fellow, American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons

Fellow, American College of Surgeons

Orthopedic Trauma Association

Foundation for Orthopedic Trauma

American Association for the Surgery of Trauma

Presentations



Dr. Born writes and lectures extensively on issues of musculoskeletal trauma and disaster management both nationally and internationally. He has authored nearly 100 peer-reviewed papers, 20 book chapters and given over three-hundred lectures at professional meetings.