Who was Alton Sterling? Residents mourn salesman, father
CLOSE Announcement comes after protesters demand answers about police shooting. Wochit

Community members gather on the steps of Baton Rouge City Hall to protest the death of Alton Sterling. July 6, 2016. (Photo: Scott Clause/THE ADVERTISER)

Alton Sterling, the black man whose fatal shooting by Baton Rouge police outside a convenience store is raising questions across the country, was a father of four and small-scale businessman who is being described by those who knew him as generous, hardworking and nonviolent.

The public has not been given much detail as to the circumstances that led to Sterling, 37, being shot multiple times, but details also have emerged that Sterling has a lengthy arrest record that includes several charges of battery. He also became a registered sex offender as a young man in September 2000 after a conviction on a charge of carnal knowledge with a juvenile.

Quinyetta McMillon, the mother of Sterling’s 15-year-old son Cameron, urged the public not to judge him on that record, saying he had paid his dues.

"He is not what the mass media is making him out to be," she said, adding that reporting of his criminal record was being used to "obscure the image of a man who simply tried to earn a living to take care of his children."

Sterling's cousin, Elliott Sterling, told The Washington Post that Sterling was well known in Baton Rouge for being a polished salesman.

“He was really good at selling those CDs,” Elliott Sterling recalled. “He couldn’t make it in a regular job, but he could make it selling CDs. He could converse with everybody.”

He said Alton Sterling was the father of four boys and lived a hardscrabble life, but tried to make it work.

“He had a hard life. He didn’t have no mama, no daddy,” Elliott said. “He wasn’t stable at all. He lived day-to-day based on what he made.”

Alton's friend, Darian Gardner, stopped by the Triple S Food Mart to visit a makeshift memorial, which included a stuffed panda holding CDs. He told The Advocate of Baton Rouge that Sterling “didn’t cause any harm to the community.”

“He was nice," Gardner said. "He wasn’t a bad guy. He was respectable."

Mufleh Alatiyat, 25, who worked at the store, told the Associated Press that Sterling was generous, often giving away CDs or buying food or drinks for people.

“He helped a lot of people," he said.

Sandra Sterling (middle-Alton Sterlings Aunt) at the prayer vigil for Alton Sterling. (Photo: SCOTT CLAUSE/THE ADVERTISER)

Sterling had been living for the past few months at the Living Waters Outreach Ministries, a transitional living center, neighbors said.

“Whatever he cooked, he cooked enough for everybody,” said Calvin Wilson, 56, who described the compound as a place for people to “get back on their feet.”

NBA player Glen Davis, a Baton Rouge native, told TMZ Sports he met "Big Alton" years ago and would sometimes give him CDs to sell as a way to help Sterling make a living.

"Great guy, big personality. CDs were his way to make income to support his family," Davis told TMZ. "Not a guy who would use violence at all."

CLOSE Police in Baton Rouge fatally shot a black man outside a convenience store early Tuesday in a confrontation recorded by a bystander whose video has gone viral.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/29xzj4m