Target brand perception falls, but it's not 'catastrophic'
Target's transgender bathroom policy has sparked nationwide outcry, but isn't likely to negatively affect the brand longterm, experts say. (Photo: ANDREW GOMBERT, EPA)

More than 1 million people may be roaring against Target's transgender-inclusive bathroom policy, but the possibility of long-term negative effects is slim, experts say.

Though that isn't to say the company won't lose a few customers.

Target has seen a dip in people who say they'd consider shopping there the next time they need something, according to data compiled by YouGov BrandIndex, a research company that conducts daily surveys measuring brand perception.

Before Target made its policy public last week, 42% of people said they would consider shopping there the next time they needed something. As of Wednesday, that number had dropped to 38%, which YouGov CEO Ted Marzilli says is a "significant" shift.

While that figure could continue to fall, the backlash that Target's position has sparked isn't "catastrophic," Marzilli says. To put the issue in perspective, when Target suffered a data breach that compromised tens of millions of customers' credit card numbers and personal information in 2013, YouGov's measurement of brand perception for the company, based on what consumers see and hear, fell roughly 60 points. In the past two weeks, Target's brand perception has fallen just eight points.

Still, Target has clearly hit a nerve in the national debate over LGBT rights and sexuality.

"I don’t think it’s a statement that people aren’t in favor of equal rights for transgender people," Marzilli says regarding what the data show. "It shows people just kind of demonstrating that they’re uncomfortable, or uncertain about how comfortable they are, with mixed public restrooms."

Target reiterated its policy — which states that transgender people can use the bathroom of the gender they identify with — in a blog post last week, at a time when transgender people have gained widespread attention due to legislation that limits LGBT rights in several states.

A petition, started by the conservative Christian group American Family Association, of people pledging to boycott Target over its policy has grown to more than 1 million signatures. Target spokeswoman Molly Snyder says the company doesn't comment on performance, such as whether sales and traffic have declined, outside of earnings releases.

Several major brands have come out in support of transgender-inclusive bathroom policies or LGBT rights more generally, calling into question how much Target will be affected by its stance. Other brands that have publicly stated the same position on the issue, such as Starbucks, are absent from the debate among customers and don't appear to be suffering any consequences.

Even AFA, which frequently speaks out against companies it believes threaten traditional family values, seems to have a confusing relationship with Target, naming the company on its 2015 "nice" list of brands considered "Christmas-friendly" in the way they market to shoppers during the holidays.

Target ultimately may be acting as a proxy for a fraught issue driven by emotion over logic, says Melissa Arnoff, senior vice president at Levick, a crisis communications firm. When it comes to debating transgender rights, Target is an easy target not only because the brand is so widely recognized but because it's perceived as a store that's family-friendly, Arnoff says.

"Starbucks is a place where adults stop for coffee," she says. "It’s not a place you take your family. And AFA is certainly making the bathroom issue a family issue."

But in fact, Arnoff points out, Target's position makes sense given the image it has cultivated as a brand, which includes featuring same-sex couples in ads; last year it phased out the use of gender-based signage in store aisles as a way of suggesting products to customers.

And while it may lose some fringe customers who didn't shop there often, Arnoff says the brand could gain just as many shoppers who are happy with its positions on social issues.

"I don’t think they stand to lose much at all," she says. "This isn’t unusual for them. It’s actually very true to who they say they are as a brand. I think the people who shop there loyally know that."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/26C0lep