N.C. gunman shot after wounding 4 at law firm, Walmart
CLOSE Skip in Skip x Embed x Share A man armed with a shotgun wounded one person at a North Carolina law firm Friday before crossing a busy street to a Wal-Mart parking lot. Police say he shot three more people before officers subdued him. (June 21) AP

Greenville police say a man with a shotgun wounded one at law office and three in store parking lot. Officers later shot the suspect. All are expected to survive.

A man with a shotgun wounded three people in the parking lot of a Walmart in Greenville, N.C., after reportedly shooting one person outside a law firm across the street. Police later wounded the gunman. (Photo: Aileen Devlin, The Daily Reflector/AP)

A man with a shotgun wounded one person outside a Greenville, N.C., law firm on Friday before crossing a busy street and shooting three more people in a Walmart parking lot, police and witnesses said.

Greenville Police Chief Hassan Aden said officers shot and wounded the suspect just before noon at an entrance to the store. A witness told The Daily Reflector that the suspect, a white man in his 60s, was shot in the face.

All were expected to survive, Aden said at a 3 p.m. news briefing.

The identities and conditions of the victims and the gunman were not immediately made public.

Police have not yet announced a motive for the shootings or said how they are connected.

The shooting started about 11:40 a.m. at the Kellum Law Firm, where a man sitting in a Geico insurance car was shot outside the firm, WNCT-TV reported, noting that one of its photographers found the victim.

The law firm,which has one office in Greenville and eight others statewide, specializes in personal injury, workers' compensation and Social Security disability.

The gunman then walked across five lanes of traffic on Greenville Boulevard and shot three people in the Walmart parking lot, Aden said. Initial reports indicated that at least one person had been shot inside.

Officers shot the gunman when he turned his weapon on them behind the Toys R Us, ear the Hooker Road entrance.

A Wal-Mart Stores Inc. spokeswoman said the store remained open.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1261laj