Former Stanford swimmer won't be eligible for USA Swimming events
CLOSE The organization pointed out that he was not a member at the time of the crime and won't be eligible to apply for membership in the future. Video provided by Newsy Newslook

In this June 2, 2016 photo, Brock Turner, 20, right, makes his way into the Santa Clara Superior Courthouse in Palo Alto, Calif. (Photo: Dan Honda, AP)

Former Stanford swimmer Brock Turner, who was convicted of sexually assaulting an unconscious woman and sentenced to six months in jail and probation, is not and will not be eligible to compete at any USA Swimming-sanctioned events (which includes Olympic Trials), USA Swimming confirmed Monday afternoon.



Monday marked four days after the sentencing hearing gained national attention — and sparked uproar because of Turner's sentence, which many called too lenient — particularly once a statement the victim read aloud to her assailant in court went viral. A jury had previously found Turner guilty of three charges: assault with the intent to commit rape, sexual penetration of an intoxicated person and sexual penetration of an unconscious person.

According to a USA Swimming spokesman, Turner was not a member of the organization at the time he sexually assaulted the victim in January 2015.

"Brock Turner's membership with USA Swimming expired at the end of the calendar year 2014," USA Swimming spokesman Scott Leightman said in an email to USA TODAY Sports. "He was not a member at the time of his crime or since then. USA Swimming doesn't have any jurisdiction over non-members.

"Brock Turner is not a member of USA Swimming and, should he apply, he would not be eligible for membership. ... Had he been a member, he would be subject to the USA Swimming Code of Conduct. USA Swimming strictly prohibits and has zero tolerance for sexual misconduct, with firm Code of Conduct policies in place, and severe penalties, including a permanent ban of membership, for those who violate our Code of Conduct."

Swimmers must be USA Swimming members in order to compete in any USA Swimming event, which includes the upcoming U.S. Olympic Trials, the meet that selects the Olympic team every four years.