Pastor goes undercover for 5 days as homeless man
Dream gives him an uncomfortable mission.

The Rev. Willie Lyle rests along a curb in downtown Clarksville, Tenn. The Sango United Methodist Church pastor went undercover, living on the streets for a week in June. (Photo: Greg Williams, The (Clarksville, Tenn.) Leaf-Chronicle) Story Highlights Methodist minister was appointed to a new congregation in April

Before he began his new position, he received a different calling



Only 4 people at his new church knew what he was doing

CLARKSVILLE, Tenn. — As one pastor was called to serve a new congregation here, he also heard a still, small, uncomfortable voice.

Three days after receiving news in April of his appointment as pastor of Sango United Methodist Church, a dream woke up the Rev. Willie Lyle at 2 a.m.

STORY: Vt. point system could limit motel stays

STORY: Homeless overwhelming Ariz. shelter

This dream was different from any in the past.

In this dream, God told Lyle to do something very specific, and God promised Lyle if he would do this, then He would provide for Lyle and protect him.

Yet the minister had a problem. What God asked Lyle to do was not something Lyle wanted to do, and he had no interest in doing it. It was clearly out of his comfort zone.

In that dream, God told Lyle that he needed to live on the streets of Clarksville, a 145,000-population city with a military base to its north and Nashville about 45 miles southeast, as a homeless and hungry person. The Lord challenged Lyle to experience firsthand just what it was like to have nothing — no home, no money, no friends, no food on even a semi-regular basis, no nothing.

Essentially, what God was saying to Lyle was, "I hear you preach the word of God and share the message of Christ. Now, I want you to actually live it. And I want to hear how you liked having nothing and being treated with disrespect and disdain by almost everybody. I'm not finished. I want you to tell your new congregation about your experience and challenge them to make a difference in the world, beginning right here in Clarksville."

According to Lyle, his conversation with God was pretty much a one-way conversation. God talked. Lyle listened.

&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;lt;!--iframe--&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;gt;

"I didn't find any comfort in what I was hearing. I definitely wasn't comfortable with the idea of living on the streets, even if for only five days."

Lyle's wife, Suzette Lyle, dropped him off in downtown Clarksville early on the Monday of June 17, and he lived on the street through the morning of June 21. In those 4½ days, Willie Lyle learned a great deal about the homeless, the working poor who face hunger daily and those in need of spiritual and emotional help.

It was not comfortable.

Willie Lyle learned something else uncomfortable. He learned from firsthand experience just how many people who are fortunate in life look down upon and ignore the homeless, the hungry and the poor without ever taking the time to learn their story.

"Generally speaking, people are not kind to the homeless," he said.

"I know there are people who live on the street and choose to do so. I am talking about the homeless and poor who find themselves in circumstances beyond their control and they have nothing," he said. "Sadly, sometimes they don't even have hope.

"They most definitely want food and shelter, but they also seek the food and shelter found in the message of Christ," the pastor said. "I'm not sure churches are addressing those needs."

Life on the streets

Once on the street, Willie Lyle learned some important things he needed for survival, including who to trust and not trust, where to get meals, where to sleep so police would not arrest him and where to hang out.

"People on the street don't trust you or talk with you at first," he said. "They want to know who you are and why you are homeless. It's not that they are rude, but just very direct."

Then he learned to navigate the city's services for the homeless.

STORY: Cities' crackdown on homeless could be compassion fatigue

STORY: Number of homeless, at-risk veterans double

"I learned immediately that Loaves and Fishes served a meal every day," Willie Lyle said. "That meal was delicious, and the volunteers were great."

He was not very familiar with a Clarksville program called the Food Initiative, a group of teens are involved in different food projects around town. When he ate at Loaves and Fishes on June 19, volunteers from the Food Initiative were serving meals. Two young men were especially impressive.

"These two high school boys called me 'sir,' introduced themselves to me, shook my hand and wanted to know how I was doing. They treated me with respect and dignity."

Although he never made it to Manna Café, other homeless people said that agency was the best place to go for assistance. He also heard about the Old Firehouse. He walked there one morning from downtown to get breakfast. He noticed only five people there and wondered why.

"After arriving and being handed a bunch of paperwork to complete and submit, I decided maybe the paperwork requirements kept people away. It was a hassle. I did get to take a shower and was grateful for that."

Willie Lyle had a great experience at The Well, a program sponsored by the Church of Christ at Trenton Crossing. "Every Wednesday evening, they provide a great meal, an uplifting message and you are accepted there. You can even get a haircut at The Well. Those folks care."

Remarking on what he now understands so much better, "Homeless people walk slowly, and now I know why. They physically hurt all over from sleeping on concrete, the ground or on wooden floors."

Something that Willie Lyle noticed during his week on the street was the large number of families who battled hunger every day. Most are referred to as America's working poor. They simply do not have enough money to feed their children on a regular basis.

"I met one man who cleared $125 each week in his job, but his rent was $100. He had to use the remainder for bills and food. I sure don't know anybody willing to trade places with him."

&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;lt;!--frame--&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;gt;

A one-of-a-kind sermon

Throughout the week, Willie Lyle kept a small journal of what he was experiencing. These notes become the foundation for the sermon he delivered June 23 at Sango United Methodist Church, a sermon that caught the congregation off guard.

Only four people at the church knew what their new pastor was doing.

Early in the morning June 23, Willie Lyle lay under a tree on the church lawn covered in a big overcoat. He still had not shaved or combed his hair.

“I wanted everybody to know what I had been through, what I had learned and the physical and emotional discomfort I experienced and that I am still dealing with.” The Rev. Willie Lyle

He wondered how many people would approach him and offer him food, invite him to sit inside an air-conditioned room, or just see how they could help. Twenty people spoke to him and offered some type of assistance.

The title of his sermon was The Least Used Parts of the Body, based on I Corinthians 12:12-15.

"Often the least used parts of the body are the ones that mean the most, like our heart and mind. We need to understand that there are no small or least used parts in the body of Christ," Willie Lyle told the congregation that was started about 10 miles outside of downtown more than a century ago. "Too many of us only want to serve God one hour each week. That doesn't cut it. That is not God's plan."

While he preached, his daughter-in-law cut his hair and his daughter helped shave off his scruffy beard. He changed shoes, and beneath the overcoat, he was wearing his Sunday clothes. He put on a tie and his suit coat, all the while continuing to preach his message.

Before the 200 people gathered that morning, he went from looking like a homeless person to the new pastor of the congregation.

"I wanted everybody to know what I had been through, what I had learned and the physical and emotional discomfort I experienced and that I am still dealing with. And I made sure to mention more than once that Christ was not comfortable on the cross."

Willie Lyle got the attention of those present, and some were uncomfortable.

"If I made someone squirm, then so be it. Sango UMC is not going to be a congregation that talks about issues and solutions. We are going to be part of the solutions to the problems we face in our community."

At the end of the sermon, Willie Lyle issued his challenge. Part of that challenge called for the congregation to "do our mission," and service to others is going to be a major part of that.

"Our goal should be to improve and change the lives of people as we live like Jesus," Willie Lyle said. "You see, we look at the outside of others and make judgments. God looks inside at our heart and sees the truth."

(Photo: Greg Williams, The Leaf-Chronicle, Clarksville, Tenn.)

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1c37wAf