Hearing reveals details in case of woman charged with killing boss
Just over a month after the Oneida County Sheriff’s Office opened a case into the death of a Whitesboro chiropractor, its office and the Onondaga County Medical Examiner’s Office received identical anonymous letters.

UTICA — Just over a month after the Oneida County Sheriff’s Office opened a case into the death of a Whitesboro chiropractor, its office and the Onondaga County Medical Examiner’s Office received identical anonymous letters.

The letters, both delivered Nov. 23, 2015, pointed to a person of interest in the July 22 poisoning death of 60-year-old Mary Louise Yoder: her youngest child, Adam Yoder.

But law enforcement was hesitant to believe the letters’ contents, Inv. Mark VanNamee testified during a Huntley hearing Wednesday in Oneida County Court, especially when they discovered the alleged murder weapon — a bottle of colchicine — in Adam Yoder’s vehicle, just where the letter said it would be.

It would be "a risky move" for Yoder to "drive out to the sheriff's office with the murder weapon" if he knew it was there, VanNamee testified. "We believed it was planted."

It was only after a series of interviews, he said, that they learned the letters reportedly were written by Kaitlyn Conley, an employee at the victim’s Chiropractic Family Care practice in Whitesboro and ex-girlfriend of Adam Yoder.

The purpose of Wednesday's hearing was to examine the admissibility of statements Conley, 23, made to law enforcement during its investigation into Mary Louise Yoder’s death — an issue Judge Barry M. Donalty will rule on at a later date. Conley is facing charges of second-degree murder in addition to two counts of first-degree falsifying business records, second-degree forgery and two counts of misdemeanor petit larceny.

Conley will be back in court Dec. 15 for a status report. It's believed her trial will be in Feburary.

During the hearing, two investigators testified that the majority of their interviews were handled as if Conley were a witness, meaning she had not been read her Miranda rights. It was only halfway through a Dec. 21 interview, after Conley reportedly admitted to writing the letters, that Conley was read her rights, they said.

Prior to that, during a Dec. 8 interview, VanNamee had confronted Adam Yoder with portions of the anonymous letter, which claimed that a container of colchicine — the poison used to kill his mother — could be found under the passenger seat of his car, according to testimony. That same day they found a glass bottle bearing the label colchicine in his car, along with a cardboard wrapper and a receipt that referenced a Google email account bearing his name.

Yoder denied the account was his. And also said he had an alibi: When Mary Louise Yoder first became sick on July 20, her son was on Long Island, where he'd been since July 15. He didn't return home until the morning of July 22, the day his mother died.

Investigators first interviewed Conley a week later, on Dec. 16, VanNamee said, regarding her “working knowledge” of the office.

During the interview, Lt. Robert Nelson asked Conley if she knew what caused Mary Louise Yoder's death. She responded that the older woman died of “a toxicity” but said she had never heard of colchicine before and asked for it to be spelled out for her, Nelson testified.

The next day, Conley was asked to return to give investigators a sample of her DNA to rule out any possible contamination on the envelopes used to deliver the anonymous letters. Conley often pre-postmarked envelopes at the chiropractic office, according to testimony.

Conley was questioned for a third time Dec. 21. By then, Google had sent investigators subpoenaed records regarding the email account used to purchase the poison. An IP address — a numerical label associated with a specific device on a network — indicated the account had been accessed at Conley’s Sauquoit home.

Conley reportedly told investigators Adam Yoder must have accessed the account from her home. But then VanNamee asked her to explain something else: While she previously said she hadn't seen Yoder since September, the Google report indicated the email account had been accessed from Conley's cellphone sometime more recently.

“She again tells me it must be Adam Yoder,” VanNamee testified. “Again she points the finger back at Adam.”

Conley became emotional during the interview, VanNamee said, and reportedly told him she had touched a bottle of what might have been colchicine at the office. When VanNamee asked her if she wrote the anonymous letter, she became "visibly shaken" and didn't answer the question, he said. He asked her again, and this time, Conley allegedly admitted to writing the letter.

It was then, after briefly leaving the room, that VanNamee read Conley her Miranda rights, he said. She no longer was a witness; she was a suspect.

“We as a team, the investigators, back when we received the anonymous letter we believed the person who wrote that letter could possibly be a suspect or the killer of Mary Yoder," VanNamee testified.

Follow @OD_Parker on Twitter or call her at 315-792-5063.