Commercial Listings
No cooperating brokerage commission shall be paid by the USPS or CBRE. Buyer's Broker, if any, shall seek commission compensation from the Buyer only.

The USPS expressly reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to reject any or all expressions of interest or offers to purchase the property (the “Property”), and/or terminate discussions with any entity at any time with or without notice. The USPS shall have no legal commitment or obligation to any entity reviewing the marketing materials or making an offer to purchase the Property unless and until written agreement(s) for the purchase of the Property have been fully executed, delivered and approved by the USPS, and any conditions to the USPS's obligations have been satisfied or waived.

CBRE, Inc. operates within a global family of companies with many subsidiaries and/or related entities (each an "Affiliate") engaging in a broad range of commercial real estate businesses including, but not limited to, brokerage services, property and facilities management, valuation, investment fund management and development. At times different Affiliates may represent various clients with competing interests in the same transaction. For example, this information may be received by our Affiliates, including CBRE Investors, Inc. or Trammell Crow Company. Those, or other, Affiliates may express an interest in the Property described and may submit an offer to purchase the Property and may be the successful bidder for the Property. You hereby acknowledge that possibility and agree that neither CBRE, Inc. nor any involved Affiliate will have any obligation to disclose to you the involvement of any Affiliate in the sale or purchase of the Property. In all instances, however, CBRE, Inc. will act in the best interest of the client(s) it represents in the transaction and will not act in concert with or otherwise conduct its business in a way that benefits any Affiliate to the detriment of any other offeror or prospective offeror, but rather will conduct its business in a manner consistent with the law and any fiduciary duties owed to the client(s) it represents in the transaction.

The information pertaining to the Property does not purport to be a representation of the state of affairs of the Property or to be all-inclusive or to contain all or part of the information which prospective purchasers may require to evaluate a purchase of real property. All financial projections and information are provided for general reference purposes only and are based on assumptions relating to the general economy, market conditions, competition and other factors beyond the control of the USPS and CBRE, Inc. Therefore, all projections, assumptions and other information provided and made are subject to material variation. All references to acreages, square footages, and other measurements are approximations. Interested parties are expected to review all information and other documents of whatever nature independently and not rely on any other information provided.

Neither the USPS or CBRE, Inc., nor any of their respective directors, officers, Affiliates or representatives make any representation or warranty, expressed or implied, as to the accuracy or completeness of this information or any of its contents, and no legal commitment or obligation shall arise by reason of your receipt of this information or use of its contents; and you are to rely solely on your investigations and inspections of the Property in evaluating a possible purchase of the real property.

Click on any of the properties pictured below to learn more.