Rumors about missing Visalia women are rumors
Raquel Zamora is asking anyone with information on her daughter’s whereabouts to contact the Tulare County Sheriff’s Department. (Photo: Sheyanne Romero)

Thomas Kenison’s wife works late nights and often walks to her car by herself. As a worried husband, he purchased his wife a can of pepper spray.

“I wish all women could have pepper spray,” Kenison said. “I wish they didn’t need it, but they do.”

After learning of the disappearance of Cecilia Bravo Cabrera, Goshen, Kenison created a GoFundMe.com account, Safety and Security for Valley Women, to purchase pepper spray and whistles for women.

“I just felt like I had to do something,” he said.

Like many community members, Kenison is concerned with the threat of abduction.

Recently, the Visalia Police Department became aware of several social media postings related to missing and abducted females in Visalia and the surrounding communities.

“We would like to take this opportunity to inform the public we currently do not have any information to support these claims, nor are we investigating any reports of abducted women,” Visalia Sgt. Damon Maurice said. “We have been in contact with the authors of recent online posts in an effort to determine if criminal conduct occurred.”

The police department would like to remind the public to be alert, be vigilant and be aware of their surroundings, at all times.

“If you experience or witness anything of a suspicious nature, please report this activity to us immediately,” Maurice said.

Kenison also reached out to two local businesses, Drill Sergeant Military Supply and Tops Military Supply to help reach his goal to provide 250 woman with pepper spray and a whistle. He plans on setting up booths outside various locations throughout Tulare County to hand out these items.

(Photo: Sheyanne Romero)

Any remaining money raised through the GoFundMe.com account will go toward the families of local missing women, like Cabrera.

Investigators with the Tulare County Sheriff’s Department still have no update on the whereabouts of Cabrera, the Goshen woman who went missing late last week. They didn’t respond to calls for tips on safety or details on the case and leads. They referred questions about rumors to Visalia police.

Family and friends held a birthday celebration for their missing loved one on Monday. During the celebration, Cabrera's father recited a prayer, after the family released many balloons.

Ramona Amancio said that every year her childhood friend would throw an extravagant party for herself.

"We know she's coming home," she said.

Cabrera, 30, was last seen at 12:39 a.m. Thursday at Tachi Palace Casino in Lemoore.

She was driving a dark gray Chevrolet Malibu. Detectives found her vehicle in the area Traver but are still searching for Cabrera.

Cabrera is described at 5-foot 1-inch tall, 160 pounds, with brown hair, possibly dyed blonde and brown eyes. She was last seen wearing a black shirt, dark blue jeans and sandals.

"I truly believe she's alive," Amancio said. "Cecilia is a fighter."

If anyone has information regarding her disappearance, please call the Tulare County Sheriff’s Department at 733-6211. To donate to Safety and Security for ValleyWomen visit, www.gofundme.com/Safety-and-Securit

Read or Share this story: http://vtd-tar.co/28D5RyG