The Lost Photographs: Marilyn Monroe
Full ScreenPhotos: 1 / 10 The Lost Photographs: Marilyn Monroe Previous Next Sweater girl Monroe, seen here with a real Mountie, photographed by her makeup artist, Allan “Whitey” Snyder, in Banff, Canada, during the filming of the movie River of No Return. On her way to hair and makeup early one morning, Monroe, who typically refused to be photographed without makeup, posed in front of some hungry black bears at the request of her makeup artist, Snyder. This image, taken on Sunday, April 15, 1956, by famed fashion and celebrity photographer Milton H. Greene, was shot on the set of Bus Stop. Greene, who would become the actress’s official photographer, eventually started a production company with the star. Taken on the set of the 1954 feature River of No Return, this never-before-seen image was acquired from Snyder’s estate. Photographed in 1952 on the eve of Monroe’s appearance in Gentlemen Prefer Blondes, this outtake from an ad shoot was created by her friend Mischa Pelz. A commercial photographer, Pelz was hired to shoot the lawn furniture, with Marilyn serving as a model. Snyder caught Monroe between takes of the 1953 movie Niagara, shot in upstate New York. This behind-the-scenes shot by Snyder offers a side-angle view of Greene photographing Monroe on the set of Bus Stop in 1956. On August 3, 1952, Lani Carlson, who was a sound engineer for Capitol Records, secured a press pass from a friend at the Chicago Tribune and claimed he needed to photograph Monroe for the Associated Press. Though Carlson developed the pictures back in the 50s, they remained in a shoebox until 2010. This frame, also by Carlson, was taken on the same day as the previous one. This snapshot by Snyder was taken in 1957, in England, during the Monroe-and-Greene-produced film, The Prince and the Showgirl, directed by Laurence Olivier.

Los Angeles Show: June 6, 2014—BOULEVARD3, 6523 Sunset Blvd., Hollywood. There will be an invite-only party from seven P.M. to nine P.M., and at 9:30 P.M., the exhibition opens to the public and remains open until the venue closes.

San Francisco Show: Thursday, June 19, 2014—Sarah Stocking Gallery, 368 Jackson Street, San Francisco. It will be open to the public all day.

New York Show: Launching Tuesday, July 22, 2014—Whitespace, 37 Walker Street, New York. There will be an invite-only launch party on Tuesday, July 22, 2014, and the gallery will be open to the public for two weeks after.