JOHN MCCAIN: AID AND COMFORT

COMMAND SERGEANT MAJOR JOHN HOLLAND ON JOHN MCCAIN

"HANOI JOHN"

BY Gordon Duff STAFF WRITER

Presidential pardon from Nixon saves John McCain from treason and collaboration charges according to Rolling Thunder Founder and 3 war veteran, John Holland….

Why nothing in the news…

Why no reports…..

Why was the truth kept from American during the election?

Some of us have seen the reports about John McCain. I know what Ted Guy had to say about McCain and I know how angry POW activists have been at his betrayal of their cause. What I didn’t know and that few of us knew, is that John Holland, Rolling Thunder Founder, had called for the Republican Party to remove McCain from the ticket.

This isn’t a minor story and isn’t one that has gone away just because the election is over. Many of us who knew what McCain had done didn’t know how much power the money boys behind Palin and McCain could go to suppress this information during the campaign.

Rally after rally, fellow POW and controversial Medal of Honor holder, Bud Day, stood beside McCain, backing him up. With substantiated claims of hundreds of counts of treason, collaboration and aid and comfort to the enemy suppressed against McCain and a number of unnamed other POWs who were expecting to be prosecuted when returned, this entire act during the election seems sick.

Ted Sampley, Vietnam combat veteran, now deceased, wrote at length about McCain and Day. Sampley’s article on Day’s Medal of Honor is extremely revealing. (US Veterans Dispatch)

With McCain supporters continually touting his heroism and attacking Democrats that served honorably in Vietnam like John Kerry and Al Gore, the unavoidable embarassment that their standard bearer may have been the biggest American traitor since Benedict Arnold, confidence in Conservative news sources has to disappear, at least with veterans.

A fair comparison to McCain would be Jane Fonda. Both spent time in North Vietnam.

Both are accused of helping North Vietnam, Fonda by being photographed and McCain by doing many propaganda broadcasts and helping the enemy plan attacks on American soldiers.

Fonda returned to be reviled and spit on while McCain returned to the Senate, spending years helping North Vietnam keep Americans prisoner and amassing a huge fortune trading on heroism and sacrifice we are now told never happened.

Of the two, Fonda was the more honest and by far had done the least harm to the United States.

According to sources, it was John McCain that fired the rocket that caused the Forrestal incident, the most serious disaster on an American ship. Stories make him out to be a "hero" and an "unnamed" total idiot is blamed. McCain is said to be that idiot with his daddy running cover for him. Thus far, Jane Fonda has never attacked one of our ships. We will be taking a look at both McCain and Fonda and try to verify claims. Perhaps they could have a contest to see who killed the most Americans. No tally as to how many pilots were shot down using intel McCain admits givint the North Vietnamese has been made. The Forrestal incident may be a huge coverup in itself.

McCain’s cover story, that the plane behind him fired a missile into his plane is at odds with other stories that blame exploding bombs on some other part of the ship. The investigation and all records involving his military records were under the direct supervision of his own father.

We are going to look at Holland’s evidence and see if there are statements from people on the Forrestal.

Colonel Ted Guy was preparing criminal charges against John McCain when Nixon took Admiral McCain’s little boy under his wing. Where are McCain’s 32 propaganda tapes that were made during Vietnam and broadcast over the radio to US troops? (Colonel Ted Guy)

Why did McCain accuse American soldiers of war crimes during Vietnam? What did he get in return?

If our news media can go thru a presidential election hiding all of this from the American people, nearly putting someone like this in office, what else are they capable of? What else have they done? What else are they hiding?

Vietnam veterans are requesting that the records of the debriefing of all POWS be made public. Those who were heroes need real recognition and shouldn’t have to hide behind a presidential pardon they never needed or wanted.

Those who betrayed their country, some to sit in public office, on corporate boards or to travel around the country basking in glory and pointing fingers at others need to get the homecoming they earned. We spent the last 35 years honoring ALL the POWs while 58,000 dead and another 200,000 plus dying were neglected and abused, denied jobs, denied medical care and hated by their fellow Americans.

None of this would matter if the shadow of Vietnam would die too. It lives on. While some of us are still around, perhaps a moment of justice is in order to help the forgotten and the fallen, wherever their spirits are tonight.

Imagine. Some people were actually worried that Barak Obama might be a Muslim or born in Africa. The same people, with credible information from unimpeachable sources stating that John McCain is a Communist agent and traitor didn’t blink an eye.

Could the problem be, lets say….color?

More on John McCain and his history:

Gordon Duff is a Marine combat veteran and regular contributor on policitical and social issues.

Related Posts: