New Bill Cosby Accusers Mean over 50 Women Have Now Accused Comedian of Sexual Assault
Last week, three women stepped forward to accuse Bill Cosby of sexual assault, bringing the comedian’s accuser count to 49. And on Thursday, two additional women held a press conference in New York City to detail new allegations against the former family-sitcom star.

Sitting alongside civil-rights attorney Gloria Allred, Charlotte Fox and a woman identified as “Elizabeth” tearfully described their alleged encounters with Cosby, which took place in the 1970s.

USA Today reports that Fox said she met Cosby when she was a 23-year-old extra while on the set of a movie. Per the report, “She said he raped her in a room at the Playboy Mansion after she ate and drank food at a dinner he hosted.”

Fox described what allegedly happened in the room, per People:

“I vaguely remember coming back from the bathroom,” Fox read in a statement. “The next thing I remember was that I was sort of awake, in a bed, with no clothes on and there was Mr. Cosby, in a robe, crawling from the bottom of the bed.” Fox added, “I was incapacitated and couldn’t say no. He engaged in sexual activity with me. It was not consensual.”

USA Today reports the alleged events described by “Elizabeth:”

Elizabeth (she did not disclose her real name), said she was an American Airlines flight attendant, 20 years old, in 1976, when she met Cosby on a flight and he invited her to the Mansion. After she later drank sake at a Japanese restaurant with him, she says she fell into a trance-like state, ended up in his hotel room, and was forced to submit to a sex act she would not detail. “All I know is that it was the most horrifying thing that could happen to an innocent young woman,” she said. “No one would have ever believed me in 1976. I would have been told that put myself in a vulnerable situation and it was my fault.”

Although statutes of limitations prevent the latest accusers from taking legal action against Cosby, Allred told reporters that Fox and “Elizabeth” “decided to come forward in an effort to help other women and to hold Mr. Cosby accountable for what they allege was his misconduct with them.”

Since today’s press conference, over 50 women have now come forward to accuse Cosby of drugging and/or sexually assaulting them.

Related: Bill Cosby Drugged Me. This Is My Story.