Deputies: No terrorists found after gunfire reported at Deep Creek
APPLE VALLEY — Authorities said a group of 17 men was detained early Sunday after the Sheriff's Department received reports that they were seen shooting firearms at Deep Creek.

The reports fostered fear that a terrorist cell was training in the area.

Some rumors online Monday suggested the men were terrorists and that they were seen chanting in Arabic before the shooting started. However, authorities denied these rumors.

“None of the subjects that were interviewed were found to be terrorists,” Sheriff’s spokeswoman Jodi Miller told the Daily Press. “They were detained, interviewed and cooperated fully with deputies.”

San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department officials said in a Monday news release that the men were detained after they were reportedly seen shooting assault rifles, handguns, and shotguns at the Deep Creek Hot Springs area early Sunday morning. However, the men were released after no evidence was found that a crime had been committed, authorities said.

Deputies responded to a report of shots fired at the Hot Springs area at 8:25 a.m. Sunday. The reporting party told the 911 operator more than 100 shots were heard and five to seven subjects wearing turbans were seen in the area shooting assault rifles, handguns and shotguns, authorities said.

Dave Stevens, who was hiking at the Hot Springs on Sunday, said he first heard shots fired around 6:30 a.m. He said he saw about five or six men “shooting in the air.”

“I was about 50 feet away from the hot tub and saw them fire about six to eight shots,” Stevens said. “I could see them near the hot tubs talking and shooting. I said, ‘I’m out of here, these guys are crazy,' and decided to leave. As I started heading up the trail I could see them shooting through the canyons. They were shooting toward the hills where people were camping.”

Stevens said he saw at least two or three pistols and heard gunfire going off for at least a half-hour after the initial incident.

Sheriff’s Aviation assisted in conducting an area check due to the rural location, while patrol units from the Victor Valley Sheriff’s Station responded. One eyewitness told the Daily Press she saw 10 to 12 squad cars. A Sheriff’s helicopter found the group of men walking away from the creek carrying backpacks and other items. Deputies from Apple Valley, Hesperia and Victorville Sheriff’s stations also responded to assist.

The group was detained and searched shortly after deputies arrived. Several handguns, a rifle, and a shotgun were found during a search of the backpacks, along with bedding the group had been carrying, authorities said. The men were very cooperative and were interviewed, authorities said, with a local FBI agent assisting with the interviews.

A records check of the subjects, their weapons and their vehicles was completed. The records check revealed none of the men had a criminal history or outstanding warrants. The weapons were registered with the Department of Justice, except for the rifle, and the vehicles were also registered, authorities said.

Several hikers at the Hot Springs were contacted, but none witnessed the guns being fired. Authorities said there was no evidence found that a crime had been committed by any of the subjects who were detained and they were released.

FBI Los Angeles field office spokeswoman Laura Eimiller told the Daily Press the agency is still working with local authorities to determine what may have happened.

"The FBI was asked to respond to reports of suspicious activity on federal land and we are currently working with local authorities to determine whether a crime occurred," Eimiller said Monday.

Stevens said he heard from other hikers that the men were chanting, but did not know anything else as he quickly left the area.

“I’ve never seen that in the 30 years I’ve been going there,” he said. “Shooting off a firearm where so many people are camping is a crime in itself. They could have killed everyone there.”

Anyone with information regarding this investigation is urged to contact Deputy S. Scranton or Sergeant D. Rodriguez at 760-552-6800. Callers wishing to remain anonymous may call the We-Tip Hotline at 1-800-782-7463 or go online at www.wetip.com.

Paola Baker may be reached at 760-955-5332 or PBaker@VVDailyPress.com. Follow her on Twitter at @DP_PaolaBaker.