Senate strongly rejects Bush's curbs on stem-cell research
The Nation Senate strongly rejects Bush's curbs on stem-cell research

For The Record Los Angeles Times Wednesday April 18, 2007 Home Edition Main News Part A Page 2 National Desk 1 inches; 55 words Type of Material: Correction Stem cells: An article Thursday in Section A incorrectly attributed a quote to Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse (D-R.I.). In fact, Sen. Gordon H. Smith (R-Ore.) said: "The question we're debating is, when does life begin," as he spoke in support of embryonic research. "Life begins with mom, life begins with the joining of life and spirit."

Bush has cast stem-cell research as a moral issue intimately connected to the question of when life begins, a question that echoed throughout the second day of Senate debate. Bush used the only veto of his career to overturn a similar bill last year.

"The war is basically won, the policy is going to be updated; it's just a matter of when," said Lawrence Soler, a vice president at the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, which lobbies for embryonic stem-cell research.

The candidates running to succeed Bush in 19 months largely endorse federally supported stem-cell research. That support, coupled with the backing of a majority of Americans, means change is almost certain.

WASHINGTON — The Senate voted overwhelmingly Wednesday to reject restrictions President Bush has placed on embryonic stem-cell research. Bush plans to veto the bill, but his restrictions are unlikely to last for long after his presidency.

"I believe this will encourage taxpayer money to be spent on the destruction or endangerment of living human embryos," Bush said in a statement.

The conservative groups and religious right that make up Bush's base praised his stand and said legislators must be educated to understand the potential of alternatives. "In two years, we could have such significant breakthroughs this is no longer an issue," said Tony Perkins, president of the Family Research Council. "It becomes harder and harder to argue with science, and the success is in the area of adult stem cells."

But the majority of leading Democratic and Republican presidential candidates support research on embryonic stem cells.

Former Sen. John Edwards, a North Carolina Democrat, strongly backs the research, while Democratic hopefuls Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York and Barack Obama of Illinois co-sponsored the Senate bill that would expand the number of embryonic stem-cell lines eligible for federally funded research.

That bill, known as the Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act, or S5, passed 63 to 34, winning the same number of votes as a similar bill last year. Sixty-seven votes are needed to overturn a presidential veto. The House passed its version of the bill in January, 253 to 174, also short of the votes needed to override a veto.

Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) supports expanded funding for embryonic stem-cell research as long as embryos are not intentionally created for research.

Former New York Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, a Republican who has few fans among conservatives for his support of abortion rights, has taken a fuzzy position.

His spokeswoman Maria Comella said Giuliani thinks "we need to take advantage of new technology, while at the same time need to be respectful of human life." She refused to provide details.

Mitt Romney, the former Republican governor of Massachusetts, supported embryonic stem-cell research before 2005, but now he strikes a balance. He supports research with cells that would otherwise be discarded by fertility clinics, but he opposes federal funding for that work. And like McCain, he opposes the creation of embryos for the purposes of research.

Only Sen. Sam Brownback (R-Kan.) opposes almost all embryonic stem-cell research. He led much of the debate on a second stem-cell bill the Senate approved, 70 to 28. Written by conservatives and the White House, it would expand funding for research on dead embryonic cells and other types of stem cells.

The restrictions Bush placed on embryonic stem-cell research limited federal funding to work on stem-cell lines created before August 2001. There are 21 such lines, but advocates say they are contaminated and unusable for research.