RUSSELL WALKER FOR HOUSE DISTRICT 48
Russell Walker -- North Carolina House District 48 ELECTION NOV. 6, 2018



Hoke and Scotland Counties















My little white ass and me



(his name is Donkey)















TIME FOR A CHANGE







14 YEARS IS TOO LONG



Career politician Garland Pierce (Democrat) has held this House seat for 14 years and he wants to increase it to 16 years. Putin has been in office for 18. Since Hoke County's founding in 1911, 107 years ago or Scotland County's founding in 1899, 119 years ago. Neither Hoke nor Scotland County voters have ever voted for a Republican Representative, Senator or Commissioner. This country was based upon citizen politicians. One or two terms and out, just like George Washington. Career politicians are abominations.



It is TIME FOR A CHANGE.





I am a degreed and North Carolina registered Chemical Engineer (license currently inactive). I have also gone to law school. I have been in all 50 states, about 40 foreign countries and six of the world's seven continents. I have sued many corporations in opposition to their often predatory and abusive policies. One of my civil actions is currently against Hoke County, Tyton NC Biofuels and the Fifth Third Bank (currently before the North Carolina Supreme Court) concerning the ethanol plant, a $110 million dollar fraud.



At the very end of this website is a complaint filed on 13 August 2018 trying to prohibit the Hoke County Board of Commissioners from spending money on an estimated $20,000,000 dollar athletic center that will be used at best by very few people in the county.



I filed a Civil Rights case in U.S. District Court against the State and Hoke County Boards of Elections to create five voting districts and to abolish "at-large" voting. I was opposed by the all-Democratic County Commissioners. Too much democracy for the Democratic party! What hypocrites! The case went to the U.S. Supreme Court and the Court refused to review the matter.



None of these actions have been reported by the Hoke County News-Journal which is nothing but a political and censoring auxiliary of the Hoke County Democratic party machine. Sadly, Ken MacDonald, the editor of the News-Journal, instead of reporting on and exposing the absolutely incompetent Hoke County Commissioners, MacDonald moved from Raeford to 749 S. Ridge St., Southern Pines, Moore County, NC 28387 about 3 years ago.



I have been given an "A" rating by the NRA. I am supported by at least two other pro-gun (pro-people) and one anti-forced vaccine organizations.





POPULIST PLATFORM



Term limits, a new broom sweeps best



End War on Drugs which is nothing but a war upon the poor



Support First Amendment Freedom of Thought, Speech and Expression



Support Second Amendment Right of People to Keep and Bear arms



End Scotland County School Floor Tax



End Food Tax



End Income Tax on wages



Reduce state 35.35 cents per gallon gasoline tax



Initiate Homestead Exemption



Stop Police Brutality and Murders of Civilians



End cash bail for nonviolent offenses



Stop No-Knock Searches



End Compulsory Fascist Auto and Moped Insurance



End lifetime Felony sentences, create automatic expungement



End rigged for conviction Criminal trials



Allow convicted felons to serve on juries



End Economic Development fraud



Photo Identification for Honest Voting



End compulsory vaccinations



Restrain government annexations



Make English the official State language





The people of this state would benefit from someone in the legislature who has a scientific background. Current state issues include fracking, off-shore oil drilling, fluorides in the Cape Fear River south of Fayetteville and the proposed Atlantic Coast Pipeline through eastern North Carolina.



I am very anti-chemical anti-pharmaceutical and will say categorically that fluorine is a toxic poison in any amount. The fluoridation of water supplies is nothing less than the criminal poisoning of the population. Look up “dental fluorosis” on the Internet.



I strongly believe in criminal justice and judicial reform. The old adage is, "The more money you have, the more justice you receive." Today, the little guy has no chance in court.



ITS ALL ABOUT HATE, HATE AND MORE HATE



On 26 June 2018 the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) of Montgomery Alabama found out that I had authored a website, "Christdescendedfromjoseph.com". They contacted the North Carolina Republican Party and the next day the North Carolina Republican Party "disavowed" me. Their actions created a nationwide news sensation.

A video of me in front of the York County South Carolina Courthouse garnered about 3.9 million views. I have received death threats as a result. The SPLC is the ultimate hate group themselves. They "hate" those who do not agree with them and seek to destroy by any means their opponents. They are not "Southern", they are jewish. It's not "Poverty" to have a reported fund of $319 million. The following is from Wikipedia.



"For 2016, its (SPLC) endowment was approximately $319 million per its annual report and SPLC spent 68% of its revenue on programs.

In 1994 the Montgomery Advertiser published an eight-part critical report on the SPLC, saying that it exaggerated the threat posed by the Klan and similar groups in order to raise money, discriminated against black employees, and used misleading fundraising tactics. From 1984 to 1994 the SPLC raised about $62 million in contributions and spent about $21 million on programs, according to the newspaper".



The Southern Poverty Law Center aka

Shylock Putrid Lying Cabal



The ultimate hate group. They decry hate. They are not just haters but HYPOCRITES.

His blood be on us, and on our children. Matt 27:25.

Askenaz Jews descend from Japheth and not from Shem, Genesis 10:1-3

The anti-Semitic thing is a blatant lie



WHAT DOES THE BIBLE SAY ABOUT POLITICS



Deuteronomy 17:15 is the only political verse relating to politics as a command in the Bible that I am aware of.



Thou shalt (command form) in any wise set him king over thee, whom the LORD thy God shall choose: one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over thee: thou mayest not (no permission) set a stranger over thee, which is not thy brother.



This is a command from Yahweh God almighty that has never been repealed or rescinded.



We now face the same situation that Jefferson warned about in a 1785 letter to the Danbury Baptists. We have a political test for office. If you don’t believe the right politically correct religion, you won’t be elected as election is the final test. Kennedy survived this test, I won’t.





WHAT IS WRONG WITH HATE?





Yahweh God almighty said, "Esau, I hate" Mal. 1:3, Rom 9:13.





Psa 139:22 -- I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.





The words "hate" or "hatred" exist about 85 times in the King James Version of the bible.

WOW you can't get much better than that. In the last 20 years a concept known as "hate crimes" has evolved. If there are "hate crimes" then logically there must be "love crimes". Of course "love crimes" would be a contradiction of terms as all crimes involve some kind of hatred towards another person, concept or organization. This of course is hypocrisy pure and simple.





​I hate disease, hate corruption, hate filth, hate dishonesty, hate ignorance, hate poison ivy, hate snakes, hate mosquitoes, hate trash, hate evil and above all -- I hate hypocrisy because hypocrisy has no redeeming value etc.



That makes me a hater. I may be a hater but I am not a hypocrite.





We are witnessing an extreme example of hypocrisy here. Others can hate some concept or speech but the condemned are not supposed to respond as their speech might be "hate speech" as defined by others. "Haters" are supposed to be silent, apologetic, and consumed with shame and remorse. NO WAY. Stand up for the truth as Daniel Webster said, "There is nothing so powerful as the truth".







I had wanted to run an issues-only campaign without the inflammatory side show of race, "white supremacy", "Confederate flag" etc. The SPLC has changed the nature of this race and their threats needed to be responded to. I hope that the voters of Hoke and Scotland Counties do not allow this anti-Christ (John 2:22) jewish group to do their thinking for them.



The Confederate flag never shot 17 year old teenagers in the back nor 12 year-olds playing in the snow. The Confederate flag never ransacked people's homes nor terrified anyone during a search. The Confederate flag never conducted a crooked criminal trial while unfortunately innocent people and their families (effectively) have been sent to prison. The Confederate flag never sent anyone to jail. The Confederate flag never tried to run over a fleeing suspect with a police car. The Confederate flag never tortured anyone in prison. The Confederate Flag never stopped anyone from driving because they could not afford automobile insurance.



The problems in Hoke and Scotland Counties are severe and will not be solved by name-calling distractions. It was Christ, not Russell Walker, who told the jews that their father was Satan and that they lusted after the desires of their father. John 8:44.



The jews cried out, his blood be on us and on our children. Matt 27:25.



Revelation 2:9 and Revelation 3:9 tell us that those who call themselves jews, are not, but are the synagogue of Satan. I did not write the bible. I only quote from it.



BAPTIST BELIEFS



As a result of the publicity of this Campaign the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) injected themselves in an attempt to get me to step-aside or ultimately to defeat me. Garland Pierce and James Leach (Chairman of the Hoke County Board of Commissioners) are both Baptist Ministers and lead many people. The absurdity of their beliefs needs to be exposed. “My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge . . .“ Hos 4:6



Let's examine four Baptist beliefs and you tell me who is telling the truth and who is making sense.



1. God spoke the earth and the Universe into existence from nothing (NIL ULTRA) . Talk about a Satanic magic show based upon 15th century Roman Catholic medieval understanding.





No - the matter of the Earth and the Universe has always existed, there was never an absolute beginning.



Did God speak himself into existence from a perfect vacuum?



What happened in Genesis 1:1 was a transformation of unorganized matter into organized matter. There will be further transformations in the Earth and Heaven. See Revelation 21:1. In this verse "new heaven", the underlying word is ouranos (Strong's Greek G3772) which basically means "universe". The entire universe including you, me, planets, stars, trees, rocks, oceans etc. is in a state of partial judgment. Due to the fact that everything is in a state of partial judgment, equality is a state that may not exist.



By the same reasoning, you and I have always existed in some form and will exist forever. This agrees with science in that matter can neither be created nor destroyed. Modern science calls this the Law of Conservation of Mass and Energy. This concept is supported by Einstein's hypotheses. Ironically the Scofield Reference Bible (1890) has no comment upon this possibly most important (Gen. 1:1) verse in the Bible.



2. Apostles Creed -- This Roman Catholic mythology has been accepted by essentially all so-called Protestant churches. Why is there no Protest in Protestantism?



"He (Christ) descended into hell; on the third day He rose again from the dead . . . ."



Absolute nonsense. Christ told the thief on the cross that today he would be in paradise with him. Luke 23:43 I guess Hell and Paradise are synonymous. The Apostle's Creed is based upon a misunderstanding 1 Peter 3:19 where Christ preached to the spirits in prison.



3. EQUALITY -- The earth and all of its inhabitants are in a state of partial judgment. That is why equality exists only as a fable. This inequality will increase leading up to the final judgment. After the final judgment inequality will be permanent for all eternity.



4. CAIN'S WIFE - Where did Cain get his wife? Never a good answer due to the lack of understanding of Genesis 1. 8th day Genesis 3, Cain got his wife from the sixth-day Genesis 1 people. Cain went on to build a city, Gen 4:17, so presumably there were more than two people involved.







Political Reality--



Governor Roy Cooper is nothing but a socialist who wants to have as many rules and regulations, except for illegal aliens, as possible, while raising taxes to support those regulations. Those who believe in socialism should move to Cuba or Venezuela and enjoy its many benefits. We need to continue the veto proof (72 out of 120 in the House) legislature that currently exists. Garland Pierce has been in the House for 14 years and in the minority since 2011. It’s time for a change. Pierce has absolutely no influence in the Republican super majority (76-44) House. Its called "Taxation without representation". Pierce is like wallpaper. He looks good, is there, but is absolutely useless. Tell me one good thing Pierce has done in 14 years. A Republican in a Republican legislature is going to have more influence rather than a member of the opposition. If the Republicans lose their veto proof majority then there will be a stalemate at best in North Carolina government and nothing will change.





POPULIST PLATFORM



I am a strong supporter of the 1st Amendment. We will either have Freedom of Speech and Expression or we will have a tyranny. There has never been any tyranny in history where Freedom of Speech existed.



I am a strong supporter of the 2nd amendment and I am rated "A" by the NRA. I have been behind the Iron Curtain where people had no guns and consequently no freedom of speech nor any other rights. It was pitiful. I don't hunt but I fully support others' rights to do so and to protect themselves and their families. I will not support any more People Control, alias Gun Control, measures.



The concept of a concealed carry permit is ludicrous. Rifles are so much more powerful and accurate than pistols, yet concealed carry permits are required for less dangerous items.



The phrases "Gun Safety" and "Gun Control" are deceptive lies. No gun ever shot or harmed anyone in history without human intervention. It is people control that is the real fact of life. The gun takers will never be happy till all non-government Americans are totally disarmed and unable to defend themselves or this civilization. The War for Independence started in 1775 at Lexington/Concord when tyrants tried to take the colonists' firearms.



End the war on drugs! It is nothing less than a war upon the poor. A dirty business with people, families and careers consumed in the process. The war on drugs has gone on now for over 50 years and it has not worked nor will it ever work. It will be as successful as the wars on prostitution, prohibition, gambling, Afghanistan and abortion.



Opium and Afghanistan --



The US Military has been in Afghanistan for 16 years to protect the opium growers and the supplies to Western Europe and North America. End the war in Afghanistan and the opiate crisis will be solved because the opium comes from where? Afghanistan.



Only the poor go to jail. Ask Hillary Clinton about that. The U.S. has about 2,500,000 people in jails in our so-called "free" country. Every person in jail represents a family in jail.



________________________



100 YEARS OF UNINTERRUPTED DEMOCRATIC PARTY RULE





PER CAPITA INCOME basis for North Carolina's 100 counties:



Moore County (18th) $25,786, Hoke County (86th) $17,630 and Scotland County (third from the bottom at 97th) $16,297. Source Wikipedia







POVERTY RATES

North Carolina 15.4% Hoke 19.5% (+26.6%) above state Scotland 27.6% (+79.3%) above state Source U.S. Census







PROPERTY TAX RATES per hundred dollars assessed:



Moore $0.465; Hoke $0.75 plus additional fire charges; Scotland County $1.01, highest in the state. North Carolina Department of Revenue State figures.



The 3rd poorest county (Scotland) pays the highest property taxes in the state. Thank God for one hundred years of uninterrupted Democratic Party rule.



Conclusion: The lower the per capita income, the higher the tax rate. No it does not make sense. It needs to change.



Property Taxes for the Rich -- Property taxes is a false statement. The rich have most of their wealth in stocks and bonds yet only real estate is taxed. The middle class have most of their wealth in their homes and they bear the burden of taxation. Taxation on wages is nothing but slavery.



UNEMPLOYMENT RATES



May 2018 - non seasonably adjusted unemployment rates for North Carolina Counties --



State 3.7% Hoke 4.8% Scotland 7.5% Highest of the state's 100 counties.



Source NC Department of Commerce





Normans and School Taxes --



When the French Normans invaded England in 1066, they brought their feudal legal system with them. Today we still have feudal tenancies, tenancy-in-common, joint tenancy, tenancy-by-the-entireties etc.



YOU DO NOT OWN YOUR HOUSE. YOU ARE A TENANT ON THE LAND. Don't pay your feudal yearly rent (taxes) and the Sheriff will come and give you a free education on property ownership while you are being evicted. If you really owned your house, it would be owned in allodium.







Initiate Homestead exemption. No one should lose their home due to property taxes. Scotland County has the highest tax rate of all of North Carolina's (100) hundred counties.



End the "school floor" tax law (1963) that only affects Scotland County. This law has been shown to be ineffective. We can thank Democrat Terry Sanford again for that. Allow the Scotland County Commissioners and School Board the authority to make decisions without State interference and control.



End all income tax on wages and salaries. Whether 1%, 5% or 100%, a tax on wages is nothing but a form of slavery. Only tax dividends, rents and business profits -- not salaries. The 16th amendment refers to income as "derived from the source". Salaries are the source and are not derived from anything.



End the Terry Sanford Democratic Party food tax, nicknamed "Terry's Tax", billed as "temporary" in 1961, yet still here 57 years later.



GASOLINE TAXES



As of January 2018 the following taxes in cents per gallon existed for North Carolina and its neighboring states:



North Carolina 35.35; South Carolina 16; Virginia 20.2; Georgia 26.8 plus local sales tax and Tennessee 21. Frankly high motor fuel taxes disproportionally affect the poor. I support a reduction in motor fuel taxes to the level of our surrounding states.







EDUCATION --



For all of the talk about education, here are the figures from the U.S. Census Department.



Most measures of educational attainment that I found are based on Census Bureau estimates. The Census Bureau defines educational attainment as “the highest level of education that an individual has completed.” Following are two measures -- “high school graduate or higher” and “bachelor’s degree or higher”.



“high school graduate or higher,” gives us the following numbers:

NC: 86.3%

Hoke: 84.6%

Scotland: 78.6% (-8.9% state)



Using “bachelor’s degree or higher,” gives us the following numbers:

NC: 29.0%

Hoke: 17.8% (-38.7% below state)

Scotland: 14.7% (-49.3% below state)



The conclusion is inescapable regardless. Hoke and Scotland Counties are below average relative to North Carolina as a whole. Under more than century-long Democratic control, corruption and inefficiency, the educational system is notoriously deficient with the students not just being cheated but suffering as a result. What is more stunning is that both counties have above average tax rates; Scotland being #1 and Hoke about #10.







POLICE AND COURTS--

End police murder of innocent civilians, require substantial nexus and no other choice before deadly force is ever used. "Equal justice under law" means that police can shoot (or choke you to death, Eric Garner, July 17, 2014) and kill you and they enjoy what is called "qualified immunity". They call it "excessive force" -- I call it "murder". They do it because they know that they can get away with it.



Tell me that no one is above the law. I can't get away with "10 over" or a Stop Sign, but a policeman can murder with impunity and get assigned to administrative duties and continue his salary and pension. It has always been it wrong and needs to stop. 12-year old Tamir Rice was killed while playing in the snow in Nov. 22, 2014 in Cleveland Ohio. I can't imagine the heartache of parents who have lost a child due to police murder. Every time I hear about this it literally turns my stomach. Tamir's parents will suffer for the rest of their lives. Join me in stopping this abomination. We can change the law across the United States but we have to start somewhere.



Reduce the protections of "qualified immunity" especially when deadly force is used. Judges and the police are simply above the law. A judge can order you to be sterilized and you cannot sue him for damages. This is wrong.



I believe that i am the only politician in the United States with the guts to call for an end to police brutality and murder. We are allegedly a civilized society and we should demand that our servants, the police, act in a civilized manner.

End no-knock search and entry. Stop the terrorism of no-knock searches.

End warantless searches. I strongly support the 4th amendment, " . . . secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects, . . ."



No police cameras at intersections or red lights. No unmarked cars used to participate in any traffic citations.



End compulsory auto insurance. Compulsory automobile insurance is nothing but fascism for profit and an assault on freedom to travel. Compulsory auto insurance increases corporate profit for the insurance companies by increasing demand. Increase the demand and you can increase the price and profits. Classic fascism of state and corporate involvement.



End lifetime felony sentences after serving prison time and probation. "Do the crime, do the time." That is the old slogan. Well after a person is released from his/her sentence, there should be an automatic expungement so that that person can get a job, get a loan or get an education without the paralyzing stigma of a record. Stop holding a man/woman down on the ground who is already disabled. Break and end the revolving door of criminality.



Justice reform --

Criminal trials are rigged for conviction with two closing statements for prosecution and with the prosecution going last. What could possibly be fairer? -- the government with two closing statements, going first and last while the defendant has only one closing statement in between. The defendant needs to go last with the last chance to affect the jury's decision considering it is the defendant's freedom which is at stake.



In all criminal trials the government must produce at least one accuser who can be confronted and cross-examined. Not just exhibits and paper evidence leading to convictions.



All judicial orders and opinions must be signed by judge or judges, no hiding behind per curiam (by the court) decisions. No destruction of any evidence while any person is under threat of criminal prosecution indictment or in prison (custody).







ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT -- ECONOMIC DISASTER



Repeal all Economic Development laws. Economic development is nothing less than discrimination against existing businesses and persons while being fertilizer for favoritism and corruption. The all-Democrat Hoke County Board of Commissioners in 2008, gave away a 500 acre $5 million dollar piece of property (about $7.5 million in 2018 dollars) to build the Ethanol plant, a $110 million fraud including tax abatement or deferral. It did not work. The only thing it did was to raise property taxes of Hoke property owners and create incentives for existing Hoke businesses to close. Today (2018) the Ethanol plant is rusting and a total waste of money. A disastrous decision for the taxpayers.



Employee protection --

No firings for off-work comments or actions. What people do away from work is their sole business and not that of their employer.



Neighborhood protection--



Outlaw city annexations across county lines

Strengthen protection against neighborhood annexations







Vaccinations --



I am convinced that vaccinations especially for young children create a favorable climate for Autism. The government should serve the people and not dictate to us how to care for our children.







GARLAND PIERCE VOTING RECORD



I have reviewed Garland Pierce’s voting record for selected votes for the last 12 years and have summarized them as follows. While there are many bills that he and I would have similarly voted upon, I would have voted in an opposite manner on all of the following listed bills. Starting in January 2011 the legislature became under Republican super-majority control for the first time in 120 years.



Legislature under Republican Control --





HB 1092 Act to amend NC Constitution to require photo-identification to vote



Passed 74-43 26 June 2018 Pierce voted Nay



HB 105 Limit governor and Lieutenant Governor to two terms



Passed 85/34 25 April 2017 Pierce voted Nay



HB 174 Authorizes Possession of concealed guns at Church services

Passed 82-34 26 March 2017 Pierce voted Nay



HB 214 Autocycles Removes Helmet Requirement

Passed 76/41 22 March 2017 Pierce voted Nay



HB 318 Prohibits Local Government recognizing foreign government’s documents.

Passed 70-43 29 September 2015 Pierce voted Nay



HB 148 Requiring Automobile Insurance for Mopeds

Passed 81-32 29 April 2015 Pierce voted Yes. This was outrageous as Mopeds are not dangerous. Moped drivers are economically disadvantaged and they should not be forced to make the insurance companies more profitable. This is nothing but fascism -- government acting in the best interests of insurance companies and not the people.



HB 522 Prohibits Application Foreign Laws in North Carolina Courts

Passed 75-37 24 July 2013 Pierce voted Nay



HB 937 Amends Firearms Laws

Passed 73-41 23 July 2013 Pierce voted Nay



SB 76 Prohibits Horizontal Drilling for Fracking

Passed 70-40 22 July 2013 Pierce voted Nay



HB 9 Term Limits for House Speaker and Senate Pro Tempore

Passed 85-34 8 May 2013 Pierce voted Nay



HB 937 Amend Firearms Laws

Passed 78-42 7 May 2013 Pierce voted Nay



HB 17 Prohibits Disclosure of Concealed Firearm Permit information

Passed 97-20 26 March 2013 Pierce voted Nay



HB 61 Term Limits Speaker of the House and Senate Pro Tempore

Passed 72-46 7 April 2011 Pierce voted Nay



HB 111 Concealed Handguns State Parks

Passed 74-42 30 March 2011 Pierce voted Nay



HB 92 Land Transfer Tax Repeal

Passed 78-38 8 March 2011 Pierce voted Nay



HB 2 Prohibits Enforcement of Patient Protection Act

Passed 66-50 February 2, 2011 Pierce voted Nay



Legislature under Democratic Control –



HB 2019 Renewable Energy Incentive Pierce voted Yes

Passed 84-19 10 July 2010 I strongly oppose this.



HB 1973 Keep NC Competitive Act Pierce voted Yes

Passed 72-31 10 July 2010 (Environmental fraud)



SB 774 Seat Belt Required

Passed 61-44 6 July 2006 Pierce voted Yes



VACCINES AND GULF WAR SYNDROME (GWS) --



This section is added due to the large number of veterans in this area. The government is not telling them the full story about metallic salts and the harmful effects upon their and their family's health. Incidentally veterans cannot sue the U.S. government for injuries suffered while employed in the military.



As a lifelong Chemical Engineer I have some knowledge about the toxicity of chemicals. Mercury is a toxic heavy metal in all concentrations. Fluorine is the most electro-negative elements and is more toxic than Mercury because it displaces Iodine from the thyroid. This is called a single-replacement reaction. An Iodine deficiency will cause many health problems. Fluorine is so electro-negative that it will strip electrons from glass. I am absolutely opposed to forced vaccinations and any requirement that only vaccinated persons shall be able to attend school. Forced vaccinations are for farm animals. I would hope that any reader of these paragraphs does further research to determine the accuracy of my statements herein.



The following comes from Wikipedia--



"Gulf War syndrome (GWS), also known as Gulf War illnesses (GWI) and chronic multi-symptom illness (CMI), is a chronic and multi-symptomatic disorder affecting returning military veterans and civilian workers of the 1990–91 Gulf War. A wide range of acute and chronic symptoms have been linked to it, including fatigue, muscle pain, cognitive problems, rashes and diarrhea. Approximately 250,000 of the 697,000 U.S. veterans who served in the 1991 Gulf War are afflicted with enduring chronic multi-symptom illness, a condition with serious consequences. From 1995 to 2005, the health of combat veterans worsened in comparison with non-deployed veterans, with the onset of more new chronic diseases, functional impairment, repeated clinic visits and hospitalizations, chronic fatigue syndrome-like illness, post-traumatic stress disorder, and greater persistence of adverse health incidents. According to a report by the Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America, veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan may also suffer from the syndrome."



What this description fails to mention is that soldiers are inoculated in Basic Training with a mix of vaccinations including heavy metal Mercury (Thimerosal or Thiomersal) preservatives as well as other toxins such as Anthrax. Then the soldiers are exposed to Uranium Oxide dust possibly in Basic Training and then in Iraq or Afghanistan. After soldiers return to the United States, frequently they get tattoos which are comprised of toxic metallic salts. Look up "Tattoo Inks" on the Internet. Some of these inks are radio active so that the tattoos glow in the dark in night clubs under "Black light".



Contamination of people's bodies with heavy metals is cumulative. It is well known that veterans have greater rates of morbidity and mortality than the population as a whole. Many veterans will never collect Social Security. As people become older they simply become more subject to heart attacks, tachycardia, cancer and auto-immune disorders. Regardless of one's race, politics or beliefs, the laws of chemistry will not change.



The military has not told the soldiers about the dangers of Uranium 238, or what is commonly known as Depleted Uranium (DU). There are several articles on the Internet concerning Depleted Uranium. Research them and believe what you wish.



I did research into Cancer mortality by NC Counties to try to correlate my thesis concerning the higher rates of mortality. Publicly available information 2012-2016 Cancer Mortality Rates by county are as follows:



Rates per 100,000 population

North Carolina 166.6

Hoke 173.3 Fort Bragg 4.0% above average

Scotland 195.5 17.0% above average

Onslow 196.1 Camp Le Jeune 17.7% above average

Wayne 180.5 Seymore Johnson AFB 8.3% above average



Scotland County is included because it is a part of House District 48 even though it has no direct military nexus. I cannot explain the high Cancer Mortality rate for Scotland County although I suspect that it is related to the use of diet drinks in aluminum cans, tobacco, beer and pork.



Depleted Uranium--



The troops in Iraq and Afghanistan are being poisoned with Depleted Uranium. There is nothing depleted about it. It's radioactive now and forever. It is causing U.S. soldiers to be sick and killing many of them. Depleted Uranium from breathing Uranium Oxide (U3O8) dust is found in soldier's saliva, blood and sperm. Uranium oxide dust is very fine and it is easily dispersed into the air. Anyone or thing breathing Uranium Oxide dust will have radioactive Uranium in their lungs -- friend or foe, dog or cat -- it makes no difference. When soldiers return home from Iraq and Afghanistan to their wives and girl friends, the women get a special present of depleted uranium from sperm in their vagina. Cancer here we come. No one in our government is going to talk about this matter. They can wave the flag all that they want to but this is the reward the U.S. soldiers receive for fighting wars for the military-industrial complex. "My people perish due to lack of knowledge." Hosea 4:6

Depleted Uranium makes Agent Orange look like ice cream by comparison.



Agent Orange -- 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), is a chlorinated defoliating hydrocarbon that was used in Viet Nam. It can be burned into oblivion. Not Uranium however, it lasts forever. Uranium has two prime isotopes. U-235 and U-238. U-235 is fissionable and is used exclusively for atomic bombs. U-238 is a waste product that comprises about 99.7% of all Uranium. Uranium is a very heavy metal about 19.1 times heavier than water. It is excellent for bombs and bullets due to this high density. It has a half-life of 4.5 billion years, forever for all practical purposes.



Uranium is chemically unstable because it is pyrophoric. Bombs and bullets are made from Uranium 238. If Uranium metal is caused to strike a wall, tank or other hard substance, it automatically explodes and oxidizes into a number of oxides with Uranium Oxide U3O8 dust being the most prominent. This chemical reaction gives off a tremendous amount of light and heat. That is why Uranium is used for its armor piercing characteristics. U-238 decays with the emission of an alpha particle, a helium nucleus, that can do a lot of damage to living cells because all of the energy of disintegration into the alpha particle will be absorbed in the body. Uranium Oxide dust is very fine and is being blown around the world helping to give cancer to millions of people.



Uranium Chemistry --



Uranium is a chemical element with the symbol U and an atomic number of 92. It is a silvery-white metal in the actinide series of the periodic table. A Uranium atom has 92 protons and 92 electrons, of which 6 are valence electrons. Uranium is weakly radioactive because all its isotopes are unstable (with half-lives of the 6 naturally known isotopes, Uranium-233 to Uranium-238, varying between 69 years and 4.5 billion years). The most common isotopes of Uranium are uranium-238 (which has 146 neutrons and accounts for almost 99.3% of the Uranium found in nature) and Uranium-235 (which has 143 neutrons, accounting for 0.7% of the element found naturally). Uranium has the second highest atomic weight of the primordially occurring elements, lighter only than plutonium. Uranium's density is about 70% higher than that of lead but slightly lower than that of gold or tungsten. Uranium occurs naturally in low concentrations of a few parts per million in soil, rock and water, and is commercially extracted from uranium-bearing minerals such as Uraninite.



In nature, Uranium is found as Uranium-238 (99.3%), Uranium-235 (0.7%), and a very small amount of Uranium-234 (0.005%). Uranium decays slowly by emitting an alpha particle. The half-life of Uranium-238 is about 4.47 billion years and that of Uranium-235 is 704 million years. Is that long enough to be forever?



From Dr. Mercola's website --



"If You Have Been Exposed to DU …



For those in the military who have had close contact with DU (or have a loved one who has been), please seek the help of a knowledgeable natural health practitioner who can help you to detoxify and take Dr. Zieve’s detoxification steps to heart.



What you’ll notice is that many of the recommendations to protect your body involve eating healthy foods and supporting detox with certain botanicals, vitamins and herbs.



Among them are vitamin D, chlorella, and curcumin (turmeric) -- all of which are health supportive for nearly all of us at varying times in our lives.



While I strongly encourage you to get professional guidance if you’ve been exposed to DU in significant quantities, you can all take a healthy step toward detoxifying and protecting your health by adhering to healthy lifestyle principles."



Some people advocate a process called "chelation" to remove heavy metals from the blood.





Term Limits --



Term limits for all state and local office holders. Garland Pierce has been in the House for 14 years. Putin has been in office for 18. This is simply too long. Pierce has voted, unsurprisingly, against term limits at least twice.



We should not have career politicians nor life terms. A new broom sweeps best.



Other items --

Deport all illegal aliens, no exceptions. Illegal aliens keep wages low and rents high.

English as the official state government language. No Tower of Babel society has ever survived.



Protect Honeybees from municipal regulation because without honeybees we will starve. Support agriculture and the right-to-farm.



Electrical Company, i.e. Lumbee River, Smart Meters should be optional at the customer's request. Smart meters fill our homes with electromagnetic radiation and are dangerous. The house wiring is the antenna.







_____________________________



Following is a civil action I filed and served on 13 August 2018 regarding the proposed swimming pool athletic center in Raeford. An Answer should be filed on or about 13 Ooctober 2018



_____________________________



STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA IN THE GENERAL COURT OF JUSTICE



COUNTY OF HOKE SUPERIOR COURT DIVISION



RUSSELL WALKER )

Plaintiff )

)

vs. )

) No. 18-CVS-00609

HOKE COUNTY )

Defendant )



COMPLAINT IN EQUITY FOR DECLARATORY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF



Summary -



1. Plaintiff seeks Declaratory Judgment pursuant to North Carolina Rule of Civil Procedure 57, as to the definition of the word “public” and Injunctive Relief pursuant to North Carolina Rule of Civil Procedure 65 to prevent public moneys being spent on a Swimming Pool / Athletic center being conceived and or constructed in Hoke County.



Parties, Venue and jurisdiction –



2. Hoke County is a political subdivision of the State of North Carolina. Letitia J. Edens is the County Manager. Her address is 227 N. Main Street, P.O. Box 1585, Raeford, NC 28376



3. Russell Walker is a 75 year old resident and Hoke County taxpayer who resides at 176 Quewhiffle Road, Hoke County, Aberdeen, NC 28315. His e-mail address is littlefarm1@windstream.net



4. Hoke County Superior Court has jurisdiction over all persons found to be within its presence.



ALLEGATIONS



5. Based upon Information and Belief, The Hoke County Board of Commissioners is in the process of authorizing a Swimming Pool - Athletic Center tentatively to be constructed near East Hoke Middle School, Raeford, NC.



6. The project is currently estimated to cost $20,000,000



7. Walker lives about 20 miles from this proposed project.



8. Walker is 75 years old and has absolutely no interest in basketball, swimming or weight lifting.



9. Walker along with other Hoke County Residents have physical impairments which prevent them from using the proposed athletic center even if they wished to. Walker estimates that fewer than 3% of the population will be expected to use this facility.



10. Walker as well as all other Hoke County taxpayers will be forced to pay for this facility, via property and sales taxes, whether they use it or not.



COUNT I Violation of the North Carolina Constitution



11. Article Five, Section 2, subsection (1) of the Constitution of the State of North Carolina states as follows:



“The power of taxation shall be exercised . . . for public purposes only , . . .” (emphasis added)



12. Walker believes that this project is not “public” as that term is used in the North Carolina Constitution and that taxes may not be used for this project’s construction for that reason. The Hoke County Board of Commissioners is ultra vires to spend any moneys for this project.



13. This project is discretionary and not legally mandated as are schools, courthouses, county offices, road maintenance buildings etc.



14. The word “public” as defined in Webster’s and Black’s Law Dictionary generally means “all”, “whole body politic”. Walker cannot find a case nor a statute where “public” has been either legislatively or judicially defined.



15. Because not “all” of the people will be able to use this facility, it fails the definition of “public” and the project’s construction is prohibited by Article 5 Section 2 of the Constitution of North Carolina.



16. The Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States prohibits any state from denying any person the “equal protection of the laws” and Hoke taxpayers should be protected from being compelled paying taxes to support a non-public facility.



COUNT 2 – VIOLATION OF STATE LAW



17. Walker realleges and incorporates by reference the averments contained in paragraphs 1 through 10.



18. Based upon information and belief. The Hoke County Commissioners have selected and announced a design build firm Bobbitt of Raleigh and Hoke County has utterly failed to follow State Law for Design-build projects.





19. The Hoke Board of Commissioners have failed to take any of the following measures.



G.S. 143-128.1A. Criteria for Using Design-Build lists several requirements that must be followed before the contracting process is initiated.



Id est –



(1)the unit must establish written criteria for determining when design-build is appropriate for a project.



(2) The criteria must be in writing, governing board approval is not specifically required (although it may be highly advisable).



(3) The statute requires the project must adopt the criteria for each project. The criteria must address at least the following six factors:



a) The unit’s ability to “adequately and thoroughly” define the project requirements in the RFP;



b) Time constraints for project delivery;



c) The unit’s ability to ensure that a quality project can be delivered;



d) The availability of qualified staff or outside consultants experienced in design-build to manage and oversee the project;



e) Good faith efforts to comply with historically underutilized business participation requirements (G.S. 143-128.2 and -128.4)



f) to recruit and select small business entities



g) The criteria used by the unit, including a cost-benefit analysis of using design-build in lieu of traditional construction bidding methods.



h) After adopting its criteria, the unit must issue a public notice of a request for qualifications (RFQ) for the project.



PRAYER FOR RELIEF



20. Walker prays that this Court :



(1) define the word “public” as used in the North Carolina Constitution, Article 5 -- Section 2



(2) declare that this project is not “public” as that term is referred to in the North Carolina Constitution



(3) declare that Hoke County has not followed North Carolina Statute Law in regard to Design Build Projects.



4) issue an Injunctive Order, after answer and hearing, prohibiting any moneys being spent for this project due to its non-public nature.



(5) Walker prays that this Court injunctively issue an Order prohibiting any new expenditures till the Board complies with State law for Design-Build Projects.



21. Walker also prays for all further just and equitable relief as appropriate.



22. All factual averments herein are verified under penalties of perjury.





Respectfully submitted,







Russell Walker



August 13 , 2018







_________________________________________________________



CONTRIBUTIONS



Contributions will be appreciated. You can use the button below or send a check to:



Walker for House



176 Quewhiffle Road



Aberdeen, NC 28315



e-mail address: walker@walkerforhouse48.com



North Carolina law requires political committees to report the name, mailing address, title or profession and name of employer or employer's specific field for each individual. If retired, just indicate that on the check. Contributions are not tax deductible as charitable donations for federal income tax purposes. Corporate contributions and contributions from foreign nationals are prohibited by law.



DONATE ONLINE