Capri Sun complaints
VIRGINIA BEACH, Va. (WAVY.com) - Two Virginia Beach families contacted 10 On Your Side saying the Capri Suns they recently purchased did not taste right and had even grown mold.

Shaneka Bellomy purchased quite a few boxes of Capri Sun for her 16-year-old Jaquan Harbison.



"I did stock up on them I think I bought 35 boxes of Capri Suns cause they were a dollar a piece," Bellomy said.



On July 4, Harbison told his aunt something wasn't right with his Capri Sun.



"It tasted nasty," Harbison said.



"It really tasted like champagne," Bellomy said.

Bellomy even asked her boyfriend to confirm the drink did not taste like it should.



"I was the last resort and I confirmed that it didn't taste right," Steven Perez said.

Two days earlier, a Virginia Beach mom sent WAVY.com a picture of what she said she found when she pulled the straw out of her son's Capri Sun.



10 On Your Side contacted Kraft Foods, and Senior Manager of Corporate Affairs Bridget MacConnell.



"Our experience has shown that because the product has no preservatives, which is a positive for most moms, if air does get into the pouch even through the smallest hole, fermentation can begin and mold can grow," MacConnell said.



A small warning on the side of the box reads: "Capri Sun contains no preservatives. Do not drink if pouch is leaking, damaged, or swollen as fermentation can occur."

Bellomy said she never noticed the warning and she and her nephew did not notice the package was swollen.



10 On Your Side found what appeared to be a small hole in the side of the pouch where air could have entered the pouch. There was no mold when Bellomy poured the Capri Sun out, but there appeared to be some type of residue on the inside of the pouch.



Kraft Foods said the mold that can grow inside of the drink is similar to common bread mold.



"Generally speaking we believe it's not harmful," MacConnell said. "It might make you sick to your stomach and if it did, I would suggest that you speak with your family health care provider."



A nurse at Virginia Poison Center confirmed the mold could give you a stomach ache but would not be poisonous or toxic if ingested.



"I would not buy Capri Suns anymore," Bellomy said.



The Kraft Foods Spokesperson said they're happy to test whatever anyone finds in a Capri Sun pouch.



You can contact Kraft Foods at 1-800-227-7478