SPEECH BY MR. SIMON CHELUGUI, CABINET SECRETARY FOR WATER AND SANITATION DURING CELEBRATION OF WORLD WATER DAY ON 22ND MARCH 2019 AT EJINJA PRI. SCHOOL, MATUNGU SUB COUNTY, KAKAMEGA COUNTY
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am delighted once again to join Kenyans and the rest of the world to celebrate this year’s World Water Day. As you are aware, World Water Day is an annual UN observance day that highlights the importance of freshwater. The day was first observed in 1993 and is used to advocate for the sustainable management and development of freshwater resources.

This year, we in Kenya have chosen to celebrate this day here in the western region of our country. We are joining the rest of the world to focus public attention on the critical water issues and also inform on the activities the Government through Ministry of Water Sanitation is undertaking in the Water Sector.

The theme this year, which is “Leaving no one behind” is very timely and well aligned to the objectives of Article 43(i)(d) of the Constitution, Vision 2030 and the UN Sustainable Development Goal 6, with special reference to the UN Decade for Water (2018-2028); all of which envisage universal access to water and reasonable sanitation by the year 2030.

Ladies and Gentlemen, in the last over 15 years, the Government has implemented reforms in the water sector to address gaps which have hindered the effective delivery of water and sanitation services in the entire country. Under Water Act 2016, a well aligned policy direction is being finalized to progressively increase access to water and sanitation services in the country, ensuring that no one is left behind. In this regard, in endeavor to achieve universal access to water and sanitation, the Ministry has drawn a road map to universal coverage by the year 2030 by undertaking key projects and programs that will connect 200,000 people to water and 350,000 to sewer annually throughout the country.

Some of the key projects under implementation are; i) Kenya Towns Sustainable Water and Sanitation program targeting rehabilitation and expansion of water and sanitation infrastructure in 28 towns across the country, connecting 2.1 million people to clean water and 1.3 million to sewer systems ii) Northern collector tunnel water project will add 140,000 cubic meters of clean water for the residents of Nairobi City, iii) Mzima II pipeline water project targeting to increase supply of clean water to parts of Kilifi, Kwale and Mombasa Counties by supplying 105,000 cubic meters of water daily, iv) Mwache Water Supply will supplement 186,000 cubic meters of water per day to Kwale and Mombasa, v) Thwake Water Supply to increase access to clean water in Makueni County and Konza City by supplying 150,000 cubic meters of water per day and irrigating 100,000 hectares of land as well as producing 20 Mega Watts of power and, vi) Last mile connectivity projects etc.

In western Kenya, major projects under construction to increase access to water and sanitation include; i) Vihiga Cluster Project to serve 120,000 people in Maseno, Mbale and Kaimosi, ii) Mt. Elgon-Bungoma-Busia Gravity Scheme to provide 86,000 cubic meters of water per day to serve over 700,000 people in Bungoma and Busia Counties, iii) Moi’s Bridge-Matunda Water and Sewerage Project to serve 30,000 people in Matunda and Moi’s Bridge towns, iv) Kipkaren Water Supply to provide 24,000 cubic meters of water per day to serve 300,000 people in Kipkaren and surrounding areas, v) Kiptogot-Kolongolo Water Project to supply 20,000 cubic meters of water per day to 300,000 people in Kolongolo, Kwanza and Kapomboi in Trans-Nzoia County and vi) Malaba Water project to supply 9,000 cubic meters of water per day to over 200,000 residents also in Busia and Bungoma Counties; while studies are going on for Kapsabet, Busia, Nambale and Webuye sewerage projects. In Kakamega County, the Ministry is undertaking last mile connectivity project for Kakamega town at a cost KSH 100 million to connect over 20,000 consumers with water. Studies for Mumias and Kimilili towns sewerage projects are going on, while designs for Malava Gravity Water Supply Scheme to serve Malava and surrounding areas have been completed.

Ladies and Gentlemen, you may be aware that the annual water per capita in Kenya is less than 500 cubic meters making the country a severe water stress country according to the UN global scale on water security. To address this situation, the Government through this Ministry is therefore undertaking a major dams’ implementation program to increase water storage in the country targeting to enhance the country’s water security.

During the period which incidentally is coinciding with the UN water decade (2018-2028), the Government targets to implement 57 major dams in the country. Eight of these dams are already prioritized and are currently under construction or about to start. They are; i) Itare Dam in Nakuru County, ii) Karimenu II and Ruiru II dams in Kiambu County, iii) Thwake Dam in Makueni County, iv) Siyoi/Muruny Dam in West Pokot County, v) Mwache Dam in Kwale County, vi) Yamo Dam in Garissa County and, vii) Sagana Regeneration Project in Muranga County. Another 23 dams in different parts of the country are at various stages of procurement, while the rest are at planning and design stage.

Regarding water resources management, the Ministry is leaving no one behind. As you are aware, water as a national resource cannot be considered as other national resources like oil, gold, copper, iron etc since, whereas water does not have high profit margins it is nevertheless of high socio-economic value. Article 43(1)(d) of the Constitution of Kenya mandates that “every person has the right to clean and safe water in adequate qualities.” However, as we all know, water resources in Kenya are not evenly distributed. Inter basin transfers is therefore encouraged, while addressing conflicts that inevitably arise from competing users through effective public participation and prudent sharing of the water resources to equally benefit all.

Adoption of user friendly and effective policy guidelines on the development of mechanisms to ensure equitable distribution and sharing of water resources through effective regulation is equally critical in resource management. Among the activities the ministry is undertaking in water resources management are conservation and catchment protection activities such as tree planting to help restore reliable and sustainable water resources in water bodies and catchment areas and; to avoid siltation in the dams as well as pollution from agricultural activities.

Ladies and Gentlemen, in implementing the agenda of ensuring water security for the country and expanding water and sanitation infrastructure to increase coverage, the ministry continues to face major challenges. Key among them being: diminishing water resources and the ever-increasing national population coupled with rapidly expanding water demand to support national development. Effects of climate change, especially the emergence of severe cycles of droughts and floods and encroaching desertification are increasingly impacting and critically reducing the country’s renewable freshwater resources.

Lack of sufficient financial resources is another major challenge facing the sector. According to Water Services Regulatory Board’s annual projections, the water sector requires an annual budget of Ksh.100 billion to attain its development targets. However, the current available annual budget is Ksh.40 billion; most of it sourced from development partners.

There is therefore a huge financial gap annually that greatly affects our ability to meet targets. This calls for comprehensive investment planning between the National Government and the County Government to ensure value for money and avoidance of duplication.

Some of the challenges highlighted are beyond our control, however others can be tackled by refocusing our efforts on maximizing the use of available water resources and taking deliberate steps to address them. The issues of transboundary water can and are being addressed through Council of Governors fora and will be adequately resolved under the Water Sector Intergovernmental Cooperation Framework.

To address drought, the Government has mapped out 23 counties adversely affected. These are; Turkana, Baringo, Marsabit, Kilifi, Wajir, Garissa, Lamu, Isiolo, Mandera, Tana River, Kitui, Laikipia, Makueni, Samburu, Kajiado and West Pokot. Others include; Tharaka Nithi, Embu (Mbeere), Narok, Taita Taveta and Nyeri (Kieni)

The Ministry has been allocated KSH 650 million to undertake emergency water tracking services, repair of boreholes, rehabilitation and extension of water supply pipelines and supply of plastic and collapsible water tanks for the affected communities. In the long term however, the envisaged dams are the solution to water security in the country.

The management of institutional and technical capacity of the sector is critical to the delivery of quality service to Kenyans. In this regard, the Ministry through programs at Kenya Water Institute is training technical staff of all Water Sector Institutions, including Water Services Providers to sharpen skills and perceptions that are necessary in progressing services in the institutions.

In conclusion Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish to draw the attention of water sector stakeholders on the importance of information sharing in the sector. I am glad to inform this gathering that the Ministry of Water and Sanitation has developed a monitoring and evaluation mechanism to monitor and document real-time progress of projects and activities. This will ensure that in future, projects are cost effective, completed on time and are of high quality. We wish to expand the database to cover information on actual access to water and sanitation services from the counties to enable the Ministry compile a comprehensive, accurate and dependable database to be shared with counties for planning purposes.

Towards this end the Ministry is encouraging full involvement of the counties in the planning and implementation of national projects to enhance inclusivity, cooperation and effective participation in project implementation with the main focus of last mile connectivity to increase access to water and sanitation.

With those remarks I once again thank you all for attending and participating in this important event. Let us all continue to contribute towards achievement of our collective responsibility of providing clean safe water without leaving any one behind.

God bless you all.

Thank you

SIMON K. CHELUGUI

CABINET SECRETARY