New strain of dog flu prompts concern for pet owners across Louisiana
Animal health officials said there are two different strains of canine influenza, or the dog flu.

The older strain, H3N8, was equine flu (horse flu) that jumped species in or around 2008. The newer strain, H3N2, came from Asia in May 2015. It was first seen in the Chicago area and stayed Midwest until recently when, in May 2017, two cases were confirmed in Monroe.

Advertisement Related Content What you need to know about dog flu in Louisiana

Both strains present standard flu-like symptoms to dogs.

“It can make dogs kind of feel achy, tired. They may not want to eat. They could have a little cough. It may even present like a serious kennel cough where they have that loud honking cough,” said Dr. Adrianna Smith, with the LA-SPCA Community Clinic.

Smith said the newer strain is not known to be a fatal disease if treated properly. But, she said, the older strain could be deadly.

“That can be a fatal disease. That is much more serious. That one can be more intense course of disease. It's a lot more serious in terms of the cough and the fever that strikes dogs a lot harder. We've been very fortunate not to see that one. The newer strand is very mild,” said Smith.

Smith said dogs can spread it to each other. But while the flu won’t make humans sick, they can carry the virus and pass it on.

“If you're touching dogs back and forth, we can pass it back and forth. Petting sick dogs, touching sick dogs ... we can get it on our skin. We can get it on our clothing. Places where the dogs have been, so bedding, blankets, exam tables, those rooms, the chairs, the floor, all those areas can become infected,” said Smith.

Smith said regular cleaning, hand washing and washing of clothes and blankets can help prevent it from spreading. She also highly recommended the flu vaccine.

“They can get it just going to the groomer, dog kennels, dog parks. We can spread it to them. We may have just touched a dog or pet a dog at the dog park and picked up some germs that we didn't know about and then go home and bring it to our dog,” said Smith. “So, I feel it's prudent to vaccinate just in case.”

Dogs and humans can also pass flu to cats. While dogs can get the vaccine, Smith said cats cannot.

Keep up with local news, weather and current events with the WDSU app here. Sign up for our email newsletters to get breaking news right in your inbox. Click here to sign up!