MILLIONS CAN GO ON-LINE THIS HOLIDAY SEASON TO FEED THE WORLD’S HUNGRY

Rome –This holiday season, Internet users can help feed millions of hungry people around the world with the simple click of a mouse, and all without spending a penny.

The "Hunger Site," (www.thehungersite.com), an independent website created last June by Indiana software programmer John Breen, links net users and the corporate world to benefit the world’s hungry. By clicking on the site’s "Donate Free Food" button, web surfers can donate a serving of rice, wheat or corn to a hungry person somewhere in the world, at no expense to themselves. Corporate sponsors pick up the tab for the meal in exchange for free advertisement on the site. The site allows surfers to make one donation per day.

Since it began, the Hunger Site has grown in popularity, with over 350,000 people clicking to donate each day, an average of one million cups of food daily. The site has gained the attention of concerned web users from around the globe, with millions of people donating food from Latin America, Europe, Asia and Africa, logging on to donate food with a click.

"We don’t know how many people will tap into the site during the holiday season, but we hope that millions more will take a brief moment from the festivities to go online and donate food," said Breen. "With one click of the mouse, people can provide real assistance to the truly needy."

All donations generated by the Hunger Site are given to the United Nation’s World Food Programme. "A click on the Hunger Site breaks down old barriers by bringing together corporations and individuals to help feed the world’s 800 million hungry poor," said Tun Myat, Director of WFP’s Resources and External Relations Division. "We are grateful to the millions of people and many corporate sponsors who have already donated food via the site."

To date, WFP has received over $200,000, which has gone towards the purchase and distribution of food to needy school children living in countries such as Ethiopia and Haiti.

Although the largest emergency food aid agency in the world, WFP also manages school-feeding projects in over 25 developing countries that provide free food to students. The meals not only relieve hunger but also improve attendance and concentration in class.

Visitors to the site are met by a world map. Every 3.6 seconds, a country somewhere on the map flashes black, signifying that a person has died of hunger. Approximately 24,000 people die every day from hunger or hunger-related causes, and 75 percent of these deaths are children. The site also contains extensive educational material on hunger, related aid organisations and WFP.

The Hunger Site collects no proceeds from donations, which go directly to WFP. Breen chose the UN food agency as the recipient of the contributions based on WFP’s efficient operations, its broad reach and its low annual administrative overhead costs in 1999 of 8.1 percent, one of the lowest of any UN agency or private charity.

"The sole purpose of the Hunger Site is to fight world hunger by using the Internet as a tool to mobilise and educate millions of people," added Breen.

The World Food Programme is the United Nations’ front-line agency in the fight against global hunger. Last year its aid workers fed 75 million people, including most of the world’s refugees. Headquartered in Rome, Italy, WFP operates in 80 countries.

Visitors to the Hunger Site are encouraged to make the site their homepage or to "bookmark" it so they can make a free daily donation.

For more information about the Hunger site click onto: www.thehungersite.com.

For more information about the World Food Programme click onto: www.wfp.org

* * *

Note to Journalists: Click here for Jpeg photographs of Ethiopian school children involved in WFP’s school feeding programme in the country.

For Press inquiries, please contact:

Trevor Rowe

Spokesperson

WFP Rome

Tel. +39-066513-2602

Francis Mwanza

Public Information Officer

WFP Rome

Tel. +39-066513-2623

Jeff Rowland

Public Information Officer

WFP Rome

Tel. +39-066513-2971

Abby Spring

Information Officer

WFP New York

Tel. +1-212-963-5196