Dallas lawyer sues Hollywood hairstylist Chaz Dean
"As I was shampooing my hair with it, I was noticing handfuls of hair"

A Dallas attorney is suing Hollywood hairstylist Chaz Dean in federal court, alleging that one of his popular WEN products causes some women to lose clumps of their hair. (Photo: Amy Davis / Attorney)

DALLAS — A local attorney is suing Hollywood hairstylist Chaz Dean in federal court, alleging that one of his popular WEN products causes some women to lose clumps of their hair.

"As I was shampooing my hair with it, I was noticing handfuls of hair," said Cindy Peterson, a former customer. "Because my hair was so thick, I didn't notice it right away."

She said she first used the WEN Cleansing Conditioner in October 2014, and said some of her hair still hasn't grown back.

"I did lose about a third of my hair, which is dramatic," she explained. "I still am a long way from where my hair should be. I don't know if it's coming back."

Five other women are also part of Peterson's lawsuit. Some of them claim bald spots appeared after using Dean's Cleansing Conditioner.

Dallas attorney Amy Davis is representing the plaintiffs.

"They feel like people are looking at them, wondering what's caused their hair loss," she said. "So women who used to enjoy time with family and friends out and about in social settings... they've become house-bound."

Davis sued Chaz Dean and Guthy | Renker — the direct marketing firm that sells WEN products — for negligence, false advertising and breach of warranty, among other things.

Davis said her legal team has hired a chemist to evaluate the ingredients of the product because they are still uncertain what causes some customers to lose their hair.

Guthy | Renker said it is aware of the lawsuit though its attorneys have yet to respond to it in court. (Photo: Taylor Lumsden / WFAA-TV)

Guthy | Renker said it is aware of the lawsuit, though its attorneys have yet to respond to it in court.

"We take great pride in the quality of WEN and take the appropriate steps to ensure every WEN product we sell meets our high standards," said Sarah Elison, Public Relations Manager for Guthy | Renker, in an e-mailed statement to News 8. "We want all our customers to have positive experiences with our products and we encourage any customer with a question to contact us."

Read or Share this story: http://on.wfaa.com/1bP6dcj