Teenager Cameron Lancaster dies after attempting ice bucket challenge at Prestonhill Quarry, Fife
Tributes have been paid to a teenager who drowned in a quarry where youths were jumping into the water as part of the 'ice bucket' challenge.

Cameron Lancaster, 18, drowned at Prestonhill Quarry near Inverkeithing, Fife, on Sunday.

Emergency services rushed to the scene shortly before 5pm after receiving a report that he had disappeared under the water, but were unable to save his life.

Locals say an increasing number of youngsters have been jumping into the water at the popular 'tombstoning' spot because of the ice bucket phenomenon.

Yesterday his devastated family released a statement through Police Scotland describing their tragic loss.

It read: "Cameron died in a tragic accident. His death is such a great loss.

"During his short life, he touched so many people with his friendliness, kindness and thoughtful generosity of spirit. He will be hugely missed by his family and friends.

"The family are finding it hard to come to terms with this sudden loss and would ask for privacy at this sad time."

A multi-agency operation involving Police Scotland, the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service and the Scottish Ambulance Service was launched and Cameron's body was recovered from the water around 9pm.

Police were unable to confirm or deny whether Cameron, of Burntisland, Fife, had taken part in the ice water challenge, but a local councillor said youths had jumped into the quarry as part of the craze.

Cllr Alice McGarry, who lives close to the scene, said: "This is an awful tragedy. Our thoughts are with the boy's family. I think that goes without saying.

"There are rumours and speculation that this tragedy is linked to the ice bucket challenge.

"Some children have been jumping off the cliffs at the quarry. They have always done that, but it seems there has been a recent increase because of this challenge.

"There is no confirmation at this stage, but that is what we think has happened.

"I saw a video of another boy jumping from one of the edges last week so this could be related."

Police were yesterday morning (Mon) still at the run-down quarry which is easily accessible because the fencing has been partially destroyed.

On Twitter, Jenni Mclafferty (@Jenni_McL) wrote: "RIP to the lad that died jumping into inverkeithing quarry for the ice water challenge, so sad "

Twitter user @Amysalteri added: "Rest in piece cameron lancaster such a horrible thing to happen to someone,thoughts to all his friends and family"

A spokesman for Police Scotland said: "We can now confirm the identity of the teenager who died at Prestonhill Quarry in Inverkeithing at the weekend.

"Cameron Lancaster, who was 18 years old and lived in Burntisland, died after an accident at the quarry on Sunday 24th August.

"Officers received a report shortly before 5pm that a man had disappeared under the water and, following a multi-agency operation also involving the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service and the Scottish Ambulance Service, his body was recovered at around 9pm.

"The teenager died at the scene and, following a multi-agency operation also involving the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service and the Scottish Ambulance Service, his body was recovered at around 9pm.

"Enquiries are underway to establish the full circumstances of what happened and Police Scotland's thoughts are with the family at this very difficult time."