Russia Responds To Obama Terror Nuke With ABM Missile Killer
World's Largest English Language News Service with Over 500 Articles Updated Daily

"The News You Need Today…For The World You’ll Live In Tomorrow."

What You Aren’t Being Told About The World You Live In

Iron Mountain Apocalypse: The True Story Of 2013

A “must have” book for those seeking to understand the true events surrounding the most troubled years of our modern times. (Continued)

Picking up the Pieces: Practical Guide for Surviving Economic Crashes, Internal Unrest and Military Suppression By: Sorcha Faal “In the span of less than 3 months gasoline prices will rise 500%. The prices of both food and shelter rise over 300%. (Continued)

Partisans Handbook: By: Sorcha Faal “Essential Survival Guide For Resisting Foreign Military Occupation, Escape And Evasion Techniques, Surviving Interrogation, Facing Execution, Wilderness Survival (Continued)

October 14, 2013

Russia Responds To Obama Terror Nuke With ABM Missile Killer

By: Sorcha Faal, and as reported to her Western Subscribers

A chilling Ministry of Defense (MoD) report circulating in the Kremlin today confirms that the Strategic Missile Forces (SMF) sudden, unannounced and successful firing of a Topol ballistic missile into the Sary-Shagan testing ground in Kazakhstan last Thursday (10 October) was in “direct response” to President Barack Obama’s attempt to destroy Charleston, South Carolina in what military intelligence analysts state was an attempted “ false flag attack.”

As we had previously reported, the SMF notified both President Putin and the General Staff this past Tuesday (8 October) that at 01:58:11 GMT/UTC an atomic device was exploded in the seabed off the US Atlantic Ocean, barely 1,000 km (620 miles) from Charleston, causing a 4.5 magnitude earthquake measurement that SMF experts equate to being a 1-kiloton yield, which is equal to the power of 1,000 tons of TNT.

Previous warnings about Obama’s planned false flag attack on Charleston had been leaked to numerous global organizations including Infowars.com, France’s highly respected dedefensa.org, and caused US Senator Lindsey Graham to cryptically tell his fellow South Carolinians that they were under the threat of a “terrorist nuclear attack.”

Obama’s response to his militaries failure to carry out this false flag attack, the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) reported, was his immediate dismissal of Americans top two military nuclear commanders, US Navy Vice Admiral Tim Giardina and US Air Force Major General Michael Carey, and two of the US Marines top officers, Major General Charles M. Gurganus and Major General Gregg A. Sturdevant.

The US military in kind, this new MoD report says, responded to Obama’s attack against their officers by rapidly returning to America over 500 troops belonging to their elite Special Purpose Marine Air-Ground Task Force (SP-MAGTF) that had been stationed in Libya, Italy, Spain and Africa.

The American military does, indeed, now fear Obama, this report continues, as he has become the first President in US history to fire 9 of his most senior officers who refuse to go along with his “master plan” for radically changing his country into a socialist dictatorship.

Even worse, and as we had previously reported on in our reports Pentagon Warns To Expect “Radical” Change In US Government Soon and Obama Retreats To Secret Bunker As “Big Event” Draws Near, the plan Obama envisioned to the American people on 2 July 2008 when as a Presidential candidate he called for the creation and establishment of a “Civilian National Security Force” he promised would be “just as powerful, just as strong, just as well funded as the US Military” has now been achieved, this MoD report says.

To how well equipped Obama’s new National Security Force is we can read as reported by Forbes magazine in their article titled 1.6 Billion Rounds Of Ammo For Homeland Security? It's Time For A National Conversation, and which, in part, says:

“The Denver Post, on February 15th, ran an Associated Press article entitled Homeland Security aims to buy 1.6b rounds of ammo, so far to little notice. It confirmed that the Department of Homeland Security has issued an open purchase order for 1.6 billion rounds of ammunition.

As reported elsewhere, some of this purchase order is for hollow-point rounds, forbidden by international law for use in war, along with a frightening amount specialized for snipers. Also reported elsewhere, at the height of the Iraq War the Army was expending less than 6 million rounds a month. Therefore 1.6 billion rounds would be enough to sustain a hot war for 20+ years. In America.

Add to this perplexing outré purchase of ammo, DHS now is showing off its acquisition of heavily armored personnel carriers, repatriated from the Iraqi and Afghani theaters of operation. As observed by “paramilblogger” Ken Jorgustin last September:

“The Department of Homeland Security is apparently taking delivery (apparently through the Marine Corps Systems Command, Quantico VA, via the manufacturer – Navistar Defense LLC) of an undetermined number of the recently retrofitted 2,717 ‘Mine Resistant Protected’ MaxxPro MRAP vehicles for service on the streets of the United States.”

Regardless of the exact number of MRAP’s being delivered to DHS (and evidently some to POLICE via DHS, as has been observed), why would they need such over-the-top vehicles on U.S. streets to withstand IEDs, mine blasts, and 50 caliber hits to bullet-proof glass? In a war zone… yes, definitely. Let’s protect our men and women. On the streets of America… ?”

To vast majority of the American people themselves not knowing of Obama’s “master plan” to destroy their country, this report says, has been fully explained in the grim report issued last week by the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) that concluded that far from fulfilling his campaign promise to improve transparency, the President has instead presided over an unprecedented campaign to contain leaks and to control media coverage of government operations.

Even the popular American science fiction writer Orson Scott Card has now begun openly warning against Obama by stating: “Obama is, by character and preference, a dictator. He hates the very idea of compromise; he demonizes his critics and despises even his own toadies in the liberal press. He circumvented Congress as soon as he got into office by appointing "czars" who didn't need Senate approval. His own party hasn't passed a budget ever in the Senate.

In other words, Obama already acts as if the Constitution were just for show. Like Augustus, he pretends to govern within its framework, but in fact he treats it with contempt.”

And, surprisingly, one of America’s top radio broadcasters, Michael Savage, has now joined the global call for the Obama regime to account for the other missing nuclear weapons planned to be used in the upcoming false flag event meant to throw the United States into civil war.

As to Russia’s response to this growing American crisis, this MoD report concludes, last weeks SMF firing of the Topol ICBM that can pierce any anti-ballistic missile (ABM) system, combined with the nuclear submarines now patrolling the Southern Seas for the first time since the Soviet era, have now given the Obama regime a “stark warning” that should their civil war begin to impact the Motherland, a “strong and immediate” response should very well be expected.

October 14, 2013 © EU and US all rights reserved. Permission to use this report in its entirety is granted under the condition it is linked back to its original source at WhatDoesItMean.Com. Freebase content licensed under CC-BY and GFDL.

[Ed. Note: Western governments and their intelligence services actively campaign against the information found in these reports so as not to alarm their citizens about the many catastrophic Earth changes and events to come, a stance that the Sisters of Sorcha Faal strongly disagrees with in believing that it is every human beings right to know the truth. Due to our missions conflicts with that of those governments, the responses of their ‘agents’ against us has been a longstanding misinformation/misdirection campaign designed to discredit and which is addressed in the report “ Who Is Sorcha Faal? ”.]

Obama Screams For War As Global Economy Implodes

Snowden Revelations Strike Fear Into Putin

Apocalypse Slams Into America, Few Notice

You May Already Be To Late…But It Has Begun!

They Are Going To Come For You…Why Are You Helping Them?