New York
Minimum Age: It is illegal to sell, offer to sell, barter or give restricted tobacco products to persons under 18. In Nassau, Rockland and Onondaga Counties, it is illegal to sell, offer to sell, barter or give tobacco products to persons under 19. In New York City and Suffolk County, it is illegal to sell, offer to sell, barter or give tobacco products to persons under 21. Please note: Minors are allowed to sell tobacco products to persons of legal age, provided however, that they are under the supervision of a person of legal age. Electronic Age Verification: Any person that sells Restricted Products may perform a transaction scan as a precondition for the purchases. Whenever the information deciphered by the transaction scan fails to match the information printed on the driver’s license or non­driver identification card, or the transaction scan indicates that the information is false or fraudulent, the attempted transaction shall be denied. A licensee, agent or employee of such licensee shall only use a device capable of deciphering any electronically readable format, and shall only use the information recorded and maintained through the use of such devices for the purposes of verifying the identification of the purchaser. No licensee or agent or employee of such licensee shall disseminate or resell the information recorded to any third person. Use of a transaction scan shall not excuse any person from the exercise of reasonable diligence.

Restricted Products: Cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, e-cigarettes, liquid nicotine, powdered tobacco, herbal cigarettes, electronic cigarettes or other tobacco products, smoking paraphernalia (pipe, water pipe, hookah, rolling papers, vaporizer or any other equipment or apparatus designed for the inhalation of tobacco), bidis, gutka (a product containing lime paste, spices, areca and tobacco) or shisha (tobacco-based product designed to be smoked in a hookah). Only persons operating a tobacco-only business may sell bidis or gutka.

Affirmative Defense: It is an affirmative defense in a proceeding alleging an unauthorized sale of Restricted Products to a minor, that the minor produced an Acceptable Form of Identification and successfully completed a transaction scan, and that the tobacco product had been sold, delivered or given to such person in reasonable reliance upon the identification and transaction scan. In evaluating the defense, the commissioner shall take into consideration any written policy adopted and implemented by the retailer to prevent the sale of tobacco products to minors.

Minor Possession: State statutes do not specifically prohibit possession of tobacco by a minor.

Acceptable Forms of Identification: A valid driver's license or a non­driver's identification card issued by the state department of motor vehicles, or any other state, United States federal government or any territory, commonwealth or possession thereof, the District of Columbia or a Canadian provincial government, a valid United States passport or that of any other country, or an identification card issued by the armed forces of the United States. Identification need not be required of any individual who reasonably appears to be at least 25 years of age. Such appearance shall not, however, constitute a defense to an allegation that the sale of a Restricted Product was made to a minor.

Fine/Penalty Schedule for Selling to Minors: Retailers and retail employees who offer to sell, barter or give tobacco products, bidis or gutka to persons under 18 (In Nassau and Onondaga Counties, to persons under 19; or in New York City and Suffolk County, to persons under 21) are subject to fines, arrest and jail. For the 1 st violation, retailers are subject to a $300.00 to $1,000.00 fine (and the retailer's name and address may be published in a local newspaper); for retail employees the maximum fine for a first violation is $500.00. For subsequent violations, retailers and retail employees are subject to a $500.00 to $1,500.00 fine. Further, the retailer shall be assigned two points per violation. If the individual who committed the violation holds a certificate of completion from a state certified tobacco sales training program, then only one point will be assigned. If the retail dealer accumulates three points or more, the dealer's tobacco registration and license (and lottery sales license) shall be suspended for six months, after which the points shall be erased. If the retailer is found in violation while its registration was suspended, the retailer shall be subject to a $2,500.00 fine and have its registration revoked permanently. If a retailer is found in violation four times within three years, the dealer’s registration and license shall be revoked for one year. Points assigned to a retail dealer's record shall be assessed for a period of thirty-­six months beginning on the first day of the month following the assignment of points. Any retail dealer who is assigned points shall be re­inspected at least two times a year until points assessed are removed from the retail dealer's record. The state-­certified tobacco sales training program shall include instruction in: (1) the health effects of tobacco use, especially at a young age; (2) the legal purchase age; (3) legal forms of identification; (4) reliance upon legal forms of identification and the right to refuse sales when acting in good faith; (5) means of identifying fraudulent identification of attempted underage purchasers; (6) techniques used to refuse a sale; (7) the penalties arising out of unlawful sales to underage individuals; and (8) the disciplinary action or loss of employment that may be imposed by the retailer for a violation of the law or a deviation from the policies of the retailer. A tobacco sales training program may be given and administered by a retailer which operates five or more registered locations, by a trade association whose members are registered as retail dealers, by national and regional franchisors who have granted at least five franchises in the state to registered retail dealers, a cooperative corporation with five or more members who are registered retail dealers and operating in this state, and by a wholesaler supplying fifty or more retail dealers. Persons administering such program shall issue certificates of completion to persons successfully completing the program. Such certificates shall be prima facie evidence of the completion of the training program. A certificate of completion may be issued for a period of three years, however such certificate shall be invalidated by a change in employment. To become an entity authorized to give and administer a tobacco sales training program, such applicant must submit to the state an application, a $300.00 filing fee, a proposed curriculum, a facsimile of training aids and materials to be used and a list of training locations. Training aids may include video or computer based instruction, printed material and other forms deemed acceptable to the state. The state shall certify programs which provide instruction in a clear and meaningful fashion. Approved programs shall be certified for a period of three years at which time an entity may reapply for certification.

Sign Requirement: A white sign with red letters that are at least 1/2 inch in height must be conspicuously posted in retail establishments. Signs must state: SALE OF CIGARETTES, CIGARS, CHEWING TOBACCO, POWDERED TOBACCO, SHISHA OR OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, HERBAL CIGARETTES, LIQUID NICOTINE, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, ROLLING PAPERS OR SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA, TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. For Counties which have adopted local ordinances setting 19 or 21 as the minimum age, the signage should reflect that ordinance. Businesses that sell bidis or gutka shall post in a conspicuous place a sign stating “SALE OF BIDIS (GUTKA) TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW” on a white card in red letters at least one­half inch in height. Retailers who violate this requirement are subject to fines, arrest and jail. For the 1st violation, retailers are subject to a $300.00 to $1,000.00 fine. For subsequent violations, retailers are subject to a $500.00 to $1,500.00 fine. Further, the retailer shall be assigned two points per violation. ONLINE: To download a pdf of required sign: http://www.health.state.ny.us/publications/3451.pdf For tobacco only stores, two additional signs are required: http://www.health.state.ny.us/publications/3495.pdf http://www.health.state.ny.us/publications/3484.pdf

Compliance Checks: As a condition of receiving federal substance abuse block grant funds, federal law requires the state to conduct random, unannounced inspections of tobacco outlets to determine compliance rates. The State Department of Health and/or local health departments coordinate and conduct the inspections, using minors.

Visual Characteristics of a State - Issued License: "Under 21 Until 00-­00-­0000" and/or "Under 18 Until 00­-00-­0000", ID number and date of birth are printed in red on the right side of the photo. Under 18 licenses have LIMITED in red on the right side of the card. For additional information about minor licenses, visit: http://www.dmv.ny.gov/license.htm#about

Other: None

State Abbrev: NY NY

ONLINE: To download a pdf of required sign: http://www.health.state.ny.us/

publications/3451.pdf For tobacco only stores, two additional signs are required: http://www.health.state.ny.us/

publications/3495.pdf http://www.health.state.ny.us/|publications/3484.pdf