WHCA DINNER
Announcing the entertainer for the 2018 White House Correspondents' Association annual dinner WASHINGTON - The White House Correspondents' Association is pleased to announce that comedian Michelle Wolf will be the entertainer at the WHCA's annual dinner on Saturday, April 28, 2018. Wolf is the host of a newly announced show on Netflix, which comes on the heels of her highly reviewed HBO special. She is also known for her acclaimed work as a contributor on Comedy Central's Daily Show With Trevor Noah. "I'm delighted to announce 'Nice Lady' Michelle Wolf as our featured entertainer this year," said Margaret Talev, president of the WHCA. "Our dinner honors the First Amendment and strong, independent journalism. Her embrace of these values and her truth-to-power style make her a great friend to the WHCA. Her Pennsylvania roots, stints on Wall Street and in science and self-made, feminist edge make her the right voice now." Wolf most recently premiered her hour-long HBO special, "Michelle Wolf: Nice Lady" and Netflix recently announced that she will star in a new weekly half-hour comedy show later this year. Prior to that, Wolf worked as an on-air contributor and writer for The Daily Show With Trevor Noah on Comedy Central. The Association, founded in 1914 to represent the White House press corps, works to maintain independent news media coverage of the president, advocating for access, handling logistics for pools of reporters who stay close to the president and those who travel with him, and providing scholarships to journalism students. The annual dinner is traditionally attended by the President and First Lady as well as many other senior government officials and members of the press corps. Proceeds from the dinner support the association's year-round work as well as scholarships for aspiring journalists and awards recognizing excellence in the profession. WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENTS' ASSOCIATION™ DINNER - APRIL 29th, 2017 White House Correspondents' Association ANNOUNCES ENTERTAINER FOR THE 2017 DINNER April 11, 2017 WASHINGTON - The White House Correspondents' Association is delighted to announce that Hasan Minhaj, a brilliant comedian and Senior Correspondent on Comedy Central's "The Daily Show with Trevor Noah," will be the entertainer at our annual dinner on Saturday, April 29, 2017. "I am thrilled that Hasan will serve as our featured entertainer at this year's White House Correspondents' Dinner," said Jeff Mason, WHCA president and White House Correspondent for Reuters. "Hasan's smarts, big heart and passion for press freedom make him the perfect fit for our event, which will be focused on the First Amendment and the importance of a robust and independent media. "The White House Correspondents' Dinner, which U.S. presidents have attended for decades, supports the work of the WHCA. Proceeds fund the organization and go toward scholarships and awards aimed at promoting aspiring journalists and recognizing excellence in the journalism profession. "It is a tremendous honor to be a part of such a historic event even though the president has chosen not to attend this year. SAD! Now more than ever, it is vital that we honor the First Amendment and the freedom of the press," said Minhaj. The WHCA represents the White House press corps in its dealings with the administration and advocates for journalists' ability to see and report on the president and his staff. CONTACT For more information, please contact Jeff Mason at jeff.mason@thomsonreuters.com.