Updated: Ballot Law Commission throws out challenge to Trump's eligibility to appear on GOP primary ballot
The state Ballot Law Commission on Tuesday quickly threw out a former New Hampshire Republican Party chairman's challenge to Donald Trump's eligibility to be on the GOP first-in-the-nation primary ballot.

Trump, O'Malley register for NH primary The first round of presidential candidates made it official Wednesday, registering with the New Hampshire secretary of state for the first-in-the-nation primary. More

After a hearing that lasted about two minutes, the five-member commission voted unanimously that the challenge filed by Fergus Cullen was without merit because New York state election records clearly show that Trump is a registered Republican in that state.

"Why are we here?" commission chairman Brad Cook asked Cullen.

"This isn't about whether we like Donald Trump," Cook said. "If 'Republican enough' is what this commission had to do, heaven forbid, we'd be here all day."

"You are challenging someone's filing," Cook said. "This commission is not the forum for speeches or electioneering or advancing any other candidate. If you have any information that he is not in fact a Republican, then share it with us."

Cullen replied, "I do not have that information."

The commission then voted to dismiss the challenge.

Cook said after the hearing that Cullen’s challenge “wasn’t with any substance. It was trying to make an editorial statement. The commission -- regardless of what anybody thinks of the merits or demerits, or the philosophy or anything about a candidate -- our sole role is to figure out if a filing was legal and accurate.”

He said Cullen’s challenge “was grandstanding of the first order, and I didn’t appreciate it.”

Cullen said he filed the challenge after Trump, during the weekend, resurrected the possibility that he would be open to running for president as an independent if he does not win the Republican presidential nomination and if he feels that he has not been treated fairly by the party.

In his complaint, Cullen wrote that Trump has a history of being a Democrat and an independent before changing his party affiliation to Republican. He noted that Trump has praised Democrat Hillary Clinton and contributed to her 2008 presidential campaign, as well as to the Clinton Foundation. Cullen also noted that Trump has spoken in a complimentary way about President Obama, who is also a Democrat.

He charged that Trump’s views, “expressed over decades, are inconsistent with the Republican Party platform and the Republican Party of New Hampshire’s Statement of Principles and By Laws.”

Cullen said he filed the complaint on his own behalf. He also said a super PAC promoting Ohio Gov. John Kasich for president, A New Day for America, was aware that he would be filing the complaint before he did so and is “on the same page” believing that Trump is not a true Republican.” Cullen, however, said he is not supporting Kasich, or any candidate, for president at the moment.

Following the hearing, Cullen said Trump is destructive to the Republican Party and the country because, according to Cullen, Trump would “disregard” the 14th Amendment, which grants citizenship to all persons born or naturalized in the United States.

Cullen said neither of his own parents were U.S. citizens when he was born, and “Donald Trump thinks that’s some kind of second class citizenship.”

“His disregard for the constitution should not be ignored by people any longer,” Cullen said. And, he said, “His affiliation with the Republican Party seems temporary. It don’t see any significant commitment.”

Cullen, asked if he had truly expected his challenge to be upheld, said, “I think we can no longer accept Trump’s dictatorial tendencies. The hope that this would go away or burn itself out has not worked. But he is a guy who is openly saying he’s going to disregard large parts of the constitution.”

“I’m not willing to sit around and watch it all play out,” Cullen said.

“This is a forum, and you fight Lee’s army where it is,” Cullen said of the Ballot Law Commission. “And this is one of the places where Trump is. I am raising the flag about the threat to democracy I think Donald Trump represents.”

Trump’s national campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski of Windham, returned fire.

“This is another example of the GOP elite trying to prevent Donald Trump from winning this election,” Lewandowski told WMUR.com in an interview. “Fergus Cullen is a failed state party chairman who couldn’t get elected to the (Republican) state committee moving forward. He is a paid political operative for the John Kasich campaign and he will do for t hem what he did for the state party, which is to rive t hem into the ground.”

But New Day for America spokeswoman Connie Wehrkamp said: "Despite this decision by the Ballot Law Commission, serious questions remain regarding Trump's anti-Republican record, including why did he contribute over $100,000 to Hillary Clinton's past campaigns and family foundation, and why has Trump threatened to run as an independent?

"It is important the voters of New Hampshire have faith that this process ensures the letters beside candidates' names are representative of party membership and shared values. We remain unconvinced that Mr. Trump is a committed member of the Republican Party."

(Our earlier report, from late Tuesday, Nov. 23, follows.)

A former chairman of the New Hampshire Republican Party says Donald Trump should not be on the GOP presidential primary ballot on Feb. 9 because the frontrunner has not proven he is a registered Republican and has expressed views “inconsistent” with the state and national party’s platform and by laws.

Fergus Cullen, who chaired the NHGOP in 2007 and 2008, filed a complaint on Monday with the state Ballot Law Commission, which will take up the matter, along with three other complaints focused on other candidates, beginning Tuesday morning.

It is unlikely statements made by Trump in the past would play a role in determining his eligibility to be on the Republican ballot. And according to the state of New York's elections website, Trump is a registered Republican.

Trump's national campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski of Windham, called Cullen's complaint "outrageous" and said Trump's filing is "flawless."

Lewandowski said if Trump is kept off of the ballot, "Mr. Trump's supporters would probably riot in the streets of New Hampshire." His full statement appears below.

Cullen, who has been a frequent critic of Trump, told WMUR.com that he filed the complaint on his own behalf. He also said a super PAC promoting Ohio Gov. John Kasich for president was aware that he would be filing the complaint and is “on the same page” regarding the allegations that Trump is not a true Republican.

Cullen noted that Trump during the weekend resurrected the possibility that he would be open to run for president as an independent if he does not win the Republican presidential nomination and if he feels he has not been treated fairly by the party.

The pro-Kasich super PAC, A New Day for America, announced last week that it is planning to invest $2.5 million in an aggressive attack against Trump during the next two months via radio, television and digital ads in New Hampshire.

A New Day for America said last week that Trump threatened to sue the organization following the release of a television ad that charges Trump and fellow Republican candidate Ben Carson do not have the necessary experience to serve as president.

“I’m filing the complaint, and A New Day for America is making the same point,” Cullen said in an interview. “We’re on the same page in making the points in the complaint.”

In the six-page complaint, Cullen asked the Ballot Law Commission – charged by state law with deciding election filing disputes and appeals from recounts – to keep Trump off of the Republican ballot because, Cullen charged, he may not be a registered Republican and has a history of not being allegiant to the Republican Party.

“I do not believe that Mr. Trump should be placed on the Republican ballot in the New Hampshire primary,” Cullen wrote.

He also wrote: “When Mr. Trump filed his Declaration of Candidacy (on Nov. 4), he was required to ‘swear under penalties of perjury’ that he is ‘a registered member of the Republican Party.’ To my knowledge, Mr. Trump has not presented any evidence to the Secretary of State or this commission that he is a registered member of the Republican Party because his views, expressed over decades, are inconsistent with the Republican Party platform and the Republican Party of New Hampshire’s Statement of Principles and By Laws.”

Citing numerous news reports, Cullen wrote that Trump changed his registration from Republican to independent in 1999, to Democratic in 2001, and back to Republican in 2009.

New York's official elections web site has Trump currently listed as an active Republican, however.

Cullen's complaint cited Trump’s comments in 1999, in which he said he might run for president as a member of the Independence Party of New York.

Cullen cited instances in which Trump contributed to Democrat Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign in 2008 and praised her in interviews. And he cited reports in which Trump was quoted as complimenting President Obama.

Also, wrote Cullen: “The sanctity of life is a core plank of the Republican Party platform, yet Donald Trump has a long history of pro-choice advocacy and even refused to oppose partial-birth abortion.”

Cullen cited 1999 interviews in which Trump declared himself strongly pro-choice.

Trump, however, has since changed his position and has said numerous times in recent years that has become pro-life on the abortion issue.

Lewandowski issued the following statement to WMUR.com on Monday night:

“Fergus Cullen works for John Kasich who is embarrassed by how poorly he is doing in all polls. Mr. Trump was the first candidate to file, the filing is flawless, and Mr. Trump is leading in all national and state polls. Most importantly, he is leading by 19 points in New Hampshire with 32 percent of the vote. Additionally, in the latest FOX News poll, Mr. Trump easily beats Hillary Clinton one on one.

Lewandowski continued: "Number one, Mr. Trump’s views do comport with the Republican Party and, number two, from a constitutional standpoint, there is such a thing as freedom of speech.

"To file such a document against the person who is not only the frontrunner, but leading by tremendous margins is outrageous. If anything like this would ever happen Mr. Trump’s supporters would probably riot in the streets of New Hampshire. This is yet another attempt by the failed GOP establishment to keep Mr. Trump off the ballot because they know he is the only one who can Make America Great Again.”

But A New Day for America spokeswoman Connie Wehrkamp countered:

“Like many other Republicans, we question Donald Trump’s conservative credentials and are happy to support Mr. Cullen’s efforts to challenge Trump’s standing on the New Hampshire Republican primary ballot.

"Unlike Trump, Ohio Gov. John Kasich is a proven conservative who will stand up for the values Republicans hold dear. He’s the only candidate who led the effort to balance the federal budget, he has cut Ohioans’ taxes by $5 billion, he has shrunk Ohio state government to the lowest levels in 30 years, he’s signed every piece of pro-2nd Amendment legislation to cross his desk and more pro-life measures than any other governor in Ohio history. John Kasich is a conservative we can trust.”

The Ballot Law Commission on Tuesday will also review a complaint challenging the eligibility of U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont to be on the Democratic primary ballot. It will also take up complaints challenging the eligibility of U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz to be on the GOP ballot, and challenging the eligibility of Cruz, U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio and former U.S. Sen. Rick Santorum to be on the GOP ballot.