Cameo Nightclub shooting victim's family to pursue civil suit in man's death
Three sisters of O'Bryan "Lucky" Spikes, his mother, his father and his own three little ones gathered this afternoon at the Eden Park Gazebo to call for an end to this community's club culture as their attorneys started to lay the groundwork for a civil lawsuit.

They are a little more than three weeks removed from nightmarish gun violence that changed their lives forever.

Advertisement Related Content Cameo nightclub shooting victims sue club, owner

Raquel Mitchell, the grieving mother of a young man who was killed on March 26 at the club spoke into a bank of microphones today and stated "You should be able to go and have a birthday drink without gettin' killed."

She said her 27-year-old son had been inside the Cameo nightclub about a half-hour when gunfire erupted.

One of the bullets caught him in the chest, ending his life.

FULL NEWS CONFERENCE: Cameo shooting victim's family to pursue civil suit in man's death



The family emphasized anew Tuesday that Spikes was not involved in anything nefarious, calling him an innocent bystander, a crossfire victim.

They said finding out how guns got inside the club is a community-wide imperative.

Raquice Mitchell, Spikes' oldest sister, said, "We encourage if anybody seen something or anybody knows something to say something. We not just fighting for justice for my brother."

The family has hired attorneys who intend to file a civil lawsuit, although they announced no timeline for it.

They are in the process of gathering information. But, it's clear from a written family statement that

those who fired shots, those who ran and owned the club and those that provided security both inside and outside the nightspot would likely be named in a civil suit.

That statement reads, in part, "We wouldn't want any family to experience the pain we are experiencing ... Most importantly, we want to help others avoid being in the situation we find ourselves in today - burying a loved one from a senseless tragedy."

Cornell Beckley, 27, has been charged in the mass shooting investigation and is scheduled to face trial late next month. Another man, identified as Deondre Davis died as a suspect in the case.

Police are not finished with their investigation. Attorneys for the family are just getting started with their own.

"The security procedures were lax," stated Chris Finney. "They had metal detectors at the doors and yet they allowed guns to come in."

The owner has stated everyone that came in that night went through security, even those in what is known as a VIP line. There continues to be speculation that slipping someone some extra cash could whisk you right past security without the normal detection checks.

That suspicion is, in part, fueling the formation of an anticipated lawsuit.

The family spoke today about the need to change the city's club culture so that Lucky's surviving children, 6-year-old O'Bryanna, 5-year-old Ozayvion and 1-year-old Arielle, could safely have a different experience a generation from now.

"Why should we go spend our money with these patrons if we are not safe in their building? That's with any building," said Spikes' mother. "Why should we go?"

AlertMe