A startling news from Bhagalpur, a live mermaid found in river Ganga
Viral on Web

Tree man syndrome. Man survived living with four kg of warts on his hands and feet

Charly Jordan's shower head falls off its holder and smashes directly into head

Pregnant woman dancing with her doctor ahead of a C-section

Girl missing during Kedarnath floods reunite with family after 5 years

Deepika Padukone pens a heart touching letter on depression

‘Manikarnika’ trailer released, Kangna mold her in ‘Jhansi ki Rani’

Segregation of dining hall for ‘pure vegetarian’ students sparks row at IIT Madras

The screaming aunty at Priyanka and Nick's mehendi is now a meme

'Battle of Longewala' hero, Brigadier Chandpuri, passes away

China plans to launch an artificial moon that's brighter than the real one

Acrobatic way to score a penalty in football – Watch Video

"The world's best bar" is closing down

Yuvraj Singh congratulates PM Modi for Ayushman Bharat on his Instagram post

Videos showing how to hack Facebook running on YouTube

Facebook Stories feature hits 300 mn users

Eleven babies died - Study in the Netherlands was using Viagra turns fatal

#TalktoaMuslim becoming popular on Twitter

Teenager in Iran was arrested for sharing her dance videos on Social Media

Born without legs she used tin cans as legs, now getting treatment

Woman who accused Justin Trudeau of groping her in 2000 issues a statement

Super typhoon Maria rapidly intensifies in the western Pacific

Nurse uses voodoo rituals to force Nigerian women for prostitution

Heartbreaking tragedy, a man killed by Bear while protecting his children.

Romantic Penguin couple on the beach, making humans think twice about their love.

Octopus correctly predicted all three of Japan's World Cup group stage results

JK Rowling sends gift to a girl in Kashmir

'World's Ugliest Dog' 2018 is English Bulldog

Hello friends, chai pi lo! Meme going viral

Happy birthday, Rahul Gandhi! Congress President turns 48. Many pour their wishes on Twitter

Stress can cause even spiritual guru to commit suicide.

World record for the largest skinny dip

The war on plastics- People in all walks of life spread the message.

In a Spider-Man like act, a man scales a building to rescue the toddler

Student shot in at Palmdale California School, suspect held

Bioluminescence lighting up the San Diego waters again, coastline are lighting up neon blue

Liquid Chocolate spill on Warsaw Highway

Father-son duo attested for duping a businessman for Rs 1.43 cr

Alert Loco Pilot Saves Potential Disaster

The destructive power of Hawaii's Kilauea volcano

Tamil actor Ajith Kumar helping MIT students build a drone

Tumbleweed invasion in Victorville, residents call for help

​A Pregnant Woman Performing Pole Dancing is Breaking the Internet

Leonardo DiCaprio; RIP Sudan, the Last white northern Rhino has gone into the stars!!

Uber Self-Driving Car Kills Pedestrian in Arizona

​ Serial Killer, a German Nurse faces Trial Over 97 Murders!

In a Bizarre Incident, the police in the US catch on hold a woman "Bride-to-Be", after hit and run!

A Wife Alleges, Her Husband Stole Her Kidney to Coverup Dowry!

PM Modi reply to debate on motion of thanks to President address in Lok Sabha

Creativity is Crazy !!

​Have you ever witness penguins from so close?