Police: Louisville teen behind online 'Purge' flier
Louisville's version of "The Purge" has come and gone.Main article: Police respond to online 'Purge' threatDespite some fears of violence, Louisville Metro Police said everything overnight was "pretty normal."A poster made the rounds on social media during the week alarming residents and law enforcement and setting off an Internet frenzy.It referenced the 2013 movie "The Purge," in which all crime is legal for one night.Police said a Louisville teenager created the poster.They say right now, he's not facing any charges, but their investigation is ongoing."We found the person who did the original poster. It was a juvenile. We talked to that individual but at this time our main concern, as far as any threats, are any additional ones that came as a result of that poster. So that's what our efforts have been concentrated on," said LMPD spokesman Dwight Mitchell.WLKY received a lot of calls and emails overnight from people who were listening to police scanners.While there were some pranks and false alarms, police said it was a normal Friday night.

Louisville's version of "The Purge" has come and gone.

Main article: Police respond to online 'Purge' threat

Advertisement Related Content St. Xavier postpones football scrimmage due to 'Purge' threats

Despite some fears of violence, Louisville Metro Police said everything overnight was "pretty normal."

A poster made the rounds on social media during the week alarming residents and law enforcement and setting off an Internet frenzy.

It referenced the 2013 movie "The Purge," in which all crime is legal for one night.

Police said a Louisville teenager created the poster.

They say right now, he's not facing any charges, but their investigation is ongoing.



"We found the person who did the original poster. It was a juvenile. We talked to that individual but at this time our main concern, as far as any threats, are any additional ones that came as a result of that poster. So that's what our efforts have been concentrated on," said LMPD spokesman Dwight Mitchell.



WLKY received a lot of calls and emails overnight from people who were listening to police scanners.



While there were some pranks and false alarms, police said it was a normal Friday night.

AlertMe