Make-A-Wish Foundation : About Us : Chain Letters
Fraudulent Sweepstakes Alert

A number of individuals have reported to us that they, or a family member or

a friend, have received a phone call informing them they have allegedly won hundreds of thousands of dollars (e.g., $350,000) in a sweepstakes or lottery associated with the Make-A-Wish Foundation. These individuals have been told that, in order to claim their “prize,” they must first wire money to cover taxes and insurance on the supposed winnings.

This is a scam. The Make-A-Wish Foundation is NOT associated with any kind of sweepstakes or lottery; and it has always had a strict policy prohibiting any sort of telemarketing in its name.

The Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”), which is frequently mentioned in connection with this phony sweepstakes scam, has issued a consumer alert urging anyone who receives such a call to file a complaint with the real FTC at ftc.gov or by calling 1-877-FTC-HELP.

“Unlimited Wishes” Spoof Video Continues to Appear

An Internet video depicting a fictional news story about the Make-A-Wish Foundation continues to circulate on YouTube and other video sites. The video portrays a “wish kid” whose wish for unlimited wishes has put the Make-A-Wish Foundation’s future in jeopardy. The “Today Now!” segment is not true and all characters, including wish child “Chad,” are fictitious. The spoof was produced in 2008 by The Onion, which is well-known for using satire to parody news events. The Make-A-Wish Foundation is financially sound thanks to its many generous donors, and we do not grant “unlimited wishes” to a wish child. We appreciate your support for the Make-A-Wish mission and the thousands of courageous children we serve.

Chain Letters

Each day, the Make-A-Wish Foundation and its chapters receive hundreds of inquiries about chain letters claiming to be associated with the Foundation and featuring sick children. However, we do not participate in these kinds of wishes. Some names associated with these wishes are: Amirtha, Jessie Anderson, Shane Bernier, Matt Dawson, Chad Briody , Amy Bruce, Jeff DeLeon, Rhyan Desquetado, Anthony Hebrank, LaNisha Jackson, Nikisha Johnson, Craig Sheldon, Craig Shelford, Craig Shelton, Craig Sheppard, Craig Shergold, Bryan Warner and Kayla Wightman.

If you receive a chain letter claiming ties to the Foundation, please: Inform the sender that the Foundation does not participate in chain letter wishes.

Refer the sender and all recipients to this page.

Do not forward the chain letter.

Refer senders to ways they can help the Foundation, such as referring a child, making a donation, donating their time & talents, or donating treasures



Only one of these requests is based in fact: In 1989, a then 9-year-old boy named Craig Shergold wanted to be recorded in the "Guinness Book of World Records" for receiving the most greeting cards. His wish was fulfilled in 1990 by another wish-granting organization not associated with the Make-A-Wish Foundation. He received more than 16 million cards. Craig is now a healthy adult, and he has requested an end to the mail. Mail that is received is forwarded to a recycling center.

The time and expense required to respond to these inquiries distracts the Foundation from its efforts on behalf of children with life-threatening medical conditions, and more importantly, can divulge information that is potentially harmful to a child and his or her family.