The International Churchill Society -
Nothing in life is so exhilarating as to be shot at without result. ”

[I object] on principle to doing by legislation what properly belongs to charity. ”

War never pays its dividends in cash on the money it costs. ”

The nose of the bulldog has been slanted backwards so that he can breathe without letting go. ”

The recognition of their language is precious to a small people. ”

The British Constitution is mainly British common sense. ”

Politics is not a game. It is an earnest business. ”

The usefulness of a naval invention ceases when it is enjoyed by everyone else. ”

The maxim of the British people is ‘Business as usual.’ ”

At the beginning of this War megalomania was the only form of sanity. ”

Honours should go where death and danger go. ”

God for a month of power & a good shorthand writer. ”

The First Sea Lord moves the fleet. No one else moves it. ”

In war, resolution; in defeat, defiance; in victory, magnanimity; in peace, goodwill. ”

Bolshevism is a great evil, but it has arisen out of great social evils. ”

I can well understand the Hon. Member speaking for practice,which he badly needs. ”

Frightfulness is not a remedy known to the British pharmacopoeia. ”

You must look at facts, because they look at you. ”

An announcement of a prospective surplus is always a milestone in a budget…. ”

Time and money are largely interchangeable terms. ”

A hopeful disposition is not the sole qualification to be a prophet. ”

It is a good thing for an uneducated man to read books of quotations. ”

Is [this coalition] to be above party Government or below party Government? ”

It is not in our power to anticipate our destiny. ”

I think of France, anxious, peace-loving, pacifist to the core, but armed to the teeth… ”

War is very cruel. It goes on for so long. ”

All wisdom is not new wisdom. ”

My Rt. Hon. Friend [Air Minister Sir Kingsley Wood] has not been long enough in office to grow a guilty conscience. ”

Each one [of the neutral nations] hopes that if he feeds the crocodile enough, the crocodile will eat him last. ”

I have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears, and sweat. ”

Our task is not only to win the battle—but to win the war. ”

This is no time for ease and comfort. It is the time to dare and endure. ”

History with its flickering lamp stumbles along the trail of the past… ”

There is no finer investment for any community than putting milk into babies. ”

If we win, nobody will care. If we lose, there will be nobody to care. ”

Give us the tools, and we will finish the job. ”

…I do not resent criticism, even when, for the sake of emphasis, it for a time parts company with reality. ”

Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few. ”

We must beware of needless innovation, especially when guided by logic. ”

I am certainly not one of those who need to be prodded. In fact, if anything, I am a prod. ”

…soldiers must die, but by their death they nourish the nation which gave them birth. ”

There is only one thing worse than fighting with allies, and that is fighting without them. ”

In wartime, Truth is so precious that she should always be surrounded by a bodyguard of lies. ”

We have a lot of anxieties, and one cancels out another very often. ”

Well it may be said, well it was said, that the prerogatives of the Crown have become privileges of the people. ”

Tidiness is a virtue, symmetry is often a constituent of beauty…. ”

I could not live without Champagne. In victory I deserve it. In defeat I need it. ”

You cannot cure cancer by a majority. What is needed is a remedy.” ”

Nothing is more costly, nothing is more sterile, than vengeance. ”

Craft is common both to skill and deceit. ”

One ought to be just before one is generous. ”

Nothing makes a man more reverent than a library. ”

Vengeance is the most costly and dissipating of luxuries. ”

Socialism is the philosophy of failure, the creed of ignorance, and the gospel of envy. ”

The English never draw a line without blurring it. ”

No technical knowledge can outweigh knowledge of the humanities. ”

Short words are best and the old words when short are best of all. ”

If you destroy a free market you create a black market. ”

Nationalization of industry is the doom of trade unionism. ”

Evils can be created much quicker than they can be cured. ”

The object of Parliament is to substitute arguments for fisticuffs. ”

It is no part of my case that I am always right. ”

The Hon. Member is never lucky in the coincidence of his facts with the truth. ”

…I am always ready to learn, although I do not always like being taught…. ”

I never take pleasure in human woe. ”

Mr. Speaker, let us envisage—an unpleasant and overworked word. ”

Dull—duller—Dulles. ”

The Hon. Member is never lucky in the coincidence of his facts with the truth. ”

The British people have taken for themselves this motto: ‘Business carried on as usual during alterations on the map of Europe.’ ”

The only guide to a man is his conscience; the only shield to his memory is the rectitude and sincerity of his actions. ”

History with its flickering lamp stumbles along the trail of the past… ”

I can well understand the Hon. Member speaking for practice, which he badly needs. ”

There is always much to be said for not attempting more than you can do… But this principle… has its exceptions. ”

–The British people have always been superior to the British climate. ”

One can usually put one’s thoughts better in ones own words. ”

How few men are strong enough to stand against the prevailing currents of opinion! ”

Sometimes when fortune scowls most spitefully, she is preparing her most dazzling gifts. ”

Above all, my dear friend, do not be vexed or discouraged. We are on the stage of history. ”

Chivalrous gallantry is not among the peculiar characteristics of excited democracy. ”

Patience and good temper accomplish much. ”

Let us learn our lessons. ”

Great and impressive are the effects of contrast. ”

Go out into the sunlight and be happy with what you see. ”

Language is a great bridge. ”

It’s a long way to Tipperary, but a visit there is sometimes irresistible. ”

When you get to the end of your luck, there is a comfortable feeling you have got to the bottom. ”

Life, which is so complicated and difficult in great matters, nearly always presents itself in simple terms. ”

We must always be ready to make sacrifices for the great causes; only in that way shall we live to keep our souls alive. ”

A fanatic is someone who won’t change his mind, and wont change the subject ”

He has all of the virtues I dislike and none of the vices I admire. ”

Kites rise highest against the wind not with it. ”