Giant Skeletons Seem Too Real To Be A Hoax
There's a lot we don't know about our own human history which is why the results of archaeological excavations around the world often gain so much attention.

And to make things more confusing, digital photo editing software has allowed people to add their own creative touches to the evolutionary timeline.

Look across the internet and you'll find countless examples of remarkable human remains allegedly uncovered on archaeological digs.

But despite a multitude of these manipulated models, many seem to have materialized from the minds of our creative community here on DesignCrowd, who were also previously members of Worth1000.com.

Scroll down to see some supposed giant skeletons or click here to view more archaeological anomalies.

Return to the valley of the giants





Artwork by Ironkite

'Discovered' while pursuing the mythical 'missing link'





Artwork by Ironkite

The man in the wall





Artwork by Trit

Unearthing the unexplainable





Artwork by Anakinnnn

Giant outlaw





Artwork by Amaranto

A big dig





Artwork by Mzpresto

Time to re-write the history books?





Artwork by Yearofthedragon

Getting a measure of the man





Artwork by Blackbook

"We're gonna need a bigger digger"





Artwork by Ufurgger

Skeleton's in the cave





Artwork by DAIlike

Mermaid remains





Artwork by The1Calleddano

Giant Cyclops





Artwork by peejo24

Want more?

Check out other times our talented design community has used their skills come up with the unthinkable:

Skeleton Logo Maker

Skull Logo Maker

Mad Mishmash Bowl Of Fruit And Vegetables

Famous Scenes from Romance Movies Get a Food Makeover

Is This Australia's New Most Dangerous creature? Images Emerge Of Previously Unseen Outback Wildlife

Kevin Bradford is a content editor at DesignCrowd with a background in journalism and digital production. Experienced in both writing and videography, he loves combining his skills to create captivating content across all multimedia channels.