Viral post about restaurant employees insulting police found to be inaccurate
A post about two police officers being treated disrespectfully at a restaurant that went viral was an exaggeration and a misunderstanding, according to a lawyer for the restaurant and the chief of police.

Advertisement

The Facebook post on Friday by the Raleigh Police Protective Association said: "Thank you Smithfield's Chicken and Barbeque for the class and professionalism as you sang, 'F--- the police' as my brothers at Raleigh Police Department attempted to eat at your restaurant. The manager sang along as well. Do you really feel that was appropriate?"

"F--- tha Police" is a song by rappers N.W.A. on the album Straight Outta Compton.

The post was shared thousands of times, and a majority of the comments indicated that people were angry about the lack of respect for the police.

Mark O'Mara, an attorney for Smithfield's Chicken 'N Bar-B-Q on Jones Sausage Road, said in a news release: "After collaboration with the Raleigh Police Department, numerous internal interviews and a review of store video, we have an understanding of what truly transpired in the restaurant on Friday night.

Facebook

"There was no singing. Multiple employees were not involved. Ultimately, this was, at most, a subtle misunderstanding between one former employee and two police officers. What has been reported and spread through social media is false. Based on results of the investigation, the employee involved is no longer with the company."

Raleigh police Chief Cassandra Deck-Brown released a statement Wednesday to try to lay the rumors about the incident to rest: "From the beginning, when I first learned about this situation, I committed that our team would work together fully with the owner of this restaurant, to better understand the matter and to find a way forward. I'm happy to report that we have collaborated in a very positive way, and together we have established that there has been a lot of misinformation spread about this incident. And, today, I'm glad to have the opportunity to update the public on what we've learned.

"Despite media reports, two officers witnessed one employee make eye contact with them and mouth the words "F---- the police." There was no singing. There were no other employees involved. Because of the subtle nature of this act, it was not witnessed by anyone else in the store.

"Ultimately, the Raleigh Police Department, Smithfield's Chicken 'N Bar-B-Q and our whole community were victims of misinformation and misunderstanding causing the original reporting of the story to be wrong.

"The Raleigh Police Department seeks to serve all members and all elements of the community in fairness and without bias. We expect the same in return and are confident that Smithfield's Chicken 'N Bar-B-Q shares those same values. The first step in creating understanding between two parties is to come together to communicate. I'm proud to say, we've done exactly that.

"We need to grow collectively in both organizations beyond this and the Raleigh Police Department remains committed to doing just that."

Smithfield's Chicken 'N Bar-B-Q franchisees David Harris and Willie “Mr. Mac” McKennies said, "For the past 17 years, we've had police officers in our restaurant day in and day out. And we appreciate their patronage.

“They deserve the utmost respect, just like all of our customers, and we are committed to ensuring that happens at Smithfield's Chicken 'N Bar-B-Q. Now that we have resolution, I look forward to seeing men and women in blue eating with us again."