Upstate principal reverses decision, allows students to bring American flags to school events
The Upstate principal at the center of a controversy that erupted during a high school football game Friday has reversed his stance on students bringing the American flag to school events.

The Greenville County School District released a statement Monday afternoon after a meeting with Travelers Rest High School Principal Lou Lavely and student and faculty leaders.

"Effective immediately, students are allowed to bring the American Flag to any and all Travelers Rest High School events," the district said in a statement.

"Instead of restricting possession of the flag, the TRHS administration will, if needed, address the misuse of the Flag, or any other inappropriate behavior, on an individual basis."

Parents received the information before it was released to the media, according to the district.

A video statement from Lavely was also to be made public later Monday, officials said.

The following is the statement in its entirety:

"At Friday night’s football game between Travelers Rest and Berea, TR High School Principal Lou Lavely restricted some students from bringing the American Flag into the stadium.

"An American Flag was also confiscated from a student within the stadium.

"Mr. Lavely based this decision on past incidents in which TR students used the U.S. Flag, in conjunction with verbal taunts, to target Hispanic members of the Berea community in a manner that was both unsportsmanlike and also a misuse of our Flag.

"Though social media reported that Mr. Lavely restricted the flag because it might offend members of the Berea community, Mr. Lavely vehemently denies believing or stating that the Flag might be offensive to that community.

"Today, after meeting with Travelers Rest student and faculty leadership, and with the benefit of time to reflect, Mr. Lavely has reached a different decision. He based this decision on current students’ request that he judge them on their own merits and not based on the actions of past students. As a result, effective immediately, students are allowed to bring the American Flag to any and all Travelers Rest High School events. Instead of restricting possession of the flag, the TRHS administration will, if needed, address the misuse of the Flag, or any other inappropriate behavior, on an individual basis."

"I fully support Mr. Lavely’s thoughtful reconsideration, and his willingness to respond to advice and input from his community,” said Superintendent Burke Royster. “I am appreciative of the Travelers Rest High School community for sharing its concerns and opinions on this matter in a respectful, civil manner.

I also appreciate and applaud their desire to promote patriotism and service as a part of the culture of their school and am in agreement that students’ desire to carry and display the American flag should be encouraged and supported throughout the District.”

Christian Bocanegra, a senior at Travelers Rest High School, said tensions ran high among students on Monday about the flag controversy.

"They're disappointed that their First Amendment right -- freedom of expression, freedom of speech -- was taken away," Bocanegra told WYFF.

His father, Gil Bocanegra, who is of Mexican descent, said students should never be discouraged from wanting to display the American flag.

"It's about patriotism," he said. "If they want to bring flags in, bring it in. It's a generation that needs to be brought back to patriotism. We've gotten away from that."

Late Monday evening we heard from students at Travelers Rest High School who got together to draft a statement.

"We the students of Travelers Rest High School feel like it is time for our voices to be heard in regards to the chain of events that began with the confiscation of American flags at Friday night's game. We simply wanted to express our patriotism by carrying the flag, a flag brave men and women died for, a right guaranteed to us in the first amendment.

We do not in any way condone using the flag to taunt others and that is not what happened on Friday night. The flag unites people of all races, religions, ethnicities, and cultures under freedom and liberty.



In wake of this event we are encouraged by the positives steps by Mr. Lavely, Mr. Royster, and the district office to meet with students and issue a revised statement this afternoon. We hope that the administration continues to foster an environment where open discussion of issues is encouraged.



The student body fought for the right to carry Old Glory and unified like our fore fathers to stand for what we believe to be right. As a result, we saw positive change and will no longer be denied the right to carry the flag to our school.

We hope that the TR community, students, and the nation sees that voicing your opinion in a respectful manner can elicit positive change. Continue to stand for your rights as Americans and communicate in a deferential way with your local officials."