Blog of Canopy Commercial
CANOPY COMMERCIAL | AUCTION CLOSES $1,477,080 INVESTMENT SALE TRANSACTION

Absolute Net Leased KFC/Taco Bell Multi-Brand Investment Property Sells to Private Investor

OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, May 26, 2010 – Canopy Commercial | Auction is pleased to announce the $1,477,080 sale of a 3,113 square foot investment property on 0.6952 acres located at 2141 Gary Boulevard in Clinton, Oklahoma. The building was built in 2010 as a Kentucky Fried Chicken and Taco Bell multi-brand restaurant. The property sold for ninety nine percent (99%) of list price and escrow closed in fewer than thirty (30) days after contract execution.

Springfield, Missouri-based Treadwell Enterprises, Inc. occupies the building and has leasehold interest in the property through April, 2030. Since opening its first KFC Restaurant in 1991, the various companies managed by Treadwell Enterprises, Inc. have acquired or built a total of 125 KFC and KFC multi-brand restaurants, including Long John Silver’s, Taco Bell and A&W franchises. They currently operate fifty-six KFCs, five KFC/Taco Bells, two KFC/Long John Silver’s, two Taco Bells, and two Ruby Tuesdays in seven states. Additional restaurants currently either under contract for acquisition or under construction will bring their total number of restaurants to ninety-seven. Included among the restaurants under construction are a Taco Bell in Elk City, Oklahoma and a Ruby Tuesday in Owasso, Oklahoma.

Will Lightfoot and Jason Little, CCIM of Canopy Commercial | Auction were the listing agents for Clinton KT, LLC, a single purpose entity managed by a joint venture between Verdad Real Estate and Conifer Real Estate, both of Fort Worth, Texas. Stan Azevedo with Rand Commercial Properties of Modesto, California was the buy side agent for Edmund F. Rosasco and Ann C. Rosasco, also of Modesto, California. The buyer was attracted to the property due to the management-free, 20-year lease, an experienced operator as a tenant, and the building’s high quality new construction.

Title and escrow services were provided for this all-cash transaction by Stephanie Kleam of Lawyers Title Company’s Dallas, Texas office.