Information and Travel Planner for Yellowstone
Yellowstone National Park is the flagship of the National Park Service and a favorite to millions of visitors each year. The park is a major destination for all members of the family. By driving the grand loop road, visitors can view the park from the comfort of their vehicle and also take a rest at one of the many roadside picnic areas. For the active visitor, the park has thousands of miles of trails from dayhikes to backcountry explorations. The main attractions are all located on the grand loop road and here are some of the top reasons to visit the park. This site has a lot of the information you need for your trip and you may also consider our dvd "The Wonders of Yellowstone" to help you plan your visit.



* World's First National Park

* 2,219,789 acres (Larger than Rhode Island and Delaware combined)

* Wildlife - 7 species of ungulates (bison, moose, elk, pronghorn), 2 species of bear and 67 other mammals, 322 species of birds, 16 species of fish and of course the gray wolf.

* Plants - There are over 1,100 species of native plants, more than 200 species of exotic plants and over 400 species of thermopholes.

* Geology - The park is home to one of the world's largest calderas with over 10,000 thermal features and more than 300 geysers. It has one of the world's largest petrifiied forests. It has over 290 waterfalls with the 308' Lower Falls of the Yellowstone River as it's showpiece.

* Yellowstone Lake is the largest (132 sq. mi.) high altitude (7,732') lake in north america.

* 9 visitor centers

* 12 campgrounds (over 2,000 campsites) "The Wonders of Yellowstone"

- 98 Minutes -

~Telly Award Winner for Nature and Wildlife~ Two years in the making and just released, "The Wonders of Yellowstone" video has been highly requested, produced in DVD format and is only available through YellowstoneNationalPark.com. Take a complete tour of Yellowstone National Park as our Narrator Cathy Coan, guides you to all the wonders of the park including the geyser basins, wildlife, waterfalls and much more. More Info or Order Online



Spring Opening Dates

Conditions permitting, roads will open to regular (public) vehicles at 8:00 am on the following dates. Colors listed after the dates correspond to the colors on the 2019 Spring Opening and Fall Closing map. April 19 West Entrance to Madison Junction, Mammoth Hot Springs to Old Faithful, Norris to Canyon Village.

to Madison Junction, Mammoth Hot Springs to Old Faithful, Norris to Canyon Village. May 3 East Entrance to Lake Village (Sylvan Pass), Canyon Village to Lake Village.

to Lake Village (Sylvan Pass), Canyon Village to Lake Village. May 10 South Entrance to West Thumb, Lake Village to West Thumb, West Thumb to Old Faithful (Craig Pass), Tower Junction to Tower Fall.

to West Thumb, Lake Village to West Thumb, West Thumb to Old Faithful (Craig Pass), Tower Junction to Tower Fall. May 24: Northeast Entrance to Cooke City Beartooth Highway

to Cooke City Beartooth Highway May 24 Tower Fall to Canyon Village (Dunraven Pass)

Open Year Round North Entrance to Gardiner / Mammoth 2019 Fall Closing Dates

Roads will close to regular (public) vehicles at 8:00 am on the following dates. Colors listed after the dates correspond to the colors on the 2019 Spring Opening and Fall Closing map. October 15 Tower Fall to Canyon (Dunraven Pass), Beartooth Highway (US 212 to Red Lodge, Montana).

November 4 All roads close at 8 am except the road between the North Entrance and the Northeast Entrance. 2019-2020 Winter Opening Dates

Conditions permitting, roads will open to oversnow travel by snowmobile and snowcoach at 8 am on the following dates: December 15: West Entrance to Old Faithful, Mammoth to Old Faithful, Canyon to Norris, Canyon to Lake, Old Faithful to West Thumb, South Entrance to Lake, Lake to Lake Butte Overlook.

December 22: East Entrance to Lake Butte Overlook (Sylvan Pass) 2020 Winter Closing Dates

Roads will close to oversnow travel by snowmobile and snowcoach at 9 pm on the following dates: March 1: East Entrance to Lake Butte Overlook (Sylvan Pass).

March 8: Mammoth Hot Springs to Norris.

March 10: Norris to Madison, Norris to Canyon Village.

March 8: Canyon Village to Fishing Bridge. March 15: All remaining groomed roads close Frequently Asked Questions for Yellowstone National Park How much is the entrance fee?

$25 - Private, noncommercial vehicle;

$20 - Motorcycle or snowmobile (winter)

$12 - Visitors 16 and older entering by foot, bike, ski, etc.

* This fee provides the visitor with a 7-day entrance permit for both Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks.



A $50 park annual pass provides entrance for a single private non-commercial vehicle at Yellowstone and Grand Teton National Parks. The $10 Interagency Senior Pass (62 and older) is a lifetime pass available to U.S. citizens or permanent residents. Where do I enter Yellowstone National Park?

Yellowstone has 5 entrances to the park:

North Entrance - Gardiner, MT, the North Entrance is the only park entrance open to wheeled vehicles all year. November through April, provides access to Cooke City, MT. US Highway 212 east of Cooke City is closed to wheeled vehicles November through April. The Mammoth to Norris road is open to wheeled vehicles from April 20 to November 4, and to tracked oversnow vehicles from around December 17 to March 12. Closest airline service is Bozeman, MT West Entrance - West Yellowstone, MT, the West Entrance is open to wheeled vehicles from April 20 to November 4, and to tracked oversnow vehicles from December 17 to March 12. Closest airline service is West Yellowstone, MT, Bozeman, MT, Idaho Falls, ID, and Salt Lake City, UT. Northeast Entrance - Silver Gate and Cooke City, MT, is open year around for wheeled vehicles to Cooke City through the North Entrance. Opening dates for roads east of Cooke City vary from year to year, depending on the weather. The Beartooth Highway is

open from late May/early June to mid October and is dependent upon weather conditions. Closest airline service is Billings, MT. South & East Entrances - Open to wheeled vehicles from May 11 to November 4, and to tracked oversnow vehicles from December 17 to March 12. Closest airline service to the South Entrance is Jackson, WY and Cody, WY to the East Entrance. Where should we stay?

The best way to answer this is to decide how much time you have and what you want to see the most. As an example, if you plan on visiting Yellowstone National Park for only a few days and want to experience some of the main attractions then West Yellowstone would be a good base. From there, it is a short drive to the geyser basins, Old Faithful and the Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone. If you want to have the full park experience then perhaps lodging at Old Faithful would be a good choice. If you want to view the most wildlife, then we suggest the Northeast Entrance and a short trip to the Lamar valley. The South Entrance is a great option if you have more time and want to visit Grand Teton National Park however it is a longer drive to the heart of Yellowstone if you base out of Jackson. The North Entrance is park headquarters and has the most historic information on the park. When is the best time to visit the park?

This depends on what your interests are. Here's a summary; Spring has abundant wildlife, roaring waterfalls and wild weather. It can snow or be in the 70's. Summer has it all including the most crowds. If you and your family plan on a summer trip, here's our best advise. Get out early and eat your breakfast on the road! Fall is a special time of year. For wildlife there is a sense of urgency in the air. Everything seems to be diminishing including the crowds. Winter is a time of solitude. In years past it was more "economical" to visit most of the park. Now it is more restricted unless you can afford a snowcoach or guided snowmobile tour. The North Entrance is the busiest due to the ease of access and plowed road. With 5 entrances and over 2 million acres, we highly suggest you plan your trip in advance. We recommend you obtain some of the many travel planners or DVD's that are available for Yellowstone. If you're more detailed oriented then obtain a travel planner. If you want to know as much information as possible in under 90 minutes then purchase a Yellowstone DVD.

YellowstoneLodging.com



New lodging and travel information website for visitors to Yellowstone National Park. Visitors traveling to the park are encouraged to check out YellowstoneLodging.com for all your lodging accomodations in and around Yellowstone including all the gateway communities. Along with listings and phone reservations for all the lodging, it includes activities, dining, camping and maps of the park. For more information on Yellowstone National Park and

the surrounding communities visit these helpful sites:



YellowstoneNationalPark.com - YellowstoneLodging.com

YellowstoneFlyFishing.com



Copyright @1999-2013 Yellowstone Media