Muslims see Woman Wearing Bikini...They Walk Over and IMMEDIATELY do This to Her
Is it just me or does it seem like when Muslims aren’t able to force a person to bow to their will and religious beliefs they immediately resort to violence?

I mean, I thought Islam was the religion of peace?

Loony lefties should probably pass the memo on to this gang of Muslim women in France who decided to beat the snot out of a woman for wearing a bikini in a park, because I don’t think they understand the false narrative progressives are trying to establish.

Nothing screams peace and tolerance like a good old fashioned beat down.

Well, the victim in this case is fighting back against these thugs in a HUGE way.

From IJReview:

Outraged women have swarmed social media to protest that a mob of females had beat a woman for wearing a bikini. Breitbart News reports the attack took place Wednesday at a public park — Parc Leo-Lagrange — in Reims, France. In a burst of outrage reminiscent of the #JeSuisCharlie movement following the Charlie Hebdo terrorist attack, many took to Twitter to post photos of bikini-wearing women using the hashtag #jeportemonmaillotauParcLeo:

Toutes les femmes sont libres de leur corps et personne ne peut décider à leur place ! #jeportemonmaillotauParcLeo pic.twitter.com/xdcRih2mNV — karine labonne ن (@karinelabonne) July 26, 2015

The idea caught on:

Demain midi c’est #jeportemonmaillotauParcLéo tous les maillots sont les bienvenus ! pic.twitter.com/O9IMwko5fJ — SOS Racisme (@SOS_Racisme) July 25, 2015

So wearing a Bikini is considered highly immoral but beating someone up is just fine?! ? #jeportemonmaillotauParcLeo — ♥Tina Patel♥ (@Tina1807) July 27, 2015

The Daily Mail reports the 16- to 24-year-olds were from a nearby housing project with “large Muslim populations” and picked a fight with their 21-year-old victim by stating: “Get dressed, it’s not summer.” But the Mayor of Reims is urging people not to jump to conclusions about the motivation for the attack, according to UK Independent: “We have to be very careful not to jump to conclusions. All the same, I can understand why people have assumed that this attack had religious motives. If that turns out to be the case, it is a very serious incident.”

Apparently the victim was so badly hurt she has not returned to work.

Local police are saying the attack is not religiously motivated, but I’m not buying what they’re selling.

You know, if Muslims have such a big problem with women’s attire in a specific country, they might consider living somewhere else where the values upheld in the nation are close to their own.

Radical thought, right?

But then again, since Islam is all about world domination and forcing others to bow to Sharia law, I guess it’s not surprising the Lady Jihad gang decided to wallop someone for daring not to think the way they do.