This Rape Quote by Bernie Sanders is Absolutely HORRIBLE
According to liberals with IQs smaller than their sock size, conservative presidential candidates absolutely LOATHE women, hate them with a passion even.

Those mean, old, white guys — which is a hilarious stereotype given there’s latinos, blacks, and women in the top spots for the GOP — want nothing more than to destroy women’s health care by defunding the ghoulish Planned Parenthood, and encourage rape culture with their antiquated views on gender roles.

None of this is actually true, of course, but when have facts ever got in the way of the liberal agenda?

What should really make you scratch your head is how lefties will rake conservatives over the coals for the things mentioned above, yet say absolutely nothing about this atrocious Bernie Sanders quote.

From The Washington Examiner:

Democratic presidential candidate Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders once penned an essay claiming that men fantasize about abusing women and women fantasize about being raped. It’s not exactly what you’d expect from the far Left candidate whose campaign runs on the idea of equality for all Americans. The 1972 article “Man — and Woman,” published in the Vermont Freeman, displays Sanders’ views on gender and sexuality at the time of its publishing. “A man goes home and masturbates his typical fantasy,” wrote Sanders. “A woman on her knees, a woman tied up, a woman abused.” When in comes to female fantasies, Bernie also knows all. “A woman enjoys intercourse with her man — as she fantasizes being raped by three men simultaneously,” the essay reads. His controversial views of male and female sexuality have little explanation, other than he was a part of a radical hippie movement back in his younger years. The essay was written and published after Sanders launched his first bid for the Senate in 1972, the first of four losing campaigns for U.S. Senate and then governor. He was then elected mayor of Burlington in 1981. When Sanders first ran for office the year “Man — and Woman” was published, he was anti-war, a proponent of guaranteeing a livable minimum wage, cracking down on big corporations and legalizing drugs.

So it’s okay for Sanders to talk about how women love to fantasize about gang rape, but ending taxpayer funding to an organization killing babies and selling their body parts is considered a “war on women?”

I can’t be the only one who sees the insanity here, right?

This, once again, is proof of the double standard loony lefties have long come to be known for.

You know, to be a party that claims to be all about “equality,” they sure don’t apply their principles evenly across the board, do they?