Official Site of Ron Wyatt's Discoveries
Noah's Ark? "And the Ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat. And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen."

...Genesis 8:4-5 Click to Enlarge CIRCA 2500 B.C. And GOD saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And it repented the LORD that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. And the LORD said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them. But Noah found grace in the eyes of the LORD. These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God. And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth. Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch. And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: The length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits. A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it. And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die. But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with thee. And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be male and female. Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive. And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them. Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he. And Noah did according unto all that the LORD commanded him. CIRCA 2348 B.C. "In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened. And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights. In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark; They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort. And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein is the breath of life. And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him: and the LORD shut him in. And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth. And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters. And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered. Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered. And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man: All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died. And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark. And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days. And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that was with him in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged; The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained; And the waters returned from off the earth continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated. And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat." Click to Enlarge

Model of Noah's Ark Note:

" upon the mountains of Ararat." Many explorers have looked on Mt. Ararat for the remains of Noah's Ark. The Bible however, does not say that Noah's Ark landed on Mt. Ararat. It says that the Ark landed upon the mountains of Ararat. (mountains plural) An examination of the Hebrew manuscripts of Genesis reveals that actual wordage is that Noah's Ark landed upon the mountains of Urartu . (The whole mountainous region in far eastern Turkey.

Would the Ark have Survived on Mt. Ararat ? Click to Enlarge

Snow capped Mount Ararat The Turkish military has been training their commandos on Mt. Ararat for many years and have thoroughly explored the mountain. At the top of Mt. Ararat are ever moving glaciers which continually flow and grind upon everything in their path. Also to be considered are the volcanic eruptions which have occurred on Mt. Ararat. One of the most recent eruptions in the early 1800's resulted in the formation of the Ohura Gorge. The Ohura Gorge is a blown out area in the North West side of Mt. Ararat, similar to the blown out side of Mt. St. Helens in Washington State, USA. As strange as it may seem, this blown out area has been the site in which most of the exploration for Noah's Ark on Mt. Ararat has been conducted. Click to Enlarge

Mount St. Helens and Mount Ararat in comparison

LIFE MAGAZINE September 1960 Twenty seven year-old Ron Wyatt, along with thousands of other people, read the following article in Life Magazine about a strange boat-shaped formation at an elevation of about 6,350 feet, in the mountains of Ararat . Not on Mt. Ararat, but in the mountains of Ararat about 12 miles from the summit of Mt. Ararat. Click to Enlarge

"NOAH'S ARK?

Boatlike form is seen near Ararat Excerpt from Life magazine...

"While routinely examining aerial photos of his country, a Turkish army captain suddenly gaped at the picture shown above. There, on a mountain 20 miles south of Mt. Ararat, the biblical landfall of Noah's Ark, was a boat-shaped form about 500 feet long. The captain passed on the word. Soon an expedition including American scientists set out for the site. At 7,000 feet, in the midst of crevasses and landslide debris, the explorers found a clear, grassy area shaped like a ship and rimmed with steep, packed-earth sides. Its dimensions are close to those given in Genesis: 'The length of the ark shall be 300 cubits, the breadth of it 50 cubits, and the height of it 30 cubits,' that is, 450x75x45 feet. A quick two-day survey revealed no sign that the object was man made. Yet a scientist in the group says nothing in nature could create such a symmetrical shape. A thorough excavation may be made another year to solve the mystery."

The Search for Noah's Ark August 1977 Ron Wyatt traveled to Turkey and personally examined the "boat shaped object" shown in the Life Magazine article. Click to Enlarge

Aerial Photogrammetry Ron finds large stones, identical in design to smaller drogue anchor stones. Click to Enlarge

Drogue Anchor Stone The Anchor Stones had specially designed holes; traditionally found on drogue anchors. Larger on one side, smaller on the other side, larger still in the middle. The idea being that you tie a knot on the end of a big rope and feed it through the hole in the anchor stone so that it catches on the small side. When the anchor is put in the water, the rope swells up in the middle of the hole and prevents the rope from wearing into. Click to Enlarge

Traditional Drogue Anchor Hole Note:

Drogue anchors are designed to drag in the water, stabilize a ship and keep it perpendicular to the oncoming waves; not to prevent it from moving. This type of drogue anchors, which have broken away, are sometimes found on the floor of the Mediterranean and other seas as they were common to ancient ships.



Ron observed crosses on the anchor stones. Some of the anchors seem to have had eight original crosses carved on them. These crosses are Byzantine style which indicates that someone after 300 A.D. recognized these anchorstones as having a connection with Noah's Ark and carved the crosses at that time. 1978 An earthquake causes the soil surrounding the "boat shaped object" to fall away, exposing as much as thirty feet of the sides.

A Giant Shipwreck August 11, 1979 Ron Wyatt returned to the site. What he saw, after the earthquake "looked like a giant shipwreck." Click to Enlarge

"Boat Shaped Object" after the Earthquake Evenly spaced indentations could be seen all the way around the object, which "looked like decaying rib timbers". Click to Enlarge

"Rib Timbers" What appeared to be "horizontal deck support timbers" were observed at consistent intervals. Click to Enlarge

"Horizontal Deck Support Timbers" Click to Enlarge

"Deck Support Timbers" The earthquake had also cracked the object from "stem to stern" and Ron was able to take samples from deep within. Samples of material outside of the object were also taken for comparison.



Ron measured the object finding it to be 515 feet long. 512 feet, plus 3 feet, the length of a section that had broken off. Note:

300 Royal Egyptian cubits = 515 feet. The unit of measurement that Moses, who wrote the Book of Genesis, would have been familiar with was the Royal Egyptian Cubit. This is the same unit of measurement used in the construction of the Great Pyramid in Egypt. This cubit was employed until at least the time of King Solomon as gates constructed by him, in Israel, are based on this unit of measurement Click to Enlarge

Ron Wyatt and Richard Rives

measuring Solomon's gate at Megiddo. Click to Enlarge

Enlarged view of the measurement:

6 Royal Egyptian cubits.

Radar Scans June/July 1985 Ron Wyatt, Dave Fassold and John Baumgardner surveyed the site with metal detectors and located a specimen which had the appearance of "wrought iron." It was reported by Dave Fassold that the semi -quantitative analysis of the iron samples, which was arranged by John Baumgardner, found them to contain from 60 percent to 91.84 percent FE2O3.



Subsurface radar scans were performed at the site revealing a boat shaped structure below the surface. Click to Enlarge

Sub-Surface Radar Scans Note:

Sub-surface radar is a device built by Geophysical Survey Systems Incorporated (GSSI) that can chart the presence of objects below the surface. August 1986 Joe Rosetta, vice-president of Geophysical Survey Systems, reviews the sub-surface radar scans. His conclusion: "This is not a natural object. The reflections are occurring too periodic for it to be a natural type interface." "You'd never see anything like this in natural geology.... Some human made this structure, whatever it is."

Noah's Ark Found February 1987 Ron meets with the Governor of the Agri District, Mr. Sevket Ekinci. The December 1986 decision was positive - it was the official decision of members of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, of Internal Affairs, and researchers from Ataturk University, among others, that the "boat-shaped formation" did indeed contain the remains of Noah's Ark! Click to Enlarge

Ron Wyatt and Mr. Sevket Ekinci Plans were made for the official dedication of the site, which would include Ron as guest of honor as the "discoverer" of the fact that it was truly the remains of Noah's Ark. June 20, 1987 Ron participates in the Dedication of "Noah's Ark."



On the mountainside overlooking the former "boat shaped object", which had now been proclaimed by the Turkish Government to be "Noah's Ark", were gathered a large number of dignitaries, from the local level to the national level, as well as high ranking military. Journalists were also present. Click to Enlarge

Associated Press Click to Enlarge

Hurriyet - Turkish Newspaper The plans were made public for a visitors' center to be erected on the spot. The governor spoke the dedication in Turkish and then he lifted the first shovel full of dirt - the groundbreaking of the new visitors' center. Ron, as guest of honor, lifted the second shovel full of dirt and then other dignitaries participated in the ceremony. Click to Enlarge

The visitors center above "Noah's Ark" After the ceremony, Governor Ekinci asked Ron to do a radar scan on the site to demonstrate for the journalists the ability of sub-surface radar to reveal structures beneath the surface.



After making several passes with the Radar, Ron noted, in an area commonly associated with "deck timber", one particular reading very near the surface. The Governor then ordered one of the soldiers to dig at the location Ron had indicated and there emerged an artifact approximately 18 inches long which was labeled "deck timber". Click to Enlarge

" Deck Timber" The excavation of the object was documented by way of film and aired throughout Turkey by way of TRT (Turkish Radio and Television).



The Governor presented Ron with the specimen for the purpose of analysis in the United States.

First Lab Tests September 16, 1987 Laboratory analysis was performed on artifact labeled "deck timber". Galbraith Labs in Knoxville, Tennessee tested samples taken from within the "formation' and from without. All of the laboratory procedures were videotaped, including the taking the sample from the specimen, and the actual execution of the analyses. Results of "inside" "outside" analysis:

The sample outside the formation showed a 1.88% carbon content; but the one from inside yielded a 4.95% carbon content, an amount that was consistent with the presence of prior living matter, such as decayed or petrified wood. It also showed a surprisingly high iron content. Note:

Petrified wood is commonly known to contain organic carbon; but it is not known to be found in natural minerals. Compounds of carbon can be analyzed to determine whether they are composed of matter that was non-organic (non-living), or organic (living). Therefore, the one test to determine if an object was organic (once living), or not is to determine its organic carbon content.



Procedure:

Gail Hutchens, Vice President of Galbraith, suggested that they run an analysis for total carbon content. This would include both inorganic and organic. Then, they would test for inorganic Then, the two tests would be compared. By subtracting the amount of inorganic from the total amount, the amount of organic carbon would be determined.



Results of organic carbon testing:

The result was that it contained .71% total carbon. Inorganic carbon totalled .0081%. It contained .7019% ORGANIC CARBON- almost 100 times more organic than inorganic! Note:

The "deck timber" having been determined to contain organic Carbon, which means that it was once living, was found to have a unique characteristic in that It displayed no growth rings. Growth rings in trees and other plants are caused by a variation in the water supply to the plant. Annual rings occur when the temperature drops and the sap in the tree fails to rise. The leaves of the deciduous trees turn color and die, soon dropping off. In the spring, the warmth releases the tree from its state of "hibernation" and the sap begins to flow again. Even though there may be water in the ground, when the temperature drops, the tree does not continue its cycle until it is again spring. Therefore, a ring results when the growth is temporarily halted and begins when spring arrives. In order to understand why the pre-flood wood showed no growth rings one needs only to consult the Bible. It informs us that before the flood it did not rain; therefore there were not wet and dry seasons. Growth was at a constant rate.



Genesis2:5 "And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the LORD GOD HAD NOT CAUSED IT TO RAIN UPON THE EARTH, and there was not a man to till the ground. 6 But THERE WENT UP A MIST FROM THE EARTH, AND WATERED THE WHOLE FACE OF THE GROUND."



Note:

Scientific study confirms the absence of growth rings in plants from what they label the "Carboniferous period" "There was, as we have already said, secondary bark and wood, similar to that of modern trees but lacking the spring and winter rings which correspond to seasonal alternation of moisture and dryness. This is a further proof that the Carboniferous climate was fairly uniform." (Larousse Encyclopedia of the Earth, p. 369.)

The Mini-Excavation October 23, 1990 Ron Wyatt and Richard Rives performed what has become known as the "mini-excavation" on "Noah's Ark". Shovels were sharpened and the blades bent to form a crude "giant razor". They simply cleaned one badly eroding section in an area believed by the Turkish Government to be "rib timbers". Click to Enlarge

Ron and Richard - "The Mini-Excavation"

Late afternoon - on the shaded side of "Noah's Ark" Being very careful not to remove more than just a minute amount of dirt, they soon could see the color difference in the lighter rib timbers as contrasted against the darker soil. The whole process was videotaped. The rib timbers were found to be fragmented and to be held in place by the surrounding material. Click to Enlarge

Results of the "Mini-Excavation"

(As viewed in the morning sun light) Note:

The INTERNAL structure members are in a much better state simply because they have not been exposed to the elements. On the east side of the ark is a section in which the "rib timbers" are exposed but have NOT completely fallen away. These "rib timbers" are fractured, having suffered from "frost wedging". Even though the ribs are in a fragmented state, they are still held in place by the soil. The " ribs" were able to be seen due to the color difference between the soil and themselves.

A Rivet Discovered June 1991 A tour group, organized by Wyatt Archaeological Research, visited the site. As Ron and the group approached "Noah's Ark" from the south end, he noticed an object that when observed, in the presence of the tour participants, bore the shape of a very large "rivet" head, with a washer around it. Click to Enlarge

"Rivet" NOTE:

Ron had previously photographed what looked like groupings of metal fittings on the sides of "Noah's Ark", but he could not disturb them by cleaning them off. Click to Enlarge

"Rivets" in matrix material

Hostage in the Mountains August 31, 1991 Application was made with the Turkish Government for a "full excavation permit" for work on "Noah's Ark". While waiting on the permit, Ron Wyatt, Richard Rives and Marvin Wilson of the United States and Dr. Allen Roberts, of Sydney Australia, were taken hostage. At gunpoint, they spent 21 days climbing mountains in Eastern Turkey as their assailants avoided the Turkish forces attempting to rescue them.

More Lab Tests February 1992 Richard Rives, having become acquainted with an international corporation which specialized in metallurgy, made arrangements for the "rivet" to be analyzed in their laboratory.



Careful analyses was performed on the specimen. Samples were analyzed from what appeared to be the washer around the head of the rivet, and from an area 1 cm. away

from the washer. Results

The 4 analyses they ran showed that location 1 yielded a 1.88% and 1.97% carbon content while location 2 yielded a .14% and .13% amount. The scientists involved in the analysis made the following notation in their report: " It is interesting to note that location 1 (presumably fossilized timber members) was found to contain much higher carbon (1.9%) than location 2 (presumably fossilized metal." Click to Enlarge

Quantitative Elemental Analysis of "Rivet"

Location 1 = Material surrounding "Rivet"

Location 2 = "Rivet" Click to Enlarge

Possible Oxide Composition

Location 2 "Rivet" Note:

When an object undergoes the process of fossilization, as its material decays it is replaced by material in the surrounding soil or water. The analysis revealed exactly what would be expected to be found in a fossilized metal washer and rivet (non-living matter) attached to a piece of fossilized wood (once living matter). Note:

The discovery of titanium in the "Rivet" is of special interest. The advantage of titanium as a metal is its tremendous strength, its light weight and its resistance to corrosion. All of the analyses performed on the "Rivet" found it to contain Iron, Aluminum, Manganese, Vanadium and Chromium. These elements are known today to be the major alloying agents added to titanium. Noah's Ark? The Turkish Government says yes! END





---