Zakharchenko's murder - confession of SBU enlisted suspect revealed
According to him, “Pushkin” restaurant was chosen for the operation of elimination of the so-called "BNR" Head in 2017

Open source

The representatives of the so-called “DNR” made public the “confession” of the suspect of assassination attempt on Aleksandr Zakharchenko, the Head of “DNR” in 2017. The man was allegedly “enlisted” by SBU. “DNR” Ministry of State Security provided Russia-controlled Zvezda TV channel with a video of the questioning, which was later revealed.

As the TV channel informed, the man, who introduced himself Oleksandr Pogorelov, was detained in 2017. Yet, after Zakharchenko’s death the officers of State Security Ministry decided to make the video of the questioning public.

“I was enlisted in Kyiv in 2014 by SBU officer Segei. I chose a call sign “Legionnaire” and signed an agreement on cooperation with the Ukrainian intelligence. Sergei appointed a meeting on Zoloti Vorota subway station. He was with someone else, who introduced himself as Roman – the head of the fifth office of SBU Counter-Intelligence Department. He told me that the priority task then was elimination of the “DNR” Head,” Pogorelov said.

According to him, “Pushkin” restaurant was chosen for the operation.

“We chose “Pushkin” restaurant. It was defined that the Head of the Republic was sitting at different tables, so it was hard to determine which one he would choose, so Roman and Sergei said that it was necessary to set an explosive device in the toilet of the restaurant,” the suspect noted.

Pogorelov confessed that he set a device under the sink and then activated it.

“As Sergei said, SBU technical officers made this device was, it had a camera inside. I got the device through the transporter in Donetsk, brought it to the restaurant, set it under the sink, activated and told Sergei about it,” he said.

He also said that he didn’t know there was another subversive group to eliminate Zakharchenko. It was allegedly working in Donetsk centre in another facility. Pogorelov stated that this group was to use “a brand-new system of remote-controlled explosive device”.

“Sergei told me that they were testing this remote-controlled explosive device in Kyiv and it worked well through thick concrete wall, passed a signal on around 1,5 – 2 km… this signal can’t be stifled,” he told.

He added that the U.S. special forces provided it. The cost was around $10,000.

Reportedly, on August 31, as a result of the explosion in the restaurant in the downtown of Donetsk, head of so-called “DNR” Aleksandr Zakharchenko died. The Russian mass media reported that Oleksandr Timofeyev, so-called "minister of revenue and duties" of so-called "DNR" has also died. The so-called “law enforcers” of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic stated that they detained “Ukrainian saboteurs” who are presumably involved in the assassination of Zakharchenko. Although, SBU hasn’t approved the information.

ORDO, Separate district of Donetsk region, suspects one of the guards of Zakharchenko in his death. At the same time, the Russian MFA accused "Kyiv regime" in the death of Zakharchenko. It was reported on the closure of all crossing checkpoints along the Inter-Entity Boundary Line because of the incident. Russian President Vladimir Putin expressed his condolences over the murder of Zakharchenko.