The "Unofficial" Hillary Rodham Clinton
THE "UNOFFICIAL" HILLARY CLINTON

Hillary links:

Hillary Forum - post a question and/or reply to an existing one.

Bio info ...

Hillary Diane Rodham was born in Chicago, Illinois, on October 26, 1947, daughter of Hugh and Dorothy Rodham. Her father owned a fabric store, and her mother was a full-time mother and homemaker. Entered Wellesley College in 1965, went to Yale, married Bill Clinton in 1975, daughter, Chelsea, was born in 1980. ... See bio at whitehouse.gov and A Biography: Hillary Clinton

Astrological Chart for Hillary Clinton

Quotes ...

"We will never build enough prisons to end our crime problem". -- Hillary Clinton, San Francisco 1996

"I just put it in a little box. That's how I deal with it. I put it in a box in my mind and I just don't think about it." --Animal House by Camille Paglia, Salon - People are alleging that the president is a sex addict -- is this true?

"To confine impeachable conduct to indictable offenses may well be to set a standard so restrictive as not to reach conduct that might adversely affect the system of government. Some of the most grevious offenses against our constitutional form of government may not entail violations of the criminal law.....Io limit impeachable conduct to criminal offenses would be incompatible with the evidence...and would frustrate the purpose that the framers intended.... Impeachment was evolved.....to cope with both the inadequacy of the criminal standards and the impotence of the courts to deal with the conduct of great public figures. It would be anomalous if the framers, having barred criminal sanctions from the impeachment remedy....intended to restrict the grounds for impeachment to conduct that was criminal" Hillary Rodham Staff Attorney House Judiciary Committee 1974

We must stop thinking of the individual and start thinking about what is best for society." (Hillary Clinton, 1993)

“…this vast right-wing conspiracy that has been conspiring against my husband since the day he announced for President.” —Hillary Clinton. on The Today Show, after the Monica Lewinsky story broke.

'I'm having a great time being the Pres, I mean Senator from New York.'

"Marriage has got historic, religious and moral content that goes back to the beginning of time, and I think a marriage is as a marriage always has been, between a man and a woman." - Hillary Clinton, opposing same-sex marriages, quoted in The New York Daily News

"The clearest way to know whether you are with a poor person in America is not by the logo on the clothes, because we all wear pretty much the same anymore. It's by looking into their eyes and seeing whether they look into yours, and seeing what kind of teeth they have." - Hillary Clinton, at a meeting for Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Push Wall Street Project, AP

"I am particularly horrified by the use of propaganda and the manipulation of the truth and the revision of history," Hillary Clinton (Associated Press, concerning Kosovo)

I'm not going to have some reporters pawing through our papers. We are the president." -- Hillary Clinton commenting on the release of subpoenaed documents

Hillary and Internet "Gatekeeping"

"We are all going to have to rethink how we deal with this, because there are all these competing values ... Without any kind of editing function or gatekeeping function, what does it mean to have the right to defend your reputation?" she said. --First Lady: Net News Needs Scrutiny Reuters @wired



The Net needs "gatekeeping," said Hillary Rodham Clinton to a select group of important people and special reporters last week, demonstrating yet again the government's tendency to be wrong. - Hillary just doesn't get it - Call for Internet 'gatekeeping' reveals a lack of understanding, by Rebecca L. Eisenberg (Feb 22, 1998)

Know Your Enemies - A list of groups and individuals have been in the forefront of recent

attacks on free expression and the arts - from a reader.

The old version of this site is archived here.

Guestbook - To Sign or View

Add/View comments to this page