McCain stumps strategists by playing up his unpopular position on free trade
CAMPAIGN '08 McCain stumps strategists by playing up his unpopular position on free trade

Bill Carrick, a Democratic strategist who supports Obama, said that a strong defense of NAFTA has never been "a vote-getter in any context."

But some political analysts wondered why McCain would choose to highlight his position in attention-grabbing trips -- whether to Canada or to economically depressed areas like Youngstown, Ohio. The Arizona senator's campaign needs to win the support of independent voters, many of them blue-collar workers worried that the North American Free Trade Agreement will cost them their jobs.

McCain's advisors believe the border crossing will show McCain in his best light -- as a leader on the world stage unafraid to embrace an unpopular position and optimistic about the new jobs that trade could create.

With Americans increasingly anxious about the effects of trade on the sinking economy, John McCain heads to Canada today, where he plans to herald free trade and argue that Barack Obama's "protectionist" policies could be harmful to U.S. alliances.

"If I was the Obama campaign, I'd send them money and say, 'Please do a straight-talk trade tour of Ohio, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Kentucky, Indiana and Michigan,' " he said.

McCain's support for free trade is backed by many economists and widely shared by GOP lawmakers, but the downturn in the economy has soured many Americans on it.

Half the voters surveyed last month in a Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg poll said that free international trade had hurt the economy, while only 26% said that it had helped. That skepticism was even more pronounced among working-class voters with less than a college education. And even among conservative Republican voters, 43% said it was harmful, compared with 38% who said international trade helped the economy.

"I'm not sure what he's thinking he will gain," said Bernie Porn, an independent pollster based in Lansing, Mich. "Maybe he and his strategists think this shows that McCain is willing to tell people what they don't want to hear. But he did that in the primary in Michigan -- he said those jobs that have left, they're never coming back -- and Mitt Romney won Michigan."

The McCain campaign, however, believes the contrast between Obama and McCain on the trade issue may be one of the sharpest in the months ahead and believes McCain can persuade voters that his approach would benefit the country in the long run.

"The American economy cannot be closed off and shut down to the world," said strategist Steve Schmidt. "No matter how appealing a poll may suggest that policy is, it's demagogic, and Sen. Obama is engaging in it. It's unfortunate, because it is not a serious path to growing the economy."

McCain has supported every major piece of trade legislation since 2001. Obama, who voted against the Central American Free Trade Agreement in 2005, has backed bilateral trade agreements since he was elected to the Senate in 2004. Schmidt said he is "trying to have it both ways" by opposing some trade agreements but making the case that he is a free trader.

McCain pounced on the issue this year after Obama and New York Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton pledged to renegotiate NAFTA. In a February debate, Obama said the United States should "use the hammer of a potential opt-out as leverage to ensure that we actually get labor and environmental standards that are enforced."

That week, McCain told reporters that his opponents' willingness to unilaterally change the treaty would send "the wrong message to the world" and could prompt Canada to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan, where they are fighting alongside U.S. forces.

The next month in Youngstown, Ohio, McCain suggested that Clinton and Obama were sounding "the siren song of protectionism," which he said would have devastating effects on the economy.