Aderholt Bill Will Make it Easier for States to Drug Test SNAP Recipients
WASHINGTON, D.C. — Congressman Robert Aderholt (AL-04), today released a statement on introducing H.R. 4540, a bill that enables states to drug test SNAP/Food Stamp recipients, thereby cutting fraud with the savings going to drug treatment programs.

"Millions of hard working Americans get up to go to work in factories, on farms and other places to pay the taxes that provide welfare assistance to those that qualify," said Congressman Robert Aderholt, chairman of the Agriculture Appropriations subcommittee with jurisdiction over SNAP. "This is meant to be temporary assistance, not a way of life. Many major employers and small businesses require applicants to pass a drug test, this bill will ensure that welfare recipients are job-ready. "

"If a welfare recipient has the money to buy drugs then they have the money to buy food. The federal government should not be enabling people to fund their drug addiction at taxpayer expense.

“This bill provides states with the ability to identify those who are gaming the system as well as those who are struggling with addiction. For those struggling, it provides funds to assist states in providing drug treatment.

“The goal is not only to break welfare recipients dependence on government programs but also on their addiction to drugs.

“SNAP, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, is used by 46 million Americans. The number of Americans on the program has doubled during the last seven years. With this large number of people on the program, it’s crucial that states have the ability to protect the integrity and purpose of the program.”

In Washington Congressman Aderholt serves as Chairman of the Subcommittee on Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies for the powerful House Appropriations Committee; he is also a member of the Committee’s Defense Subcommittee, the Committee’s Commerce, Justice, and Science Subcommittee, and the Helsinki Commission.



For more information about Aderholt’s work in Congress visit: www.aderholt.house.gov.

###