Coursera Blog
About

We envision a world where anyone, anywhere can transform their life by accessing the world’s best learning experience.

Courses Every course on Coursera is taught by top instructors from the world’s best universities and educational institutions. Courses include recorded video lectures, auto-graded and peer-reviewed assignments, and community discussion forums. When you complete a course, you’ll receive a sharable electronic Course Certificate. Online and open to everyone

Learn a new skill in 4-6 weeks Priced at about $29-$99

Earn a Course Certificate Find a Course Specializations If you want to master a specific career skill, consider joining a Specialization. You’ll complete a series of rigorous courses, tackle hands-on projects based on real business challenges, and earn a Specialization Certificate to share with your professional network and potential employers. Online and open to everyone

Learn a new skill in 4-6 months Priced at $39-$79 per month

Earn a Specialization Certificate Find a Specialization Online Degrees Real career transformation sometimes requires a university-recognized degree. Coursera believes that transformation should be accessible to everyone, so we’ve worked with our university partners to offer flexible, affordable online degree programs in business, computer science, and data science. All online - admission required

1-3 years of study Currently priced at $15-$25,000

Earn an accredited master’s degree Find a Degree

“The group forums, video lectures, weekly quizzes, and monthly projects were so practical and in-depth. I honestly don't think I'd ever been so enthusiastic about learning before.” Charlotte Stevens Course: R Programming, Johns Hopkins University

“Bundled courses with a Certificate - like Coursera Specializations - are the way forward. The strong point of Coursera is that you learn things that you apply directly. You demonstrate your value to your employer.” Maurice op de Beeks Specialization: Java Programming: An Introduction to Software, Duke University

“This program has given me credibility. The coursework has introduced me to new concepts, approaches to managing projects, ways to measure decisions, and tools for analysis” Vanessa Georg Degree program: University of Illinois iMBA

On Coursera, you have access to: