AFP to Launch Multimillion-Dollar Ad Campaigns in Tennessee, Wisconsin, and Missouri Senate Races

ARLINGTON, Va. – Americans for Prosperity today announced it will launch multimillion-dollar television and digital ad campaigns across Tennessee, Wisconsin, and Missouri highlighting the harmful records of Phil Bredesen, Senator Tammy Baldwin (D-WI), and Senator Claire McCaskill (D-MO), respectively, on AFP policy priorities, including taxes, spending, and health care. The ads will run in select markets starting August 30.

In Wisconsin, AFP will launch its first television ad in the Wisconsin Senate race, drawing a clear policy contrast between Sen. Tammy Baldwin and Leah Vukmir. The new $820,000 investment will include broadcast, cable, and digital advertisements that will run in markets across the state. Earlier this month, AFP-Wisconsin expressly called for the defeat of Sen. Baldwin and the election of Vukmir in November’s election, citing the two candidates’ different views and voting records on policy matters.

You can view the ad here.

In Tennessee, AFP will launch a new $2 million television and digital ad campaign highlighting Phil Bredesen’s support for higher taxes and out-of-control spending during his time as the state’s governor. AFP-TN recently announced it has mobilized its activists and launched grassroots activities in support of Rep. Marsha Blackburn.

You can view the ad here.

In Missouri, AFP will launch a $2.1 million television and digital ad campaign criticizing Sen. Claire McCaskill’s positions on health care and her failure to put Missourians’ best interests first.

You can view the ad here.

AFP President Tim Phillips issued the following statement:

“Our organization is committed to removing barriers to opportunity and improving people’s lives, and the policies these politicians have supported directly counter that goal. Americans can’t afford to continue electing politicians who believe the path to prosperity is through higher taxes, more spending, and bigger government. We are committed to building broad policy coalitions by supporting principled champions and opposing those who will take our country in the wrong direction.”

For further information or to set up an interview, please send an email to GBraud@afphq.org.

Americans for Prosperity (AFP) exists to recruit, educate, and mobilize citizens in support of the policies and goals of a free society at the local, state, and federal level, helping every American live their dream – especially the least fortunate. AFP has more than 3.2 million activists across the nation, a local infrastructure that includes 36 state chapters, and has received financial support from more than 100,000 Americans in all 50 states. For more information, visit www.AmericansForProsperity.org

###