AFP Backs Achievement School Districts in North Carolina
RALEIGH – Americans for Prosperity North Carolina announced Wednesday it supports House Bill 1080 Achievement School District, legislation allowing the State Board of Education to contract with charter school operators to improve continually low-performing schools. H.B. 1080 passed the state House K-12 Education Committee by a vote of 18-11 on May 26 and is scheduled for full floor votes Wednesday and Thursday this week. State Director Donald Bryson issued a statement: “This Achievement School District legislation is a small first step testing one approach to the long-overdue process of improving 500 failing schools in North Carolina,” Bryson said. We support the pilot program planned in H.B. 1080 because it’s an innovative idea to fix the worst schools statewide that need reform now. We applaud this effort to address the debilitating disparity in education outcomes for kids trapped in a school with perpetually low performance. Low-income kids don’t deserve to face dimmer education prospects based on their demographics, but they are statistically more likely to be stuck in a failing school than their more-advantaged peers.” “The General Assembly should pass this pilot program because hundreds of schools remain broken education communities, systematically failing to teach tens of thousands of students without any path towards meaningful, long-term reform or improved achievement. Just as students learn to experiment, test and learn to improve outcomes in a science lab or research project, education leaders must pursue significant changes at failing schools to create better opportunities for kids statewide and prepare them for a bright future.” “Opponents of public education reform will surely convey H.B. 1080 as a radical proposal to permanently disrupt our state’s public school systems in favor of private operations. In reality this legislation starts a very limited, isolated test to address a truly radical failure by those same education leaders to teach the children in their classrooms to read and add. They shouldn’t derail a potentially positive improvement in student performance to protect their status-quo and wage a turf war over school budgets and education control. I want to know where those groups have been while our children and families have been crying for help. These are the schools that Judge Howard Manning was speaking of when he coined the term ‘academic genocide.’ “We encourage members of the General Assembly to pass H.B. 1080 and continue pursuing significant reforms for failing schools in our state.”