No, China Exim Bank hasn’t taken ‘absolute control of Eskom power facility in South Africa’
Eskom is South Africa’s biggest power generator, providing 95% of the country’s electricity. The utility is struggling with debt currently estimated at R420 billion and South Africa has recently endured extended blackouts.

But is it true that a Chinese bank has taken over an Eskom plant after it failed to repay a loan?

The website Newsoweto published a story on 15 January 2019 claiming China’s Exim Bank had taken “absolute control” of an “Eskom facility plant” after a “default in payment” on a “R33.4 billion” loan.

The story was posted on Facebook, where a user flagged it as false.

Eskom loan ‘is not from Exim Bank’

Eskom spokesperson Khulu Phasiwe told Africa Check that in July 2018 the utility signed a loan agreement worth US$2.5 billion (about R35.3 billion) with China Development Bank – not Exim Bank China.

The loan is to build Kusile power station.

Story from fake Twitter account

Newsoweto based its article on a tweet supposedly by China Exim Bank, posted earlier in January. But the Twitter account @EximBankChina is unverified, and doesn’t use the bank’s official logo.

Phasiwe tweeted: “This is a Parody account. Eskom does not have a loan from Exim Bank China as suggested by the hoax social media post currently circulating. Beware of fake news.”

Research by AFP Fact Check confirms the account is fake and not connected to Exim Bank. The logo may be that of Exim Bank of Bangladesh, AFP says. – Africa Check (20/02/19)

Africa Check teams up with Facebook Africa Check has partnered with Facebook to combat fake news and false information on the social platform. This spotcheck is part of the initiative. As part of its third-party fact-checking programme, Facebook allows its partners to see public articles, pictures or videos that have been flagged as potentially inaccurate. Content rated as “false” by fact-checkers will be downgraded in news feeds. This means fewer people will see it. You can help us identify fake news and false information on Facebook. This guide explains how.

© Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.