South African footballer Ekstein resigns from Kaizer Chiefs – again – after manager Middendorp calls him a monkey? No, it’s another fake
Yet another dodgy Trends Daily article has surfaced on Facebook, this one claiming long-time Kaizer Chiefs football club midfielder Hendrick “Pule” Ekstein has again resigned.

The headline is: “Racism: Chiefs Long Serving Midfielder Submit Resignation Letter After Middendorp Call Him A Monkey Out Of Anger”.

The article is dated 8 February 2019 and appears to be a reworking of a previous Trends Daily article from 4 February 2019, also published on Facebook. Both articles were written by someone called “Rex Rex”.

Aside from the added racism allegation, the two articles are identical, including the mixing up of the names of the previous and current Kaizer Chiefs coaches. In some sentences it names Giovanni Solinas as the coach Ekstein is “fed up with”, despite both articles being published two months after Solinas left the club.

We have already checked the claim that Ekstein has resigned from Kaizer Chiefs, and found it to be fake. – Africa Check (20/02/19)

Africa Check teams up with Facebook Africa Check has partnered with Facebook to combat fake news and false information on the social platform. This spotcheck is part of the initiative. As part of its third-party fact-checking programme, Facebook allows its partners to see public articles, pictures or videos that have been flagged as potentially inaccurate. Content rated as “false” by fact-checkers will be downgraded in news feeds. This means fewer people will see it. You can help us identify fake news and false information on Facebook. This guide explains how.

© Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.