Duterte statue in Nairobi? Afrikan Daily makes up another story
Another false story has surfaced on a website masquerading as the genuine African Daily Voice – claiming that Kenya’s President Uhuru Kenyatta had erected a statue in honour of President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines.

Posted on the day Kenya marked 55 years of independence, the story claimed the country’s love for Duterte was “beyond measure”.

But its shortcomings are obvious. It doesn’t say where in the central business district of Kenya’s capital Nairobi the statue was erected. There’s also no government body in Kenya called the Dangerous Drugs Board – the National Authority for the Campaign Against Drug Abuse is responsible for fighting drug and alcohol abuse in Kenya. And the Kiswahili word bangi refers to marijuana not, as the story claims, methamphetamine.

The website also used an old picture of a statue of former Filipino president Ferdinand Marcos unveiled in the Philippines in 2015.

Only county government can approve statues

All statues erected in Nairobi’s public spaces must be approved by the county government, Richard Bosire, the county’s director of communication, told Africa Check. There has been no approval and there’s no statue. (Note: The director of culture in the ministry of sports and heritage, Dr Kiprop Lagat, also confirmed to Africa Check that only the county government can grant approval for statues in public places.)

A look at the Twitter timeline of Kenya’s president on the day he supposedly launched the statue shows he was attending national festivities at the Nyayo national stadium and at his residence issuing national awards. – Alphonce Shiundu (14/12/2018)

CORRECTION: A previous version of this fact-check said the website African Daily Voice published this false story. In fact, it was an impostor website that used the genuine African Daily Voice’s logo, as its director explains here. We have corrected our report and apologise to African Daily Voice for the confusion caused.

Further reading:

Africa Check teams up with Facebook Africa Check has partnered with Facebook to combat fake news and false information on the social platform. This spotcheck is part of the initiative. As part of its third-party fact-checking programme, Facebook allows its partners to see public articles, pictures or videos that have been flagged as potentially inaccurate. Content rated as “false” by fact-checkers will be downgraded in news feeds. This means fewer people will see it. You can help us identify fake news and false information on Facebook. This guide explains how.

© Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.