No, eSwatini hasn’t passed a law to let its king marry ‘14-year-old virgins’
Featuring a photo of King Mswati III of eSwatini (formerly Swaziland) “inspecting” his many wives, a website masquerading as the genuine African Daily Voice reported that the country had passed a new law allowing the king to marry “14-year-old virgins”.

The publication said this decision was taken by eSwatini’s parliament in December 2018.

The story was also published on Enthuse Africa and Face of Malawi. After a South African DJ tweeted about it, several readers asked us to check if the claim was true.

‘No such law has been passed’

“There is no such law that has been passed,” eSwatini government spokesperson Percy Simelane told Africa Check. “Parliament was dissolved before elections around June 2018. We have just emerged from elections and parliament will be re-opened in February 2019. That is when we can discuss or pass laws.”

There also hasn’t been any discussion about reducing the age of marriage to 14, Simelane said.

Unicef also wasn’t aware of any new law allowing the king to marry 14-year-olds, Nadia Samie-Jacobs, a spokesperson for the UN children’s agency, told Africa Check.

The legal age of marriage in eSwatini is 18, Simelane said. But UN news agency Irin has reported on local groups’ worries about loopholes in customary marriage laws. – Lloyd Hazvineyi (12/12/2018)

UPDATE: This fact-check has been updated to clearly distinguish between the genuine African Daily Voice website and www.african-daily.com, which published this false story. The imposter website is illegally using African Daily Voice’s logo, as its director explains here.

Further reading:

Africa Check teams up with Facebook Africa Check has partnered with Facebook to combat fake news and false information on the social platform. This spotcheck is part of the initiative. As part of its third-party fact-checking programme, Facebook allows its partners to see public articles, pictures or videos that have been flagged as potentially inaccurate. Content rated as “false” by fact-checkers will be downgraded in news feeds. This means fewer people will see it. You can help us identify fake news and false information on Facebook. This guide explains how.

© Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.