South African footballer Ekstein resigns from Kaizer Chiefs after fight with manager Middendorp? No, the story is fake
A Trends Daily article published on Facebook says long-time Kaizer Chiefs football club midfielder Hendrick “Pule” Ekstein has resigned after a “fight with Ernst Middendorp”.

Middendorp rejoined Chiefs as manager in December 2018 after having coached the side from 2005 to 2007.

According to the article, a “close source” confided in a “Mr Zungu” that Ekstein, who has played in the Chiefs first team since the start of the 2015/16 season, was “fed up with [Giovanni] Solinas”, the previous manager, and “would grab an opportunity to leave”. But the article was published on 4 February 2019 – two months after Solinas left the club

Credible South African sports website Kick Off reports that Ekstein’s contract with Chiefs comes to an end in June 2019. Its says the midfielder is not happy with his new contract, stalling negotiations and prompting speculation that he may sign with another club in the next season.

Middendorp praises Ekstein

But in contrast to the report of a “fight” with Middendorp, the manager recently praised Ekstein as “an outstanding player” with the ability to carry the team with his ideas, and one of the best players he had ever worked with.

Middendorp said this after the Soweto derby between Chiefs and Orlando Pirates, the most popular soccer match-up in the South African Premier Soccer League. At the game on 9 February, Ekstein was in the Chiefs starting line-up.

There have been no other reports of a falling out between Ekstein and Middendorp, or between Ekstein and the club.

And comments on the Trends Daily Facebook post refer to its article as a “joke”, asking if the admin is “smoking something”. – Africa Check (13/02/19)

Africa Check teams up with Facebook Africa Check has partnered with Facebook to combat fake news and false information on the social platform. This spotcheck is part of the initiative. As part of its third-party fact-checking programme, Facebook allows its partners to see public articles, pictures or videos that have been flagged as potentially inaccurate. Content rated as “false” by fact-checkers will be downgraded in news feeds. This means fewer people will see it. You can help us identify fake news and false information on Facebook. This guide explains how.

© Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.