Fake news: Safaricom’s Fuliza loan servers not hacked to clear M-Pesa debt in Kenya
A viral Facebook post falsely claims Safaricom’s servers have been hacked, clearing the debt of Kenyans who had loaned M-Pesa funds on the mobile Fuliza platform.

On 6 May 2019, a Facebook user posted an image that seemed to be a screenshot of a Citizen TV Kenya tweet saying “a man named Ken Vaite” had hacked Safaricom’s Fuliza servers and cleared “all loan records”.

The images’ caption read: “Watu wa fuliza, kadeni kamelipwa [colloquial Kiswahili for ‘People on Fuliza, the debt has been paid’] …God bless this computer experts.”

The image has attracted at least 53 reactions and 17 comments. A similar claim appeared on a Facebook page with some 5,000 followers, prompting more than 800 reactions and 100 comments.

No record of ‘hacking’ tweet

But the screenshot is a photoshopped fake.

Africa Check could not find the tweet or a similar post on Citizen TV Kenya’s social media accounts. And the media house hasn’t produced any story like it.

The TV channel has cautioned the public about fake imposter content using its logo.

“Our attention has been drawn to a series of fake and misleading social media posts made by accounts purporting to belong to Citizen TV,” read its public notice posted on Twitter. “Ignore them and note that all our social media accounts are verified.”

‘Claim is false’

Africa Check asked Dennis Mbuvi of Safaricom’s public relations and corporate communication department about the image.

He said the “screenshot” was faked, as was the report of hacking.

“The screenshot shared is not genuine as much as it purports to be from Citizen TV. The claim is false.” – Dancan Bwire (20/05/19)

Africa Check teams up with Facebook Africa Check has partnered with Facebook to combat fake news and false information on the social platform. This spotcheck is part of the initiative. As part of its third-party fact-checking programme, Facebook allows its partners to see public articles, pictures or videos that have been flagged as potentially inaccurate. Content rated as “false” by fact-checkers will be downgraded in news feeds. This means fewer people will see it. You can help us identify fake news and false information on Facebook. This guide explains how.

© Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.