Rhulani Mokwena now Orlando Pirates head coach after Micho Sredojevic’s resignation? More false news from Trends Daily
Another Trends Daily article shared on Facebook claims the Orlando Pirates football club’s head coach Milutin “Micho” Sredojevic has tendered his resignation to club chair Irvin Khoza.

It says the coach is “fed up with some of the internal decisions”, according to “reports emanating from an unconfirmed source”.

This was after Micho said the Buccaneers – fans’ affectionate name for Pirates – had been punished for “silly mistakes” after their penalty shootout defeat to Black Leopards in their Round of 32 Nedbank Cup fixture.

Trends Daily also says Pirates’ assistant coach Rhulani Mokwena has been given “an express order to stir the affairs of the club as the acting coach”.

No reports of resignation

Although Micho’s “silly mistakes” quote has been published in credible news articles, there are no reports of him submitting his resignation to the club or its chairperson. The Orlando Pirates website still lists Micho as the head coach and Mokwena as the assistant coach.

On 4 February 2019 Trends Daily claimed Kaizer Chiefs midfielder Pule Ekstein had resigned after a fight with club manager Ernst Middendorp. This story is also untrue.

Africa Check teams up with Facebook Africa Check has partnered with Facebook to combat fake news and false information on the social platform. This spotcheck is part of the initiative. As part of its third-party fact-checking programme, Facebook allows its partners to see public articles, pictures or videos that have been flagged as potentially inaccurate. Content rated as “false” by fact-checkers will be downgraded in news feeds. This means fewer people will see it. You can help us identify fake news and false information on Facebook. This guide explains how.

© Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.