No evidence US and Russia pledged to support Biafran secession from Nigeria
A report by online news outlet Jamyco claims the governments of the United States and Russia have pledged to support the separation of south-eastern Nigeria to form the independent state of Biafra.

The report has been shared dozens of times by a number of Facebook pages, most of them supporters of Biafra. It includes a photo of US President Donald Trump with his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin.

It says “US political expert, Michael Kerry” believes Biafra lost the 1967-1970 civil war because its then leader Chukwuemeka Ojukwu did not agree to a deal with Russia.

No ‘Michael Kerry’ found

It adds that the door is “still open” and the US and Russia are “ready” to help Biafra secede in exchange for its oil “for five years”, according to a “Biafran newspaper”.

A Google search couldn’t find a US political expert named Michael Kerry. The link on “Michael Kerry” in the report leads to another Jamyco article that claims the Chinese government is also backing Biafra.

The link on “Biafran newspaper” leads to yet another Jamyco story, this one saying Putin had endorsed Biafra.

A reverse image search shows the photo in the report was taken in July 2017, when Trump and Putin met at a G20 Summit in Hamburg, Germany.

A search for “Biafra” in US Department of State press releases returns no results. And if the claim of US and Russian support for Biafra were true, it would be a serious diplomatic issue widely reported by mainstream international media. – Allwell Okpi (14/03/19)

Africa Check teams up with Facebook Africa Check has partnered with Facebook to combat fake news and false information on the social platform. This spotcheck is part of the initiative. As part of its third-party fact-checking programme, Facebook allows its partners to see public articles, pictures or videos that have been flagged as potentially inaccurate. Content rated as “false” by fact-checkers will be downgraded in news feeds. This means fewer people will see it. You can help us identify fake news and false information on Facebook. This guide explains how.

© Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.