Claims about ‘white genocide’ in South Africa unsupported
“White genocide in South Africa is real,” prominent American alt-right activist and author, Mike Cernovich, recently tweet.

White genocide in South Africa is real. Said that for years, and I’ll say it now. If nominated for ambassadorship, I’ll say it to Congress. — Mike Cernovich ?? (@Cernovich) November 17, 2016

His claim had been retweeted nearly 500 times at the time of publishing this spot check. But no organisation has declared that there is a “white genocide” underway in the country, Africa Check found last year.

Claims of a “white genocide” are frequently attributed to Genocide Watch, an organisation created to predict, prevent, stop, and punish genocide and other forms of mass murder. But the organisation has publically stated that “white genocide is not underway in South Africa”.

It has, however, ranked South Africa on stage six – the stage of “polarisation” – on its 10 Stages of Genocide. Yet the organisation was not prepared to provide the sources or methodology it used to determine the country’s ranking. Neither would it pinpoint the events in South Africa that met the detailed description of that stage, which includes “extremist terrorism [targeting] moderates”.

Without this information, it is impossible to interrogate their ranking. Experts have also suggested that the organisation’s genocide framework could do more harm than good in combating violence in the country.

No other organisation has warned of a genocide or impending genocide in South Africa. This includes both the United Nation’s Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect and the Atrocity Forecasting Project. -17/11/2016

Additional reading

ANALYSIS: Genocide Watch thin on transparency & methodology

Are SA whites really being killed ‘like flies’? Why Steve Hofmeyr is wrong

© Copyright Africa Check 2019. Read our republishing guidelines. You may reproduce this piece or content from it for the purpose of reporting and/or discussing news and current events. This is subject to: Crediting Africa Check in the byline, keeping all hyperlinks to the sources used and adding this sentence at the end of your publication: “This report was written by Africa Check, a non-partisan fact-checking organisation. View the original piece on their website", with a link back to this page.