How Harry Reid shepherded healthcare reform through the Senate
(Page 2 of 2)

How Harry Reid shepherded healthcare reform through the Senate

The Democratic leader's rare grasp of the institution and of colleagues' individual needs enabled him to bargain and smooth the path to victory by Christmas.

The "Group of 10," as it came to be called, began meeting on a Friday night in the same room where Emanuel had demanded speed a month before. The talks ran for five days straight.

He included the staunchest supporters and opponents of a public option, but added moderate voices that he hoped could help cool the passions. And he chose lawmakers who had been left out of earlier healthcare deal-making, such as Sens. John D. Rockefeller IV (D-W.Va.) and Russell D. Feingold (D-Wis.).

Rather than impose a top-down compromise on his party's warring factions, Reid asked a group of 10 senators to hammer out a compromise.

"Harry laid out where he thought things were," said one participant in the Nov. 30 meeting. "He thought he had something over 55 votes, but didn't have 60. . . . We walked through the people who were open question marks, and talked about how much of a coordinated effort we could make."

"We bonded," said Rockefeller, who always made sure to sit next to Sen. Sherrod Brown, a sometimes fiery liberal from Ohio. Rockefeller took to calling Brown "Charlie" after Brown's brother, a West Virginia resident. Brown in turn called Rockefeller "Nelson." On the evening of Dec. 8, the group emerged with a tentative deal to scrap the public option that Reid had put in the bill, but to allow some Americans between 55 and 64 to buy into Medicare. Reid and his leadership team believed they had broken the impasse.

Their hopes were short-lived. That Sunday, Lieberman publicly announced that he would not support a bill with the Medicare buy-in provision.

Reid, who prided himself on understanding his members, was stunned. He and others had assumed that Lieberman would back the compromise because he had endorsed a Medicare buy-in a few months before.

At an emergency meeting in Reid's office that afternoon, Schumer despaired that there was no time to fix the bill. In a hallmark of his leadership, Reid said simply that they needed to talk to Lieberman. "Reid just kept the process going," said one participant.

When Lieberman joined the meeting at 2:30 that afternoon, he said he still wanted to support the bill.

Reid did not commit to a deal but said that he understood Lieberman's concerns and would work on them.

That set in motion a series of calls and meetings as Reid and his lieutenants scrambled to persuade liberals to accept a bill without a Medicare buy-in.

Reid knew that he had to keep Lieberman in the tent. And the next night, when Democrats gathered for a special caucus meeting, Reid did not call out the Connecticut senator, focusing instead on the need to unite and move forward.

Without the Medicare buy-in, Lieberman would be the 59th vote. And Reid turned to Nelson, who had a long list of demands, including more restrictions on funding abortions and full federal funding to expand Nebraska's Medicaid program. (Most other states would be forced to pick up some of the cost.)

Reid was closing in on a deal.

Then, less than 48 hours before the necessary motions had to be filed to ensure a final vote by Christmas, another crisis erupted.

Republicans were in a full-court press to extend debate, even if it meant filibustering the defense appropriations bill as a way to postpone consideration of the healthcare legislation.

Democrats found themselves one vote short of quashing the GOP filibuster threat because Feingold, an ardent war critic, had pledged to oppose the defense funding.