What is your opinions of PETA?  ?
Best Answer:

I'm all about animal rights but PETA goes overboard. I don't believe that most people realize just how extreme PETA is about animal rights. They believe that an ant's life is no more valuable than a dog's life and I'm sorry but I strongly disagree. I also believe that we should use rodents for necessary medical testing to find cures for diseases such as cancer as long as it is in the most humane manner and the animal suffers as little as possible. I know that sounds horrible but I just think it's worth finding a cure for childhood cancer if it means experimenting on a mouse. I don't think we should test on other animals though which I know may not make sense to a lot of people. We all have our own opinions! I always tell animal rights activists that if their child was really dying of cancer and there was a drug out there that was developed by testing on animals that would cure him would they rather have the child die just to stick to their beliefs? I don't think so. I DO STRONGLY BELIEVE THAT WE SHOULD FIND ALTERNATIVES TO ANIMAL RESEARCH SUCH AS HARVESTING HUMAN STEM CELLS AND USING MODERN TECHNOLOGY! I also won't buy make-up that has been tested on animals which PETA encourages. I also don't believe in fur coats which we all know PETA is strongly against! I think it's fine that PETA protests but when it comes to throwing red paint on people's furs that is crossing the line. ONCE AGAIN, I DO NOT BELEIVE THAT MOST PEOPLE KNOW WHAT PETA IS ALL ABOUT! They also believe that we should not keep animals as pets EVEN DOGS! That is what PETA truly believes although I know most people don't know that. They just think they are against animal testing and fur coats and not eating meat! I respect everyone's opinons although I may not agree with them. I think it's stupid that PETA doesn't think we should have cats and dogs as pets! I bet Pamela Anderson (their big celebrity supporter) has pets and they don't say anything about it! I also think a lot of people get into PETA 'cause they think it's cool and not so much because they truly believe in what PETA is all about. Sorry about going on and on. Animal rights is something I think about a lot so you got me going, lol! I do love animals though! Here's PETA's website so people can read more about them.Don't get me wrong. Some of what they believe in and have helped stop (like using many animals in circuses) is wonderful. It's just that they are way too extreme for what I believe in. They are even against horseshows and used to love showing my horses and my horses enjoyed it as well!GOOD QUESTION! YOU GET A STAR!edit- I just read more of what you wrote and it sounds like you and I think a lot alike which is good!