Will the police respond if you call 911 and stay on the line but don't say anything?

If I called 911 and then just stayed on the line without saying anything, would they come? Or would they assume it was a prank/accidental call and ignore it? I've always been curious about that because sometimes if I'm home alone, I get paranoid about what would happen if someone broke in or something.... show more If I called 911 and then just stayed on the line without saying anything, would they come? Or would they assume it was a prank/accidental call and ignore it?



I've always been curious about that because sometimes if I'm home alone, I get paranoid about what would happen if someone broke in or something. In which case, I probably couldn't talk to the 911 dispatcher or they would hear me talking and find me (if I was trying to hide or something).



Luckily, no one has ever broken in or anything (knock on wood) but it doesn't mean that it couldn't happen... I just want to know, *just in case*...



And also, how long would it take to track down your address by GPS if you're calling from a cell phone? I don't have a house phone in my room and I use my cell for everything. I called 911 on my cell once for a car accident outside my house and they had to ask me my address, the intersection, the township, etc and it took over 10 mins for someone to get there... (Luckily no one was hurt though).

Update: Geez people, I'm not THAT paranoid!!! You can't tell me you have NEVER been home alone and thought "What would I do if such-and-such happens?" I said I was just curious! I like to be prepared for unexpected events... Or maybe I just watch too much CSI and Law & Order where people DO break in... show more Geez people, I'm not THAT paranoid!!! You can't tell me you have NEVER been home alone and thought "What would I do if such-and-such happens?" I said I was just curious!



I like to be prepared for unexpected events...



Or maybe I just watch too much CSI and Law & Order where people DO break in and hurt people.

Update 2: When I was little, I dialed 911 on my grandmom's phone and then hung up real quick and no one came. And later my sister did it too and no one came then either.... So maybe it just depends how busy they are.... Or if you hang up immediately, they assume that it was an accident then....?