Committee Approves the Fiscal Year 2017 Agriculture Appropriations Bill Legislation supports federal programs for rural communities, farmers, and ranchers, maintains food and drug safety, provides food security for those in need

Washington, April 19, 2016

The House Appropriations Committee today approved the fiscal year 2017 Agriculture Appropriations bill. The proposed legislation funds important agricultural and food programs and services, including food and medical product safety, animal and plant health programs, rural development and farm services, marketplace oversight, and nutrition programs.

The bill totals $21.3 billion in discretionary funding, which is $451 million lower than the fiscal year 2016 enacted level and $281 million below the President’s budget request. The legislation targets funding to programs to provide the most benefit to the American people and the U.S. economy, while reducing funding for inefficient, wasteful, or lower-priority programs and agencies. In addition, the bill contains several policy provisions to rein in unnecessary and burdensome regulations that harm U.S. food producers and that impede growth in important U.S. industries.

“This bill prioritizes activities that have a direct impact on the American people: critical food and drug safety programs; important rural development programs; and effective agricultural research and support programs. These investments recognize the widespread importance of these efforts – that every American, every day expects and deserves safe and healthful food on their table,” House Appropriations Chairman Hal Rogers said.

“There is not a single person in the United States whose life is not touched by agriculture,” said Agriculture Subcommittee Chairman Robert Aderholt. “This bill ensures that agriculture continues to be impactful from the field, to the family dinner table, to the sprouting of new business and opportunities across our nation."

The following amendments to the FY 2017 Agriculture Appropriations bill were adopted by the full committee today:

Rep. Aderholt – The amendment makes technical and noncontroversial changes to the bill and report. The amendment was adopted on a voice vote.

Rep. Cole – The amendment adds bill language to modernize the February 2007 predicate date for tobacco products. The amendment was adopted on a vote of 31-19.

Rep. Farr – The amendment adds language to the bill to prevent the slaughter of horses for human consumption within the United States. The amendment was adopted on a vote of 25-23.

Rep. Palazzo – The amendment adds bill language delaying a new rule by USDA that changes requirements for approved SNAP retailers. The amendment was adopted on a voice vote.

Rep. Valadao – The amendment adds bill language that prevents the CFTC Swap Dealer de minimis level from automatically being lowered by 60 percent. The amendment was adopted on a vote of 30-19.

Rep. Lee – The amendment adds bill language to use $1 million in USDA funding within the bill for loans and grants under the Healthy Food Financing Initiative. The amendment was adopted on a vote of 28-22.

Rep. Harris –The amendment adds bill language to stop the implementation of a Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration regulation that would place restrictions on poultry, beef and pork marketing arrangements. The amendment was adopted on a vote of 26-24.

The bill was adopted on a voice vote.

For a summary of the bill, please visit:

/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=394490

For the text of the bill, please visit:

/UploadedFiles/BILLS-114HR-FC-AP-FY2017-AP00-Agriculture.pdf

For the bill report, please visit:

/uploadedfiles/hrpt-114-hr-fy2017-agriculture.pdf

#####