UN declares war on America, orders Trump must allow caravan into the …
UN declares war on America, orders Trump must allow caravan into the United States 10/29/2018 0 Comments ​ Breitbart Reports: International officials with the United Nations (UN) Refugee Agency say President Trump must allow a caravan of Central Americans into the United States to seek asylum.As Breitbart News has chronicled, migrants with an at least 7,000-strong caravan have repeatedly admitted that they are traveling to the U.S. to seek jobs, re-enter the U.S. as previously deported illegal aliens, and flee crime. One previously deported illegal alien with the caravan even admitted that he was convicted of attempted murder in the U.S. None of these cases are eligible asylum claims.

The United Nations has now declared defacto war against the United States, where international officials connected to the UN Refugee Agency have tonight ordered that President Trump must accept the Caravan into the United States. We already know that the United Nations and Soros are working in tandem to flood America with these caravan invaders, as document information released earlier today show that the United Nations and Soros are working together inside this Honduran Caravan...Where there are now three waves of the invaders taking place in Central America.

​ With the United Nations today now thinking it can order President Trump and America to accept the Honduran Caravan, it's now likely time to declare the United Nations as a National Security threat to the United States. Now that the United Nations has ordered President Trump to accept the caravan into the United States, not only is this a defacto Act of War by the UN...But this now confirms that the United Nations is now obviously behind the caravan trying to invade the United States around the 2018 midterms.

0 Comments





Leave a Reply.

Author Anti msm news, Created by a US NAVY vet. "Seek the truth" Check me out on Facebook and Twitter at top of page, also check me out on gab.ai @PuppetStringNews