DC Police: ‘March For Our Lives’ Was Secretly Planned Last Year
USMC::: obviously you have not been kept in the loop so too speak about the things that have transpired in the last few years here in the USA. BTW I am a USN veteran and have been seeing the handwriting on the wall for some time. The Globalists have done the same in numerous other countries , by creating false flag operations too , if , possibly horrify people into giving up thier guns!!! In essence , ( making them out too be FOOLS!)!! Its a systematic take down of what they consider their enemies, ( create a horrifying scene), then the people not believing the horror they are seeing think in their hearts( if i give my guns over too them then that will help stop further incidents of horrific crimes!!, but they dont realize that the ones creating the horrifying crimes are their own Governments!!!! Adolf Hitler did the same thing against his own people,. stating we have one common enemy and i will help you too rid you of the threat. , but first you must register your weapons, then once that is done, we will leave you in peace, but in fact once the Nazi party learned who had what , and where , and when they immediately went after the weapons, effectively disarming not only the Jews, but also his own people, so they couldnt resist!!!!! Then they lined up the Jews and killed them execution style!!!! I fought against such tyrany, and swore a oath too uphold the Constitution, till death if necessary!! The Ignorant ones of the y ounger ones doesnt know the history of the past!! I have listened too many young ones in the area i live , and asked them if they learned about the Nazis in WW2, too which they stated, Huh?, who was Adolf HItler?? , which horrified me, too which i informed the said one about what Adolf Hitler did... We cannot let these ignorant ones give away our rights too have weapons, or we will follow the same path!! Then we will be the next ones too die!!! I dont know about you USMC , but i say HELL NO!!!!, I am packing and will defend my neighbors and children etc etc till i have no breath in me!!!! What say YOU????!