Pfizer Vice President blows whistle on Gardasil: “The vaccine is deadly”
The former vice president of Pfizer, Dr. Peter Rost, can be seen in the video clip below, discussing what many of us have been saying for years: the One More Girl ” documentary – features Dr. Rost revealing how vaccines and The former vice president of Pfizer, Dr. Peter Rost, can be seen in the video clip below, discussing what many of us have been saying for years: the Gardasil vaccine is dangerous and Big Pharma just wants to keep people unhealthy. The clip below, taken from the yet to be released “One More Girl” documentary – features Dr. Rost revealing how vaccines and Big Pharma drugs are designed to keep people in a state of dis-ease.

NOTE: Dr. Rost doesn’t directly say “Gardasil is dangerous” but he’s discussing the vaccine in the documentary “Gardasil: One More Girl.” Again, the topic IS THE GARDASIL VACCINE. Although he might not use the words, that vaccine is the topic of the interview.

RELATED STORY:

(It is also important to note that the One More Girl project seemed to stall. No one is sure how or why, or even where the filmmakers went. They started a Kickstarter campaign to begin their project, filmed for three months, cut a trailer, updated everyone with a release date and then disappeared. Their website is no longer active, neither is their Facebook account or YouTube channel, (It is also important to note that the One More Girl project seemed to stall. No one is sure how or why, or even where the filmmakers went. They started a Kickstarter campaign to begin their project, filmed for three months, cut a trailer, updated everyone with a release date and then disappeared. Their website is no longer active, neither is their Facebook account or YouTube channel, although there are a couple of video clips from OMG . Did someone scare them off their trail?)

RELATED STORY:

We cannot trust the mainstream media to bring these quotes and this truth to our attention, in spite of the fact that they paint quite a bleak picture about the state of things. No, instead we have to continue to use our voices and tell people the truth.