Australians to select from 33 different gender labels under radical new proposal
Published: 18:25 EDT, 26 November 2018 | Updated: 02:35 EDT, 29 November 2018

Australians may soon have the option to select from several different gender labels on their official documents under a draft proposal by the Labor Opposition.

Omnigender, neutrois and demigender are among 33 labels that will be discussed at the party's upcoming national conference and could soon be seen printed on passports and birth certificates, according to The Daily Telegraph

The radical proposal, if accepted by the party, would enforce a review of document requirements which affect various genders.

The proposal argues that transgender and intersex people would be able to enjoy 'equal human rights without discrimination' with the additional gender options.

The party will also look at promoting options beyond 'binary male and female'.

Australians may soon have the option to select from several different gender labels on their official documents under a draft proposal by the Labor government (stock)

'Labor will ensure people obtain identification options that match their sex characteristics and/or gender identities, as preferred,' the draft read.

Previously, Bill Shorten rejected the idea of supporting the removal of gender from birth certificates, indicating that Labor 'had no plans to change' birth certificates.

Tasmania is on the verge of abolishing gender from birth certificates so transgender people don't have to 'out themselves'.

Last week, the Tasmanian Labor and Greens successfully passed a law in the lower house which include parents having to 'opt in' to have a baby's sex recorded on birth certificates.

According to Daily Telegraph omnigender, neutrois and demigender were among the 33 genders which would be discussed for the official documents.

An ALP spokeswoman reiterated Mr Shorten's previous comments that he still had no plans to change the gender laws.

Health Minister Greg Hunt called on the Opposition leader to detail their plan which would significantly increase the minimum 12 labels used to a maximum of 33 labels.

'We (the Morrison government) have a clear commitment to our existing gender identity laws,' he told Sky News.

'They want to adopt a standard which has a minimum of 12 different forms of identity which people can adopt or nominate,' Mr Hunt said.