L.A. Times: Adam Schiff's Gay Lover Makes Claims Of Abuse | TheNetSpi…
WILL BOTTOM CLAIMS CALIFORNIA CONGRESSMAN ADAM SCHIFF HAS ABUSED HIM PHYSICALLY, EMOTIONALLY, AND SEXUALLY.

Los Angeles, CA- Los Angeles Times reporter and assistant managing editor, Kristina Bellatori dropped another bombshell in what can only be described as the ongoing US Congressional and political sex and domestic violence scandal this afternoon.

“The Rob Porter domestic violence fiasco seems to have turned more than just the White House upside down,” Bellatori told The Net Spies via Skype. “Not only has everything been turned upside down, but it seems that abuse victims are literally falling from the sky.”

Bellatori was contacted by Will Bottom, who claims to be the gay lover of California Congressman, Adam Schiff. “Will contacted me and told me that he had been a victim for too long and wanted to speak out,” Bellatori told us. “Mr. Bottom stated that he has been Mr. Schiff’s gay lover for many years and has endured a plethora of physical, emotional, and sexual abuse.”

Bellatori went on to quote Mr. Bottom. “I call Adam, Shih-Tzu, cuz it sounds like his name and he looks like one. Anyway, Shih-Tzu always tells me that my stuff is too small and I don’t pound him hard or deep enough. That hurts my feelings, man. Then he beats me up with his little fists if I don’t get him off just right. I have put up with a lot of crap from him, but I love him, man. He has even pimped me out to his friends on many occasions. I never really minded him pimping me out too much until he made me hook up with Bernie Sanders. That dude smell like moth balls or something.”

Mr. Bottom provided Bellatori with several pictures, most taken by Schiff, that showed the horrific extent of Schiff’s cruelty and perversion. “Anyone who treated an animal in such a manner would find themselves with a lengthy jail sentence,” related Bellatori. “This is a human being. It seems like high time to start holding these politicians accountable for their sick, vulgar, and reprehensible behaviors.”