California Gov. Jerry Brown To Force Schools To Show Kids ‘Gay Sex’ –…
California Governor Jerry Brown has mandated the use of gay pornography in elementary schools in order to teach children about LGBT sex.

This makes California the first state in the union to not only use mandatory LGBT-inclusive textbooks in schools, but also force young children to learn sexually explicit material without the choice of opting out.

The textbooks will include references to famous gay celebrities and public figures, as well as detail the various sexual choices a gay person has.

Truthrevolt.org reports: That law requires a “fair, accurate, inclusive, and respectful” treatment of homosexual, bisexual, transgender, and lesbian Americans despite the historical insignificance.

“We’re not trying to make anybody gay; we’re not saying there’s an agenda; we’re not saying that these people are better than other people; what we’re saying is this is another group of Americans and they face certain prejudices,” said state publisher Mark Jarrett, whose history textbooks include special mention of the sexual preferences of historical figures like Jane Adams, Emily Dickinson, Nathaniel Hawthorne, President James Buchanan, though it’s inconclusive if these prominent Americans were gay or not.

“I think we should say, ‘Buchanan, he never married. He had a very good friend who was living with him. He may have been gay,’” Jarrett added. “On the other hand, at that time, being gay was seen as something evil and wrong.”

California approved the textbooks written by Jarrett, a Ph.D, to be used in the 8th grade.

Students will read that legendary stagecoach driver Charlie Parkhurst “was a woman who identified as a man,” according to Fox News

They will read that George Washington’s chief of staff Baron Von Steuben “may have been gay,” and that poet Walt Whitman “was drawn to young men… but denied his same sex preferences in public.”

Critics say much of these accounts are speculation, but California rejected any publisher that didn’t mention the homosexual preferences or claims against historical figures in their textbooks.

In one textbook, the state forced the publisher to add “lesbian” to describe NASA astronaut Sally Ride.

And here we thought the Democratic Party was the party of “choice.” Clearly the state knows better than the parents what children need to learn.