Celine Dion Launches Luciferian, Gender Neutral, Clothing Line With Pedophilia and New World Order Messages
I was perusing through my Facebook newsfeed and came across what I initially thought was pretty crazy. Images of kids wearing odd-looking cl...

http://humansarefree.com/2018/11/celine-dion-launches-luciferian-gender.html

I was perusing through my Facebook newsfeed and came across what I initially thought was pretty crazy. Images of kids wearing odd-looking clothing with occult symbols and the words ‘NEW ORDER’ written across the chest.

"Ho!" -- How is this acceptable? She's a CHILD!

Baby New Order with Skulls?

So all children will be "gender neutral" in the Luciferian "New Order"? Is this the message?

Here is the commercial:

Bonus: Disturbing Pictures from Nununu's Instagram Account

Very important to note: "nunu" means private parts of either sex .

Children depicted as demons - Is this how they see children?

I thought it was some joke someone had put together to play on how there has been a long-standing goal of the elite/cabal to create a ‘new world order’ and what better way to start than babies and kids.It all is shown in a new commercial where Celine Dion is breaking into a hospital baby ward to help bring her new clothing line to babies.The company Celinununu states in its mission: CELINUNUNU unites two forces by one voice: fashion has the power to shape people’s minds. Inspire your children to be free and find their own individuality through clothes. The commercial for the product line is interesting on its own. She plays the ‘saviour’ of these babies, against police who are trying to stop her from telling these babies it’s OK to not select a gender.After she sneaks in, gets to the baby ward, she blows a magical dust onto the children, suddenly turning them all into gender-neutral babies wearing her clothing line.In cabal/occult terms, one might look at this as casting a spell on the children, something that fits deeply into the constant confusion the cabal is trying to cast on humanity.One of the long-discussed plans of the elite/cabal has been to create a New World Order . Part of that order involves bringing everyone under one religion, one government, one military, and stopping things like procreation etc so as to have to control fewer people.This is why it’s so odd that the focus of this clothing line seems to push towards ‘New Order’ while talking about a highly controversial issue.I couldn’t get that creepy Celine Dion commercial out of my head, so I had to check out the Instagram page of her kids clothing business myself.Depending on how much you know about the Luciferian Satanic / New World Order / Pedo culture or black magic , or if you simply have an eye for what’s normal, this IS NOT.And now here are some very disturbing pictures from the company's Instagram account (be sure to read the photo captions as well):