700+ illegals, including sex offenders, caught in El Paso overnight
More than 700 more illegal immigrants – including two convicted sex offenders – were caught by United States Border Patrol agents in El Paso, Texas, overnight from Tuesday to Wednesday, and the barrage of illegals continued on to Thursday, bringing the two-day total to 1,000 migrants. More than 700 more illegal immigrants – including two convicted sex offenders – were caught by United States Border Patrol agents in El Paso, Texas, overnight from Tuesday to Wednesday, and the barrage of illegals continued on to Thursday, bringing the two-day total to 1,000 migrants.

The sex offenders were previously deported from the U.S. after being found guilty of their crimes, and they were apprehended in two separate groups of Central American migrants who made their way through Mexico and across its northern border with the U.S.

“Two convicted sex offenders were among those detained,” “Two convicted sex offenders were among those detained,” TheBlaze reported . “The men had attempted to enter the U.S. with larger groups of immigrants that agents were processing.”

Swarms of illegals inundating unwalled border

Taking advantage of the Democratic Party’s unwillingness to grant President Donald Trump the $5 billion he needs to construct a continuous 2,000=mile wall spanning the U.S.-Mexico border from California’s Pacific Coast to Texas’ Gulf Coast, waves of immigrants – the latest ones primarily comprised of families and unaccompanied juveniles from Central American countries – continue to break into America illegally.

“Agents apprehended a group of 112 illegal aliens at the border wall near downtown just after midnight, [and] at about the same time, agents working further east were processing a group of 252 aliens apprehended at the border just west of Bowie High School,” “Agents apprehended a group of 112 illegal aliens at the border wall near downtown just after midnight, [and] at about the same time, agents working further east were processing a group of 252 aliens apprehended at the border just west of Bowie High School,” a U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) press release announced Thursday . “Throughout the morning hours, several smaller groups also arrived at multiple locations along the border in the El Paso metropolitan area, [and] in just a few hours, the total number taken into custody exceeded 500.”

The immigrants are reportedly coming from an array of Latin American countries.

“One of the large groups was reportedly made up of mostly women and children from Brazil, Guatemala and Honduras to Mexico,” TheBlaze’s Jana J. Pruet explained.

Illegals are even abandoning toddlers – or just carelessly leaving them behind – in their desperate surge to penetrate the border.

“An unaccompanied 2-year-old child was also found among one of the groups,” CBP noted. “The U. S. Border Patrol is currently working with international and domestic agencies in order to locate the parent(s).”

Importing crime

Criminal aliens are reportedly continuing their attempts to use hundreds of illegal immigrants to distract and preoccupy Border Patrol agents, yet the federal authorities diligence to take care of these matters is said to be thwarting this underhanded strategy.

“While dealing with this influx of illegal aliens, Border Patrol agents also arrested two convicted sex offenders attempting to enter illegally while the agents were preoccupied with the large groups,” the CBP release informed. “Both sex offenders were arrested in different groups attempting to enter the United States illegally evading Border Patrol agents. Both subjects had been convicted of their sex offenses and had served time in jail before being deported from the United States.”

The criminals being apprehended are not just one-time offenders, but dangerous repeat offenders being pursued by federal authorities.

“Agents in far-east El Paso County also arrested a group of six, in which a subject – a 28-year-old U.S. citizen, self-proclaimed prison gang member – was found to have an outstanding federal warrant for escape, [and] in addition, the subject has a lengthy criminal record,” the CBP report added. “The subject was remanded to the custody to the U.S. Marshals Service, [and] the other five aliens are currently being processed accordingly.”

Federal authorities call the flood of immigrants merely a diversion to continue their illegal dealings undetected.

"They're using these individuals to try to coordinate movements and try to get our agents to create gaps in the coverage, and that way, they can try to exploit those gaps for the criminal aliens," "They're using these individuals to try to coordinate movements and try to get our agents to create gaps in the coverage, and that way, they can try to exploit those gaps for the criminal aliens," CBP Spokesman Joe Romero told the local news outlet, KTSM . "We're talking about the felons – the wanted individuals, the pedophiles, the rapists, the murderers. They are trying to smuggle them past our agents by inundating them with groups like this."

He indicated that drug traffickers across the border are controlling the timing and placement of the migrant movements attempting to break into the U.S. from Mexico.

Citizen volunteer groups in El Paso provided assistance for the migrant groups, who merely appeared to be going through the motions at the urgings of criminal groups.

“Local organizations arrived with food, water and blankets Wednesday night,” KTSM reported. “Some of those migrants even spent the night at the border waiting to be picked up by agents on Thursday morning.”

The numbers are staggering …

It is reported that the latest wave of groups being taken into custody in the southwestern Texas city has been one of the biggest busts to date.

“The number of unaccompanied children – those younger than 18 years old who've been taken into federal custody in El Paso – has spiked by 296 percent this fiscal year over 2018, according to recently released CBP data,” Pruet informed. “From October 2017 to February 2018, there were 1,355 unaccompanied minors apprehended, [and] since October, there have been more than 5,372.”

Federal statistics on recent apprehensions indicate that the border problem is only getting worse.

“[T]he number of those captured – while traveling as family units – has exploded by 1,689 percent, according to CBP data,” Pruet continued. “Agents in El Paso have taken in more than 36,298 traveling as family units since October – up from 2,029 during the same period during the fiscal year 2018.”