Look Who's Holding Secret Fundraisers With Islamic Groups Tied to Ter…
And the winner is... Rep. Ilhan Omar.

According to the Washington Free Beacon, Omar has held private fundraisers, not open to the public, with two groups that have known ties to terrorism. Her remarks to these groups have not been made public, nor have they been made available to the press.

The content of these speeches, given to predominately Muslim audiences, remains unknown, prompting some of Omar's critics to express concern about the type of rhetoric she is using before these paying audiences, particularly in light of the lawmaker's repeated use of anti-Semitic tropes in public. Omar recently spoke in Florida at a private event hosted by Islamic Relief, a charity organization long said to have deep ties to groups that advocate terrorism against Israel. Over the weekend, she will appear at another private event in California that is hosted by CAIR-CA PAC, a political action committee affiliated with the Council on American Islamic Relations, or CAIR a group that was named as an unindicted co-conspirator in a massive terror-funding incident.

CAIR's involvement with the Holy Land Foundation -- a group found guilty of funding Hamas -- led to the FBI cutting ties with them in 2009. They make no secret of their support for the Palestinians, but insist they don't support terrorism against Israel.

It remains unclear what Omar has told these audiences in her private talks. Washington Free Beaconattempts to obtain video of past events were unsuccessful, and multiple local news and television outlets in the Tampa, Fla., area, where Omar spoke to Islamic Relief last month, confirmed they were unable to gain access to the closed door event. Islamic Relief has come under congressional investigation for what lawmakers have described as its efforts to provide assistance to terrorist group such as Hamas and the Muslim Brotherhood. The charity has been banned by some countries as a result of these ties In 2017, Congress sought to ban taxpayer funds from reaching the charity due to these terror links. A representative from Islamic Relief declined to provide the Free Beacon with any material related to Omar's appearance. "The event was closed to the media. No materials are available," the official said. On Sunday, Omar will hold another meet and greet in Irvine, Calif., for CAIR-CA PAC. Those wishing to hear Omar speak are being asked to donate anywhere from $50 to $250 dollars, according to a flyer for the event. The CAIR event also appears closed to the press. Free Beacon attempts to contact the organizer and obtain access were unsuccessful. Requests for comment on the nature of the speeches sent to Omar's congressional office also were not returned.

It is not unusual or illegal for congressmen to hold "secret" fundraisers that are closed to the public and press. Transparency in fundraising disappeared long ago.

But it's also true that Omar has shown a virulent Jew-hatred and you have to wonder if she's stoking the hate at these events, letting the attendees know that she's "on your side."

Being a black Muslim, she's an untouchable as far as most press criticism goes. Her critics are mostly on the right, with a few brave Democratic Israel supporters chiming in. The fact is, the anti-Semitic wing of the Democratic Party is growing in power and influence as politicians like Omar come out of the closet and enable a more open -- and nauseating -- kind of anti-Semitism.