Blue Wave Looking More Like Crimson Tide for Dems
A newborn conservative says it’s time for the left to just "walk away."

The "resist" movement promoted by progressives like former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Rep. Maxine Waters, D-Calif., is succeeding beyond their imagination — it just isn’t the movement they imagined.

now-viral video. At first glance, Brandon Straka is the stereotypical liberal. He’s young, works in the arts, and lives in New York City. And he’s gay. "Once upon a time, I was a liberal. Well, to be honest, less than a year ago, I was still a liberal," begins Straka in a

Straka says, "I reject a system which allows an ambitious, misinformed and dogmatic mob to suppress free speech, create false narratives, and apathetically steamroll over the truth."

But most of all, Straka declines that which the Democratic Party has been cultivating and peddling to the public in recent years.

Straka concludes, "I reject hate." The video has since been watched by more than 163,000 people. "These are the reasons why I became a liberal. And these are the same reasons why I am now . . . walking away."

Facebook page and And thus was born the #WalkAway movement, with Striker’spage and Twitter account as its hub.

#Independent through the Bush years. Obama was an eight year blank. The hatred and violence the #WalkAway . . . " Soon people by the thousands began telling their own #WalkAway stories — including actor James Woods. "I was a registered Democrat for the greater portion of my voting life," the high-energy actor tweeted . "The #Clintons cinched it for me. I was anthrough the Bush years. Obama was an eight year blank. The hatred and violence the @Democrats now promote convince me I was right to. . . "

Woods’ message was retweeted 27,000 times, was liked by 77,000 people, and garnered 4,500 replies, the majority sharing their own stories of the events that led them to #WalkAway from liberalism — and the Democratic Party.

Many, like Woods, left because of politicians and policies. One serviceman, returning from Vietnam, left the party when he was accosted by a mob at the airport shouting, "How many babies did you kill today, Marine?"

But a significant number of those with stories to tell were recent "walkaways" — and for good reason.

called on supporters to harass Trump administration officials in response to several senior White House members — both women — being run out of public restaurants. Maxine WatersTrump administration officials in response to several senior White House members — both women — being run out of public restaurants.

Waters got a high-five from a journalist in a Washington Post commentary, writing that "Chasing White House officials out of restaurants is the right thing to do."

Tom Arnold vowed to harass the president’s youngest son Barron, stating "We're going to make you uncomfortable." Peter Fonda took it a giant step further and suggested locking Barron in a cage with a pedophile. Actorthe president’s youngest son Barron, stating "We're going to make you uncomfortable." Peter Fondaand suggested locking Barron in a cage with a pedophile.

a 1-minute video depicting just how unhinged the left has become in 2018. The GOP produceddepicting just how unhinged the left has become in 2018.

But what’s just as bad is the hypocrisy.

The Guardian, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton asked, "What is more uncivil than taking children away?" Yet four years earlier she told a CNN town hall that "We have to send a clear message, just because your child gets across the border, that doesn’t mean the child gets to stay." During a recent interview with, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton asked, "What is more uncivil than taking children away?" Yet four years earlier she told athat "We have to send a clear message, just because your child gets across the border, that doesn’t mean the child gets to stay."

announced flat out that "Illegal immigration is wrong" in 2009. Now he’s all tea and sympathy for the children, prompting a new Trump moniker — "Cryin’ Chuck Scumer." Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y.,that "Illegal immigration is wrong" in 2009. Now he’s all tea and sympathy for the children, prompting a new Trump moniker —

It has nothing to do with the White House immigration policy — a policy unchanged for more than 20 years.

observed Turning Point USA founder Charlie Kirk. "These illegal immigrant protests are much more about hating Trump than actually helping children,"Turning Point USA founder Charlie Kirk.

Illegal immigrant children are now the Democratic Party’s soup of the day — a position once held by minorities, then gays, then Muslims. No longer do black lives matter — they got moved to the back of the bus.

And this year it all dawned on Straka that he — and other members of alleged marginalized groups — was being used to collect votes. "I will no longer be part of an ideology or political party that represents everything that contradicts my values of unity, equal opportunity, personal empowerment, compassion, and love," he says at the close of the video. "So I am walking away, and I encourage all of you to do the same."

If Straka and the others are being driven into the arms of the Republican Party and the Trump administration, the Democratic Party’s predicted "blue wave" this November may look more like an Alabama "Crimson Tide."

Michael Dorstewitz is a retired lawyer and has been a frequent contributor to BizPac Review and Liberty Unyielding. He’s also a former U.S. Merchant Marine officer and an enthusiastic Second Amendment supporter, who can often be found honing his skills at the range. To read more of his reports — Click Here Now.