Donald Trump Signs Executive Order Allowing The Hunting Of Bald Eagle…
Donald Trump signed an Executive Order today legalizing the hunting of bald eagles. (AP Photo / Dennis System)

WASHINGTON, D.C. (AP) — Today WASHINGTON, D.C.— Today President Donald Trump made what could very well prove to be the most controversial move of his presidency by signing Executive Order 14841 , which allows the hunting of bald eagles.

Speaking at a White House Press Conference today, Trump explained his decision for making the hunting of the bald eagle legal.

“There’s nothing more American and more of a symbol of freedom, than having the freedom to hunt and kill a bald eagle,” Trump told reporters. “This will allow Americans to take advantage of their “There’s nothing more American and more of a symbol of freedom, than having the freedom to hunt and kill a bald eagle,” Trump told reporters. “This will allow Americans to take advantage of their Second Amendment rights in the most Patriotic way possible. Plus the taste is absolutely tremendous, a great bird, the best tasting bird. I ate one the last time I was in China, absolutely delicious.”

Trump spoke further to reporters about his decision to allow the hunting of bald eagles.

“Honestly, I wish the bald eagle had not been chosen as the representative of our country. He is a bird of bad moral character, very bad. He does not get his living honestly… probably is an illegal too. And because of this we should change the symbol of America, “Honestly, I wish the bald eagle had not been chosen as the representative of our country. He is a bird of bad moral character, very bad. He does not get his living honestly… probably is an illegal too. And because of this we should change the symbol of America, the American Seal , to something more appropriate, something greater, and I can only think of one thing; Trump Towers. They stand for freedom in this country and the potential that every good Christian, God-fearing American has in this country.”

Donald Trump Legalizes The Hunting of Bald Eagles

This Executive Order does not come as a surprise to most environmental activists. 38-year-old Paul Horner, with the This Executive Order does not come as a surprise to most environmental activists. 38-year-old Paul Horner, with the Washington State Department of Ecology , says he disagrees with everything Trump has done since taking office when it comes to protecting the environment.

“There is NOTHING more PATRIOTIC than killing a bald eagle, the symbol of AMERICA! Executive Order 14841 will be GREAT, THE BEST THING EVER!”

Once a common sight in much of the continent, the bald eagle was severely affected in the mid-20th century by a variety of factors, among them the thinning of egg shells attributed to use of the pesticide Once a common sight in much of the continent, the bald eagle was severely affected in the mid-20th century by a variety of factors, among them the thinning of egg shells attributed to use of the pesticide DDT . Bald eagles, like many birds of prey, were especially affected by DDT due to biomagnification . DDT itself was not lethal to the adult bird, but it interfered with the bird’s calcium metabolism, making the bird either sterile or unable to lay healthy eggs. The species was first protected in the U.S. and Canada by the 1918 Migratory Bird Treaty , later extended to all of North America. The Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act , approved by the U.S. Congress in 1940, protected the bald eagle and the golden eagle , prohibiting commercial trapping and killing of the birds. The bald eagle was declared an endangered species in the U.S. in 1967, and amendments to the 1940 act between 1962 and 1972 further restricted commercial uses and increased penalties for violators.

Press Secretary Press Secretary Sean Spicer told reporters details of the bald eagle hunting licenses that will be made available to the public on June 1st, 2017.

“These hunting licenses for the bald eagle will be made available to only those Americans who truly love this country. They must be able to prove that that they are American, and not illegal anchor babies or Muslims. Also, these licenses are free for children under the age of twelve. If you’re not a good, Christian American, don’t even think of getting one of these licenses. These licenses stand for freedom and are not to be abused or used by those who hate America.”

Tom Downey, political activist, told reporters he believes what Trump is doing is wrong, but can be stopped.

“From citizens swarming airports and launching legal challenges to block Trump’s travel ban, to the flooding of town halls, offices and voicemails of Congress across the country to defeat the disastrous roll back of our healthcare rights, on many fronts right now massive citizen mobilization is winning! The Trump Administration “From citizens swarming airports and launching legal challenges to block Trump’s travel ban, to the flooding of town halls, offices and voicemails of Congress across the country to defeat the disastrous roll back of our healthcare rights, on many fronts right now massive citizen mobilization is winning! The Trump Administration calls Climate Change a hoax and a waste ! But when we show up together we have tremendous power, let’s never forget it!”

Sarah Bradley, a spokeswoman for Sarah Bradley, a spokeswoman for Sock It Forward , a group that provides the homeless and those less fortunate with brand new socks, spoke to reporters about Trump’s decision to legalize the hunting of bald eagles in this country.

“This is a great first step in the war against masturbation in this great Christian nation of ours! The bald eagle is an extremely sexy looking bird and only brings out deviant behavior in the Atheists, Devil Worshippers, non-normals and the heathens of this country. Way to go Donald Trump, you are legendary! Praise!”

The Trump Administration has setup a hotline for those wishing to voice any concerns or comments over the new bald eagle hunting licenses that will be made available next month. That hotline’s phone number is (785) 273-0329.