Questions and Answers
What form or forms of medical assistance in dying would be permitted?

The amendments would allow two types of medical assistance in dying: where a physician or nurse practitioner directly administers a substance that causes the death of the person who has requested it - commonly called voluntary euthanasia; and where a physician or nurse practitioner gives or prescribes to a person a substance that they can self-administer to cause their own death - commonly known as physician-(or medically-) assisted suicide.

Would all patients be able to choose which type of medical assistance in dying they want?

The criminal law would permit physicians and nurse practitioners to provide both types of medical assistance in dying. Provinces and territories could decide, under their health jurisdiction, to make additional rules about one or both practices.

Does the person have to be dying from a fatal or terminal disease to be eligible?

No. Any mentally competent adult who has a serious and incurable illness, disease or disability, who is in an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability, who is suffering intolerably, and whose death has become reasonably foreseeable, should have access to medical assistance in dying, by making a voluntary request giving informed consent. It is not required that the person be suffering from a fatal disease that will cause their death. Rather, the legislation expressly states that death must be “reasonably foreseeable, taking into account all of their medical circumstances,” which could include considerations of age or frailty, and the interaction of several different medical conditions which may cause the person to be in a life-threatening condition. This language was deliberately chosen to avoid limiting assistance to those suffering from fatal or “terminal” conditions, and to allow everyone who is in suffering while in decline toward the end of life to have the option of choosing a medically-assisted death.

Would psychological suffering meet the test for eligibility?

Yes. A person would need to be suffering unbearably as a result of their medical circumstances, and both physical pain and psychological suffering can justify a request for medical assistance in dying. However, a patient would still need to meet all of the other eligibility criteria.

Why is the proposed law only available to adults?

At this time, not enough is known about the risks and benefits of medical assistance in dying for minors. The trial judge in Carter found that, to the degree that there was a societal consensus on eligibility for medical assistance in dying, it was limited to mentally competent or capable adults. This approach responds directly to the Supreme Court’s ruling in Carter: “The appropriate remedy is therefore a declaration that p. 241 (b) and s. 14 of the Criminal Code are void insofar as they prohibit physician-assisted death for a competent adult person who (1) clearly consents to the termination of life; and (2) has a grievous and irremediable medical condition (including an illness, disease or disability) that causes enduring suffering that is intolerable to the individual in the circumstances of his or her condition. “Irremediable”, it should be added, does not require the patient to undertake treatments that are not acceptable to the individual. The scope of this declaration is intended to respond to the factual circumstances in this case. We make no pronouncement on other situations where physician-assisted dying may be sought.” However, the Government would also initiate an independent review of the special considerations related to requests for medical assistance in dying by mature minors within 180 days of the legislation receiving Royal Assent.

Why not offer medical assistance in dying for mature minors?

The Carter ruling was limited to adults (see paragraph 127 of the decision). There was no evidence before the Court about assessing a minor’s ability to make a decision involving terminating their life, nor about how medical practitioners might respond to such cases. The Supreme Court of Canada expressly acknowledged that the issue of medical assistance in dying for minors was not part of the factual circumstances being considered by the Court (paragraph 111 of the decision). However, if Bill C-14 passes in Parliament, the government would initiate an independent review to study the legal, medical and ethical issues related to medical assistance in dying for mature minors and in other contexts within 180 days of the legislation receiving Royal Assent. This will enable the development of the approach to this study, and the study itself, to be informed by the considerations and perspectives that will be expressed during the Parliamentary study of the Bill.

When will the federal government mandate the independent studies of other issues, such as requests by mature minors, advance requests and requests when mental illness is the sole underlying medical condition?

The federal government would initiate these reviews within 180 days of the legislation receiving Royal Assent. This would allow Parliamentary and other perspectives expressed during the study of the Bill to inform the approach to these studies, and the studies themselves.

Would patients have to be mentally competent or capable at the time that medical assistance in dying would be provided?

Yes. Just before the physician or nurse practitioner could provide medical assistance in dying — whether in the form of administering, providing or prescribing a lethal substance — they would need to confirm with the patient that they are still sure that this is what they want. It is very important that the patient be able to withdraw their consent for medical assistance in dying at any time.

Why is it important to ensure that requests are voluntary?

The requirement that the request be “voluntary” is another way of saying that the person who would receive medical assistance in dying must decide to request it for themselves, without any pressure from any other person. The Supreme Court of Canada found that the right to choose medical assistance in dying belongs only to the competent adult who would receive it. This requirement is also necessary to protect vulnerable people.

Would Kay Carter have been eligible under the Bill C-14 criteria?

As noted in the Supreme Court’s decision in Carter , “Kay was diagnosed in 2008 with spinal stenosis, a condition that results in the progressive compression of the spinal cord. By mid-2009, her physical condition had deteriorated to the point that she required assistance with virtually all of her daily activities. She had extremely limited mobility and suffered from chronic pain.” (para 17). Kay Carter was 89 years old when she went to Switzerland to obtain assisted dying. Under the proposed legislation, two independent health care professionals would need to evaluate the circumstances of a patient’s health. The circumstances of Kay Carter could have been found to meet the following four eligibility criteria to receive medical assistance in dying: Having a serious and incurable illness, disease or disability; Being in an advanced state of irreversible decline; Enduring physical or psychological suffering that was intolerable to her; and, Her natural death had become reasonably foreseeable, taking into account all of her medical circumstances, without a prognosis necessarily having been made as to the specific length of time left to live. (it is not required that death be caused by any particular disease or condition - it can include considerations of age or frailty, and all other relevant health considerations).

Why not offer medical assistance in dying for those suffering solely from a mental illness?

People with a mental illness would be eligible for medical assistance in dying, as long as they met all of the People with a mental illness would be eligible for medical assistance in dying, as long as they met all of the eligibility criteria Where death is not reasonably foreseeable in all of the circumstances of the person’s medical condition or where their mental illness renders them incompetent to make medical decisions, people with psychiatric conditions would not be able to access medical assistance in dying, because they would not meet all of the eligibility criteria. In terms of the Carter ruling there was no evidence before the Court about the specific considerations and complexities regarding medical assistance in dying for people suffering solely from amental illness, and no witnesses or parties to the case were in such circumstances. In fact, the Court said at paragraph 111, in regards to evidence from Belgium: “a number of recent, controversial and high-profile cases of assistance in dying in Belgium ... would not fall within the parameters suggested in these reasons, such as euthanasia for minors or persons with psychiatric disorders...”. Medical assistance in dying for people suffering solely from a mental illness involves a unique range of considerations and concerns, and more study is needed to determine the relative benefits and risks associated with permitting assistance in dying in this context in Canada. If Bill C-14 passes in Parliament, the government is proposing an independent study be conducted of the legal, medical and ethical issues related to medical assistance in dying for those suffering from a mental illness alone. This would enable the development of the approach to this study, and the study itself, to be informed by the considerations and perspectives that will be expressed during the Parliamentary study of the Bill.

Why not allow advance directives for medical assistance in dying?