Transgender rapes little girl in a bathroom; Media silent... | RedFla…
Exodus 21:16 dictates the death penalty for kidnappers. Because every rape constitutes a kidnapping, under a biblical law, if convicted, this man should not be put in prison at innocent taxpayers' expense. He should be put to death expeditiously, per Ecclesiastes 8:11.

That the innocent (including this child's parents) are liable for the housing, clothing, feeding, and entertainment of society's criminals in an unbiblical penal system is but more evidence of the biblically seditious nature of America's Constitutional Republic. Time to get back to our true biblical foundations as evidenced in 17th-century Puritan America.

Under the Bible's juridical system prisons are superfluous. Convicted capital criminals are put to death expeditiously, per Ecclesiastes 8:11. Non-capital criminal are required to pay two to five times restitution (depending upon the nature of the crime) to their VICTIMS, per Exodus 22:1ff, etc. If a thief is unable to pay the required restitution, he's to be sold into indentured servitude until restitution has been paid, per Exodus 22:3. If he refuses to pay restitution, his contempt of court is a

capital crime for which he's to be put to death expeditiously, per Deuteronomy 7:9-13.

Perfect, just like King David said it was in Psalm 19:7-11. Under such a system, crime would be all but unheard of and tax-paid-for prisons would non-existent.

For more on how Yahweh's triune moral law (His Ten Commandments and their respective statutes and judgments) applies and should be implemented today, see

free online book "Law and Kingdom: Their Relevance Under the New Covenant." Click on my name, then our website. Go to our Online Books page and scroll down to title.

Then find out how much you really know about the Constitution as compared to the Bible. Take our 10-question Constitution Survey in the right-hand sidebar and receive a complimentary copy of a book that examines the Constitution by the Bible.