Grandpa Nearly Dies after Girl Unplugs His Life Support So She Can Ch…
A 26-year-old woman nearly caused the untimely death of her grandfather after she unplugged his life support but the action wasn’t really intentional because she had *only* wanted to charge her phone!

This could go down in history as one of the stupidest things a person could ever do but 26-year-old Ally Louia didn’t feel the least bit remorseful, saying she was also experiencing a critical emergency when the phone’s battery nearly died.

" “ Let’s see: my phone was at 1%, which can be described as a critical situation. Besides, my mother asked me to text her how my grandpa was doing right after getting to the hospital, so I had to do it ,” Louia argued.

Ugh. Can someone please tell this girl what a ‘critical situation’ means?

But Louia wasn’t finished defending herself from bashers who called her crazy for unplugging her grandpa’s life support just so she could charge her phone. In fact, she argued that not only did she use the phone to text her mom but she also managed to take photos of her grandpa to send her mom as update of his condition.

At the time, the old man was already turning blue from lack of oxygen but Louia didn’t feel the least bit concerned as she thought his strange color was due to an Instagram filter she applied in taking the photos.

Didn’t she even bother to check if he was alright? What’s worse is that she pinned the blame on her Instagram followers who didn’t send her a warning.

" “ People could have also warned me, instead of just tapping ‘Like’ ,” she accused.

As the old man lay gasping for breath, Louia didn’t do anything to help him because she thought that was just normal. Thankfully, he was able to reach the call button for the nurses’ station. Naturally, they were angry over what the old man’s granddaughter did.

" “ They freaked out when they realized that the respirator was turned off. I asked them if there was another socket in the room but they didn’t answer. I think it’s unfair that there was only one socket ,” the young lady whined.

Of course, her family was furious! Who wouldn’t be? She nearly killed her grandpa due to her carelessness. But she was unfazed.

" “ I understand your anger and I share it. But we gotta look for solutions. We either buy one of those external batteries for my phone or we buy another one ,” Louia said with much hope.

Do you think she should be sent to jail for her careless actions?