Husband Of Trump-Hater Samantha Bee Is Fighting To Keep Poor Black Kids Out Of His Kid’s School. OOPS!
getsocial-loaded 15.4k Shares

In case you’ve been blissfully unaware of who Samantha Bee is, she’s a Canadian-American comedian, writer and “media critic” (whatever that is). She’s made a name for herself as an outspoken objector to everything conservative and or Trump-related, espousing an all inclusive and socialist friendly platform for her stand-up routine.

This makes it especially curious that when the question of integrating Bee’s ritzy neighborhood school, her family would fight it.

Samantha Bee's husband is fighting the introduction of low income, minority children to their kids' school. Samantha Bee's husband is fighting the introduction of low income, minority children to their kids' school. https://t.co/90wLjHJjRj — Ellen L. Carmichael (@ellencarmichael) — Ellen L. Carmichael (@ellencarmichael) April 30, 2017

Via Via Slate

The Upper West Side is another place where the “rights” of rich parents are being pitted against the reality of the neighborhood’s demographics. The current battleground is the sought-after P.S. 452 on West 77th Street, a stone’s throw from the Museum of Natural History.

Like so many public schools in New York City, P.S. 452 has a lopsided enrollment, with a population that’s Like so many public schools in New York City, P.S. 452 has a lopsided enrollment, with a population that’s three-quarters white and Asian , with only 13 percent of kids qualifying for free lunch, in a district that’s 43 percent white and Asian and 48 percent low-income, according to a Chalkbeat story on the brewing controversy.

One P.S. 452 parent speaking out against the move is comedian and former Daily Show correspondent Jason Jones, who’s married to Samantha Bee. “To portray any opposition as classist or racist is as bad as it can get,” Jones told One P.S. 452 parent speaking out against the move is comedian and former Daily Show correspondent Jason Jones, who’s married to Samantha Bee. “To portray any opposition as classist or racist is as bad as it can get,” Jones told WNYC . And elsewhere: “We are not divided,” he said at a public hearing about the proposal, “we are absolutely united in wanting what’s best for our children,” then encouraged fellow parents not to talk to the press about the controversy.

This is such a noble cause, wanting what’s best for your kids, I know I want what’s best for mine. The difference being that I’m honest with people about the true reasons behind what I do. I also don’t say that what’s best for your kids isn’t best for my kids. If unfettered illegal immigration is so great and Trump’s deportation plan is so bad, then you shouldn’t have a problem with those immigrants being around your kids.

That’s what’s known as putting your money where your mouth is . . . what’s good for the goose is good for the gander . . . stop me when something rings a bell. But I guess if you’re a low-income family in that neck of the woods they’re more of the “float like a butterfly, sting like a Bee” kind of people.