Weather Weapon Attack: Fire From the Sky in Michigan – Energy Weapon or Meteor? (Video)

Wednesday, January 17, 2018 5:54

% of readers think this story is Fact. Add your two cents.

The Rod of God. A Directed Energy Weapon. Main stream presstituts will have you believe this was a meteor, a meteor that fell at a perfect 90* angle. SMH.. This just happened a few hours ago in Taylor, Michigan. 01/16/18

This energy blast was seen and heard in 4 US states and Canada.

The United States Geological Survey reports a 2.0 magnitude earthquake at 8:09 p.m. January 16, 2018 – exactly the same time a meteor flashed through the sky in Michigan.

The earthquake was a very weak earthquake having what is called a “local magnitude” (Ml) of 2.0. This USGS map shows a “meteorite” notation for the quake. A 2.0 magnitude earthquake would not be felt by humans.

This is confusing because all the Meteor videos I can find for this day on YouTube show something else entirely than these photographs. The videos show like a regular ole meteor going thru the air. But these pictures show a percise ray of energy beamed down lighting the ground on fire. Could this be the same tech causing the wildfires all over the USA aka California etc? I don’t know. That is why I am sharing this for discussion.

Just In.. The meteor visuals from the news reports and videos do not line up with the pictures above. Seems like two seperate incidents on the same day. I’m trying to get to the bottom of it. Here is another picture of the incident taken from an African American woman’s drive way of the same incident! What the hell is it?

Look What I Found! Are the meteor and fire two seperate incidents?

Police: 4 people die, including 2 kids, in Detroit-area fire

ROSE TOWNSHIP, Mich. (AP) — Police say four people, including two children, have died in a fire at a home in suburban Detroit.

Michigan State Police say two other people were seriously injured in the fire early Tuesday in Oakland County’s Rose Township. Police say the injured were taken to a hospital for treatment and at least one had severe burns. The cause of the fire wasn’t immediately known.

The North Oakland County Fire Authority says a man and woman believed to be in their mid-20s died along with the children. Names weren’t immediately released.

State police spokesman Lt. Mike Shaw tells WWJ-AM that a neighbor called 911 to report the fire. He says the home about 40 miles northwest of Detroit was engulfed in flames by the time crews arrived.

I host the Church of Mabus radio show and it is going on 8 years. I’ve been in the paranormal community for 20 years. I provide content from a network of sources and guests and allies. Ranging from Politics to the Paranormal and the Spiritual. You can check out my other articles here at my BIOGRAPHY at BIN and you can check out my free radio show at this link HERE. Thanks for showing your support and stopping by.