Mariah Carey records shock cover of Dead Kennedy’s ‘Nazi Punks Fuck Off’ in support of ANTIFA
Born again Christian pop singer and self styled “voice of the MTV generation” Mariah Carey, has sent shock waves through tin pan alley with the announcement that she has recorded a cover of the Dead Kennedy’s “Nazi Punks Fuck Off” to be released as a single and with the proceeds to be donated to US anti Fascist action group ANTIFA.

The shock release is slated to be available as MP3 and Flac downloads as well as CD single and a strictly limited edition vinyl double single in red vinyl featuring bonus covers of “California Über Alles” and “Too Drunk to Fuck”.

A spokesman for Ms Carey confirmed that the singer, who is descended from immigrants of mixed African American, Venezuelan and Irish descent had been particularly affected by coverage of the recent anti white supremacist protests in Charlottesville and felt obliged to speak out.

“Mariah may be best known for producing some of the most dismally bland commercial music of the past two decades and for dating obscenely rich men but she feels this is the time to make a break with the past and embark on a new stage in her career,” he explained. The spokesman confirmed that plans are far advanced for Carey to do a nationwide tour of small club venues with a four piece backing band. “We can’t confirm the line up yet but East Bay Ray has said he’s up for it, and (Ex Hüsker Dü guitarist) Bob Mould is interested,” he added.

He also declined to confirm rumours that Carey had recorded a version of the Toy Dolls take on the classic childen’s song “Nellie the Elephant”, noted for its raucus chorus of “TRUMP ! TRUMP ! TRUMP!” to be released the moment the already disgraced president is impeached.

News of the shock release has been taken by many to confirm long standing rumours that Carey had been secretly dating former Kennedy’s front man Eric Boucher, better known under his stage name Jello Biafra.

The former singer turned spoken word artist and outspoken atheist represents a marked contrast to Ms Carey’s previous paramours who include former husbands; billionaire head of Sony Music, Tommy Mottola and TV presenter and impresario Nick Canon. Carey also dated Australian multi Billionaire and cricket fan James Packer.

However the pair famously broke off their engagement following a bitter argument over a contested LBW decision in the second test of the 2016 West Indies tour of Australia.