Now THIS is controversial!!! Please... - Hebrew Israelite Community |…
Now THIS is controversial!!!

Please note that I do not for one second agree with the Nazi concentration camps and the innocent lives that were shed! Men, women and children were slaughtered and it was so wrong. May their souls RIP.

This post is not about agreeing with what Hitler did, no reasonable person would. He without a doubt was a wicked man.

This post is about the fact that He knew who the Hebrew Israelites are! If he knows then the ruling class that rule the world clearly know too.

THEY KNOW THE POWER WE HAVE IN US............. ISRAEL WE NEED TO WAKE UP and prepare our selves for the SECOND EXODUS!!!

"In a book titled, “The Nazis World War II”, by Robert Edwin Herzstein, published by Time Life Books, there is the following quote apparently said by Hitler himself!

Hitler said even in his death that he will start World War 3. One of his soldiers asked, “how?” Hitler replied, “The day mankind finds out that I was trying to defend this nation, Germany, from then that is the day # WorldWar3 will start. For on that day, mankind will learn that I was trying to save my Nation from the Free Masons, the Illuminati, and the Jews. For if the Americans wins the war, then they will conquer the world and forever be a slave to the Jews, and they will try to conquer God. Do you know who America has in its possession?“ he asked. “No”, the solider replied. The Americans have the Jewels Of God. The Americans have stolen God’s Precious Jewels.” he said. “What Do You Mean His Precious Jewels?” the soldier asked. Hitler replied, “America has stolen the Jews. The Jews Of God. His Jewelry. The # Negroes . They are the true # Hebrew ’s. What a foolish move and a direct challenge to God, and they plan on moving these false white Jews into a state of Israel"

Revelation 2:9 says, “I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan.”

I haven't read this book but will be ordering it and carrying out some research. Feel free to share your thoughts.

Has anyone read this book?