ANTIFA Website Planning Nationwide Anarchy On November 4th – Anonymous
ANTIFA are planning a nationwide day of riots on November 4th, which they say will force President Trump out of office.

[ynw] According to two ANTIFA-based websites, plans are being made to end the “Trump/Pence regime” via acts of violence and terrorism across the United States. According to two ANTIFA-based websites, plans are being made to end the “Trump/Pence regime” via acts of violence and terrorism across the United States.

Don’t be caught flatfooted. Call your congressman, senator, sheriff, mayor’s office and ask them: “What are you going to do to ensure these domestic terrorists don’t get away with killing more Americans?”

This Nightmare Must End: The Trump/Pence Regime Must Go!

Who should attend this conference? Students and youth, the faith community, representatives of organizations and people who are unaffiliated, artists and professionals, long-time activists and folks who have never protested before – everyone who wants to see the nightmare of the Trump/Pence Regime end and is willing to act together to accomplish this. We will start organizing now for:NOVEMBER 4, 2017

Take To The Streets And Public Squares in cities and towns across the country continuing day after day and night after night—not stopping—until our DEMAND is met.

ON NOVEMBER 4, 2017:

We will gather in the streets and public squares of cities and towns across this country, at first many thousands declaring that this whole regime is illegitimate and that we will not stop until our single demand is met: This Nightmare Must End: the Trump/Pence Regime Must Go!

Our protest must grow day after day and night after night—thousands becoming hundreds of thousands, and then millions—determined to act to put a stop to the grave danger that the Trump/Pence Regime poses to the world by demanding that this whole regime be removed from power.

Sat, August 19, 2017 Organizing Conferences.

This Nightmare Must End: The Trump/Pence Regime Must Go! In the Name of Humanity, We REFUSE to Accept a Fascist America! Regional Conferences in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Austin, hosted by RefuseFascism.org

Come Get Organized for nation-wide protests that begin November 4th and continue – night after night and day after day, growing from thousands to hundreds of thousands to millions – until our demand is met: This Nightmare Must End: The Trump/Pence Regime Must Go! Millions feel that the Trump/Pence Regime is truly a nightmare and ache with the question of how to stop this unrelenting horror. The stakes are nothing less than the future of humanity and the planet itself.

The list:



New York City

12:00 pm – 6:00 pm

LGBT Center 208 West 13th Street NYC

646-851-6785, NYC@refusefascism.org

Austin, Texas

11:00 am – 5:00 pm

Location information will be sent upon registration

Austin@refusefascism.org, Texas@refusefascism.org

Chicago, Illinois

10:00 am – 5:00 pm

Trinity Episcopal Church 125 E. 26th Street Chicago

312-933-9586, Chicago@refusefascism.org

Los Angeles

1:00 pm – 7:00 pm

Location information will be sent upon registration

323-946-1742, SoCal@refusefascism.org,

San Francisco

11:00 am – 5:00 pm Saturday, Aug. 19

11am-5pm

Mission Cultural Center for the Latino Arts, 2868 Mission St. (1 block from 24th St. BART station), San Francisco.

510-253-5551, norcal@refusefascism.org

Please take a second to share this warning so patriots and innocent people in these cities know what to look out for and when.

Related Items: antifa