Chuck Callesto
this is not my story it came from another Facebook post.



This girl is not who she is claiming to be. She went to Roanoke college and majored in childhood education and sociology. This plays an important role in her job choices. She was fired from 3 di

fferent daycares and had to be escorted out of one of them by the police because she threw a fit and locked herself into a room with the children.



She then worked for Craig county DSS. She had shoddy work performance and was very dramatic and didn't carry the values of the agency. I am unsure if she got fired or resigned because she knew what was coming, but she came over to Roanoke city dss.



She was a nightmare and would not listen to any redirection and was unethical in her approach to child welfare. She always wanted to remove children and that is always the last resort if possible.



In her videos she stated that she got intro trouble because she had to bring a coworker back to the office when she wanted to respond to an emergency. We are not first responders like she says. We cannot make people open the door for us, we can't give first aid, we can't take children without a proper procedure. She stated that the child's life was in danger and she needed to be there. The cops report first to any danger in life. That in itself tells you that she didn't understand our job or the scope of it. Nor did she understand the delicacy of it. She was unable to accept instructions and when she was corrected, she would throw royal fits and lock herself into an abandoned office and scream and cry like a toddler.



Her and her boyfriend broke up for a few days in January after she downloaded the Tinder app and got caught. He told her to get her stuff out of their house. She went dancing at sidewinders with a coworker. While there, she was dancing all up on a married man and pissed the wife off. The wife poured beer on her head and a scuffle ensued and Storm was pushed to the ground and got a busted lip. When she was outside talking to the cops, she was drunk and yelling that she worked for dss and was a cps worker and therefore shouldn't get in trouble. She called the (ex)bf and he showed up and starting threatening the coworker, saying he would slit her throat.



This was reported to the agency and that is why there was concern about there being domestic violence in the home and they were trying to see if she needed help.



It was also reported to the agency that one of the times when she was reprimanded by the person training her, her bf showed up in the back parking lot and someone overheard him saying he had his gun on him. Allegedly he also followed this person down to sheetz. Storm never reported this, but it was reported by another worker.



That is why she was escorted out by police. She is unstable and it was unknown if her bf would show back up with a gun if she was allowed time to call him. Also based on her previous behavior, it was unknown if she had her gun on her or in her vehicle and that is why she was a serious threat to the building.



No one wants an unhinged, hysterical person around children that have already been through trauma. Even less so an unhinged, hysterical person with a gun.



I am very pro second amendment. She gives us all a very bad name. When her story comes out, just imagine how the media will run with this.