Stillness in the Storm : Benjamin Fulford -- March 31st 2017: Obama A…
All data is freely available to the ALL, as an inherent inalienable right of consciousness and existence, for the use of any being in creation. No Claim of Ownership is made by SITS, for any data presented on this page or elsewhere.





Any information, writing, photographs, videos or content on this page is freely available to ALL without claim of Intellectual Ownership. We advise providing attribution to this website (Stillness in the Storm) when, and if, data herein presented is used elsewhere; so as to remain honest, transparent and to maintain the public trust as to where the information was found.





Any and All data herein presented has been re-claimed for the collective benefit of all sentient life from any and all parties who seek to limit its dissemination. Any claims of intellectual ownership or copyright, that were once ascribed to content on this page, or elsewhere, is NULL and VOID; as a result of a misrepresentation of right of ownership and breach of trust by any party whom presumes to claim title and exclusive right of use.





No requests, threats, or notices which seek to limit the sharing information for the benefit of ALL will be honored. However, a humble request to provide information in a certain way or form will be considered, up to and including, the partial removal of data, and only as an agreement between 2 honorable parties whom fully disclose and honor a moral duty to the truth.





FAIR USE NOTICE:



This site contains copyrighted material the use of which has not always been specifically authorized by the copyright owner. It is being made available in an effort to advance the understanding of environmental, political, human rights, economic, democracy, scientific, and social justice issues, and so on. It is believed that this constitutes a 'fair use' of any such copyrighted material as provided for in section 107 of the US Copyright Law. In accordance with Title 17 U.S.C. Section 107, the material on this site is distributed without profit to those who have expressed a prior interest in receiving the included information for research and educational purposes.



In this respect we are in accordance with the statutes as well as Natural Law. ﻿