Loud-Mouth Liberal Ashley Judd Wants To Live In Middle East Where Women Have ‘MORE RIGHTS’
36K Like

KIRSTERS BAISH| Here we go again with another liberal celebrity making headlines for their complete and udder stupidity. What else is new? Ashley Judd isn’t a stranger to the limelight for reasons that are not so savory. Judd has made it clear over the years that she believes that not only are women equal to men, but apparently, they should be treated better than men. She has proved time and time again that her viewpoints place men as second-class citizens.

When Judd showed up at the Women’s March this year she let her pie-hole fly off the handle, making herself sound like a total dumbass.







However, it was a tweet that she wrote that has her in hot water this time. Judd made a rookie mistake in trusting in numbers to prove her invalid point when she claimed that the Middle East allowed women more rights than the United States does. Wow Ashley, I thought you were dumb before, but this is gold.

Judd was imprudent enough to post that “the U.S. ranks 104th , behind countries like Burundi. Serbia, and Iraq” when posting about women’s rights. I hate to be the one to break it to you Ash, but that statement is outright incorrect. CNN should think about offering Judd a job since she’s so into delivering fake news.

The big question on all of our minds now is “when is this crazy bitch’s flight to Iraq?” I think I can speak for all of those reading this when I say that we would all be more than happy to help Ms. Judd pack her bags for her big move to the Middle East, where according to her, women have more rights than they do in the U.S. You’re probably holding back laughter right now at the udder thought of how stupid someone has to be to make a statement like that, which is totally fine! In case you’re looking for another laugh, take a look at Judd’s speech from the Women’s March.

Here’s to hoping that Ms. Judd finds her way out of the country that she hates so much along with all of the other celebrities who have claimed in recent months that they would be leaving the U.S. Maybe we can stick them all on one plane. God knows the U.S. would be better off without them!

.