U.S. Air Force Just Called 1,000 Retired Pilots Back Into Service Under Powers Granted In Trump’s New Executive Order
President Trump signed a expands the power of the Federal government to call back any retired service member into service, and it is already being used. The Air Force is recalling at least 1,000 retired pilots per year to active duty, due to a “shortage”, according to the White House and Pentagon. President Trump signed a new executive order today, that dramaticallythe power of the Federal government to call backany retired service memberinto service, and it isbeing used. The Air Force is recalling at least 1,000 retired pilotsper yearto active duty, due to a “shortage”, according to the White House and Pentagon.

Before Trump signed his new order today, only 25 pilots could be recalled into service every year. “We anticipate that the Secretary of Defense will delegate the authority to the Secretary of the Air Force to recall up to 1,000 retired pilots for up to three years,” Navy Cdr. Gary Ross, a Pentagon spokesman, said in a statement.

Senator Lindsey Graham, (R-S.C.) hailed this executive order and literally announced that the United States will be expanding military operations around the globe. “The war is morphing,” Graham said, “You’re going to see more actions in Africa, not less. You’re going to see more aggression by the United States toward our enemies, not less. You’re going to have decisions made not in the White House but out in the field. And I support that entire construct.”

Trump’s new Executive Order Trump’s new Executive Order amends Executive Order 13223, which was issued by former President George W Bush on September 14, 2001 , and essentially started official preparations for war following the terrorist attacks on 9/11.

It is too early to say whether we are truly headed for war, as only Trump knows that for sure, but this new Executive Order, and the Air Force recalling pilots, reasonably gives one pause. People are reasonably worried because president Trump has publicly talked about war with North Korea, going as far as threatening them with “fire and fury.”

There is also the fact that this administration seems to be the most dishonest in memory. The Air Force and the White House are claiming that they are only recalling pilots because of a shortage, but it could just as easily be preparations for war with Iran or North Korea. We just can’t trust the reasons they are giving for these concerning actions.

They are claiming a pilot shortage that is so extreme, that they cannot up recruitment and run additional flight schools for new recruits? They really need 1,000 retired pilots per year back enlisted? This looks a lot like a ramp up to conflict, where they realized they were under time constraints. This is not good at all.

Comments