Trump Orders to Remove Obama Highway Name and Put This New Highway Name ? Do you support him?
Sometimes most of us rush to disregard the importance of names. With so many new things being created every day, things of the past can be perceived as “less relevant”. But, it’s for this same reason that names also have one valuable role. They allow us to preserve our legacy and heritage.

Highway located in Riviera Beach, Florida is officially being renamed as “President Barack Obama Highway”.

Over the last few months, we have heard how liberals have tried to desecrate the history of our ancestors by trying to remove Confederate monuments from our cities. Now they are going a step further and they are trying to remove the name “Dixie” from our history.

Highway located in Riviera Beach, Florida is officially being renamed as “President Barack Obama Highway”. The change was decided after city officials concluded the old name was “racist and offensive”. They believe that by changing it to “Obama”, they will get a clean slate on history.

“(The street is) symbolic of racism, symbolic of the clan, symbolic of cross burnings and today we are stepping up to a new day, a new era,” said the mayor of Riviera Beach.

While it was indeed true that in the past there was some KKK activity in the Riviera Beach and the major may want to distance themselves from that. To believe that they can hold the name “Dixie “accountable for such history borders between insult and stupidity.

There is nothing racist with either “Dixie” or Confederate monuments. They are part of the American history and are part of a rich culture that goes beyond whatever bad liberals may want to attach to it.

To arbitrarily decide that President Obama may be more relevant to American History than hundreds of years of heritage is ludicrous. On top of that, Obama has never done anything for equality in America.

Obama’s self-claim of representing “African Americans” while sharing no heritage or culture has probably been the most racist proclamation of modern politics.

For those who believe he is a role model for Afro Americans. He was raised by outside the country, and his black heritage comes from his Kenyan father who abandoned him. He was raised by a white couple and never understood any of the racial conflicts in this country.

It’s time that people stopped trying to use public stunts like this to “foster unity”. A real sense of unity can only come from sharing common goals and improving together throughout generations. Renaming a heritage street with the name of the worst president of American History is not proof of anything.