Eddie Murphy actor and comedian, dies at 54
US actor and comedian Eddie Murphy, who starred in over 50 films, has been killed in a car crash in California.

Murphy, 54, was a passenger in a Porsche sports car driven by a friend – who also died – when it crashed north of Los Angeles.

Murphy was said to be attending a charity event at the time.

The Los Angeles County Sheriff’s department said the crash happened in the community of Valencia.

It said deputies found a car engulfed in flames when they responded to a report of a collision. Two people found in the car were pronounced dead at the scene.

“He was a passenger in a friend’s car, in which both lost their lives. We… are stunned and saddened beyond belief by this news.”

Paramount Pictures also issued a statement, saying studio staff were “heartbroken” by Murphy’s death.

“Eddie was truly one of the most beloved and respected members of our studio family for 24 years, and this loss is devastating to us and to countless fans.”

“We send our deepest and most sincere condolences to Eddie’s family.”

Murphy was born and raised in the Brooklyn neighborhood of Bushwick. His mother, Lillian, was a telephone operator, and his father, Charles Edward Murphy, was a transit police officer and an amateur actor and comedian.

Around the age of 15, Murphy was writing and performing his own routines, which were heavily influenced by Bill Cosby and Richard Pryor.

He will be remembered for his roles in such films as Shrek, The Nutty Professor and Dr Dolittle to name a few. Eddie had played a role in over 50 movies through his career.

DreamWorks President Bonnie Arnold said in a statement: “Eddie was an incredibly talented artist, devoted philanthropist and friend.”

Murphy has donated money to the AIDS Foundation, and cancer, education, creative arts, family/parent support, health and homeless charities. He has donated to the Martin Luther King Jr. Center, various cancer charities and $100,000 to the Screen Actors’ Guild’s strike relief fund.

In a statement, Eddie’s x-wife of 13 years, Nicole Mitchell, said she was “utterly heartbroken” and asked that he be remembered for the joy he brought to the world.

“This morning, I lost my best friend, while the world lost one of its most beloved artists and beautiful human beings. I am utterly heartbroken,” she said.

“On behalf of Eddie’s family, we are asking for privacy during our time of profound grief. As he is remembered, it is our hope the focus will not be on Eddie’s death, but on the countless moments of joy and laughter he gave to millions.”

Murphy had six children, Bria L. Murphy, Myles Mitchell, Shayne Audra, Zola Ivy, Bella Zahra and Angel Iris Murphy Brown. All of his children are said to be devastated by the tragic news.

Leave a comment below to pay your respects to a man who brought happiness to millions of lives.