[ วาดรูปเศรษฐกิจพอเพียง ] วิถีไทยแบบพอเพียง โดย SufficientEconomyDraw…
1. Use the correct title formatting. The title formatting is outlined above. Make sure to follow it or else your post will be removed. Do not add any extraneous information or be subjective in your title.

2. Please add flair to your post. Click on the red "Please Add Flair to Your Post" button after you post, and select whether it is an "Artwork," "Article," "Discussion," etc. If you are looking for constructive criticism, please add the "Artwork CC" flair.

3. Give credit to the artist. Add the artist's name to the title and provide a link to their site in the comments whenever possible.

4. Do not link to blogs or content rehosting sites. Please only use reputable news sites featuring recent news related to the art world.

5. Do not make multiple posts, make an album instead. Please do not re-post your work unless otherwise told to.

6. Do not submit sketches, doodles or unfinished work. Post these to other subreddits like /r/IDAP, /r/sketches and /r/doodles instead. If you need advice, post it as a self post. Please try not to include pens, paints, pencils, or anything else extraneous to the art.

7. Do not post memes. Also,those who post melted crayon 'art' will be banished.

8. Do not request tattoos or artwork commissions, or link to pages selling art. These pages should be submitted to /r/artstore, /r/designjobs or /r/artisangifts.

9. Leave comments that contribute to discussion. Try to add to the conversation in a meaningful way. If you have nothing to contribute but like the post, then upvote the post instead. Comments that don't add to the conversation may be subject to removal.

10. If you want to critique a post, be constructive and follow Reddiquette. Don't engage in personal attacks, hate speech or racism, and do not complain about downvotes.

11. Mods reserve the right to remove submissions that aren't high quality. This refers both to the quality of the submission and quality of the photograph. We realize this is subjective, so consider posting in /r/IDAP or one of the other art related subreddits listed here if you're not sure.

★ Feel free to add user flair! Please edit your flair to tell us your qualifications or specialty, but follow the guidelines. Using non /r/art related flair will result in a ban.

★ If your post doesn't show up... it may have been caught in the spam filter. Please message the moderators and we'll be happy to look into it.