Lesson 5: The Wealth Tax of 1935 and the Victory Tax of 1942
Time Frame One to three hours

Curriculum Area(s) History/Social Studies

Civics/Government

Economics

Technology

Purpose To help students understand that during the Great Depression and World War II, the Roosevelt administration implemented new, broader, and more progressive taxes in order to cover the costs of the New Deal programs and the war

Objectives Students will be able to explain the history of the Wealth Tax of 1935 and the Victory Tax of 1942.

explain the purpose of the Wealth Tax and the Victory Tax.

Background The Wealth Tax of 1935 During the Great Depression, President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal programs put millions of jobless Americans back to work and stabilized the economy. Social Security programs provided pensions to those who could not work. However, the government needed new taxes to pay for these programs. The Revenue Act of 1935 put a new progressive tax, the Wealth Tax, in place. Those making more than $5 million a year were taxed up to 75 percent. Unlike their Civil War grandparents, the wealthy were not happy to pay income taxes during crisis times. Loopholes in the tax code were used. The federal government aggressively prosecuted tax evaders. The Revenue Act of 1937 cracked down on tax evasion by revising tax laws and regulations. The Victory Tax of 1942 In 1939 only about five percent of American workers paid income tax. The United States' entrance into World War II changed that figure. The demands of war production put almost every American back to work, but the expense of the war still exceeded tax-generated revenue. President Roosevelt's proposed Revenue Act of 1942 introduced the broadest and most progressive tax in American history, the Victory Tax. Now, about 75 percent of American workers would pay income taxes. Because so many citizens paid the tax, it was considered a mass tax. To ease workers' burden of paying a large sum once a year, and to create a regular flow of revenue into the U.S. Treasury, the government required employers to withhold money from employees' paychecks. Additional taxes were put in place in 1943. By war's end in 1945, about 90 percent of American workers submitted income tax forms, and 60 percent paid taxes on their income. The federal government covered more than half its expenses with new income tax revenue.

Key Terms mass tax A broad tax that affects a majority of taxpayers. progressive tax A tax that takes a larger percentage of income from high-income groups than from low-income groups. tax code The official body of tax laws and regulations. tax evasion A failure to pay or a deliberate underpayment of taxes. withholding ("pay-as-you-earn" taxation) Money, for example, that employers withhold from employees paychecks. This money is deposited for the government. (It will be credited against the employees' tax liability when they file their returns.) Employers withhold money for federal income taxes, Social Security taxes and state and local income taxes in some states and localities.