(2) University Of Jokes
Kingsley Carter Clerk

.

#SEX_4_FREE

#EPISODE_1

So I said, "A man who hasnt discovered his ...

talent yet, has never gotten hungry" and it's very

true. Once hunger strikes on you, nobody will

tell you to do something. You'll sit on your own

and think so much about things you can do with

your life to satisfy your stomach.

Being a guy is not about waking up with your

dick so hard in your boxer shorts, it's not about

going to the gym to work out for bigger muscles,

neither is it about going round and picking

fights that are not meant for you.

Being a guy is just about living with the

principles of men, always in your mind. There

are three philosophies every man should take

note of. Lemme break them. Every man should:

1. Think faster. Dont think fast, even women can

do that. Think faster.

2. Act smarter. Dont act smart, even women can

do that. Act smarter.

3. Play safe. No woman can do this trick like a

man. Just play safe.

So you see, think faster, act smarter and play

safe. In the end, you'll smile to yourself.

To my story, hunger visited me one morning and

swore never to leave me for the rest of my life if

I hadnt been smarter. I graduated from Prempeh

College in 2011, four years ago. Coming from

such school should've given me luck in life,

that's what I thought but it seemed it wasnt like

that. Not coming from a rich home, I had to

struggle on my own to make some money to

continue my education or live at peace thereby

reducing the burden my five other siblings were

putting on parents. I wasnt lazy, I just didnt find

any job as good as I thought. The first job I

picked was to work with a preacher. I liked that

job because the money we always got was

enough but I stopped voluntarily. You know

why? It's because this preacher always made me

pray after preaching. I told him I wasnt so

familiar with prayers and that, he should say all

the prayers but he was so stubborn, always

chose me to pray. So I stopped to work at a

mechanic shop. I liked the work too but my only

problem was the clothes. You might go to work

like a lamb but return home like a pig. So I

stopped two weeks later. Then, I went to teach

in a primary school. I stopped three weeks later

without even waiting for my salary. The students were so block-headed. They were so stupid that I always felt dizzy in class. So I stopped and decided to work as a cab driver for one old man. The man was just as stupid as his car. For the two days that I worked with the car, it was always at fault. Instead of the man to allow his wife to give me food to eat, he would still ask me to go home empty-handed and empty stomach ...

Continue Reading