On Oct. 22, 2016, Donald J. Trump issued what he called his “Contract with the American Voter.” This was a specific plan of action that would guide his administration, starting from the first day, and listed 60 promises. Follow the Trump Promise Tracker

Donald Trumpas Contract

with the American Voter

What follows is my 100-day action plan to Make America Great Again.

It is a contract between myself and the American voteraaaand begins with restoring

honesty and accountability, and bringing change to Washington.

On the first day of my term of oi!ce, my administration will immediately pursue the following:

Six measures to clean up the

corruption and special interest

collusion in Washington, DC:

a FOURTH, I will direct the Secretary of

Commerce and U.S. Trade Representative to

identify all foreign trading abuses that unfairly

impact American workers and direct them to

use every tool under American and international

law to end those abuses immediately.

a FIRST, propose a constitutional amendment to

impose term limits on all members of Congress.

a FIFTH, I will lift the restrictions on the

a SECOND, a hiring freeze on all federal employees

to reduce the federal workforce through attrition

(exempting military, public safety, and public health).

a THIRD, a requirement that for every new federal regulation,

two existing regulations must be eliminated.

a FOURTH, a five-year ban on White House and

Congressional oi!cials becoming lobbyists after they

leave government service.

a FIFTH, a lifetime ban on White House oi!cials lobbying

on behalf of a foreign government.

a SIXTH, a complete ban on foreign lobbyists raising

money for American elections.

production of $50 trillion dollarsa worth of

job-producing American energy reserves,

including shale, oil, natural gas and clean coal.

a SIXTH, lift the Obama-Clinton roadblocks and allow vital

energy infrastructure projects, like the Keystone Pipeline,

to move forward.

a SEVENTH, cancel billions in payments to U.N. climate

change programs and use the money to fix Americaas

water and environmental infrastructure.

Five actions to restore security

and the constitutional rule of law:

a FIRST, cancel every unconstitutional executive action,

memorandum and order issued by President Obama.

Seven actions to protect

American workers:

a SECOND, begin the process of selecting a replacement

a FIRST, I will announce my intention to renegotiate

a THIRD, cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities.

for Justice Scalia from one of the 20 judges on my list,

who will uphold and defend the U.S. Constitution.

NAFTA or withdraw from the deal under Article 2205.

a SECOND, I will announce our withdrawal from the

Trans-Pacific Partnership.

a THIRD, I will direct the Secretary of the Treasury to label

China a currency manipulator.

a FOURTH, begin removing the more than two million

criminal illegal immigrants from the country and cancel

visas to foreign countries that wonat take them back.

a FIFTH, suspend immigration from terror-prone regions

where vetting cannot safely occur. All vetting of people

coming into our country will be considered aextreme vetting.a

continued on the back

Donald J. Trump

Your signature

L E A R N M O R E AT

donaldjtrump.com/contract

continued from the front

I will work with Congress to introduce the following broader legislative measures

and fight for their passage within the first 100 days of my Administration:

Middle Class Tax Relief and

Simplification Act

Affordable Childcare and

Eldercare Act

An economic plan designed to grow the economy 4% per year

and create at least 25 million new jobs through massive

tax reduction and simplification, in combination with trade

reform, regulatory relief and lifting the restrictions on

American energy. The largest tax reductions are for the

middle class. A middle-class family with two children will get

a 35% tax cut. The current number of brackets will be reduced

from seven to three, and tax forms will likewise be greatly

simplified. The business rate will be lowered from 35%

to 15%, and the trillions of dollars of American corporate

money overseas can now be brought back at a 10% rate.

Allows Americans to deduct childcare and eldercare

from their taxes, incentivizes employers to provide on-site

childcare services and creates tax-free dependent care

savings accounts for both young and elderly dependents,

with matching contributions for low-income families.

End the Offshoring Act

Establishes tariffs to discourage companies from laying off

their workers in order to relocate in other countries and ship

their products back to the U.S. tax-free.

American Energy and

Infrastructure Act

Leverages public-private partnerships, and private

investments through tax incentives, to spur $1 trillion in

infrastructure investment over ten years. It is revenue neutral.

School Choice and Education

Opportunity Act

Redirects education dollars to give parents the right to send

their kid to the public, private, charter, magnet, religious or

home school of their choice. Ends Common Core and brings

education supervision to local communities. It expands

vocational and technical education, and makes two- and fouryear college more affordable.

Repeal and Replace

Obamacare Act

Fully repeals Obamacare and replaces it with Health Savings

Accounts, the ability to purchase health insurance across

state lines and lets states manage Medicaid funds. Reforms

will also include cutting the red tape at the FDA: there are

over 4,000 drugs awaiting approval, and we especially want

to speed the approval of life-saving medications.

End Illegal Immigration Act

Fully-funds the construction of a wall on our southern

border with the full understanding that the country of

Mexico will be reimbursing the United States for the full cost

of such wall; establishes a two-year mandatory minimum

federal prison sentence for illegally re-entering the U.S. after

a previous deportation, and a five-year mandatory minimum

federal prison sentence for illegally re-entering for those

with felony convictions, multiple misdemeanor convictions

or two or more prior deportations; also reforms visa rules to

enhance penalties for overstaying and to ensure open jobs

are offered to American workers first.

Restoring Community Safety Act

Reduces surging crime, drugs and violence by creating

a task force on violent crime and increasing funding for

programs that train and assist local police; increases

resources for federal law enforcement agencies and federal

prosecutors to dismantle criminal gangs and put violent

offenders behind bars.

Restoring National Security Act

Rebuilds our military by eliminating the defense sequester

and expanding military investment; provides veterans

with the ability to receive public VA treatment or attend

the private doctor of their choice; protects our vital

infrastructure from cyber-attack; establishes new screening

procedures for immigration to ensure those who are

admitted to our country support our people and our values.

Clean Up Corruption in

Washington Act

Enacts new ethics reforms to drain the swamp and reduce

the corrupting influence of special interests on our politics.

On November 8th, Americans will be voting for this 100-day plan to restore prosperity

to our economy, security to our communities and honesty to our government.

This is my pledge to you.

And if we follow these steps, we will once more have a government of, by and for the people.

L E A R N M O R E AT

donaldjtrump.com/contract