Protestors Just Tried To Dig Up Confederate General’s Grave, Then Got Hit With ULTIMATE KARMA
 Share  Tweet  Subscribe - GET THE LIBERTY WRITERS NEWS LETTER! Our morning news letter will start your day with breaking news, politics and everything Trump! Enter your email address to subscribe. * Subscribe

A group of protestors has now dug up the body of Here is the shocking video below. A group of protestors has now dug up the body of Klu Klux Klan leader and Confederate general, Nathan Forrest, from his grave. The group took a shovel to the burial site of Nathan Bedford Forrest.

He was the KKK’s first Grand Wizard and died in 1877 and his body was moved to a public park in Memphis, Tennessee after it was exhumed from the Nathan Bedford Forrest. He was a lieutenant general in the Confederate States Army.

Advertisement

These Marxists want the statue of the soldier on the horse to be removed as well. The Memphis city council has been already approved the digging up of the body, according to These Marxists want the statue of the soldier on the horse to be removed as well. The Memphis city council has been already approved the digging up of the body, according to Daily Mail

A recent Tennessee law that prevents memorials to historical figures from the Civil War from being removed. This is the only thing stopping Marxists from completely erasing the history of the Democratic Party.

According to According to NPR , officials at the state capitol are thinking about throwing out a bust General Forrest.

Share this if you think that Trump was right. These people are never going to stop. First, it’s going to be Confederate war memorials. Then, it’s going to be George Washington and other parts of history.

We need to stop this here. The liberal left is trying to erase American history so that they can repeat it. The Democrats are just mad that Trump is kicking out their new slaves (illegal immigrants) out of the country.

Republicans are going to HAVE to save this country again.