Protestors Have Begun Digging Up Confederate Graves - Chicks On The R…
UPDATE: Our original source has issued the following statement: “The story linked below was originally published 2 years ago. We regret and apologize for the error.”

When it comes to the destruction of monuments and erasure of American history, I have one major question: Where does it end? How far is too far?

Well, apparently digging up dead bodies isn’t too far for these people, because it’s happening. They’re literally digging up graves.

A group of protesters who want the body of an alleged Ku Klux Klan leader removed from their city have broken the soil over the grave. The campaigners claim it has taken officials in Memphis, Tennessee, too long to exhume Nathan Bedford Forrest – who was a lieutenant general in the Confederate States Army. They also want the statue of the soldier on a horse on the burial site to be removed. The rebel cavalryman, who died in 1877, has been buried in the city’s Health Sciences Park since 1904. This Game Will Keep You Up All Night! x Sponsored by Revcontent Find Out More > 86,985 Members of the protest group, who call themselves the Commission on Religion and Racism, removed only a small patch of grass from the park, but threatened to return with heavy machinery to tear down the wartime symbol.

So they’re turning to grave desecration, huh?….wow.

While there is evidence that Forrest was a member of the KKK in his time, there is also plenty of evidence that he did a lot to disband it.

A congressional investigation into the KKK at the time concluded that Forrest was actually responsible for the dissolution of the KKK: “The natural tendency of all such organizations is to violence and crime; hence it was that General Forrest and other men of influence in the state, by the exercise of their moral power, induced them to disband.” In his final public appearance, just a decade after the end of the Civil War, Forrest spoke eloquently about race relations, and some might say redeemed himself: Ladies and Gentlemen I accept the flowers as a memento of reconciliation between the white and colored races of the southern states. I accept it more particularly as it comes from a colored lady, for if there is any one on God’s earth who loves the ladies I believe it is myself. This day is a day that is proud to me, having occupied the position that I did for the past twelve years, and been misunderstood by your race. This is the first opportunity I have had during that time to say that I am your friend. I am here a representative of the southern people, one more slandered and maligned than any man in the nation. I will say to you and to the colored race that men who bore arms and followed the flag of the Confederacy are, with very few exceptions, your friends. I have an opportunity of saying what I have always felt – that I am your friend, for my interests are your interests, and your interests are my interests. We were born on the same soil, breathe the same air, and live in the same land. Why, then, can we not live as brothers? I will say that when the war broke out I felt it my duty to stand by my people. When the time came I did the best I could, and I don’t believe I flickered. I came here with the jeers of some white people, who think that I am doing wrong. I believe that I can exert some influence, and do much to assist the people in strengthening fraternal relations, and shall do all in my power to bring about peace. It has always been my motto to elevate every man- to depress none. (Applause.) I want to elevate you to take positions in law offices, in stores, on farms, and wherever you are capable of going.

All that aside…. these people are literally digging up graves now. This is never ok. I’m having a hard time wrapping my head around the fact that this is where we are now.

The move outraged a spokesman for Forrest’s family, who said the act was vandalism and that the protesters had broken the law. One man even drove some 270 miles to replace the turf after being dismayed by footage of the digging.

Soon, there will be no confederate monuments left. Some will be torn down by politicians beholden to the SJWs, some will be illegally vandalized by thugs claiming moral high ground. Eventually, all will be destroyed. I believe that.

What’s next?

Well….everything. All historical markers. If America is in the business of tearing down any monuments someone finds “offensive”….no monument will stand.