No Lapdog Media II
I can no longer keep this to myself so here it goes...I’m a teacher. It’s my calling. For 24 years I’ve been in a room 8 hours a day with your children, grandch ... ildren, nieces and nephews. They are my greatest sense of pride and frustration every single day! I love them and I love teaching.

Over the years the children have not changed but how we are raising them certainly has! We are NOT raising our children to respect authority but to challenge it. We are raising OUR children to pass the buck to someone else, never letting them deal with the consequences of their actions. We have to STOP this!!! They ARE children. Stop putting adult responsibility and situations on them. Stop giving them the ability to choose. Some things are nonnegotiable. Be a parent. Let them know there are things that they are required to do for NO other reason than because it is what an adult tells them to do! Tell your children NO!! Tell them they are WRONG!! It IS ok to fail!! Talk to your children, you would be amazed what they can teach you. Discipline them. Teach them to respect others and to respect themselves. Our children are hurting because WE have failed them AND this is what is wrong with our society. We have created this proverbial monster, if you will.

My heart has ached over every school shooting that’s occurred. I have prayed for these families. Prayed for the victims. Prayed for the perpetrators. Prayed for our schools. I never once prayed for our elected officials to DO something to fix this?!? It is so easy to place the blame on others for these killings but we have to take this responsibility. We, as parents and members of a society, have a responsibility to our children. Stop falling short on your job. Get involved and help your neighbor that can’t get their child to ball practice. Buy a glove for that little boy that has MLB dreams. Stop turning your back when you see a need. Fill that need. Call your school, ask them what families need help. This is how YOU can make a change. For goodness sakes STOP believing that a public official will stop this problem. Get on your knees and PRAY then get up and do something to help someone else.

Whew!!! That has been bottled up for quite some time and it sure feels good to get it out. Don’t complain...that’s a waste of your energy.

XOXO