Loud-Mouth Liberal Ashley Judd Wants To Live In Middle East Where Women Have ‘More Rights,’ Gets Unexpected Surprise! [VIDEO]
Beware: loudmouth liberal celebrities are out of touch once again! This time, it’s Ashley Judd’s turn to whine and cry about the ‘terrible situation’ in our country. She tweeted that America lacks behind some other countries in equal rights for women.

If she doesn’t like it here, we’ll be more than happy to start a GoFundMe for her one-way ticket to Burundi, Serbia, or Iraq, where apparently women are treated better.

Wonder what she thinks about the Muslims who murder Christians in the Middle East?

All she has to do is ask, we’ll send her wherever she wants. I’m sure all of these countries would love to have a C-List celebrity with no gratitude for the great American country she lives in as a millionaire.

Ashley Judd’s Tweets were met with some pretty harsh criticism from the plethora of much smarter people on the Internet, reports Ashley Judd’s Tweets were met with some pretty harsh criticism from the plethora of much smarter people on the Internet, reports Patriot Fires

“The U.S. ranks 104th, behind countries like Burundi, Serbia and Iraq.” “The U.S. ranks 104th, behind countries like Burundi, Serbia and Iraq.” https://t.co/TT54goMkRH — ashley judd (@AshleyJudd) — ashley judd (@AshleyJudd) March 22, 2017

Seriously, please, get out. Make room for people with common sense and actual knowledge of the matter.

Delusion of the Lefty women…Ash take a reality pill Delusion of the Lefty women…Ash take a reality pill https://t.co/pFpUfcDiqX — Spears (@gtwarrior47) — Spears (@gtwarrior47) March 22, 2017

Apparently, Judd wasn’t done ‘expressing herself’ on Twitter. Here’s another one:

Question: are equal rights in the Constitution? Question: are equal rights in the Constitution? https://t.co/vv4hQrm37N — ashley judd (@AshleyJudd) — ashley judd (@AshleyJudd) March 22, 2017

Of course, Twitter users didn’t hold back. Here are some of the great replies:

Really. It’s not that hard if you just try to read it.

And let’s not forget about the horrible speech she gave to the beta males and man-hating feminists at the Women’s March, which was quite possibly the most embarrassing thing a large group of women has ever done.

What do you think about this? Share this on Facebook and Twitter SCROLL DOWN FOR MORE