Hilarious 'North Korean propaganda' video depicts 'modern America' | …
Hilarious 'North Korean propaganda' video depicts 'modern America': U.S. citizens drink snow, live in tents supplied by Pyongyang... and eat 'yummy' birds on a Tuesday

The video claims to be an official film about how 'Americans live today'



It says people in the U.S. live in tents because their houses blow over, take handouts from Pyongyang and are grateful for their daily cup of 'hot snow'

Authenticity of the video, seen thousands of times, is doubted

Published: 07:05 EDT, 13 March 2013 | Updated: 05:15 EDT, 14 March 2013

An alleged North Korean propaganda video has emerged online that claims Americans drink 'hot snow' as coffee, live in tents and eat wild birds on Tuesdays,

The four-minute film portrays people in the U.S. as living in extreme poverty, who are lucky to have a floor to sleep on and live on a diet of 'local snow'.



The supposedly North Korean narrator - 'translated' on the film by a British man - tells viewers: 'This is how Americans live today.'

Scroll down for video

Poverty: It is repeatedly said Americans have to drink coffee made from snow and are grateful for the handouts

Gun-toting: The narrator said that Americans use guns to shoot one another and especially children Body bags: These two friends sit next to blue plastic bags filled with dead bodies, according to the film

The authenticity of the video has been doubted and many believe it is a clever spoof done in the style of official North Korean propaganda videos.



The 'propaganda' film has already been viewed thousands of times in the three days since it was uploaded.



It features clips of poverty, cold and hardship. The narrator tells viewers: 'This is how they live in modern day. Huddled together - the poor, the cold, the lonely and the homosexuals.'

The bizarre video appears to use footage from the aftermath of natural disasters filmed around the world.



Many of the clips seem to have been shot in Europe, and Paris' famous Gard de Nord station is seen in one image.



VIDEO A humorous 'North Korean take' on American lifestyles...

Drug use: This man is 'awaiting heroin', the narrator tells viewers

Charity: Many Americans live in tents donated by the North Korea as their own homes have fallen down

But the narrator explains this as other parts of America that 'disguise' themselves as foreign cities.



Either way she says they live a 'terrible life'.

It is said that Americans have to live in tents donated by North Korea and take handouts of snow coffee because their houses 'blow down easily.'

Among the fantastical claims made in the video are that Americans have eaten the bird population almost to extinction.



The 'yummy birds' that remain in the trees will be eaten on Tuesday, according to the narrator.



When the film shows a man walking through the snow in what appears to be Paris, the narrator says: 'This man is a former Republican candidate for Oregon who is now having to get coffee made of snow.'

The video also features two elderly men sitting on a bench surrounded by plastic bags.

Donations: Americans are said to be very grateful for their one cup a day of snow coffee

Lucky: The narrator says these people are considered fortunate because they can sleep on the floor indoors

Decline: This man is said to be a former Republican candidate but now has to beg for snow coffee

The narrator tells viewers: 'These people lie huddled together with their dead friends in blue body bags with their coffee cups full of local snow.



'They are very good friends that are together in adversity.'

The video also accuses Americans of being obsessed with weaponry and buy 'guns to kill each other especially children.'

Last month, Pyongyang released a clip on Uriminzokkiri - Korean for 'Our Nation' - which shows Barack Obama and American troops in flames.

If genuine, the latest video of American poverty could be an attempt to divert domestic attention away from the plight of residents, thousands of whom are believed to be starving after failed harvests.



It comes as Pyongyang released a photograph of leader Kim Jung Un, that has been compared to a Bond villain.



He was seen inspecting sturgeon in a pond at the Ryongjong Fish Farm in South Hwanghae, southwestern North Korea in the picture released by the Korean Central News Agency.



In a picture reminiscent of a Bond villain North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, left, inspects sturgeons in a pond