Promoter Found Dead After Exposing Mayweather-McGregor ‘Fake Fight’
A boxing promoter who had been working on the upcoming Mayweather-McGregor bout, was found dead within hours of warning the fight is fixed.

Barry Gibson was found dead in his hometown of Washington D.C. in what has the hallmarks of an execution-style killing, hours after blowing the lid on the Mayweather-McGregor fight backstage at a press conference in Toronto, Canada.

Early reports claim the 45-year-old was found shot dead in his Jeep, along with one other man, believed to be a colleague.

Gibson, a PR executive, had been working alongside Mayweather Promotions as well as McGregor Sports & Entertainment on promoting Saturday’s prize fight between the pair. However Gibson went “off-script” in Toronto and was removed from the premises by security staff, but not before publicly criticizing the pair.

According to Gibson, Mayweather and McGregor have organized a “fixed fight” that will earn them both record pay packets and hundreds of millions for broadcasters, but will send jaded boxing fans home disappointed.

“This is the biggest scam in boxing history,” Gibson said in Toronto, according to reports. “I’m telling you now there is more than a gentleman’s agreement between these two assholes. The fight is already completely scripted out.”

“Believe me when I say I’ve read it.“

“These two assholes have been traveling around the world on the same private jet to promote the fight… Laughing all the way to the bank. The acting you see on stage, don’t believe the hype, they are pals. This is a fix.“

Telling reporters that he is a “boxing fan first, promoter second“, Gibson said “Boxing in 2017 needs great fights, not scams. Boxing in America won’t recover from this.“

Barry Gibson was found dead in his Jeep in D.C. Mayweather Promotions and McGregor Sports & Entertainment are now denying they worked with him. “We don’t know Barry Gibson.”

Early reports that stated Gibson had been shot dead in an “execution-style killing” in D.C. have also been scrubbed from the internet, but not before alert readers captured screenshots of the story.

Washington Post article entitled, ‘Boxing promoter, 44, found shot dead in “execution-style” in D.C.’ – later scrubbed from the internet

The Washington Post has not responded to queries regarding why they unpublished the story. Fight fans on Internet forums are speculating that mainstream media operations, owned by the same oligarchs that are set to cash in heavily on the fixed fight, have ordered all reports about Barry Gibson and his warnings to be scrubbed.

Mayweather vs. McGregor, billed as “ The Billion Dollar Fight “, takes place at the T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada on Saturday 26 August, and rumors are circulating that Gibson was taken out to ensure the high stakes fight goes ahead, and the fighters and media organizations receive their hundreds of millions of dollar paydays.

The fight is expected to earn Mayweather upwards of $400 million for his 50th professional fight, if the TV viewership achieves it’s targets. McGregor, who will be making his pro boxing debut, will earn at least $75 million.

The pairs’ exact earnings will not be known until after the fight as they both signed confidentiality agreements preventing them from talking about the subject.

According to Gibson, the numbers are all important, because the fight itself is a scam. The decision has already been decided, and a re-match has already been agreed by both camps.

“McGregor is going to stalk Mayweather and keep him within punching range while waiting for an opening and punching his face right off. Mayweather is going to let McGregor get some jabs in, he’s going to get knocked down, but as the fight goes on he’s going to dance and keep McGregor at bay. In the eleventh round McGregor is going to throw his shoulder out so they can both go home with egos intact, counting their millions.

“Of course there will be a rematch. That might be more of a genuine fight. But knowing these two, probably not.”

.