House budget vote: Republicans unite with plan to slash Medicaid, Medicare
House Republicans unite behind budget vote

No Democrats support the plan to slash Medicaid, overhaul Medicare and cut taxes, which the GOP says will cut $5.8 trillion in spending over the next decade. The plan is certain to die in the Senate.

"This budget keeps America exceptional," Ryan said on the House floor before the vote. "It preserves its promise to the next generation."

Republicans maintain that the plan will cut $5.8 trillion in spending over the next decade and balance the budget in 2030. It cuts taxes on the top income earners and businesses — from 35% to 25% — while closing unspecified loopholes and tax exemptions.

All but four Republicans voted Friday to support the 2012 budget resolution crafted by House Budget Committee Chairman Paul D. Ryan (R-Wis.). No Democrats supported the plan, which passed on a 235-193 vote.

Reporting from Washington — — Braced for a possible political backlash, House Republicans charged forward with their plan to slash deficit spending by scaling back Medicaid and overhauling Medicare while still cutting taxes, putting themselves on a collision course with President Obama and Democrats.

Democrats cast the Republican vote as an attempt to dismantle the country's social safety net, even as the rich receive tax cuts.

Republicans know the political risks, especially in swing districts and states, since all recent efforts to drastically restructure benefit programs have bombed with voters.

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-San Francisco) said House GOP leaders were sending their rank-and-file members to slaughter. "I want to say to my Republican colleagues: Do you realize that your leadership is asking you to cast a vote today to abolish Medicare as we know it?" she asked.

As GOP lawmakers left Washington for a two-week break, House leaders armed members with charts and talking points aimed at refuting Democrats' criticism and winning over constituents. A kit for members outlined a day-by-day plan for focusing comments on Republicans' plans to add jobs, deregulate business and cut taxes.

While certain to die in the Democratic-controlled Senate, House approval of Ryan's plan puts Republicans squarely on the record in favor of an approach to deficit reduction markedly different from an outline offered by President Obama on Wednesday.

The president advocates raising $1 trillion through taxes on the wealthy, cutting spending by $2 trillion, and saving $1 trillion in debt interest, thus reducing borrowing by $4 trillion over 12 years. Obama contends that on balance, his plan would cut the deficit more than the GOP proposal as a result of the tax increases.

The Ryan budget blueprint would cut federal spending on Medicaid, which provides healthcare for seniors, children and the poor, and would begin distributing money to states by block grant.

The plan would do away with Medicare's direct payment for healthcare for seniors, replacing it with a voucher system in which seniors choose between private insurers. The Congressional Budget Office found that part of the plan, which takes effect in 2022, could nearly double out-of-pocket costs for seniors.

Republicans argued Friday that Americans are willing to accept diminished social programs in return for a firmer fiscal standing.

"They understand in my district: We're broke. If we don't deal with this, we lose the social safety net," said Rep. Tim Walberg, a Republican from a southern Michigan district that voted for Obama. "I think they're ready."

Polls show a much less certain picture. Americans appear to have a significant appetite for deficit reduction, but their appetites shrink as they get into details, particularly those involving changes to Medicare.