Top Scientist Admits on Live TV: Recent... - The Underground Resistan…
Like Page

Top Scientist Admits on Live TV: Recent Hurricanes are Man-Made

Dr. Michio Kaku accidentally makes confession on weather modification By: Jay Greenberg on 8th September 2017 @ 1.53pm © Neon Nettle Dr. Michio Kaku admits on live TV that recent hurricanes are man-made One of the world's leading scientists has made a shocking confession on live TV when he accidentally admitted that the recent "man-made" hurricanes have been artificially created through secret government weather modification.During an interview on mainstream media outlet CBS news, Physicist Dr. Michio Kaku said that the skies have been sprayed with nano particles and storms are then "activated" using "lasers". SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEOGeoengineering isn't a new idea though, and government-funded programs such as the High-Frequencyency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP) was created in the early 1990s and was an ionospheric research program jointly funded by the U.S. Air Force, the U.S. Navy, the University of Alaska Fairbanks, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).HAARP was capable of "weaponizing" the weather and has the ability of potentially triggering floods, droughts, hurricanes, and earthquakes. Throughout the life of the program, it had incurred around $250 million in tax-funded construction and operating costs. Woman 40+ Only. £4.95 Moisturizer Removes the Signs of Ageing. Healthy News Sponsored by Revcontent Find Out More > 84,963 Anonymous reports: People in positions of influence propose that the skies be sprayed to “combat climate change,” but they never exactly admit it is already happening: in this little-known slip-up, a mainstream scientist admitted it.In the interview, Michio Kaku briefly dips into the history of weather modification (in little detail compared to extensive works, such as the book “Chemtrails Exposed: a New Manhattan Project”).Very quickly, the CBS crew interrupted him to say the state weather modification programs were only “alleged.”That might even suggest the CBS staff was explicitly told never to approach that topic.One detail in a plethora of academic papers and patents about altering the weather with electromagnetic energy and conductive particles in the stratosphere, research published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences said the “laser beams” can create plasma channels in the air, causing ice to form.

According to Professor Wolf Kasparian: "Under the conditions of a typical storm cloud, in which ice and supercooled water coexist, no direct influence of the plasma channels on ice formation or precipitation processes could be detected."Under conditions typical for thin cirrus ice clouds, however, the plasma channels induced a surprisingly strong effect of ice multiplication."Within a few minutes, the laser action led to a strong enhancement of the total ice particle number density in the chamber by up to a factor of 100, even though only a 10−9 fraction of the chamber volume was exposed to the plasma channels."The newly formed ice particles quickly reduced the water vapor pressure to ice saturation, thereby increasing the cloud optical thickness by up to three orders of magnitude." To really understand geoengineering, researchers have identified defense contractors Raytheon, BAE Systems, and corporations such as General Electric as being heavily involved with geoengineering. READ MORE: Hurricane Harvey Exposed as Man-Made Weapon Used to Impose Martial Law According to Peter A. Kirby, Massachusetts has historically been a center of geoengineering research.With the anomalous hurricanes currently ravaging the Americas, floods destroying India, and wildfires destroying the Pacific Northwest, weather warfare is a topic on the public consciousness right now.Please share this with as many people as possible.