Villaggio - 14 Reviews - Pizza - 3 Park Ln, Massapequa, NY - Restaura…
14

3 Park Ln

Massapequa , NY 11758



(516) 799-0606

You guys boycotting need to do your homework. The picture being used to promote the veteran and service dog story is from the the show Madam Secretary. Do a Google image search for yourself.

Shameful business practices. Look at the reviews people, first they price gouged during Sandy and now they turn away a vet because of his service animal? Shame on you Villaggio. This is New York, you can find pizza anywhere, their pizza is nothing special. Go somewhere else.

They refused to serve military man who came in with his service dog.....boycotting!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! This is my friend John Welch He was denied service at Villagio's Pizzeria, 3 Park Lane in Massapequa Park because he attempted to enter with his service dog "Onyx". Please take action, boycott, call,share and spread this, something. John has truly sacrificed and deserves better!!!

How could you refuse service to a man that served his country so you could even own a business. I will never come here

Myself, friends and family will NEVER give business to villaggio after they told my friend's father- a veteran having served as a marine for over 20 years- "get out" because he had his service dog Onyx with him. And after the fact, lied about the situation and publicly blamed him for it! Breaking the law does not bode well on any company. Good luck after this blunder, villaggio.

Will never dine here based on the fact that they denied a service dog to enter the restaurant or serve the military personnel because of the dog... Shame on you!

John Welch was denied service at Villagio's Pizzeria, 3 Park Lane in Massapequa Park because he attempted to enter with his service dog "Onyx". Please take action, boycott, call,share and spread this, something. John has truly sacrificed for our Country and deserves better!!!

What a disgraceful "business" for denying service to a veteran and his service dog. If you are going to run a real establishment learn the ADA laws. Denying service to someone with a service dog is equivalent to denying service to someone in a wheelchair ! You should be ashamed of yourselves .

Good pizza, especially the Grandma's Pie. My son loves the buffalo chicken pizza. Fast delivery 'Nuff said

I went in on a weekend between the lunch and dinner rush. I stood at the counter for 5 min before any employee came from the back and even realized I was there. The pizza was good; not my type as I prefer a very thin crust pizza, but still good none the less.

Excellent pizza and friendly service. The other reviewers on here are ridiculous. This is one of the best pizza places on the island. Their square pie is not too thick. The sauce is great. Never too oily. You would think with all of the pizza places in the area it would be easy to find a good slice but it's the opposite. There are a few good places and this is one of them.

I've never had a bad experience with this restaurant. Nicest people work here and deliver. Best Sicilian pizza around

They priced Gouged During Hurricane Sandy . When people called them out on it this was their reply ..".try going out buying everything, fighting trying to buy the last of thing to keep our store up and running. We could simply be cleaning our house rather then making food and cooking for you. the prices of cheese yeast and flour has risen with this hurricane because they cannot get deliveries. you complain about our prices rising we need to break even today to pay for our expenses. hotels have been riping everyone off for what a room and bathroom and people are okay with that. our true customers are understanding and thats all that matters. we are not here to be millionaires we're here to keep the lights and business running. we work 12 hours days for what" I WILL NEVER GO BACK TO THIS PLACE & THINK PEOPLE SHOULD BOYCOTT & TELL HIM WHY!!!