Girl Unplugs Her Grandpa’s Life Support So She Can Charge Her Phone
It holds true that humanity has become very dependent on technology. When we wake up in the morning, what is the first thing we usually do? Open our phones and check our emails, right? Or perhaps we go straight to our social media accounts and check if there are any new likes or messages. In any case, technology has helped us achieve far better things than before.

Apparently, though, a 26-year-old girl by the name of Ally Louia took things differently. For her, charging her phone was more important than her grandpa’s life. So what did she do exactly? She disconnected her old man’s life support so she can plug her phone.

Clearly, Ally did not understand the signficant of a life support.

In her defense, she said:

“ Let’s see: my phone was at 1%, which can be described as a critical situation. Besides, my mother asked me to text her how my grandpa was doing right after getting to the hospital, so I had to do it.”

She unplugged her grandpa’s life support so she can charge her phone.

Ally basically visited her grandpa, who was suffering from lung cancer. And when the nurse and other family members left, she immediately disconnected the life support and plugged her device. But apart from texting her mom, she took some pictures of herself and her grandpa – who was already suffering from lack of oxygen – so she can upload them to Instagram.

She thought that her grandpa turning blue was due to the social media’s filter feature.

“ No way, I just did it to prove them that he was okay. And yes, it’s true that he was turning blue, but I thought that that was an Instagram filter.”

She even complained and said,

“ People could have also warned me, instead of just tapping ‘Like.’”

Fortunately for her, the old man was able to reach the control and alerted the infirmary. The doctors rushed to the room and “they freaked out when they realized that the respirator was turned off.”

Good thing her grandpa did not die.

Ally was also quoted saying this,

“ I asked them if there was another socket in the room but they didn’t answer. I think it’s unfair that there was only one socket.”

As soon as the family members heard of Ally’s little stunt, they were completely angered. But Ally does not care and even talked about looking for “solutions.”

“ We either buy one of those external batteries for my phone or we buy another one.”

Save to Facebook