Canadian Schools Now Pushing "LGGBDTTTIQQAAP"
This is sadly real. You may have thought it was a joke. Because mocking the every growing “LGBTQAAPI silent F” is a punchline around these parts. Well, this morning a dedicated reader emailed me with the full bulletin below. Our punchline is now a reality. Life imitates comedic art.

What’s the status of the life ending meteor?

Yes, that’s the full bulletin. And if my non-STEM arithmetic is correct, that’s a fifteen letter acronym. Which rather defeats the purpose of an acronym, but these are the people who don’t understand sarcasm and think eliminating “Down syndrome” via killing everyone who has it is a great idea. Critical thinking and morality aren’t in their wheelhouse.

Now, the entire point of this LGGBDTTTIQQAAPP inclusivity training (that’s their new acronym) is to become “more familiar” with the current language of this new movement and to become more sensitive to the students in the movement. If they’re taking pointers, I’d suggest shrinking their acronym, but enough about that stupid thing.

Clearly, these figures are not measures of active bisexuality – overall, 89% of the population describes themselves as heterosexual – but putting yourself at level 1 allows for the possibility of homosexual feelings and experiences. More than anything, it indicates an increasingly open minded approach to sexuality. In a further set of questions asking if respondents could conceivably be attracted to, have sex with or have a relationship with someone of the same sex (if the right person came along at the right time), level 1s were at least 35% more likely to say they could than level 0s.

I apologize for the continuous usage of all caps. There might be some leftists reading this post, and all caps is their language. See, I can be inclusive too.

Anyway, back to the survey. It’s an interesting survey in that it essentially proves people identifying as whatever they identify with is CULTURAL. The younger the people, the more “fluid” they are. Because being “fluid” is a trend. There are now entire events (like this one) built around people who are NOT heterosexual (or so they claim). Such people are seen not as “others” but as “special.” Which reminds me to check my FedEx tracking. I’m waiting for a custom made tiara and scepter. For identifying as a goddess.

This bulletin, advertising the event for “inclusiveness training” is proof that being not-heterosexual grants special treatment. If you’re a young whipper snapper hoping to be accepted into the tribe, while also desiring to be special, why wouldn’t you identify as part of the expanding LGBTQAAIP (silent F) movement? The red carpet rolls right out for them. It’s lined with rainbow donuts offered without shame.

Again, elementary school children are being force-fed this drivel. No wonder they’re confused.

When are we going to have an “Inclusiveness Training” for “people who like the opposite sex”? Seems we’re the ones who need a little understanding thrown our way.