Meghan Markle's mother Doria will 'have afternoon tea' with the Queen…
Published: 02:02 EDT, 18 May 2018 | Updated: 09:26 EDT, 18 May 2018

Doria Ragland, 61, is also supporting her daughter after an extraordinary week where her father Thomas pulled out and her estranged relatives landed en masse to cash in on her big day.

Ms Ragland has already enjoyed a 'very jolly' afternoon with Charles and Camilla this week with royal sources saying they got on famously.

Today Meghan's yoga instructor mother will meet her most esteemed new relative by marriage – the Queen – for tea at Windsor Castle, along with Harry and his fiancee.

It emerged today that Prince Charles will walk Meghan down the aisle rather than Ms Ragland, who had been favourite to give her away.

Cliveden House Hotel – of the notorious Profumo affair, one of the greatest scandals of the Cold War period – is where Meghan and her mother will stay tonight, along with a group of her closest girlfriends plus her dress designer and hairdresser.

Doria (left, leaving her home in LA on Tuesday, is supporting her daughter through the continuing drama over her father Thomas Markle's involvement in the wedding and has enjoyed a 'jolly' afternoon with Charles and Camilla (right at Kensington Palace yesterday)

Prince Harry and Meghan Markle looked relaxed as their Range Rover took them from Windsor Castle after the rehearsal

The Queen travelled to Windsor from Buckingham Palace to help the couple with their final wedding preparations and wiull meet Doria later today

Doria Ragland, pictured with Meghan, was whisked off to the royal residence after arriving in the UK yesterday

Harry, as is tradition, will say goodbye to wife-to-be and stay elsewhere with his best man, Prince William.

The princes have plumped for Coworth Park, a five-star country house a stone’s throw from Windsor and one that has been the venue for many a royal polo match and his first public kiss with Meghan.

Doria Ragland has had the royal red carpet rolled out for her ahead of the royal wedding on Saturday.

She has been staying at Kensington Palace, has already enjoyed a 'very jolly' afternoon with Prince Charles and the Duchess of Cornwall, just hours after landing, and yesterday met the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and their children.

Miss Ragland also met the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and their two eldest children Prince George and Princess Charlotte at Windsor Castle yesterday afternoon.

She will meet the Queen later and Her Majesty is set to host a traditional afternoon tea, which she likes to take at 4pm.

Former staff have said she often drinks a cup of Earl Grey with no milk in her favourite bone china cup and saucer.

This is served with a selection of crustless finger sandwiches such as cucumber, egg mayonnaise and ham and English mustard.

She also likes 'jam pennies' - small white sandwiches containing raspberry jam cut into the shape and size of an old English penny - and staff are also asked to serve a selection of biscuits, including her favourites Rich Tea, as well as scones and a sponge cake.

Meghan was forced to make an extraordinary and moving statement confirming her father will no longer walk her down the aisle at St George's Chapel on Saturday

Prince Harry, 33, and his bride-to-be Meghan Markle, 36, are pictured leaving Windsor Castle after a dress rehearsal for their wedding at St George's Chapel on Saturday

Meghan looked serene in the back of the car and even smiled despite the turmoil in the build-up to her wedding on Saturday

Pictured: Harry and Meghan's Range Rover, yesterday afternoon, escorted by police as they sped past crowds of well-wishers lining the Long Walk

Meghan Markle has described her sadness after revealing her father will not attend her wedding to Prince Harry

Meghan Markle is now just 24hours from her royal wedding as she tries to put a horrendous week of family dramas behind her.

She was pictured smiling last night as she left her final wedding rehearsal with Prince Harry after a dramatic week of set backs.

Meghan's father Thomas Markle is in hospital after heart surgery and days after it emerged he had done a paparazzi-deal to pose for wedding-related photos said to be worth $100,000.

Meghan's half-brother, Thomas Markle Jr., was pictured outside Windsor Castle this week after flying to the UK ahead of the service

Her half-brother, Thomas Markle Jr., was pictured outside Windsor Castle this week after flying to the UK ahead of the service while her half-sister Samantha has continued to use TV interviews to undermine her.

The royal bride will hope there are no further surprises from her family to disrupt the build-up to the wedding.

Last night royal fans were seen camping out outside the castle to ensure a good view of the planned procession, using sleeping bags and even folding chairs after local police banned tents.

Yesterday they witnessed a full rehearsal in which a carriage and members of the armed forces paraded through the streets of Windsor.

Meghan has pleaded for her 73-year-old father, who is recovering from heart surgery in Mexico after revelations about his alleged collusion with a paparazzi photographer, to be given 'space'.

In the statement, which she is said to have written herself, Miss Markle, 36, said: 'Sadly, my father will not be attending our wedding.

'I have always cared for my father and hope he can be given the space he needs to focus on his health.

'I would like to thank everyone who has offered generous messages of support. Please know how much Harry and I look forward to sharing our special day with you on Saturday.'

The actress also appeared to reject criticism by her siblings that she had failed to do enough to support the reclusive Thomas Markle, saying she had 'always cared' for him.

Prince William is seen leaving Windsor Castle during the final preparations for Saturday's royal wedding

William and Kate were also photographed leaving Kensington Palace as they joined the couple in Windsor for rehearsals

'It'll take a long time to heal': Meghan Markle's father says he's 'ok' after undergoing heart surgery Thomas Markle (pictured this week) is recovering after he had three stents Meghan Markle's father is 'alone and upset' in hospital after undergoing heart surgery. Thomas Markle is recovering after he had three stents implanted in arteries following a heart attack at home in Mexico eight days ago and said: 'It will take a long time to heal'. Mr Markle told TMZ last night: 'I'm okay. Staying in the hospital a few more days. Not allowed to get excited' and his children said he is 'heartbroken' to miss the wedding. Mr Markle said his doctors needed to 'go in and clear blockage, repair damage, and put a stent where it is needed' during the operation. His daughter Samantha, who has a poor relationship with Meghan, claims her father is 'upset and alone' following his surgery. But there is some confusion over his care as sources close to the Markle family said he had already been diagnosed with a heart condition and was due to undergo planned surgery to fit a stent, the same operation Prince Philip underwent in 2011, early next week – on his return from London. .

Amid criticism from some in the extended Markle family, sources close to Miss Markle yesterday insisted that she and Harry, 33, had offered both her parents substantial 'support and advice' as to how to handle the global interest since they started dating in 2016.

And friends told the Mail that contrary to claims by her half-siblings, Samantha Markle and Thomas Markle Jnr, that she had left their intensely private father to deal with the paparazzi on his own, she had been in 'frequent' touch with him by phone and text, including in recent days.

It is understood Mr Markle told his daughter personally that he would not be medically fit enough to fly to the UK.

It was claimed yesterday that he was recovering after having three stents implanted in arteries following a heart attack at home in Mexico eight days ago, and that he had said it would 'take a long time to heal'.

In return, Miss Markle was said to have told him that she loved him and supported him, regardless of the paparazzi photograph debacle.

Kensington Palace declined, however, to confirm when Miss Markle had last seen her father or when she planned to see him next. They were also unable to say when Prince Harry would meet his new father-in-law. Although the couple have been dating for two years, the prince has only ever spoken to him by phone.

Yesterday's announcement came at the end of a truly remarkable few days, in which Kensington Palace was accused of failing to get a grip of the situation, leaving Thomas Markle to brief the US gossip website TMZ about his plans.

Even Buckingham Palace courtiers have started looking at the website for the latest updates.

But as the final preparations were put into place yesterday afternoon, Miss Markle and Harry appeared to be all smiles.

The couple attended their last wedding rehearsal at St George's Chapel in Windsor with the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and their children, Prince George and Princess Charlotte, who are page boy and bridesmaid.

Miss Markle looked radiant despite the strain of the past week, wearing a white £285 Boss bodysuit and £7,000 Birks diamond earrings.

Although the Queen arrived at Windsor Castle for the weekend while the wedding party was there, she is understood not to have taken part.

Friends said last night that despite the drama of the past few days, Miss Markle was excited about the wedding and looking forward to exchanging vows with her prince. One admitted that families could sometimes be 'messy', but that she and Harry knew they had done everything possible to support her parents.

'They are just looking forward to the next few days and happy and excited about becoming man and wife,' the source said.

TMZ yesterday said it had again been in touch with Mr Markle. Journalist Sean Mandell said Miss Markle's father had told him: 'It will take a long time to heal. I'm okay. Staying in the hospital a few more days. Not allowed to get excited.'

Meghan will stay at Cliveden House Hotel (pictured), on the National Trust's Cliveden Estate, with her mother Doria. It was owned by Lord Astor and his family until it was bought by investors in 2012

Cliveden House hotel in Taplow, Berkshire, can cost £445-a-night for a Club Room like this one but suites cost £1,500

Prince Harry will stay at the Dorchester Collection's Coworth Park (pictured) in Sunningdale, Berkshire, on Friday, which is owned by the Sultan of Brunei

Harry and his brother will enjoy sumptuously furnished bedrooms like this on the night before the wedding

As for his daughter, Mr Mandell said it was clear she had been very upset by events. 'Meghan was embarrassed and tearful in private,' he said.

'She is holding up, from what I've been told. It has been a tearful and a trying time for her.'

When asked if her relationship with her father could recover from this week's debacle, he said: 'I do get the sense he does want to be reunited with Meghan.

'She's no stranger to having to deal with hard moments in her life'. He told Good Morning Britain: 'She [Meghan] called him Monday when the story first broke. But he did not have his phone on him and then she texted him, saying she loved him, that she was concerned over his health and bore him no ill will over the controversy of the fake photos.

'He told us we wanted to be there and had a change of heart on Tuesday after speaking with Meghan over text and he felt he had pulled out prematurely.

'He had originally felt it would be better for him not to be at the wedding because it would cause further embarrassment, he thought, for the Royal Family, and for Meghan, which is the last thing he wanted.

'He realised, 'I'm a father, and I want to be there for my daughter, and I want to be part of history'. Ultimately his health prevented him from being able to do that.

'Meghan is by all accounts a very strong women.

'From what Thomas has told me there's just love being conveyed there and a gentle approach between them when they speak.'

Meghan, pictured with her retired father Thomas Markle, 73, circa 2000, says she still cares for her father despite the chaos he has caused ahead of her wedding day

The Ascot Landau carriage set to carry the couple was paraded empty through the Berkshire town with Harry and Meghan still at Kensington Palace