Horrified onlookers spot ‘Harry Potter dementor’ figure in the sky above busy shopping centre
One eyewitness said: "Some started worshipping but others ran away. It was so strange"

Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 399

Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

A BIZARRE human-like figure appears to have been spotted in the clouds above a shopping centre.

Images circulated on social media show the huge shape, which bares a resemblance to the evil ‘dementors’ in the Harry Potter series.

CEN 3 An image which claims to show the mysterious shape in the sky

CEN 3 An eyewitness reportedly claimed: “Some started worshipping but others ran away. It was so strange”

The figure appeared above the Mukuba Mall in the city of Kitwe in north-central Zambia, according to locals.

One eyewitness said: “We were shocked to see images that looked like a human in the clouds for close to 30 minutes.

3 The figure shows a resemblance to the dementors from the Harry Potter series

“Some started worshipping but others ran away.

“It was so strange.”

According to locals, the figure was 100 metres long and stayed in the sky for more than 3o minutes.

MOST READ IN NEWS 'THIS IS WATERGATE' Donald Trump claims Barack Obama had his wires tapped in Trump Tower before US election win TRUMP TOWER BLAZE Officials say 'suspicious' fire at Trump hotel was actually caused by faulty machinery in a room COME DINE WITH ME Kind-hearted Sainsbury’s worker has dinner ‘date’ with elderly widower after learning he has no friends or family SICKENING ORDEAL Dad whose daughter, 3, told him she didn't want to be sexually abused any more tells court he 'didn't think anything of it' HARRY & MEG DOWN THE ISLE Prince Harry kisses and cuddles Meghan Markle in front of friends at his close pal’s wedding in Jamaica gruesome baby body discovery Mass grave containing remains of babies is discovered in sewage tank at notorious home

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368