Disgusting Feminists Launch ‘Raise The Skirt’ Project, Want Women To Do SICK Act In Public
The disgusting feminists of the world have officially outdone themselves. They’ve now launched a new project dubbed “Raising the Skirt,” which calls on women to perform a sick act in public.

Feminists raise their skirts to celebrate the diversity of vaginas. (Photo Credit: Instagram)

The feminist movement might have had some noble goals at its inception decades ago. However, it has morphed into something which is not just annoying, but downright disgusting.

Case in point: Some of the more enthusiastic social justice warriors of the feminist movement have begun a project called “Raising the Skirt,” aimed at “celebrating the diversity of vaginas.” This is not a drill. There are actual women gathering with the sole purpose of raising their skirts, exposing their most intimate part to complete strangers. And they call it a celebration.

“The act of lifting the skirt has been translated across cultures and geographies,” claims the RTS website (yes, these imbeciles even have a website). “It was known as Anasyrma or Ana-Suromai in ancient Greece, Anlu in Kom communities and many more.”

“A flash of the cunt has been known to calm forces of nature; in Madras India women were known to subdue storms by exposing their genitalia,” the site claims. “In other folklore women could drive away devils, evil spirits and even invading warriors. Raising the Skirt is working to evoke these narratives by using a deep placed wild and somatic drive to reclaim the cunt as a powerful tool in assertion.”

The craziness continues with an explanation of RTS founder Nicola Hunter’s background:

“Nicola Hunter (formerly Canavan) created ‘Raising the Skirt’ from a place of extensive research into the historical links between the vulva and power as well as from a deeply personal place of overcoming judgement [sic] that was placed her own body. The historic and the personal were weaved together with the threads of her performance practice which questions notions of beauty and the status of women both socially and culturally while confronting how the female body is translated across mass media. From these interlinked places she set out to create a space that was rooted in hidden traditions, forged in personal experiences and connected in an ever-expanding community.”

It’s difficult to imagine coming to a place in your life where you feel like exposing yourself is necessary (we have laws against this sort of behavior), but if this sounds like something you’d like to participate in, luckily for you, Raising the Skirt is looking for “contributors” to its website. No previous work experience or higher education necessary. You just have to have a vagina.

“Dear all skirt raisers and allies, I am looking for contributors for the ‘Raising the Skirt’ website,” reads a post on the group’s Facebook page. “RTS is looking for very simple and clear high res digital photographs of your vulvas, pubic hair, photographs of you actioning the ‘Raising the Skirt Roarrrr’ to camera and any personal ‘Ode to my Cunt’ audio/written/drawn memoirs.”

Basically, if you’ve ever been interested in breaking into the amateur porn industry, this is your shot.

A crazed feminist demonstrates the “Raising the Skirt Roar.” (Photo Credit: Raising the Skirt/Facebook)

Call me old-fashioned, but back in the day, we celebrated birthdays and holidays and personal milestones such as graduation from college or retirement after a long and successful career. Not vaginas.

Truth be told, there is no need whatsoever to “celebrate the diversity” of this intimate body part. It’s just like every other part of the body. We all have arms and legs. We all recognize that our arms and legs look different than our neighbor’s limbs. There’s really no need to “celebrate” that or flash people.

If you’re the sort of whackjob who believes that exposing yourself can “subdue storms” and ward off evil spirits, I’m not sure there’s any help for you. Maybe we could get Al Gore in here to see if vaginas can stop global warming, too. What a load of BS.

.