Raising Your Skirt To Celebrate Vagina Diversity Is A Thing Now. - Ch…
I follow a few accounts on Instagram that post hilarious feminist stuff (or, I suppose, anti-feminist stuff), and on one of those accounts today, I came across this:

Obviously, I had to investigate to see if Raising The Skirt is an Actual Thing, which is what led me to the sourcelink. And you guys, their About page is positively insane. It says, in big bold letters across the top, “Reclaim your c*nt. Reclaim our c*nt.” Only without the polite asterisks. And then, in part, it says this (all grammatical errors are theirs):

Raising the Skirt has followed the personal narrative of Nicola Hunter, and was triggered by a deeply personal place of overcoming judgement that was placed their own queer body. Hunter began the project by researching the historical links between the vulva and power in hope to develop a deeper connection to their own body, and more specifically their vulva, which is where they came across the history of Raising the Skirt. The historic and the personal were weaved together with the threads of her performance practice which questions notions of beauty and the status of women both socially and culturally while confronting how the female body is translated across mass media. From these interlinked places she set out to create a space that was rooted in hidden traditions, forged in personal experiences and connected in an ever-expanding community. ‘Raising the Skirts’ began as a three-day workshop funded by Live Arts Development Agency and was co-facilitated by Dawn Felicia Knox, each workshop is a deeply intimate space and created for an authentic experience and is focused on observing, learning about and reclaiming the c*nt… The workshops look specifically at the relationship cis women have had with their genitals from birth which includes a refresher in Personal Sexual Health Education (PSHE). The workshop has been developed through research into the menstrual cycle, internal reproductive system, vaginal health, sexual development, external genitals, the socio-cultural history of the the vulva, the history of raising the skirt and the reclaiming of the cunt. We aim to come together as a group to talk about how our these experiences effect the connection we have with our own bodies and our sexual and intimate relationships in adulthood. The workshops at present focuses on biological function, menstruation and socio-cultural experiences of the vulva from birth so at the moment our work is designed for cis women with very specific lines of enquiry, however as individuals we celebrate people of all genders and are active in fighting for gender equality and supporting the voices of individuals with a spectrum of experiences, the project is in it’s very early stages of development and we need time to invest in research, conversation and action. We want to be representative of all diverse cunts and to open up conversations about what the cunt means to people of all genders. The future for ‘Raising the Skirt’ is to be an inclusive space for dialogue and community. We are very excited to have created a platform for scope to address much more complex questions about gender but unfortunately due to our grass roots we are completely self funded and until we can invest the time to develop our own tool box, the structure of the workshops will remain the same for the short term.

They’re serious about this, you guys. They even have testimonials on their website from women who claim to have been positively impacted affected by this…whatever this is. Like this one, for example:

“I significantly more connected with the experience of owning and embodying my vagina, but most of all, I feel attracted and lured to its appearance and nature more and more by the day. I can appreciate its honesty, authenticity and history, and feel excited about our future together, as opposed to feeling like it was just an arousing orifice for my own and others pleasure. Its more than that now, and I would like to have the opportunity to delve deeper into its ‘being’ whilst sharing the experience with others.”

She’s excited about her future with her vagina, y’all. And she wants to delve deeper into its being.

I can’t even.

But if you CAN even, and you want to contribute your own photos to this…whatever this is, you’re in luck. They’re accepting submissions and are looking for very simple and clear high res photos of your ladyparts.

app-facebook Raising the Skirt www.raisingtheskirt.com about 10 months ago . http://www.raisingtheskirt.com/contribute-to-the-website.ht… Dear all skirt raisers and allies, I am looking for contributors for the the 'Raising the Skirt' website.

RTS is looking for very simple and clear high res digital photographs of your vulvas, pubic hair, photographs of you actioning the 'Raising the Skirt Roarrrr' to camera and any personal 'Ode to my Cunt' audio/written/drawn memoirs. I'm also looking for contributions of associated papers, research, personal exper ... iences and associated art works. All contributions can be anonymous or credited.

Email: raisingtheskirthub@gmail.com for more information

IMAGE: Wellcome Collection See More CONTRIBUTE TO THE WEBSITE Dear all skirt raisers and allies, I am looking for contributors for the the 'Raising the Skirt' website. I am looking for very simple and clear high res digital photographs of your vulvas, pubic... raisingtheskirt.com . . 4 4 10

This is modern-day feminism. This. And this is why so many reasonable, normal, regular women want nothing whatsoever to do with the feminist label.