George W. Bush Selects Diverse Cabinet
President-elect George W. Bush follows through on his campaign pledge to bring diversity to his new administration by selecting a second African-American to his foreign policy team and a Hispanic to be his chief White House counsel.

Transcript

George W. Bush selects diverse cabinet

JOHN SEIGENTHALER, anchor:

Now to politics and the transfer of power. President-elect George W. Bush followed through on his campaign pledge to bring diversity to his new administration again today by selecting a second African-American to his foreign policy team and a Hispanic to be his chief White House counsel. NBC's Campbell Brown joins us tonight from Austin.

Good evening, Campbell.

CAMPBELL BROWN reporting:

Good evening, John. Condoleezza Rice was President-elect Bush's top foreign policy adviser during the campaign. She will continue in that role at the White House as national security adviser.

At the governor's mansion today, Bush described Rice as brilliant, experienced, someone whose judgment he trusts. Rice returns to the White House having last served on the national security team of the previous Bush administration.

Ms. CONDOLEEZZA RICE (National Security Advisor Designate): It's a wonderful time for the United States and foreign policy because it's a time when markets and democracy are spreading, when our values are being affirmed around the world, and yet it's a time of great challenge.

BROWN: Bush also introduced other key members of his team, Texas Supreme Court Justice Alberto Gonzales will become White House counsel, the administration's top lawyer. And campaign communications director Karen Hughes has been given the title of counselor to the president. With the announcement yesterday of Colin Powell as secretary of state, Bush has so far named two women and two African-Americans to top jobs, and today Bush said his choices should send a message.

President-elect GEORGE W. BUSH: People that work hard and make the right decisions in life can achieve anything they want in America.

BROWN: Bush says he expects to name the rest of his White House staff and Cabinet in the next two weeks. The foreign policy team now in place with the appointments of Powell and Rice.