Republicans want a return to workplace immigration raids

They say they'll use their new majority in the House to press for more aggressive enforcement without any path to legal status.

Large-scale workplace arrests of illegal workers were hallmarks of the George W. Bush administration's approach in its final years. But two years ago Obama decided to shift enforcement efforts to focus on employers who knowingly hire illegal workers.

Deportations under Obama have reached new heights for two years running, statistics show, but Republicans said they would use their new majority in the House to press for more aggressive enforcement without any path to legal status.

Republican lawmakers called on the Obama administration to return to the era of workplace raids to arrest illegal employees, an approach that contrasts sharply with the president's continued push to create a path to citizenship for "responsible young people" and deport only those illegal immigrants charged with serious crimes.

Reporting from Washington — Deportations of illegal immigrants have reached new heights for two years running under President Obama, statistics show, but Republicans say they'll use their new majority in the House to press for more aggressive enforcement without any path to legal status.

Arrests from worksite raids for immigration-related offenses, such as using a forged driver's license or a fake Social Security number, have dropped by 70% since the end of the Bush administration, when a series of large raids of factories and meatpacking plants received national media attention.

Because Democrats hold a Senate majority and Obama has veto power, the GOP cannot force a change in the enforcement policy.

But with illegal immigration likely to be a hot-button issue in the 2012 campaign season, House Republicans on the House Judiciary subcommittee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement plan to hold hearings to criticize an administration they claim allows illegal immigrants to take American jobs.

With unemployment over 9%, "it is hard to imagine a worse time to cut worksite enforcement efforts by more than half," Rep. Lamar Smith (R-Texas), chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, said Wednesday. "Citizens and legal immigrants should not be forced to compete with illegal workers for jobs."

The Republican move came a day after Obama, in his State of the Union address, called on Congress to "once and for all" address illegal of immigration — both border security and a path to legalization.

He said he was willing to work with Republicans and Democrats to "address the millions of undocumented workers who are now living in the shadows. I know that debate will be difficult. I know it will take time. But tonight, let's agree to make that effort."

Though workplace raids are high-profile and often receive media attention, they also are criticized as an expensive and unnecessarily traumatic approach to attacking the problem.

Some of the large-scale raids launched in 2007 and 2008 cost taxpayers upward of $10 million, said one former law enforcement official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the debate.

"I was appalled at the raids," Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee (D-Texas) said Wednesday, referring to surprise raids that often involve large numbers of agents and local law enforcement. "In my district people were falling off ladders, pregnant women were falling. It was not effective."

Broad sweeps fill limited jail and court docket space the Obama administration wants to reserve for more hardened criminals, officials said. Each deportation costs the federal government about $12,500, Immigration and Customs Enforcement Deputy Director Kumar Kibble told lawmakers Wednesday.