Ham and Bananas Hollandaise
“Nice with a green salad for brunch or lunch”

There’s a reason why some flavour combinations which, at first glance, seem odd have survived the 1970’s and others died a timely, natural and not particularly sad death (devils on horseback being a perfect example of a plucky survivor – yum!). Bananas, ham, mustard and hollandaise sauce is not a combination that quickly comes to mind and I am pretty sure I have never heard anyone say “I remember an amazing cooked banana and ham dish from my childhood that I MUST recreate”. We set out to find out why.

A few people had sent the idea to us (thank you) and we found the full recipe on a vintage food cards site. There it sat, in all its yellowy glory.

The recipe was one of the easiest we have ever had to make with only five ingredients. In keeping with the retro theme of including as many instant/ tinned ingredients as possible the hollandaise sauce specified was a packet mix. We then just needed bananas, ham, lemon juice and mustard. The mustard was smeared on the ham slices. The lemon juice was sprinkled on the bananas and then the mustardy ham was wrapped around the bananas. The result was baked. The hollandaise sauce was made and poured over and the end result was then baked again for 5 minutes.

I am a huge fan of unexpected fruit/ meat combinations and was really looking forward to this one. The smell of cooking banana filled the house and with great anticipation we pulled it out, dressed it up with some retro accompaniments and served it up.

It didn’t look all that appetising. Despite careful application of lemon juice (both the specified sprinkling AND brushing to ensure even coverage) some of the bananas looked a bit, well, crap. The rest of the bananas shone with a lemony gleam, the ham curled up slightly and the mustard lurked under the surface – unseen but prepared to torpedo your tastebuds. We sliced it up and tucked in anyway.

The result? It wasn’t that bad. There was plenty left over but there were a few surprised noises of appreciation. Probably the worst bit was when you got too much mustard and banana together in a mouthful but other than that it was… ok. On this blog that’s a ringing endorsement.

Advertisements