Astronaut Selection
Frequently Asked Questions What is the best degree field to choose?



Among the academic fields considered qualifying for Astronaut Candidate positions, we would not recommend one over another or specify which might be more appropriate in the future. You should choose a field of study that is of interest to you; this will ensure that, whatever course your career takes, you will be prepared to do something that is personally satisfying. The qualifying degree fields are: Engineering, Biological Science, Physical Science, Computer Science, or Mathematics. You can obtain information on the backgrounds of the current and past astronauts at the following website:



http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/Bios/



Among the academic fields considered qualifying for Astronaut Candidate positions, we would not recommend one over another or specify which might be more appropriate in the future. You should choose a field of study that is of interest to you; this will ensure that, whatever course your career takes, you will be prepared to do something that is personally satisfying. The qualifying degree fields are: Engineering, Biological Science, Physical Science, Computer Science, or Mathematics. You can obtain information on the backgrounds of the current and past astronauts at the following website: http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/Bios/

Are there age restrictions?



There are no age restrictions for the program. Astronaut candidates selected in the past have ranged between the ages of 26 and 46, with the average age being 34.





There are no age restrictions for the program. Astronaut candidates selected in the past have ranged between the ages of 26 and 46, with the average age being 34. Do you have to be a U.S. citizen to apply for the Astronaut Candidate Program?



Yes, you must be a U.S. citizen to apply for the program through NASA, applicants with valid U.S. dual-citizenship are also eligible. It is not recommended that you change your citizenship solely for the purpose of being eligible for the Astronaut Candidate Program.



We do have international astronauts from the countries with which we have an international agreement-Canada, Japan, Russia, Brazil, and Europe select the International Astronaut. Each of these countries has their own Space Agency.



You can obtain information about other space agencies at the following website:



International Space Agencies





Yes, you must be a U.S. citizen to apply for the program through NASA, applicants with valid U.S. dual-citizenship are also eligible. It is not recommended that you change your citizenship solely for the purpose of being eligible for the Astronaut Candidate Program. We do have international astronauts from the countries with which we have an international agreement-Canada, Japan, Russia, Brazil, and Europe select the International Astronaut. Each of these countries has their own Space Agency. You can obtain information about other space agencies at the following website: International Space Agencies What is the best college or university to attend?



NASA cannot recommend one college or university over another, or specify which schools might best prepare an individual for the Astronaut Candidate Program. However, please remember that the college or university you attend must be an accredited institution.



NASA cannot recommend one college or university over another, or specify which schools might best prepare an individual for the Astronaut Candidate Program. However, please remember that the college or university you attend must be an accredited institution.

Is flying experience necessary?



Flying experience is not a requirement. The Astronaut Candidate Program requires either 3 years of professional related experience, or 1,000 hours of pilot-in-command time in jet aircraft to meet the minimum qualification requirement. Jet aircraft experience is usually obtained through the military. Any type of flying experience-military or private, is beneficial to have.



Flying experience is not a requirement. The Astronaut Candidate Program requires either 3 years of professional related experience, or 1,000 hours of pilot-in-command time in jet aircraft to meet the minimum qualification requirement. Jet aircraft experience is usually obtained through the military. Any type of flying experience-military or private, is beneficial to have.

Are waivers granted for any of the medical requirements?



No, NASA does not grant waivers for the medical requirements. When qualifying astronauts for space flight, NASA must look at not only what is required for normal spaceflight operations, but also what each astronaut would require should serious, even life threatening, problems develop. For maximum crew safety, each crewmember must be free of medical conditions that would either impair the person's ability to participate in, or be aggravated by, space flight, as determined by NASA physicians.



No, NASA does not grant waivers for the medical requirements. When qualifying astronauts for space flight, NASA must look at not only what is required for normal spaceflight operations, but also what each astronaut would require should serious, even life threatening, problems develop. For maximum crew safety, each crewmember must be free of medical conditions that would either impair the person's ability to participate in, or be aggravated by, space flight, as determined by NASA physicians.

Is surgery to improve visual acuity allowed?



As of September 2007, the refractive surgical procedures of the eye, PRK and LASIK, are now allowed, providing at least 1 year has passed since the date of the procedure with no permanent adverse after effects. For those applicants under final consideration, an operative report on the surgical procedure will be requested.



As of September 2007, the refractive surgical procedures of the eye, PRK and LASIK, are now allowed, providing at least 1 year has passed since the date of the procedure with no permanent adverse after effects. For those applicants under final consideration, an operative report on the surgical procedure will be requested.

Is it better to apply as a civilian or through the military?



Military experience is not a requirement for the Astronaut Candidate Program. Active duty military personnel must submit applications for the Astronaut Candidate Program through their respective service. After preliminary screening by the military, eligible applications are submitted to NASA for further consideration. If selected, military personnel are detailed to NASA for a selected period of time.



Military experience is not a requirement for the Astronaut Candidate Program. Active duty military personnel must submit applications for the Astronaut Candidate Program through their respective service. After preliminary screening by the military, eligible applications are submitted to NASA for further consideration. If selected, military personnel are detailed to NASA for a selected period of time.

What is the annual salary for astronauts?

Salaries for civilian Astronaut Candidates are based upon the Federal Government's General Schedule pay scale for grades GS-11 through GS-14. The grade is determined in accordance with each individual's academic achievements and experience. Currently a GS-11 starts at $66,026 per year and a GS-14 can earn up to $144,566 per year.



Military Astronaut Candidates are detailed to the Johnson Space Center and remain in an active duty status for pay, benefits, leave, and other similar military matters.

How do I apply through USAJOBS? Make sure your Pop-Up Blocker is turned off. You must Create a Resume through USAJOBS first. Search Jobs for the Astronaut Candidate position or Vacancy Announcement number. Select the Astronaut Candidate vacancy announcement. Apply Online for the Astronaut Candidate position. You will receive an e-mail acknowledging receipt of your resume.

To receive consideration, you must create a resume using the USAJobs resume builder, answer the screening questions, answer the NASA-specific questions, upload your transcript(s), and provide at least five references. The NASA questions appear after you submit your application and are transferred to the NASA web site. If you successfully apply, USAJOBS will show your application status as 'Received'. If your status is Application Status Not Available', you have not successfully applied. Do not rely on a USAJOBS email to confirm successful application. Only an email from NASA confirms a successful application.

Can I update my application and/or forms after I have submitted them?



You can update your application and/or forms any time before the closing date. If you update your resume you will have to reapply to the Vacancy Announcement through USAJOBS. The application date will change anytime you make an update. The date of your application will not affect our consideration of your application. We will not be reviewing any of the applications until after the closing date. How do I update my application after the closing date of the vacancy announcement? Please be sure to include all information you would like to be considered before submitting your application. Once the announcement closes, only updates to contact information will be accepted. Please do not send copies of diplomas, letters of recommendation, or any other unsolicited application material. How does an active-duty military person apply for the Astronaut Candidate Program? Active-duty military applicants must apply through both USAJOBS and their respective military service. Please follow the procedures of your respective branch of military service. Does an active-duty military applicant submit their transcripts to NASA? Please follow the application procedures listed on USAJobs, which includes uploading copies of your transcripts at the time you submit your resume. Do my transcripts have to be in a sealed envelope?



This selection cycle we will be asking for potential applicants to upload their transcripts at the time they submit their resumes to the vacancy announcement on USAJobs. Please upload transcripts that show both the degree conferred and the date the degree was conferred.

How do I contact the Astronaut Selection Office?



You may contact the Astronaut Selection Office at astronaut.selection@nasa.gov or 281-483-5907.

Who do I contact if I have medical questions?



You may contact the Flight Medicine Clinic at 281-483-7999.