Funding College for Gold Star and Military Families – Clarifying Misinformation
There have been media reports and dialogue on a recent vote in the Assembly Higher Education Committee on a bill regarding funding college tuition for military families. Unfortunately, the dialogue has included misinformation that is downright inaccurate regarding resources that are available to Gold Star families for college tuition assistance and college costs. Frankly, I understand and would agree with the disappointment and frustration that has been expressed if I was relying solely on the information being circulated that incorrectly states that the Higher Education Committee blocked a bill from moving forward that would provide free college to Gold Star Families. Also, I wholeheartedly agree with the overall objective of the legislation proposed by Assemblymember Hawley and the vote to hold in it committee was not a vote opposing a bill. I only wish he had raised the issue during the budgetary process so that the costs and other issues could be addressed in a timely manner.

Important details have been left out of the press reports and I would like to offer some information on the committee vote and provide context explaining why the bill was held. This is a long explanation but I hope you bear with me and read the citations that I provide to allow you to ascertain the facts for yourself.

The most glaring piece of misinformation is that the committee sought to deny Gold Star families free college tuition. New York State already provides free college tuition and money for expenses for Gold Star families and families of military personnel that are not Gold Star through the Military Enhanced Recognition, Incentive and Tribute (MERIT) Scholarship. The current MERIT scholarship is a program in which any person who applies and meets the eligibility requirements will receive a financial award. The scholarship covers both tuition and non-tuition costs (books, supplies, transportation, and housing) for a maximum annual award of $24,250. The current law only applies to those spouses, children, and financial dependents of New York State military personnel who 1) have died, become severely or permanently disabled, or has been classified as missing in action in a combat zone; or (2) has died or become severely or permanently disabled as a result of injury or illness suffered or incurred during military training in preparation for duty in a combat zone.

It should be noted that the 2019-20 enacted budget provided $2.7 million for the MERIT scholarship for 145 recipients. This scholarship initially began in 2003 as a direct response to the 9/11 attacks and the Iraq and Afghanistan Wars. More information about the scholarship is here: https://www.hesc.ny.gov/pay-for-college/financial-aid/types-of-financial-aid/nys-grants-scholarships-awards/msrs-scholarship.html

The sponsor of Assembly bill A.2991, Assemblymember Hawley, who is a member of the minority conference, filed a motion to discharge the bill from committee which requires the committee to take action on the legislation.

The substance of the Hawley bill (text available here https://nyassembly.gov/leg/?default_fld=&leg_video=&bn=A02991&term=2019&Memo=Y&Text=Y) would expand eligibility for this program that already exists. The bill would give scholarships to the spouses, children, and financial dependents of New York State military personnel who have died while performing official military duties (not necessarily within a combat zone), a meritorious goal, but a major expansion to the current law with significant fiscal implications.

It is very important to note that the definition of a Gold Star Family is a very specific designation. Gold Star Family Members are the immediate family members of fallen service members who died while serving in conflict.

While I respect the sacrifices of all military family and personnel, those who would be impacted by the Hawley bill are not Gold Star families who already receive the benefits of the MERIT scholarship.

The committee moved to hold the bill due to the fact that it is an issue that is more appropriately addressed in the context of state budget discussions. The effect of the Hawley bill would significantly change the current program and would increase eligibility to the point where additional funding would be necessary. Therefore, there are very likely significant costs attached to the proposal that were not appropriated for in the 2019-20 enacted state budget.

The members who voted to hold the bill in committee were not voting against the bill, the issue, or the concept. Instead I believe further discussion is needed on how we fund the bill, rather than advancing a bill that does not have funding attached to it, which would be a disservice to those who may not be as familiar with the state budget process.

It is unfortunate that the member who sponsored the bill did not speak up during the budget process to include this component in the budget process that was just completed on April 1st and instead filed the motion after the budget when it is known at the very least among legislators that fiscal items are addressed during the budget process.

What is really unfortunate is that the minority group that is raising this issue did not spend 15-30 minutes getting an estimate of the cost of the enhancement. One might be surprised that it might not be that much and I for sure will work to find out now that this has been brought to our attention. The third unfortunate is this – the group raising this issue voted AGAINST the 145 recipients that are eligible to receive this scholarship. Fortunately a majority of the members joined in to make sure those 145 students where not abandoned.

In the course of this discussion, the question has been raised as to why we are funding college education for undocumented immigrants through the Dream Act. The criticism I have been seeing and hearing is that we are “giving away free college to illegals.” I would like to clarify what the Dream Act actually does. The Dream Act allows undocumented college-bound students who meet certain eligibility requirements – such as attending high school in New York – to access the state Tuition Assistance Program (TAP) (a grant limited to $50-$5165) and other assistance programs, including the Higher Education Opportunity Program (HEOP), Education Opportunity Program (EOP), Collegiate Science and Technology Entry Program (C-STEP) and similar programs at community colleges. It also expands access to the New York State College Tuition Savings (529) Program so children of undocumented immigrant parents with a valid taxpayer identification number can use their own funds to set up tuition savings accounts.

It is important to keep in mind some facts regarding the children of undocumented immigrants, many are born here and therefore that was not their choice. They have already received a K-12 education and that the tuition assistance provided via TAP Funds are historically never fully expended as they are the last dollars added to a college tuition cost.

I realize that individual feelings about immigrants and legal status clouds this discussion and I respect that. That being said, many of these students are taxpayers and overall the approximately 760,000 immigrants in this state pay over $1.1 billion in state and local taxes each year. That is a little known fact (not myth) and one that was part of the discussion when this bill was discussed.

I hope that clears some things up and if not, I am always happy to discuss further.