Full text of "Margaret Sanger; an autobiography."

jniversity of Connecticut libraries kv "I »-.•#?> »* .... *. HQ 764.S3A3 Margaret Sanger; hbl, stx 3 C I153 D073MflQ3 2 Co Digitized by the Internet Archive in 2012 with funding from LYRASIS members and Sloan Foundation http://archive.org/details/margaretsangerau1938sang MARGARET SANGER ^r Margaret Sanger PLEASE NOTE It has been necessary to replace some of the original pages in this book with photocopy reproductions because of damage or mistreatment by a previous user. Replacement of damaged materials is both expensive and time-consuming. Please handle this volume with care so that information will not be lost to future readers. Thank you for helping to preserve the University's research collections. MARGARET SANGER -aJ^5^^^^«5»^-3»^^^-5JMK»^ «S-«K-gfr«6~«C>«3S-«K~««-«$-«g- ?An <iAutobiography new york W-W-NORTON 6f COMPANY publishers Copyright, 1938, by W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. 70 Fifth Avenue, New York First Edition PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA FOR THE PUBLISHERS BY THE VAIL-BALLOU PRESS TO ALL THE PIONEERS OF NEW AND BETTER WORLDS TO COME ACKNOWLEDGMENTS My thanks are due especially to Rackham Holt for her discerning aid in organizing material and for her untiring and inspired advice dur- ing the preparation of this book; as well as to Walter S. Hayward whose able assistance has helped to make the task lighter. In the course of preparing this narrative many books have been consulted. I trust their authors zvill agree with me that a bibliography in a personal history is cumbersome and accept a general but none the less grateful acknowledgment. My admiration has always gone out to the person who can put him- self in print and set down for historical purposes an exact record of his honest feelings and thoughts, even though they may seem to re- flect upon many of his friends and helpers. I have not in this story hurt any one by intent. Because its thread has, of necessity, followed dramatic highlights, many people who played prominent parts have not been mentioned. These I have not forgotten, nor those numerous others who made smaller offerings. Some have pioneered in their special fields and localities; seme have given generously and unfail- ingly of their financial help; some have volunteered in full measure their time and efforts as officers and Committee members; some have fought and labored by my side throughout the years; some have stepped in for only a brief but significant role. Although on the out- skirts of the army, it is to these last as well as to those in the vanguard that the advance has been made. And particularly do I zuish to thank those co-workers and members of the various staffs whose contribu- tions can in no way be measured by tlieir duties, and whose indefati- gable, loyal devotion Jias been a bulwark of strength to me at all times. 5 6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS It has been impossible to carry out my sincere desire to give per- sonal and individual recognition and expression of gratitude to all. Neither a history of the birth control movement nor the part I have taken in it could be complete, hozvever, did I not pay tribute to the integrity, valiance, courage, and clarity of vision of the men and women who, year after year, maintained their principles, and never swerved from them in a cause which belongs to all of us. TABLE OF CONTENTS I. FROM WHICH I SPRING 1 1 II. . BLIND GERMS OF DAYS TO BE 2\ IJI. BOOKS ARE THE COMPASSES 33 IV. DARKNESS THERE AND NOTHING MORE 46 V. CORALS TO CUT LIFE UPON 58 VI. FANATICS OF THEIR PURE IDEALS 68 VII. THE TURBID EBB AND FLOW OF MISERY 86 VIII. I HAVE PROMISES TO KEEP 93 IX. THE WOMAN REBEL I06 X. WE SPEAK THE SAME GOOD TONGUE 121 XI. HAVELOCK ELLIS 1 33 XII. STORK OVER HOLLAND 1 42 XIII. THE PEASANTS ARE KINGS 153 XIV. O, TO BE IN ENGLAND 1 69 XV. HIGH HANGS THE GAUNTLET 179 XVI. HEAR ME FOR MY CAUSE 1 92 XVII. FAITH I HAVE BEEN A TRUANT IN THE LAW 2IO XVIII. LEAN HUNGER AND GREEN THIRST 224 XIX. THIS PRISON WHERE I LIVE 238 XX. A STOUT HEART TO A STEEP HILL 25 1 XXI. THUS TO REVISIT 268 XXII. DO YE HEAR THE CHILDREN WEEPING? 280 XXIII. IN TIME WE CAN ONLY BEGIN 292 7 8 table of contexts xxiv. laws were like cobwebs 306 xxv. alien" stars arise 316 xxvi. the east is blossoming 327 xxvii. ancients of the earth 337 xxviii. the world is much the same everywhere 349 xxix. while the doctors consult 358 xxx. now is the time for converse 369 xxxi. great heights are hazardous 376 xxxii. change is hopefully begun 392 xxxiii. old father antic, the law 398 xxxiv. senators, be not affrighted 413 xxxv. a past which is goxn'e forever 43 1 xxxvi. faith is a fine invention 447 xxxvit. who can take a dream for truth? 461 xxxviii. depth but not tumult 478 xxxix. slow grows the splendid pattern 493 index 497 MARGARET SANGER Chapter One FROM WHICH I SPRING "'Where shall I begin, please your Majesty?' he asked. 'Begin at the beginning,' the King said, very gravely, 'and go on till you come to the end: then stop.'" LEWIS CARROLL THE streets of Corning, New York, where I was born, climb .right up from the Chemung River, which cuts the town in two ; the people who live there have floppy knees from going up and down. When I was a little girl the oaks and the pines met the stone walks at the top of the hill, and there in the woods my father built his house, hoping mother's "congestion of the lungs" would be helped if she could breathe the pure, balsam-laden air. My mother, Anne Purcell, always had a cough, and when she braced herself against the wall the conversation, which was forever echoing from room to room, had to stop until she recovered. She was slender and straight as an arrow, with head well set on sloping shoul- ders, black, wavy hair, skin white and spotless, and with wide-apart eyes, gray-green, flecked with amber. Her family had been Irish as far back as she could trace; the strain of the Norman conquerors had run true throughout the generations, and may have accounted for her unfaltering courage. Mother's sensitivity to beauty found some of its expression in flowers. We had no money with which to buy them, and she had no time to grow them, but the woods and fields were our garden. I can never remember sitting at a table not brightened with, blossoms ; from the first spring arbutus io the last goldenrod of autumn we had an abundance. Although this was the Victorian Age, our home was almost free ii 12 MARGARET SANGER from Victorianism. Father himself had made our furniture. He had even cut and polished the slab of the big "marble-topped table," as it was always called. Only in the spare room stood a piece bought at a store — a varnished washstand. The things you made yourself were not considered quite good enough for guests. Sometimes father's visitors were doctors, teachers, or perhaps the village priest, but mostly they were the artisans of the community — cabinet makers, masons, carpenters who admired his ideas as well as shared his pas- sion for hunting. In between tramping the woods and talking they had helped to frame and roof the house, working after hours to do this. Father, Michael Hennessy Higgins, born in Ireland, was a non- conformist through and through. All other men had beards or mus- taches — not lie. His bright red mane, worn much too long accord- ing to the family, swept back from his massive brow ; he would not clip it short as most fathers did. Actually it suited his finely-modeled head. He was nearly six feet tall and hard-muscled; his keen blue eyes were set off by pinkish, freckled skin. Homily and humor rip- pled unceasingly from his generous mouth in a brogue which he never lost. The jokes with which he punctuated every story were picked up, retold, and scattered about. When I was little they were beyond me, but I could hear my elders laughing. The scar on father's forehead was his badge of war service. When Lincoln had called for volunteers against the rebellious South, he had taken his only possessions, a gold watch inherited from his grandfather and his own father's legacy of three hundred dollars, and had run away from his home in Canada to enlist. But he had been told he was not old enough, and was obliged to wait impa- tiently a year and a half until, on his fifteenth birthday, he had joined the Twelfth New York Volunteer Cavalry as a drummer boy. One of father's adventures had been the capture of a Confederate captain on a fine mule, the latter being counted the more valuable acquisition to the regiment. We were brought up in the tradition that he had been one of three men selected by Sherman for brav- ery. That made us very proud of him. Better not start anything with father; he could beat anybody! But he himself had been appalled by the brutalities of war; never thereafter was he interested in fighting, FROM WHICH I SPRING 1 3 unless perhaps his Irish sportsmanship cropped out when two well- matched dogs were set against each other. Immediately upon leaving the Army father had studied anatomy, medicine, and phrenology, but these had been merely for perfecting his skill in modeling. He made his living by chiseling angels and saints out of huge blocks of white marble or gray granite for tomb- stones in cemeteries/He was a philosopher., a rebel, and an artist, none of which was calculated to produce wealth.jOur existence was like that ofy any artist's family — chickens today and feathers to- morrow. ' i "Christmases were on the poverty line. If any of us needed a new winter overcoat or pair of overshoes, these constituted our presents. I was the youngest of six, but after me others kept coming until we were eleven. Our dolls were babies — living, wriggling bodies to bathe and dress instead of lifeless faces that never cried or slept. A pine beside the door was our Christmas tree. Father liked us to use natu- ral things and we had to rely upon ingenuity rather than the village stores, so we decorated it with white popcorn and red cranberries which we strung ourselves. Our most valuable gift was that of im- agination. We had little time for recreation. School was five miles away and we had to walk back and forth twice a day as well as perform house- hold duties. The boys milked the cow, tended the chickens, and took care of Tom, the old white horse which pulled our sleigh up and down the hill. The girls helped put the younger children to bed, molded clothes, set the table, cleaned the vegetables, and washed the dishes. We accepted all this with no sense of deprivation or aggrieve- merit, being, if anything, proud of sharing responsibility. And we made the most of our vacations. There were so many of us that we did not have to depend upon outsiders, and Saturday after- noons used to put on plays by ourselves in the barn. Ordinarily we were shy about displaying emotions; we looked upon tears and temper in other homes with shocked amazement as signs of ill-breeding. Play-acting, however, was something else again. Here we could find outlet for histrionic talent and win admiration instead of lifted eyebrows. I rather fancied myself as an actress, and often mimicked some of the local characters, to the apparent pleasure of my limited 14 MARGARET SANGER audience of family and neighbors. It was not long before I slipped into declaiming. The Lady of Lyons was one of my specialties : This is thy palace, where the perfumed light Steals through the mist of alabaster lamps, And every air is heavy with the sighs Of orange groves, and music from the sweet lutes And murmurs of low fountains, that gush forth F the midst of roses ! All outdoors was our playground, but I was not conscious at the time of my love for the country. Things in childhood change per- spective. What was taken for granted then assumes great significance in later life. I knew how the oak tree grew and where the white and yellow violets could be found, and with a slight feeling of superiority I showed and expounded these mysteries to town children. Not until pavements were my paths did I realize how much a part of me the country was, and how I missed it. We were all, brothers and sisters alike, healthy and strong, vigor- ous and active ; our appetites were curtailed only through necessity. We played the same games together and shared the same sports — baseball, skating, swimming, hunting. Nevertheless, except that we all had red hair, shading from carrot to bronze, we were sharply distinct physically. The girls were small and feminine, the boys husky ?:id brawny. When I went out into the world and observed men, otherwise admirable, who could not pound a nail or use a saw, pick, shovel, or ax, I was dumfounded. I had always taken for granted that any man could make things with his hands. I expected this even of women. My oldest sister, Mary, possessed, more than the rest of us, an innate charm and gentleness. She could do anything along domestic lines — embroidery, dress making, tailor- ing, cooking ; she could concoct the most delicious and unusual foods, and mix delicate pastries. But she was also an expert at upholster- ing, carpentry, painting, roofing with shingles or with thatch. When Mary was in the house, we never had to send for a plumber. She rode gracefully and handled the reins from the carriage seat with equal dexterity; she could milk a cow and deliver a baby; neighbors called her to tend their sick cattle, or, when death came, to lay out the body; FROM WHICH I SPRING 1 5 she tutored in mathematics and Latin, and was well-read in the classics, yet she liked most the theater, and was a dramatic critic whose judgment was often sought. In all that she did her sweetness and dearness were apparent, though she performed her many kind- nesses in secret. She left the home roof while I was still a child, but she never failed to send Christmas boxes in which every member of the family shared, each gift beautifully wrapped and decorated with ribbons and cards. My brothers were ardent sportsmen, although they might not have been outstanding scholars. They could use their fists and were as good shots as their father. For that matter, we all knew how to shoot ; any normal person could manage a gun. Father was a great hunter. Our best times were when friends of his came to spend the night, talking- late, starting early the next morning for the heavy woods which were full of foxes, rabbits, partridge, quail, and pheasant. Someone was always cleaning and oiling a gun in the kitchen or carrying food to the kennels. The boys were devoted to their fox and rabbit hounds, but father lavished his affection on bird dogs. Our favorite came to us unsought, unbought, and I had a prideful part in his joining the family. One afternoon I was sitting alone by the nameless brook which ran by our house, clear and cool, deep enough in some places to take little swims on hot summer days. I was engaged in pinning together with thorns a wreath of leaves to adorn my head when a large, white dog ambled up, sniffed, wagged his tail, and seemed to want to belong. This was no ordinary cur, but a well-bred English setter which had evidently been lost. How father would love him ! Even though the dog had no collar, I was slightly uneasy as to my right of ownership. One conspicuous brown-red spot on the back of his neck simplified my problem. Unobtrusively I slipped him into the barn, tied him up, selected a brush, dipped it in one of the cans of paint always on hand, and multiplied the one spot by ten. For a day, waiting for them to dry, I fed him well with food filched from the rations of the other kennel occupants, then led him forth, his hairy dots stiffened with paint, and offered him to father as a special present. Accepting the gift in the spirit in which it was intended, father 1 6 MARGARET SANGER admired the dog's points, and, with an unmistakable twinkle, lent himself to a deception which, of course, could deceive nobody. When Saturday night came, the neighborhood looked the animal over ; none knew him so we named him Toss and admitted him to the house. Later he bred with an Irish setter of no importance, and one of the resultant puppies, Beauty, shared his privileges. Toss, as well as everybody else, subscribed to the idea that the "artist" in father must be catered to. With the first sound of his clearing his throat in the morning Toss picked up the shoes which had been left out to be cleaned, and carried them one at a time to the bedroom door, then stood wagging his tail, waiting to be patted. Fa- ther's shoes were always polished, his trousers always creased. Every day, even when going to work, he put on spotless white shirts with starched collars and attachable cuffs ; these were something of a lux- ury, because they had to be laundered at home, but they got done somehow. Father took little or no responsibility for the minute details of the daily tasks. I can see him when he had nothing on hand, laughing and joking or reading poetry. Mother, however, was everlastingly busy sewing, cooking, doing this and that. For so ardent and coura- geous a woman he must have been trying, and I still wonder at her patience. She loved her children deeply, but no one ever doubted that she idolized her husband, and through the years of her wedded life to her early death never wavered in her constancy. Father's devo- tion to mother, though equally profound, never evidenced itself in practical ways. The relation existing between our parents was unusual for its day ; they had the idea of comradeship and not merely loved but liked and respected each other. There was no quarreling or bickering ; none of us had to take sides, saying, "Father is right," or, "Mother is right." We knew that if we pleased one we pleased the other, and such an atmosphere leaves its mark; we felt secure from emotional uncer- tainty, and were ourselves guided towards certainty in our future. We were all friends together, though not in the modern sense of familiarity. A little dignity and formality were always maintained and we were invariably addressed by our full names. The century of the child had not yet been ushered in. FROM WHICH I SPRING 1 7 In those days young people, unless invited to speak, were seen and not heard/ But as soon as father considered us old enough to have ideas or opinions, we were given full scope to express them jno mat- ter how adolescent. He hated the slavery of pattern and following of examples and believed in the equality of the sexes; not only did he come out strongly for woman suffrage in the wake of Susan B. Anthony, but he advocated Mrs. Bloomer's bloomers as attire for women, though his wife and daughters never wore them. He fought for free libraries, free education, free books in the public schools, and freedom of the mind from dogma and cant. Sitting comfortably with his feet on the table he used to say, "You should give something back to your country because you as a child were rocked in the cradle of liberty and nursed at the breast of the goddess of truth." Father always talked like that. Although the first Socialist in the community, father also took single tax in his stride and became the champion and friend of Henry George. Progress and Poverty was one of the latest additions to our meager bookshelf. He laughed and rejoiced when he came upon what to him were meaty sentences, reading them aloud to mother, who ac- cepted them as fine because he said they were fine. The rest of us all . had to plow through the book in order, as he said, to "elevate the mind." To me it still remains one of the dullest ever written. Mother's loyalty to father was tested repeatedly. Hers were the responsibilities of feeding and clothing and managing on his in- come, combined with the earnings of the oldest children. But fa- ther's generosity took no cognizance of fact. Once he was asked to buy a dozen bananas for supper. Instead, he purchased a stalk of ^fifteen dozen, and on his way home gave every single one to school- boys and girls playing at recess. On another occasion he showed up with eight of a neighbor's children ; the ninth had been quarantined for diphtheria. They lived with us for two months, crowded into our beds, tucked in between us at the table. Mother welcomed them as she did his other guests. The house was always open. She was not so much social-minded as inherently hospitable. But with her frail body and slim pocketbook, it took courage to smile. Once only that I can remember did mother's patience give way. That was when father invaded her realm too drastically and invited 1 8 MARGARET SANGER Henry George to lecture at the leading hotel — with banquet thrown in. From the money saved for the winter coal he had taken enough to entertain fifty men whose children were well-fed and well-clothed. This was the sole time I ever knew my parents to be at odds, though even then I heard no quarreling words. Whatever happened between them I was not sure, but father spent several days wooing back the smile and light to her eyes. After Henry George's visit we had to go without coal most of the winter. With more pleasure than Progress and Poverty I recall a History of the World, Lalla Rookh, Gulliver's Travels, and Aesop's Fables. The last-named touched a sympathetic, philosophical chord in fa- ther. "Wolf! Wolf!" and "Sour Grapes" were often used to ex- emplify the trifling imperfections to which all human beings were subject. For his parables he drew also on the Bible, the most enor- mous volume you ever laid eyes on, brass bound, with heavy clasps, which was the repository of the family statistics; every birth, mar- riage, death was entered there. The handbooks to father's work were the physiologies, one of which was combined with a materia medica. These were especially attractive to me, perhaps because they were illustrated with vivid plates, mostly red and blue, and described the fascinating, unknown interior of the human body. Neighbors were constantly coming to father for help. "What do you think is the matter with this child?" Even without a thermometer he could tell by feeling the skin whether you were feverish. He pre- scribed bismuth if the diagnosis were "summer complaint," castor oil if you had eaten something which had disagreed with you, and always sulphur and molasses in the spring "to clean the blood." Father's cure-all was whiskey — "good whiskey," which "liberated the spirit." There was nothing from a deranged system to a de- pressed mind that it could not fix up. He never drank alone, but no masculine guest ever entered the door or sat down to pass the time of day without his producing the bottle. "Have a little shtimulant ?" The chief value of whiskey to father, however, was medicinal. If mumps turned into a large, ugly abscess, he put the blade of his jack- knife in the fire, lanced the gland, and cleaned the wound with whiskey — good whiskey. When my face was swollen with erysipelas, FROM WHICH I SPRING 19 he painted it morning, afternoon, and evening with tincture of io- dine ; the doctor had so ordered. I was held firmly in place each time this torture was inflicted, and, as soon as released, jumped and ran screaming and howling into the cellar, where I plunged my burning face into a pan of cool buttermilk until the pain subsided. This went on for several days, and I was growing exhausted from the dreaded iodine. Finally father decided to abandon the treatment and substi- tute good whiskey. Then I recovered. As necessary to father as the physiologies was a book by the fa- mous phrenologist, Orson Fuller, under whom he had studied. Fa- ther believed implicitly that the head was the sculptured expression of the soul. Straight or slanting eyes, a ridge between them, a turned-up nose, full lips, bulges in front of or behind the ears — all these traits had definite meaning for him. A research worker had to be- inquisitive, a seeker with more than normal curiosity-bumps ; a musician had to have order and time over the eyebrows ; a pugilist could not he made but had to have the proper protuberances around the ears. One of father's phrases was, "Nature is the perfect sculptor ; she is never wrong. If you seem to have made a mistake in reading, it is because you have not read correctly." He himself seldom made a mis- take, and his reputation spread far and wide. Young men in confu- sion of mind and the customary puzzled, pre-graduation state came from Cornell and other colleges to consult him about their careers. He examined heads and faces, told them where he thought their true vocations lay, and supplemented this advice later with voluminous in- terested correspondence. I could not help picking up his principles and some of his ardor, though I have never been able to analyze char- acter so well. No amount of front or salesmanship could divert him, whereas I have often been taken in by a person's self-confidence and estimation of himself. In the predominantly Roman Catholic community of Corning, set crosses in the cemeteries were the rule for the poor and, before they went out of style, angels in various poses for the rich. I used to watch father at work. The rough, penciled sketch indicated little; even less did the first unshaped block of stone. He played with the hard, unyielding marble as though it were clay, making a tiny chip 20 MARGARET SANGER for a mouth, which grew rounder and rounder. A face then emerged, a shoulder, a sweep of drapery, praying hands, until finally the whole j stood complete with wings and halo. Although Catholics were father's best patrons, by nature and up- bringing he deplored their dogma. He joined the Knights of Labor, who were agitating against the influx of unskilled immigrants from Catholic countries, and this did not endear him to his clientele. Still less did his espousal of Colonel Robert G. Ingersoll, a man after his own heart, whose works he had eagerly studied and used as texts. Once when the challenger was sounding a ringing defiance in near-by towns, father extended an invitation to speak in Corning and en- lighten it. He collected subscriptions to pay for the only hall in town, owned by Father Coghlan. A notice was inserted in the paper that the meeting would be held the following Sunday, but chiefly the news spread by word of mouth. "Better come. Tell all your friends." Sunday afternoon arrived, and father escorted "Colonel Bob" from the hotel to the hall, I trotting by his side. We pushed through the waiting crowd, but shut doors stared silently and reprovingly — word had also reached Father Coghlan. Some were there to hear and learn, others to denounce. Antipathies between the two suddenly exploded in action. Tomatoes, apples, and cabbage stumps began to fly.^This was my first experience of rage directed against those holding views which were contrary to accepted /ones!\[t was my first, but by no means my last. I was to encounter it many times, and always with the same bewilderment and disdain. My father apparently felt only the disdain. Resolutely he announced the meeting would take place in the woods near our home an hour later, then led Ingersoll and the "flock" through the streets. I trudged along again, my small hand clasped in his, my head held just as high. Who cared for the dreary, dark, little hall ! In the woodland was room for all. Those who had come for discussion sat spell-bound on the ground in a ring around the standing orator. For them the boo- ing had been incidental and was ignored. I cannot remember a word of what Colonel Ingersoll said, but the scene remains. It was late in the afternoon, and the tall pines shot up against the fiery radiance of the setting sun, which lit the sky with the brilliance peculiar to the afterglows of the Chemung Valley. FROM WHICH I SPRING 21 Florid, gray-haired Father Coghlan, probably tall in his prime, came to call on mother. He was a kindly old gentleman, not really intolerant. Shutting the hall had been a matter of principle; he could not have an atheist within those sacred walls. But he was willing to talk about it afterwards. In fact, he rather enjoyed arguing with rebels. He was full of persuasion which he used on mother, begging her to exercise her influence with father to make him refrain from his evil ways. She had been reared in the faith, although since her marriage to a freethinker which had so distressed her parents, she had never attended church to my knowledge. The priest was troubled to see her soul damned when she might have been a good Catholic, and implored her to send her children to church and to the parochial school, to stand firm against the intrusion of godlessness. Mother must have suffered from the conflict. None of us realized how the Ingersoll episode was to affect our well-being. Thereafter we were known as children of the devii^ On our way to school names were shouted, tongues stuck out, grimaces made; the juvenile stamp of disapproval had been set upon us. But we had been so steeped in "heretic" notions that we were not par- ticularly bothered by this and could not see ahead into the dark fu- ture when a hard childhood was to be made harder. No more marble angels were to be carved for local Catholic cemeteries, and, while father's income was diminishing, the family was increasing. Occasionally big commissions were offered him in adjacent towns where his reputation was still high, and he was then away for days at a time, coming back with a thousand or fifteen hundred dollars in his pocket; we all had new clothes, and the house was full of plenty. Food was bought for the winter — turnips, apples, flour, po- tatoes. But then again a year might pass before he had another one, and meanwhile we had sunk deeply into debt. Towards orthodox religion' father's own attitude remained one of tolerance. He looked upon the New Testament as the noble story of a human being which, because of ignorance and the lack of print- ing presses, had become exaggerated. He maintained that religions served their purpose; some people depended on them all their lives for discipline — to keep them straight, to make them honest. Others did not need to be so held in line. But subjection to any church was 22 MARGARET SANGER a reflection on strength and character. You should be able to get from yourself what you had to go to church for. 'When we asked which Sunday School we should attend, he sug- gested, "Try them all, but be chained to none." For a year or two I made the rounds, especially at Christmas and Easter, when you re- ceived oranges and little bags of candy. It was always cold at the Catholic church and the wooden benches were very bare and hard; some seats were upholstered in soft, red cloth but these were for the rich, who rented the pews and put dollars into the plate at collection. I never liked to see the figure of Jesus on the cross ; we could not help Him because He had been crucified long ago. I much preferred the Virgin Mary; she was beautiful, smiling — the way I should like to look when I had a baby. Saying my prayers for mother's benefit was spasmodic. Ethel, the sister nearest my own age, was more given than I to religious phases and I could get her in bed faster if I said them with her. One eve- ning when we had finished this dutiful ritual I climbed on father's chair to kiss him good night. He asked quizzically, "What was that you were saying about bread ?" "Why, that was in the Lord's Prayer, 'Give us this day our daily bread.' " "Who were you talking to ?" "To God." "Is God a baker?" I was shocked. Nevertheless, I rallied to the attack and replied as best I could, doubtless influenced by conversations I had heard. "No, of course not. It means the rain, the sunshine, and all the things to make the wheat, which makes the bread." "Well, well," he replied, "so that's the idea. Then why don't you say so ? Always say what you mean, my daughter ; it is much better." Thereafter I began to question what I had previously taken for granted and to reason for myself. It was not pleasant, but father had taught me to think. He gave none of us much peace. When we put on stout shoes he said, "Very nice. Very comfortable. Do you know who made them?" "Why, yes, the shoemaker." We then had to listen to graphic descriptions of factory conditions FROM WHICH I SPRING 23 in the shoe industry, so that we might learn something of the misery and poverty the workers suffered in order to keep our feet warm and dry. Father never talked about religion without bringing in the ballot box. In fact, he took up Socialism because he believed it Christian philosophy put into practice, and to me its ideals still come nearest to carrying out what Christianity was supposed to do. Unceasingly he tried to inculcate in us the idea that our duty lay not in consider- ing what might happen to us after death, but in doing something here and now to make the lives of other human beings more decent. "You have no right to material comforts without giving back to society the benefit of your honest experience," was one of his maxims, and his parting words to each of his sons and daughters who had grown old enough to fend for themselves were J "Leave the world better because you, my child, have dwelt in it." J This was something to live up to. Chapter Two BLIND GERM OF DAYS TO BE "l think, dearest Uncle, that you cannot really wish me to be the 'mamma d'une nombreuse famille,' for I think you will see the great inconvenience a large family would be to us all, and particu- larly to the country, independent of the hardship and inconvenience to myself; men never think, at least seldom think, ivhat a hard task it is for us women to go through this very often." QUEEN VICTORIA to KING LEOPOLD OFTEN when my brothers and sisters and I meet we remind each other of funny or exciting adventures we used to have, but I never desire to live that early part of my life again. Childhood is supposed to be a happy time. Mine was difficult, though I did not then think of it as a disadvantage nor do I now. It never occurred to me to ask my parents for pocket money, but the day came during my eighth year when I was desperately in want of ten cents. Uncle Tom's Cabin was coming to town. On Sat- urday afternoon I started out with one of my playmates, she with her dime, I with nothing but faith. We reached the Corning Opera House half an hour early. The throng at the entrance grew thicker and thicker. Curtain time had almost come, and still no miracle. Nevertheless, I simply had to get into that theater. All about me had tickets or money or both. Suddenly I felt something touch my arm — the purse of a woman who was pressed close beside me. It was open, and I could see the coveted coins within. One quick move and I could have my heart's desire. The longing was so deep and hard that it blotted out everything except my imperative need. I had to get into that theater. I was about to put out my hand towards the bag when the doors were thrown wide and the crowd precipitately surged forward. Be- 24 BLIND GERM OF DAYS TO BE 2$ ing small, I was shoved headlong under the ropes and into the safety of the nearest seat. But I could take no joy in the play. As I lay sleepless that night, after a prayer of thanks for my many blessings, the crack of Simon Legree's whip and the off-stage hounds baying after Eliza were not occupying my mind. Their places were taken by pictures of the devil which had tempted me and the hand of God which had been stretched out to save me from theft. Following this experience, which might have been called a spiritual awakening, I began to connect my desires with reasoning about con- sequences. This was difficult, because my feelings were strong and urgent. I realized I was made up of two Me's — one the thinking Me, the other, willful and emotional, which sometimes exercised too great a power ; there was danger in her leadership and I set myself the task of uniting the two by putting myself through ordeals of various sorts to strengthen the head Me. ^ To gain greater fortitude, I began to make myself do what I feared most — go upstairs alone to bed without a light, go down cel- lar without singing, get up on the rafters in the barn and jump on the haystack thirty feet below. When I was able to accomplish these without flinching I felt more secure and more strong within myself. But ahead of me still lay the hardest task of all. Across the Chemung some friends of ours had a farm. Their orchard, heavy with delectable apples, seemed to me a veritable Eden. But to reach it by the wooden wagon bridge was three miles around ; my brothers preferred the shorter route over the high, narrow, iron span of the Erie Railroad, under which the river raced deep and fast. The spaced ties held no terrors for their long legs, and they often swung them over the edge while they fished the stream beneath. When I made the trip father and brother each gave a hand to which I clung fiercely, and they half lifted me over the gaps which my shorter legs could hardly compass unaided. Held tight as I was, I be- came dizzy from the height, and a panic of terror seized me. In fact, the mere thought of the journey, even so well supported, made me feel queer. The younger children were forbidden to cross the bridge unac- companied. But I had to conquer my fear; I had to take that walk alone. I trembled as I drew near. The more I feared it, the more 26 MARGARET SANGER determined I was to make myself do it. I can recall now how stoically I put one foot on the first tie and began the venturesome and pre- carious passage stretching endlessly ahead of me. I dared not look down at the water ; I wanted terribly to see that my feet were firmly placed, but could not trust my head. About halfway over I heard the hum of the steel rails. My sec- ond dread had come upon me — the always possible train. I could not see it because of the curve at the end of the bridge. The singing grew louder as it came closer. I knew I could not get across in time, and turned towards the nearest girder to which I might cling. But it was six feet away. The engine with a whistling shriek burst into view — snorting, huge, menacing, rushing. I stumbled and fell. In those days I was plump, and this plumpness saved me. In- stinctively my arms went out and curled around the ties as I dropped between them. There I dangled over space. The bridge shook; the thunder swelled ; the long, swift passenger cars swooped down. I was less than three feet from the outer rail, and a new terror gripped me. I had seen the sharp, sizzling steam jet out as locomotives drew near the station. I screwed my eyes shut and prayed the engineer not to turn on the steam. After the blur of wheels had crashed by I could feel nothing. I hung there, I do not know how long, until a friend of my father, who had been fishing below, came to my rescue. He pulled up the fat, aching little body, stood me on my feet again, asked me severely whether my father knew where I was, gave me two brisk thwacks on the bottom, turned my face towards home, and went back to his rod and line. After waiting a few moments to think matters over I realized that it would be impossible for me to retrace my course. Common sense aided me. The journey forward was no further than the jour- ney back. I stepped ahead far more bravely, knowing if I could reach the end of the bridge I would never be so terrified again. Though bruised and sore I continued my cautious march and had as good a time at the farm as usual. However, I returned home by the wooden bridge, the long way round, but the practical one. When Ethel asked me that night why I was putting vaseline under BLIND GERM OF DAYS TO BE 2^ my arms I merely said I had scratched myself. Foolhardiness was never highly esteemed by anyone in the family. Though resource- fulness was taken for granted, running into unnecessary danger was just nonsense, and I wanted no censure for my disobedience. We were seldom scolded, never spanked! If an unpleasant con- versation were needed, no other brother or sister was witness; •neither parent ever humiliated one child in front of another. This was part of the sensitiveness of both. Mother in particular had a horror of personal vehemence or acrimonious arguments; in trying to prevent or stop them she would display amazing intrepidity — separating fighting dogs, fighting boys, even fighting men. Peacemaker as she was, on occasion she battled valiantly for her loved ones, resenting bitterly the corporal punishment then customary in schools. Once my brother Joe came home with his hands so swol- len and blistered that he could not do his evening chore of bringing in the wood. Mother looked carefully at them and asked him what had happened. He explained that the teacher had fallen asleep and several boys had started throwing spitballs. When one had hit her on the nose she had awakened with a little scream. Most children had the trick of burying their faces behind their big geographies and appearing to be studying the page with the most innocent air in the world. But Joe had no such technique. He was doubled up with laughter. The teacher first accused him of throwing the spitball, and, when he denied it, insisted that he name the cul- prit. She had been embarrassed by her ridiculous situation, and had turned her emotion into what she considered righteous indignation. Joe had paid the penalty of being beaten for his unwillingness to vio- late the schoolboy code of honor. This was injustice and the surest road to mother's wrath. She started at once the long trip to the school. When she found no one there, she walked more miles to the teacher's home. Reproof was called for and she administered it. But that was not enough. She then demanded that father go to the Board of Education and take Joe with him. There would have been no sleeping in the house with her had he not done so. An investigation was promised, which soon afterwards resulted in the teacher's dismissal. The teachers at the Corning School were no worse than others of 28 MARGARET SANGER their day ; many of them were much better. The brick building was quite modern for the time, with a playground around it and good principals to guide it. Its superiority was due in part to the influ- ence of the Houghtons, the big industrialists of the town. For three generations they had been making glassware unsurpassed for tex- ture and beauty of design, and hardly a family of means in the coun- try did not have at least one cut-glass centerpiece from Corning. The factories had prospered during the kerosene lamp era, and now, with electricity coming into its own, they were working overtime blowing light bulbs. Corning was not on the whole a pleasant town. Along the river flats lived the factory workers, chiefly Irish; on the heights above the rolling clouds of smoke that belched from the chimneys lived the owners and executives. The tiny yards of the former were a-sprawl with children; in the gardens on the hills only two or three played. This contrast made a track in my mind. Large families were asso- ciated with poverty, toil, unemployment, drunkenness, cruelty, fight- ing, jails; the small ones with cleanliness, leisure, freedom, light, space, sunshine. The fathers of the small families owned their homes; the young- looking mothers had time to play croquet with their husbands in the evenings on the smooth lawns. Their clothes had style and charm, and the fragrance of perfume clung about them. They walked hand in hand on shopping expeditions with their children, who seemed positive in their right to live. To me the distinction between happi- ness and unhappiness in childhood was one of small families and of large families rather than of wealth and poverty. In our home, too, we felt the economic pressure directly ascrib- able to size. I was always apprehensive that we might some day be like the families on the flats, because we always had another baby coming, another baby coming. A new litter of puppies was interest- ing but not out of the ordinary; so, likewise, the cry of a new in- fant never seemed unexpected. Neither excited any more curiosity than breakfast or dinner. No one ever told me how they were born. I just knew. I was little more than eight when I first helped wash the fourteen- and-a-half -pound baby after one of mother's deliveries. She had had BLIND GERM OF DAYS TO BE 20, a "terrible hard time," but father had pulled her through, and, in a few weeks, tired and coughing, she was going about her work, be- lieving as usual that her latest was the prize of perfect babies. (Mother's eleven children were all ten-pounders or more, and both she and father had a eugenic pride of race. I used to hear her say that not one of hers had a mark or blemish, although she had the utmost compassion for those who might have cleft palates, crossed eyes, or be "born sick." Late one night a woman rushed into our house, seeking protec- tion, clutching in her shawl a scrawny, naked baby, raw with eczema. When her hysteria was calmed sufficiently we learned that her hus- band had reeled home drunk and had thrown the wailing infant out into the snow. Father was all for summoning the police, but mother was too wise for that. She dispatched him to talk to the man while she gave the weeping woman a warm supper and com- forted her. Father returned shortly to say it was safe for her to go back to the multitude of other children because her husband had fallen asleep. Ugly and taciturn though he was I could picture him coming home after a hard day's work to a household racked with the shrieks of the suffering little thing. I could see that he too was pathetic and a victim ; I had sympathy for his rage. Put mother did lose one of her beautiful babies. Henry George McGlynn Higgins had been named for two of the rebel figures father most admired. The four-year-old was playing happily in the afternoon; a few hours later he was gasping for breath. Father heated his home-made croup kettle on the stove until it boiled, and then carried it steaming to be put under the blanket which rose like a covered wagon above the bed. As soon as he realized that home remedies were failing he sent for the doctor. But events moved too swiftly for him. We had gone to bed with no suspicion that by morning we should be one less. I was shocked and surprised that something could come along and pick one of us out of the world in so few hours. I had no time, however, to consider the bewildering verity of death. We all had to turn to consoling mother. Perhaps unconsciously she had subscribed to father's theory that the face was the mirror to the soul. She complained she had no picture of her lovely boy, 30 MARGARET SANGER and kept reminding herself of the fine shape of his head, the wide, well-set eyes, the familiar contours which had been wiped forever from her sight, and might soon be sponged from her memory as well. Mother's grief over her lost child increased father's. Because in part he blamed himself, he was desperate to assuage her sorrow. The day after the burial he was constantly occupied in his studio, and when evening fell he took me affectionately by the hand asking me to stay up and help him on a piece of work he was about to do. I agreed willingly. About eleven o'clock we went forth together into the pitch-black night, father pushing ahead of him a wheelbarrow full of tools and a bag of plaster of Paris. We walked on and on through the stillness for fully two miles to the cemetery where the little brother had been buried. Father knew every step, but it was scary and I clung to his hand. Just beyond the gateway father hid the lighted lantern in the near- by bushes over a grave and told me to wait there unless I heard some- body coming. He expected me to be grown up at the age of ten. Nerves meant sickness; if any child cried out in the night it was merely considered "delicate." Consequently I obeyed and watched, shivering with cold and excitement, darting quick glances at the ghostly forms of some of father's monuments which loomed out of the darkness around me. I could hear the steady chunk, chunk, chunk of his pick and shovel, and the sharper sound when suddenly he struck the coffin. Father had taken it as a matter of course that I should under- stand and had not explained what he was about to do. But I never questioned his actions. I did not know there was a law against a man's digging up his own dead child but, even had I known, I would have believed that the law was wrong. We traveled back the long, weary way, arriving home in the early hours of the morning. Nothing was said to mother or to the others about that amazing night's adventure ; I was not told to keep silent, but I knew there was mystery in the air and it was no time to talk. For two evenings I worked with father, helping him break the death mask, mold and shape the cast. I remember the queer feeling BLIND GERM OF DAYS TO BE 3 1 I had when I discovered some of the hair which had stuck in the plaster. On the third day, just after supper, father said to us all, "Will you come into the studio?" With tender eyes on mother he uncovered and presented to her the bust of the dead little boy. She was extraordinarily comforted. Though to me the model, per- fect as it was, seemed lifeless, every once in a while she entered the studio, took off the cloth which protected it from the dust, wept and was relieved, re-covered it and went on. Not one of us dared to utter a word of criticism about mother's adored and adoring husband; nevertheless her soul was harassed at times by his philosophy of live and let live, by his principles against locked doors and private property. She was merely-selfless. Often when one of her children was feverish she went to the kitchen pump for water so that it might be cooler and fresher for parched lips. Once, groping her way on such an errand, she stumbled over a tramp who had taken advantage of the unlatched door and lay sprawled on the floor. She rushed back to arouse father, telling him he must put the man out. But he only turned over on his side and muttered, "Oh, let him alone. The poor divil needs sleep like the rest of us." Another night mother was awakened by noises outside. "Father," she called, "there's somebody at the hencoop!" "What makes you think so?" he answered sleepily. "I hear the chickens. They wouldn't make a noise unless some- body was in there. Get up !" Obediently father put on his trousers and coat; not even before thieves would he appear in his nightshirt out of his bedroom. He proceeded to the kitchen door, and, holding a lamp on high, addressed the two men, one of whom was handing out chickens to the other, "Hey, you, there! What do you mean by coming to a man's house in the middle of the night and shtealing his chickens? What kind of citizens are you ?" This seemed to mother no time for a moral lecture. "Why don't you go out ?" she prodded. "It's raining." "Give me the lamp !" she demanded, exasperated. She started towards our nearest neighbor, splashing through the 32 MARGARET SANGER little brook, getting her feet wet, calling, "Some one's in our chicken house !" Our neighbor armed himself and came running. A man with a gun sent the marauders scurrying up the hill. That was mother's philosophy. I think father fell in her estimation for a few days after this. She expected him to be the guardian of the home, but he was never that. His liberal views were so well known that our house was marked with the tramp's patrin of the first degree. "Always get something here. Never be turned away." If it happened to be pay day they could count on a quarter as well as a meal. One particular evening we were expecting father home, his pock- ets bulging with the money from his latest commission, but by night- fall he had not yet returned. When mother heard a rap at the door she went eagerly to open it. Two ragged strangers were standing there. "Is the boss in ?" "No, but I'm looking for him any minute." "We want something to eat." With no more ceremony than was customary among the knights of the open road they pushed through the door and made for the kitchen, plainly knowing their way about. "How dare you come into this house!" exclaimed mother indig- nantly. "Toss! Beauty!" she cried sharply. The fear in her voice brought the dogs lunging downstairs with fangs bared and hackles bristling. They leaped at the backs of the uninvited guests. Father came in a few hours later. The door was swinging wide, the snow was blowing in. Torn scraps of clothing, spots of blood were about, and mother was unconscious on the floor. He poured whiskey down her throat. "It was only good whiskey that brought you to," he often said afterwards, recalling his alarm. He used the same remedy to pull her through the ensuing six weeks of pneumonia. But he had been so thoroughly worried that his generosity towards tramps lessened and his largesse was curtailed. After this illness mother coughed more than ever and it was evi- dent the pines were not helping her. Father decided to move; the house was so obviously marked and he had to be gone so much he thought it unsafe for us to live alone so far away. Chapter Three BOOKS ARE THE COMPASSES SO we moved into town, still on the western hills. It marked the beginning of my adolescence, and such breaks are always dis- turbing. In the house in the woods we had all been children together, but now some of us were growing up. Nevertheless, there were always smaller ones to be put to bed, to be rocked to sleep; there were feet and knees to be scrubbed and hands to be washed. Although we had more space, home study some- times seemed to me impossible. The living room was usually occu- pied by the older members of the family, and the bedrooms were cold. I kept up in my lessons, but it was simply because I enjoyed them. In most schools teachers and pupils then were natural enemies, and the one I had in the eighth grade was particularly adept at arous- ing antagonism. She apparently disliked her job and the youngsters under her care as much as we hated her. Sarcasm was both her de- 'fense and weapon of attack. One day in mid-June I was delayed in getting off for school. Well aware that being tardy was a heinous crime, I hurried, pulling and tugging at my first pair of kid gloves, which Mary had just given me. But the bell had rung two minutes before I walked into the room, flushed and out of breath. The teacher had already begun the class. She looked up at the in- terruption. "Well, well, Miss Higgins, so your ladyship has arrived at last ! Ah, a new pair of gloves ! I wonder that she even deigns to come to school at all." Giggles rippled around me as I went into tKe cloakroom and laid 33 34 MARGARET SANGER down my hat and gloves. I came back, praying the teacher would pay no more attention to me, but as I walked painfully to my seat she continued repeating with variations her mean comments. Even when I sat down she did not stop. I tried to think of something else, tried not to listen, tried to smile with the others. I endured it as long as I could, then took out my books, pyramiding arithmetic, gram- mar, and speller, strapped them up; rose, and left. Mother was amazed when I burst in on her. "I will never go back to that school again !" I exclaimed dramatically. "I have finished for- ever ! I'll go to jail, I'll work, I'll starve, I'll die ! But back to that school and teacher I will never go !" As older brothers and sisters drifted home in the evening, they were as horrified as mother. "But you have only two weeks more," they expostulated. "I don't care if it's only an hour. I will not go back!" When it became obvious that I would stick to my point, mother seemed glad to have me to help her. I was thorough and strong and could get through a surprising amount of work in no time. But the rest of the family was seriously alarmed. The next few months were filled with questions I could not answer. "What can you ever be with- out an education?" "Are you equipped to earn a living?" "Is factory life a pleasant prospect? If you don't go back to school, you'll surely end there." "All right. I'll go to work!" I announced defiantly. Work, even in the factory, meant money, and money meant independence. I had no rebuttal to their arguments; I was acting on an impulse that transcended reason, and must have recognized that any explanation as to my momentous decision would sound foolish. Then suddenly father, mother, my second older sister Nan, and Mary, who had been summoned to a family council, tried other tac- tics. I was sent for two weeks to Chautauqua, there to take courses, hear lectures from prominent speakers, listen to music. This was de- signed to stimulate my interest in education and dispel any idea I might have of getting a job. My impulse had been misconstrued. I was not rebelling against education as such, but only against that particular school and that particular teacher. When fall drew near and the next session was at BOOKS ARE THE COMPASSES 35 hand I was still reiterating that I would not go back, although I still had no answer to Nan's repeated, "What are you going to do ?" Nan was perhaps the most inspiring of all my brothers and sisters. The exact contrary to father, 'she wanted us all to conform and was in tears if we did not. To her, failure in this respect showed a lack of breeding. Yet even more important than conformity was knowl- edge, which was the basis for all true culture. She herself wanted to write, and had received prizes for stories from St. Nicholas and the Youth's Companion. But the family was too dependent upon the earnings of the older girls, and she was obliged to postpone college and her equally ardent desire to study sculpture. She became a trans- lator of French and German until these aspirations could be fulfilled. At the time of my mutiny Nan was especially disturbed. "You won't be able to get anywhere without an education," she stated firmly. She and Mary, joining forces, together looked for a school, reasonable enough for their purses, but good enough academically to prepare me for Cornell. Private education was not so expensive as today, and families of moderate means could afford it. My sisters selected Claverack College and Hudson River Institute, about three miles from the town of Hudson in the Catskill Mountains., Here, in one of the oldest coeducational institutions in the country, the Meth- odist farmers of the Dutch valley enrolled their sons and daughters ; unfortunately it is now gone and with it the healthy spirit it typified. One sister paid my tuition and the other bought my books and clothes ; for my board and room I was to work. , j Going away to school was epochal in my life. The self-contained family group was suddenly multiplied to five hundred strangers, all living and studying under one roof. The girls' dormitory was at one end, the boys' at the other, but we shared the same dining room and sat together in classes ; occasionally a boy could call on a girl in the reception hall if a teacher were present. I liked best the attitude of the teachers; they were not so much policemen as companions and friends, and their instruction was more individual and stimulating than at Corning. I did not have money to do things the other girls did — go off for week-ends or house-parties — but waiting on table or washing dishes did not set me apart. The work was far easier than at home, 36 MARGARET SANGER and a girl was pretty well praised for doing her share. At first the stu- dents all appeared to me uninteresting and lacking in initiative. I never found the same imaginative quality I was used to in my family, but as certain ones began to stand out I discovered they had personali- ties of their own. I had been at Claverack only a few days and was still feeling home- sick when in the hall one morning I encountered the most beautiful creature I had ever seen. Long hair flying from her shoulders, she was so slender and wraithlike that she seemed unreal. I have never since been so moved by human loveliness as I was by Esther's. I cried at night because I sensed it was something I could not reach. Even her clothes were unlike all others. Many girls envied their taste and quality, but I knew they belonged to her of right. Of every book I had read she was the heroine come alive. Worlds apart though we were in tradition, looks, behavior, ex- perience, Esther and I had the same romantic outlook. Having as- pirations for the theater, she remained only one year and then left to attend Charles Frohman's dramatic school. I had been too over- powered by my admiration for her to be happy in it, and it kept me from caring particularly about anyone else. Nevertheless, I am con- vinced that in any interchange of affection the balance is unequal; one must give and the other be able to receive. My second year I was the recipient of devotion from a younger girl similar to that I had showered upon Esther. The loyalty and praise of Amelia Stuart, my laughing friend, fed all the empty spaces in my heart. She was gay and clever, a Methodist by upbringing but not by conviction. Each Sunday afternoon, given over to the reading of the Bible, we received permission to study together in my room, and there occu- pied ourselves dutifully, I in mending and darning, and she reading aloud, but interspersing solemn passages with ridiculous exaggera- tions. What was intended to be a serious exercise of the spirit was turned into merriment. My friendship with these two girls has been interrupted, but never broken. Very shortly after my arrival at Claverack I had been infected by that indefinable, nebulous quality called school spirit, and before long was happily in the thick of activities. Assembly was held in the BOOKS ARE THE COMPASSES 37 chapel every morning, during which we all in turn had to render small speeches and essays, or recite selections of poetry. I had a vivid feeling of how things should be said, putting more dramatic fervor into certain lines than my limited experience of the theater would seem to explain, and on this account the elocution teacher encouraged me to have faith in my talents. Every girl, I suppose, at some time or other wants to be an actress. Mary had taken me to the theater now and then, once when Maude Adams was playing Juliet to John Drew's Romeo, and had gone to some pains to explain to me the difference between artistes like Mary Anderson or Julia Marlowe and mere beauty as such. She would not have been pleased at my seeing Lillian Russell, which I did during a Christmas holiday in New York; Lillian Russell was too glamorous and, furthermore, she was said to have accepted jewelry from men. One vacation I announced to my family that I was thinking of a stage career. Disapproval was evident on all sides. Father pooh- poohed ; Mary alone held out hope. She said I had ability and should go to dramatic school in New York as soon as I had finished Claver- ack. She would apply immediately to Charles Frohman to have me understudy Maude Adams, whom I at least was said to resemble physically — small and with the same abundant red-brown hair. Lack- ing good features I took pride only in my thick, long braids. I used to decorate them with ribbons and admire the effect in the mirror. The application was made; I was photographed in various poses with and without hats. A return letter from the school management came, enclosing a form to be filled in with name, address, age, height, weight, color of hair, eyes, and skin. r But additional data were required as to the exact length of the legs, both right and left, as well as measurements of ankle, calf, knee, and thigh. I knew my proportions in a general way. Those were the days when every pack of cigarettes carried a bonus in the shape of a pictured actress, plump and well- formed. In the gymnasium the girls had compared sizes with these beauties. But to see such personal in- formation go coldly down on paper to be sent off to strange men was unthinkable. I had expected to have to account for the quality of my voice, for my ability to sing, to play, for grace, agility, character, and 38 MARGARET SANGER morals. Since I could not see what legs had to do with being a sec- ond Maude Adams, I did not fill in the printed form nor send the photographs, but just put them all away, and turned to other fields where something beside legs was to count. Chapel never bored me. I had come to dislike ritual in many of the churches I had visited — kneeling for prayer, sitting for instruc- tion, standing for praise. But in a Methodist chapel anyone could get up and express a conviction. Young sprouts here were thinking and discussing the Bible, religion, and politics. Should the individual be submerged in the state? If you had a right to free thought as an individual, should you give it up to the church ? We scribbled during study periods, debated in the evenings. With- out always digesting them but with great positiveness I carried over many of the opinions I had heard expounded at home. To most of the boys and girls those Saturday mornings when the more ambitious efforts were offered represented genuine torture. They stuttered and stammered painfully. I was just as nervous — more so probably. Nevertheless, I was so ardent for suffrage, for anything which would "emancipate" women and humanity, that I was eager to proclaim theories of my own. Father was still the spring from which I drank, and I sent long letters home, getting in reply still longer ones, filled with ammuni- tion about the historical background of the importance of women — Helen of Troy, Ruth, Cleopatra, Poppaea, famous queens, women authors and poets. When news spread that I was to present my essay, "Women's Rights," the boys, following the male attitude which most people have forgotten but which every suffragette well remembers, jeered and drew cartoons of women wearing trousers, stiff collars, and smoking huge cigars. Undeterred, I was spurred on to think up new arguments. I studied and wrote as never before, stealing away to the cemetery and standing on the monuments over the graves. Each day in the quiet of the dead I repeated and repeated that speech out loud. What an essay it was ! "Votes for Women" banners were not yet flying, and this early faint bleating of mine aroused little enthusiasm. I turned then to an equally stern subject. The other students had automatically accepted BOOKS ARE THE COMPASSES 39 the cause of solid money. I espoused free silver. At Chautauqua I had heard echoes of those first notes sounded by Bryan for the working classes. The spirit of humanitarianism in industry had been growing and swelling, but it was still deep buried. I believe any great con- cept must be present in the mass consciousness before any one figure can tap it and set it free on its irresistible way. I had not seen the "Boy Orator of the Platte," but the country was ringing with his words, "You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns; you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold." These rich and sonorous phrases made me realize the importance of clothing ideas in fine language. Far more, however, they struck a solemn chord within me. I, also, in an ob- scure and unformed way, wanted to help grasp Utopia from the skies and plant it on earth. But what to do and where to start I did not know. Due to my "advanced ideas," for a time, at least, I am sorry to say, it was chiefly the grinds with whom I "walked in Lovers' Lane," nodding wisely and answering their earnest aspirations with pro- found advice. But this did not last. Soon I was going through the usual boy and girl romances ; each season brought a new one. I took none of them very seriously, but adroitly combined flirtatiousness with the conviction that marriage was something towards which I must develop. Therefore I turned the vague and tentative suggestions of my juvenile beaus by saying, "I would never think of jumping into marriage without definite preparation and study of its responsibili- ties." Practically no women then went into professions; matrimony was the only way out. It seems ages ago. Various pranks occurred at Claverack, such as taking walks with boys out of bounds and going forbidden places for tea. Towards the end of my last year I thought up the idea that several of us should slip out through the window and down to the village dance hall where our special admirers would meet us. About eleven-thirty, in the midst of the gayety, in walked our principal, Mr. Flack, together with the preceptress who had come for the "ladies." We were all marched back to school, uneasy but silent. The next morning I received a special invitation to call at The Office. I entered. Mr. Flack, a small, slight, serious, student type of 40 MARGARET SANGER man, with a large head and high brow, was standing with his back to me. I sat down. He gave me no greeting but kept on at his books. To all appearances he did not know I was there. Then, without look- ing around, he said, "Miss Higgins, don't you feel rather ashamed of yourself for getting those girls into trouble last night, by taking them out and making them break the rules ? They may even have to be sent home." Although surprised that he should have known I was the one re- sponsible, I could not deny it, but it flashed across my mind at first that someone must have told him. He went on with rapid flow, almost as though talking to himself, "I've watched you ever since you came and I don't need to be told that you must have been the ringleader. Again and again I've noticed your influence over others. I want to call your attention to this, because I know you're going to use it in the future. You must make your choice — whether to get yourself and others into difficulty, or else guide yourself and others into constructive activities which will do you and them credit." I do not quite recall what else he said, but I have never forgotten going out of his room that day. This could not exactly be called a turning point in my life^ but from then on I realized more strongly than before that there was a something within myself which could and should be kept under my control and direction. Long afterwards I wrote to thank Mr. Flack for his wisdom in offering guidance instead of harsh discipline. He died a few years later, and I was glad I had been able to place a rose in his hand rather than on his grave. I spent three happy years at Claverack. The following season I de- cided to try my hand at teaching, A, $hen a lady-like thing to do. A position was open to me in the first grade of a new public school in southern New Jersey. The majority of the pupils — Poles, Hun- garians, Swedes — coulii not speak English. In they came regularly. I was beside myself to know what to do with eighty- four children who could not understand a word I said. I loved those small, black- haired and tow-headed urchins who became bored with sitting and, on their own, began stunts to entertain themselves. But I was so tired at the end of the day that I often lay down before dressing for dinner and awakened the next morning barely in time to start the routine. BOOKS ARE THE COMPASSES 41 In very short order I became aware of the fact that teaching was not merely a job, it was a profession, and training was necessary if you were to do it well. I was not suited by temperament, and therefore had no right to this vocation.fi had been struggling for only a brief while when father summoned me home to nurse mother. ) She was weak and pale and the high red spots on her cheek bones stood out startlingly against her white face. Although she was now spitting blood when she coughed we still expected her to live on for- ever. She had been ill so long; this was just another attack among many. Father carried her from room to room, and tried desperately to devise little comforts. We shut the doors and windows to keep out any breath of the raw March air, and in the stuffy atmosphere we toiled over her bed. (In an effort to be more efficient in caring for mother I tried to findv out something about consumption by borrowing medical books from \ the library of the local doctor, who was a friend of the family, and in \ doing this became so interested in medicine that I decided definitely I I would study to be an M.D. \Vhen I went back for more volumes / and announced my decision the doctor gave them to me, but smiled/ tolerantly, "You'll probably get over it." I had been closely confined for a long time when I was invited to Buffalo for the Easter holidays to meet again one of the boys by whom I had been beaued at Claverack. Mother insisted that I needed a vacation. Mary and Nan were both there ; I could stay with them, and we planned a pleasant trip to Niagara Falls for the day. With me out of the way mother sent off the little children one by one on some pretext or another. She had more difficulty with father. The fire bricks in the stove had split and she told him he must go to town and get new ones. Much against his will, because he was vaguely unquiet, he started for the foundry. He had left only because mother seemed to want it so much, but when he had walked a few blocks, he found he could not go on. For some Celtic mystic reason of his own he turned abruptly around and came back to the house. Mother was gasping in death. All the family hated scenes, she most of all. She had known she was to die and wanted to be alone. It was a folk superstition that a consumptive who survived through the month of March would live until November. .Mother died on 42 MARGARET SANGER the thirty-first of the month, leaving father desolate and inconsol- able. I came flying home. The house was silent and he hardly spoke. Suddenly the stillness of the night was broken by a wailing and Toss was found with his paws on the coffin, mourning and howling — the most poignant and agonizing sound I had ever heard. [I had to take mother's place — manage the finances, order the meals, pay the debts. There was nothing left for my clothing nor for any outside diversions. All that could be squeezed out by making this or that do had to go for shoes or necessities for the younger brothers. Mend, patch, sew as you would, there was a limit to the endurance of trousers, and new ones had to be purchased. To add to my woes, father seemed to me, who was sensitive to criticism, suddenly metamorphosed from a loving, gentle, benevolent parent into a most aggravating, irritating tyrant ; nobody in any fairy tale I had ever read was quite so cruel. He who had given us the world in which to roam now apparently wanted to put us behind prison bars. His unreasonableness was not directed towards the boys, who were in bed as soon as lessons were done, but towards his daughters, Ethel and me. Whatever we did was wrong. He objected particularly to young men. Ethel was receiving the concentrated attention of Jack Byrne. Fa- ther in scolding her said she should mix more. My beaus were a little older than the ones I had had at school, and more earnest in their intentions. Though not one really interested me — their conversation seemed flat, consisting of foolish questions and smart, silly replies — father scolded me also about them, "Why aren't you serious like your sister? Can't you settle yourself to one? Do you have to have somebody different every evening?" Messages were coming to me from a young man going West, post- marked Chicago or San Francisco. These daily letters and some- times telegrams as well, were not father's idea of wooing. What could anyone have to say every day? To his way of thinking, a decent man came to the house and did his talking straight; he sat around with the family and got acquainted. Father said, 'That fellow's a scoundrel. He's too worldly. He's not even known in town." We had to ask permission whether Tom or Jack or Henry could call. Without reason or explanation father said, "No," and that was BOOKS ARE THE COMPASSES 43 an end to it. If we went out, we had to be back at ten and give an account of ourselves. Then came the climax. Ethel and I had gone to an open-air con- cert. On the stroke of ten we were a full block away from home running with all our might. When we arrived, three minutes late, the house was in utter darkness — not a sight nor sound of a living creature anywhere. We banged and knocked. We tried the front door, the back, and the side, then again the front. It opened part way; father looked out, reached forth a hand and caught Ethel's arm, saying, "This outrageous behavior is not your fault. Come in." With that he pulled her inside, and the door slammed, leaving me in the dark, stunned and bewildered. I did not know this monster. - Hurt beyond words, I sat down on the steps, worrying not only about this night but about the next day and the next, concerned over the children left at home with this new kind of father. I was sure if I waited long enough he would come out for me, but it was a chilly evening in October. I had no wrap, and began to grow very cold. I walked away from the house, trying to decide where I should go and what I should do. I could not linger on the streets indefinitely, with the possibility of encountering some tipsy factory hand or drum- mer passing through. At first there seemed no one to turn to. Finally, exhausted by stress of emotion, I went to the home of the girl who had been with us at the concert. She had not yet gone to bed, and her mother welcomed me so hospitably that I shall be eternally grateful. The next morning she lent me carfare to go to Elmira, where I had friends with whom I could stay. Meantime father had found me gone. He had dressed and tramped up and down First Street, searching every byway, inquiring whether I had been seen. When he had returned at daybreak to find me still missing he had sent word to Mary, who received his message at almost the same time as one from me, telling her not to worry ; I was all right. Both of them urged me to come back to Corning, and in a few days I did so, taking up again my responsibilities. Father and I tried to talk it over, but we could not meet on the old ground; be- tween us a deep silence had fallen. Father had almost stopped expounding; instead, he was reading 44 MARGARET SANGER more. Debs had come on his horizon, and the Socialist papers crop- ping up all over the country were appearing in the house. From the Free Library, which he had helped to establish years earlier, he was borrowing Spencer, who was modern for that time, and other books on sociology. I had given up encouraging young men to see me, but I, too, was patronizing the library. My books were fiction. "All nonsense," fa- ther snorted at the mention of such titles as Graustark, Prisoners of Hope, or Three Musketeers. The word "novel" was still shocking to many people, and he classed them all as "love stories." "Read to cultivate and uplift your mind. Read what will benefit you in the battle of life," he admonished. But I continued my escape from the daily humdrum to revel in romances, devouring them in the evenings and hiding them under the mattress during the day. One noon when I was waiting for the children to come in to lunch I was buried in David Harum, finding it very funny, and did not hear father enter. He stood ominously in the doorway. I should have felt trapped, but, instead, without warning and without reason, the old love flamed up again. I laughed and laughed. I was no longer afraid nor did I care for his scowls or his silly old notions. The long silence was broken. "Do listen to this." And I started reading. The frown began to melt away and soon father too was chuckling. This was the first laughter that had been heard in that dreary household since mother's death. The book disappeared into his room, and soon thereafter he was caught seeking more of "that nonsense." At last I realized why father had been so different. He had been lonely for mother, lonely for her love, and doubtless missed her ready appreciation of his own longings and misgivings. Then, too, he had always before depended on her to understand and direct us. He was probably a trifle jealous, though not consciously, because he considered jealousy an animal trait far beneath him, and refused to recognize it in himself. Nevertheless, beaus had been sidetracking the affections of his little girls. So oppressed had he been by his sense of responsibility that he had slipped in judgment and in so doing slid into the small-town rut of propriety. His belated discipline, BOOKS ARE THE COMPASSES 45 caused by worry and anxiety, was merely an attempt to guide his children. I, however, considered the time had passed for such guidance. I had to step forth by myself along the experimental path of adult- hood. Though the immediate occasion for reading medical books had ceased with mother's death, I had never, during these months, lost my deep conviction that perhaps she might have been saved had I had sufficient knowledge of medicine. This was linked up with my latent desire to be of service in the world. The career of a physician seemed to fulfill all my requirements., I could not at the moment see how the gap in education from Claverack to medical school was to be bridged. Nevertheless, I could at least make a start with nursing, j j But father, though he proclaimed his belief in perfect independ- ence of thought and mind, could not approve nursing as a profession, even when I told him that some of the nicest girls were going into it. "Well, they won't be nice long," he growled. . Tt's no sort of work for girls to be doing." .My argument that he himself had taught us to help other people had no effect. Father's notions, however, were not going to divert me from my intention; no matter how peaceful the home atmosphere had be- come, still I had to get out and try my wings. For six months more we jogged along, then, just a year after mother had died, Esther asked me to visit her in New York. I really wanted to train in the city, but her mother knew someone on the board of the White Plains Hospital, which was just initiating a school. There I was accepted as a probationer. Chapter Four DARKNESS THERE AND NOTHING MORE THE old White Plains Hospital, not at all like a modern insti- tution, had been a three-storied manor house, long deserted because two people had once been found mysteriously dead in it and thereafter nobody would rent or buy. The hospital board, scoff- ing at superstition, had gladly purchased it at the low price to which it had been reduced. However, in spite of rearrangements and re- decorating, many people in White Plains went all the way to the Tarrytown Hospital rather than enter the haunted portals. Once set in spacious grounds the building was still far back from the road ; a high wall immediately behind it shut off the view of the next street and nothing could be seen beyond except the roof of what had been the stable. The surrounding tall trees made it shadowy even in the daytime. To reach the office you had to cross a broad pillared veranda. Parlor and sitting room had been thrown together for the male ward, and an operating room had been tacked on to the rear. The great wide stairway of fumed oak, lighted at night by low- turned gas jets, swept up through the lofty ceiling. On the second floor were the female ward and a few private rooms. The dozen or so nurses slept in the made-over servants' quarters under the gam- brel roof. Student nurses in large modern hospitals have little idea what our life was like in a small one thirty-five years ago. The single bath- room on each floor was way at the back.^ We did not have a resident 46 DARKNESS THERE AND NOTHING MORE 47 interne, and, consequently, had to depend mainly upon our own judgment. Since we had no electricity, we could not ring a bell and have our needs supplied, and had to use our legs for elevators. A pro- bationer had to learn to make dressings, bandages, mix solutions, and toil over sterilizing. She put two inches of water in the wash- boiler, laid a board across the bricks placed in the bottom, and bal- anced the laundered linen and gauze on top. Then, clapping on the lid, she set the water to boiling briskly, watched the clock, and when the prescribed number of minutes had elapsed the sterilizing was over. The great self-confidence with which I entered upon my duties soon received a slight shock. One of our cases was an old man from the County Home. He complained chiefly of pains in his leg and, since his condition was not very serious, the superintendent of nurses left him one afternoon in my care. This was my first patient. When I heard the clapper of his little nickeled bell, I hurried with a pro- fessional air to his bedside. "Missy, will you please bandage up my sore leg? It does me so much good." Having just had my initial lesson in bandaging, I was elated at this opportunity to try my skill... I set to work with great precision, and, when I had finished, congratulated myself on a neat job, ad- miring the smooth white leg. My first entry went on his record sheet. A little later the superintendent, in making her rounds, regarded the old man perplexedly. "Why have you got your leg bandaged?" "I asked the nurse to do it for me." "Why that leg? It's the other one that hurts." . "Oh, she was so kind I didn't want to stop her." I bowed my head in embarrassment, but I was young and eager, and it did not stay bowed long. Within a short period I considered myself thoroughly inured to what many look upon as the unpleasant aspects of nursing ; the sight of blood never made me squeamish and I had watched operations, even on the brain, with none of the usual sick giddiness. Then one day the driver of a Macy delivery wagon, who had fallen off the seat, was brought in with a split nose. I was holding the basin for 48 MARGARET SANGER the young doctor who was stitching it up, when one of the other nurses said something to tease him. He dropped his work, leaving the needle and cat-gut thread sticking across the patient's nose, and chased her out of the room and down the hall. The patient, painless under a local anesthetic, gazed mildly after them; but the idea that doctor and nurse could be so callous as to play jokes horri- fied me.\ When pursuer and pursued returned they found me in a heap on the floor, the basin tipped over beside me, instruments and sponges scattered everywhere. The patient was still sitting quietly waiting for all the foolishness to stop. I am glad to say this was the one and only time I ever fainted on duty. The training, rigid though it was, would have been far less diffi- cult had it not been for the truly diabolical head nurse. In the morn- ing she was all smiles, so saintly that you could almost glimpse the halo around her head. But as the day wore on the demon in her ap- peared. She could always think up extra things for you to do to keep you from your regular afternoon two hours off. This was particu- larly hard on me because I had developed tubercular glands and was running a temperature. In my second year I was operated on, and two weeks later assigned to night duty, where I stayed for three awful months. My worst tribulation came during this period. People then seldom went to hospitals with minor ailments ; our patients were commonly the very sick, requiring a maximum of attention. There was no or- derly and I could use only my left hand because my right shoulder was still bandaged. I took care of admissions, entered case histories, and, when sharp bells punctuated the waiting stillness, sometimes one coming before I had time to answer the first, I pattered hurriedly up and down the three flights, through the shadows relieved only by the faint red glow from the gas jets. I suppose adventures were inevita- ble. One night an Italian was picked up on the street in a state of almost complete exhaustion, and brought to the hospital. He was so ill with suspected typhoid that he should have had a "special," but in- stead he was placed in the ward. An old leather couch stood across the windows, and whenever a pause came in my duties I lay down. DARKNESS THERE AND NOTHING MORE 49 From there I could keep an eye on my new patient. Sick as he was he insisted on making the long trip through the ward to the bath- room. I could not explain how unwise this was, because he could not understand a word of English. He must have reeled out of his bed between thirty and forty times. Just as the early spring dawn came creeping in the window be- hind me I grew drowsy. I was on the point of dozing off when some premonition warned me and I opened my eyelids enough to see the man reach under his pillow, take something out cautiously, glide from his bed. Spellbound I watched him slithering soft-footedly as he edged his way towards me. I seemed to be hypnotized with sleep and could not stir. He came nearer and nearer with eyes fixed, hands behind him. Suddenly I snapped into duty, arose quickly, ordered him back to bed, and ran ahead to straighten his sheets and pillows, not realizing my danger until he loomed over me, his knife in his hand. Before he could thrust I grabbed his arm and held it. Though I was small-boned I had good muscles, and he was very ill. Meanwhile, another patient snatched up his bell and rang, and rang and rang. Nobody answered. The nurses were too far away to hear ; the other patients in the ward were unable to help me. But the man quickly used up what little energy he had, and I was able to get the knife from him, push him back in bed, and take his temperature. I as- sumed he had suddenly become delirious. About seven o'clock I answered a summons to the front door and found three policemen who wanted to know whether we had an Italian patient. "Indeed we have," I answered feelingly and called the superintendent. When the red tape was unwound, I learned that my Italian be- longed to a gang which had been hiding in a cave between Tarry- town and White Plains, holding up passers-by. Amongst them they had committed five murders. The others had all been hunted down, but this man's collapse had temporarily covered his whereabouts. The attack on me had apparently been merely incidental to his attempt at escape through the open window behind me. He was carried off to the County Hospital Jail, and I was not sorry to see him go. After this incident an orderly was employed and, though he was allowed to sleep at night, it was reassuring to know he could be called 5<D MARGARET SANGER in an emergency. The emergency soon arose. A young man of about twenty-five, of well-to-do parents, was admitted as an alcoholic. I re- member that I was impressed by the softness of his handshake when I greeted him. He had the first symptoms of delirium tremens but he was now perfectly conscious and needed no more than routine at- tention. Sometime in the night the new arrival asked me to get him a drink of water. When I came back into the room and offered it to him he knocked me into the corner ten feet away. As my head banged against the wall, he leaped out of bed after me and reached down for my throat. Though half -stunned and off my feet, I yet had more strength than the man whose flabby muscles refused to obey his will. The patient in the adjoining bed rang and in a few moments the orderly came to my assistance. Between us we got the poor crazed youth into a strait jacket. The doctor who was summoned could do nothing and in the morning the young man mercifully died. To differentiate between things real and things imaginary was not always easy at nighttime. One morning about two o'clock I was writing my case histories in the reception office on the ground floor just off the veranda. Both window and curtain behind my back were up about ten inches to let in the cool, moist air. Abruptly I had a feel- ing that eyes were staring at me. I could not have explained why ; I had heard no sound, but I was certain some human being was some- where about. Anybody who had come on legitimate business would have spoken. Perhaps it was another patient with a knife. Should I sit still ? Should I look behind me ? I turned my head to the window, and there an ugly, grinning face with a spreading, black mustache was peering in at me. It might have been disembodied; all I could see was this extraordinary face, white against the inky background. It was not a patient, not anyone in my charge. Relief was immediate and action automatic. I seized the long window pole, twice as tall as I, dashed to the outer door, and shooed him off the veranda. He ran for the outer gate while I bran- dished my weapon after him. Such instantaneous responses must have been the result of having in childhood sent fears about their business before they could gather momentum. Now I could usually act without having to think very DARKNESS THERE AND NOTHING MORE 5 1 much about them or be troubled in retrospect. They were all in the day's work of the night nurse. Probably the fact that I was low in vitality made me more sus- ceptible to mental than physical influences. Realistic doctors and stern head nurses tried to keep tales of the old house from the probation- ers, but not very successfully. When the colored patients could not sleep they used to tell us weird stories, and with rolling eyes solemnly affirmed they were true. One old darky woman, hearing the hoot owls begin their mournful "too-whoo, too-whoo," would sit straight up in her bed and whisper, "Suppose dat callin' me? Hit's callin' some- one in dis hospital." Again and again after the owls' hooting either somebody in the hospital died, or was brought in to die from an accident. Reason told me this was pure coincidence, but it began to get on my nerves. And then stranger events, for which I could find no explanation, followed. Once when I was making my rounds a little after midnight, I turned into the room occupied by the tubercular valet of a member of the Iselin family. I had expected him to be sleeping quietly be- cause he was merely there to rest up before being sent back home to England, but he was awake and asked for ice. I started for the re- frigerator, which was two flights down in the cellar. But at the top of the stairs I suddenly stopped short — "One — Two — Three!" I heard dull, distinct knocks directly under the stairway. Not one, single, tangible thing near by could have made those sounds. In the space of a few seconds I took an inventory of the im- portance of my life as compared to the proper care of my patient. I had to walk deliberately down those steps, not knowing what might be lying in wait for me below. As I stepped on the first tread the same knocks came again — "One — Two — Three!" I tried to hurry but it seemed to me that each foot had tons of iron attached to it. The little red devils of night lights blinked at me and seemed to make the shadows thicker in the corners. But nothing clutched me from the dim and ghostly hall. I got down those steps somehow and passed through the dining room into the kitchen. There I paused again. Should I take a butcher knife with me? "No, I won't do that," I answered myself resolutely, and started for the cellar stairs. 52 MARGARET SANGER For the third time came the knocking. Glancing to right and left, my back against the dark, I crept down, reached the refrigerator, broke off some chunks of ice with trembling hands, put them in a bowl, steeled myself while I chopped them into still finer pieces, and set out on the return, my feet much lighter going up than down. I had been away only a brief while altogether, but the patient, for no apparent cause, had had a hemorrhage, and died in a few minutes. Many times after that I heard these nocturnal sounds, usually overhead. They began to seem more like footsteps — "tap, tap, tap, tap," — very quick and a bit muffled. Soon I was not sleeping well in the daytime. One morning I asked at breakfast table, "Who was walking around last night?" "I wasn't." "Not I." "Certainly not me," came a chorus. "What makes you think someone was up?" "I distinctly heard footsteps the full length of the third floor." "What time?" "Around four o'clock." But nobody admitted to having been up. "Then one of you must have been walking in your sleep," I insisted. The nurse who had preceded me on night duty timidly contributed, "I always heard somebody. I didn't want to say anything about it for fear you'd think I was queer." Towards morning of the very next night when I was in the sec- ond floor ward, I heard the patter again above my head. I ran up- stairs to the nurses' quarters as fast as I could and looked down the corridor. Every door was tight shut. I tore down two flights to the first floor. The noise came once more above me. Back to the second floor. All patients were in their beds. I asked the only wakeful one, "Did you get up just now ?" "No." "Did anybody else get up?" "No." Some nights went by quietly. But I heard the noises often enough to become truly concerned for fear I might be imagining things. I said to one of the older nurses, "I'm going to wake you up and see whether you hear them too." DARKNESS THERE AND NOTHING MORE 53 "I'll sit up with you," she offered. "No, I'll call you. They never come until almost morning." The next time, at the first tap, I hurried to her room, shook her awake, led her to the floor below, "There, do you hear it?" Her expression was confirmation enough. Leaving her I raced down another flight, and waited. In a mo- ment the "Tap, tap, tap, tap" came again from overhead. Up I went. She said she had heard it all right but it had come from over her head. At least my senses were not playing me tricks. My accounts were given greater credence, and other nurses sometimes interrupted their slumbers to listen. One of my companions told a young and intelligent doctor on the staff that I had better be taken off night duty before I had a nervous breakdown. Though he thought this was girlish nonsense, he could see I was being seriously affected, and anyhow the strain of three continuous months at such a hard task was far too much. Another nurse relieved me. After my second glandular operation I was placed in one of the private rooms on the upper floor. I had not come through very well, and this same doctor remained in the hospital all night to be on call. Being restless, I woke up, only to hear the identical noises which had haunted me for so long. I called him and exclaimed, "There it is. Don't you hear it?" He did, but confidently he strode upstairs to the nurses' floor. I knew he would find nothing. When he came back, I asked, "Did you see anyone?" "No. Apparently everybody was asleep. I looked in all the rooms." Immediately the raps came again. He moved a little faster to get downstairs. In a few minutes he put his head back in the door. "You're in bed? You haven't been up?" I assured him I had not moved, knowing well he must have heard them as always I had, from above. Though still believing somebody was walking around the place, the doctor by this time was determined to get to the bottom of the mystery, and returned every night for a week. But the sound was a will-o'-the-wisp. He never could catch up with it. He was so eager to exhaust every possibility that he even brought the matter be- 54 MARGARET SANGER fore the board. One of them patronizingly explained that it was probably the echo from some rat in the walls ; they were in the habit of dismissing thus lightly the superstitions which clung about the old house. The doctor continued his detective work until one day he appeared in great good humor. From the rear windows he pointed to the roof which rose beyond the high back wall. "I've found it. That stable is built on the same timbers as this house. When some horse grows restless towards morning he stamps and the vibration is carried through them underground to this building. Now do you believe in ghosts ?" Life was