Full text of "OVERSIGHT OF CUSTOMER SERVICE IN THE CABLE AND SATELLITE TELEVISION INDUSTRY"

AUTHENTICATED , US. GOVERNMENT INFORMATION ^ S. Hrg. 114-409 CUSTOMER SERVICE AND BILLING PRACTICES IN THE CABLE AND SATELLITE TELEVISION INDUSTRY HEARING BEFORE THE PERIilANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON imM^STIGATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOAH]RNMENTAL AFFAIRS UNITED STATES SENATE ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION JUNE 23, 2016 Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov/ Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs n G C/3 n H > o 03 § “ M > o c/3 > H rn H M H M m < s ^ o o G c/3 m ? s > o Cd P O n H n m c/3 c/3 H „ W Z H X m S. Hrg. 114-409 CUSTOMER SERVICE AND BILLING PRACTICES IN THE CABLE AND SATELLITE TELEVISION INDUSTRY HEARING BEFORE THE PERIilANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON imM^STIGATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOAH]RNMENTAL AFFAIRS UNITED STATES SENATE ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION JUNE 23, 2016 Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE 21-423 PDF WASHINGTON : 2016 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402-0001 COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AEFAIRS RON JOHNSON. Wisconsin. Chairman JOHN McCAIN, Arizona ROB PORTMAN, Ohio RAND PAUL, Kentucky JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming KELLY AYOTTE, New Hampshire JONI ERNST, Iowa BEN SASSE, Nebraska THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri JON TESTER, Montana TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota CORY A. BOOKER, New Jersey GARY C. PETERS, Michigan Christopher R. Hdcon, Staff Director Gabrielle a. Batkin, Minority Staff Director John P. Kilvington, Minority Deputy Staff Director Laura W. Kilbride, Chief Clerk Benjamin C. Grazda, Hearing Clerk PERMANENT SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS ROB PORTMAN, Ohio Chairman JOHN McCAIN, Arizona CLAIRE McCASKILL, Missouri RAND PAUL, Kentucky JON TESTER, Montana JAMES LANKFORD, Oklahoma TAMMY BALDWIN, Wisconsin KELLY AYOTTE, New Hampshire HEIDI HEITKAMP, North Dakota BEN SASSE, Nebraska Brian Callanan, Staff Director Margaret Daum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel Kelsey Stroud, Chief Clerk (H) CONTENTS Opening statements: Page Senator Portman 1 Senator McCaskill 4 Senator Paul 22 Senator Lankford 25 Prepared statements: Senator Portman 41 Senator McCaskill 44 WITNESSES Thursday, June 23, 2016 Tom Karinshak, Senior Vice President, Customer Service, Comcast Cable 9 John Keib, Former Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, Residential Services, Time Warner Cable Inc 11 Kathleen “Kip” Mayo, Executive Vice President, Customer Operations, Char- ter Communications, Inc 12 Rasesh Patel, Senior Vice President, Product Management, AT&T Entertain- ment Group (DirecTV) 14 Kathleen Schneider, Senior Vice President, Operations, DISH Network, L.L.C 16 Alphabetical List of Witnesses Karinshak Tom: Testimony 9 Prepared statement 49 Keib, John: Testimony 11 Prepared statement 57 Mayo, Kathleen “Kip”: Testimony 12 Prepared statement 60 Patel, Rasesh: Testimony 14 Prepared statement 67 Schneider, Kathleen: Testimony 16 Prepared statement 73 APPENDK Charter bill referenced by Senator McCaskill 48 Staff Report 85 Minority Staff Report 101 Hearing Exhibits 163 Letter regarding correction from Mr. Patel 181 Statement for the Record from the National Association of Telecommuni- cations Officers and Advisors 183 Responses to post-hearing questions for the Record Mr. Karinshak 185 Ms. Mayo 200 Mr. Patel 205 Ms. Schneider 214 (III) OVERSIGHT OF CUSTOMER SERVICE IN THE CABLE AND SATELLITE TELEVISION INDUSTRY THURSDAY, JUNE 23, 2016 U.S. Senate, Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, OF THE Committee on Homeland Security AND Governmental Affairs, Washington, DC. The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in room SD-342, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Rob Portman, Chairman of the Subcommittee, presiding. Present: Senators Portman, Paul, Lankford, Ayotte, McCaskill, Tester, Baldwin, and Heitkamp. OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PORTMAN Senator Portman. The Committee will come to order. We are here today to discuss a topic that affects just about eveiy American family and often frustrates all of us as American fami- lies, and that is our cable or satellite TV service. For over a year now. Senator McCaskill and I have undertaken an investigation of the cable and satellite television industry. As many of you know. Senator McCaskill has been interested in this issue for many years, from her role on the Commerce Committee. She will talk about that. We both have a keen interest in making sure cable and sat- ellite companies do right by their subscribers. The Subcommittee has reviewed literally thousands of documents and interviewed countless witnesses to learn more about the con- sumer practices of the five largest pay-TV providers. This includes Comcast, Charter, Time Warner Cable, DISH Network, and DirecTV. Together, these companies serve more than half of all American households and nearly three-quarters of those who pay for television programming. Today’s hearing will focus on those companies’ billing and cus- tomer service practices. Our joint report^ outlines troubling find- ings about the practices of two cable companies that have consist- ently failed to provide refunds to customers who they know they have overcharged, including thousands of people in my home State of Ohio. I will talk about those findings in a moment. The second is a report issued by Senator McCaskilP on a number of issues of ^The staff report appears in the Appendix on page 85. 2 The report issued by Senator McCaskill appears in the Appendix on page 101. ( 1 ) 2 interest to consumers: how pay-TV companies disclose their prices, what these fees are for, and how they teach their employees to interact with and retain customers. And without objection, these reports will be made part of the record. During the course of the Subcommittee’s investigation, we discov- ered something about refunds that, frankly, I found hard to believe. As anyone with a cable or satellite subscription knows, when your bill arrives every month, it often has a long list of charges on it. I have a bill here in front of me. It is a pretty complicated bill. A base charge for the TV package, maybe $10 extra per month for HBO, and equipment fees and surcharges for the set-top boxes that you rent. Given how many millions of people get television service from these companies, it is inevitable that from time to time a customer will wind up getting charged for something by mistake. That hap- pens. The same thing, by the way, happens in the grocery store checkout line sometimes. It has happened to me. Mistakes hap- pen — and we understand that. What matters in life is how you own up to your mistakes and make things right. What we discovered is that some cable and satellite companies are better at doing that than others. All of the companies before us have ways of identifying over- charges to customers or preventing them from happening in the first place. But what happens when they find out they have been overcharging someone for equipment the customer does not actu- ally have? The first thing to do, of course, is take it off the cus- tomer’s bill going forward. All the companies before us know to do that. But not all of them bother to go back and figure out when the overcharge started, calculate how much they owe the consumer, and give them a refund. During the time period examined by the Subcommittee, Time Warner Cable and Charter Communications — who have just re- cently merged with each other — made no effort to trace equipment overcharges they identified and provide refunds to their customers. Instead, their practice has been to just pocket the past overcharges. To understand the scale of this problem, we asked Time Warner Cable for specific numbers about overcharges in my home State of Ohio. Here is what we found: During the first 5 months of 2016, this year. Time Warner Cable overbilled up to 11,000 customers in Ohio, and those overcharges totaled over $100,000. Time Warner Cable further estimates that, throughout last year alone, it over- billed 40,000 Ohio customers with overcharges of more than $430,000. And rather than correct the mistake by refunding the overcharges, the company just kept the money. In my view, that is a ripoff of Ohio consumers, and I will be asking the company today how they are going to fix it. Specifically, when Time Warner Cable discovered the over- charges, it only dealt with the problem prospectively. It took erro- neous charges off customers’ bills going forward, but did not pro- vide any backward-looking refunds and did not even provide notice to customers so they could investigate the problem themselves. They just kept the money. Based on data provided to the Sub- committee, Time Warner Cable will overbill its customers nation- 3 wide an estimated $2 million for equipment charges in 2016 and, even after discovering these billing errors, will fail to do the work required to provide a full refund. We will talk about that. Time Warner Cable has recently been acquired, as I said, by Charter Communications. So I am hopeful the new company will work quickly to fix this problem. But Charter has had problems of its own. Until August 2015, the company did not run any systematic audits to reconcile its billing records with equipment records. That means overcharged cus- tomers could not even receive a prospective correction of their bill unless they spotted the problem themselves and contacted Charter. Just recently. Charter began taking steps to identify equipment overcharges currently on its system. But even though it has identi- fied overcharges and removed erroneous charges from future bills since August 2015, until today. Charter has not provided any re- funds or notice of the problem to consumers — just like Time War- ner Cable. It does not have to be this way. Our investigation revealed that Comcast, DirecTV, and DISH have had better practices. Comcast and DirecTV provide automatic refunds or credits to customers who have been overcharged by their billing systems, while DISH’s bill- ing system is designed and apparently has been successful in pre- venting any of these types of overcharges from occurring in the first place. So feasibility, in my view, is not a good excuse for fail- ing to refund customers when they have been overcharged. We do have some good news to report today. As a result of our investigation. Charter and Time Warner Cable have taken steps to improve their practices. Time Warner performs a monthly audit to find overcharges. Going forward, the company will provide an auto- matic 1-month credit to all customers for each piece of overbilled equipment or service, and it will provide notice to overbilled cus- tomers so they can determine whether to request a credit or a re- fund. That is a good start. But it does not make all customers whole. Time Warner Cable has not yet committed to do anything for the 40,000 Ohio customers, for instance, who were overcharged last year. And we will get into that discussion later today. Charter has announced that starting today it will provide a 1-year credit to all affected consumers. That, of course, goes further to make customers whole, but what would be better is simply to ensure that customers receive the full refunds that they are owed. Senator McCaskill’s report shows that Americans are often un- happy with their cable and satellite service. Questionable customer service techniques and confusion surrounding billing practices have led consumers to feel mistreated. I support her effort to get to the bottom of these issues, and I believe that the best solution to the problem of poor customer service is more competition in the pay- TV industry. Regulations have their place, but what is really need- ed is for consumers to have a more options — more competition in the market. If you do not like your television service provider, you should be able to choose a different provider that suits your needs and suits your preferences, and Senator McCaskill and I are both interested in continuing to examine how the industry can be im- proved to create more choice for consumers. 4 I want to thank Senator McCaskill for her hard work on this. She has always been a stalwart friend of consumers, as I said ear- lier. She and her staff have worked with us in a professional and productive way to make today possible. With that, I would like to turn to Senator McCaskill for her opening statement. OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR MCCASKILL Senator McCaskill. Thank you, and I want to thank you. Chair- man Portman, for allowing me to pursue, along with you and your staff, this investigation. I think that we can feel great about the fact that just this investigation and hearing have caused good things to happen for consumers as it relates to pay-TV. As you in- dicated, we have had a change just from the investigation. Both Charter and Time Warner agreed to issue credits for thousands of customers who were overbilled, and Comcast has provided addi- tional guidance to its retention representatives of allowing cus- tomers to cancel without an argument. So we can already claim some small victory as a result of these investigations and this hear- ing today. And I think this is an important area for us to continue to look at. It is amazing to me, when we began asking for input, the volume and passion of input we got from people about how they feel like they are mistreated by their pay-TV provider. And this morning, for the first time, our Nation’s largest cable and satellite companies are testifying together before us about their customer service and billing practices. They are here because this Subcommittee has broad jurisdiction to investigate issues which affect the American people. I tried to have this hearing as the Chairman of the Con- sumer Protection Subcommittee, and I got no cooperation from any of these companies in connection with that hearing in the later months of 2014. And so I made a determination then that I was not going to give up and that we were going to stay on this, and I am really grateful, as I say. Chairman Portman, for your agree- ment to allow this investigation to go forward. The five companies here today provide video services to more than half of all American households. They enable more than 71 million subscribers and their families to receive news, entertain- ment, and other programming. And while we may love watching our shows, we do not love our cable and satellite bills, and we hate dealing with the cable and satellite companies. Although the com- panies have made some gains in the last year, paid TV providers remain among the most disliked industries in America. This year, a survey of consumers found that more than 20 percent of the peo- ple who had interacted with TV providers reported having a bad experience during the previous 6 months, the highest level of any industry. So how did I begin down this road? Well, it was with a personal experience. I called one of my providers and asked questions about my bill. And in the process of that conversation, I learned — this was over 2 years ago — that there was a $10 charge on my bill for a certain service that now was included in the basic package. And I said, “Well, so I am paying $10 that I do not have to?” And the person on the other end of the line kind of said, “Yes, you are pay- 5 ing $10, and you do not have to pay it.” And I said, “Well, were you going to tell me this?” And they said, “Well, no. You have to call in and ask.” That is exactly the kind of “hide the ball” that in- furiates people. So if I had not called in and asked, that $10 could still be on my bill today based on the billing practices of the companies rep- resented at this hearing. So we have done a huge investigation, and I have reviewed a lot of material, and my staff has, and I have consumed a lot of infor- mation about this. So I decided 2 days ago I would take another spin, because now I know a lot. Now I know the difference between a customer service representative and a retention specialist. Now I know what to say and how to say it. So 2 days ago, I called one of my providers, and on my website, McCaskill.Senate.gov, people can listen to the recording of this con- versation. And, in fairness, because I do not think this is nec- essarily one company versus another, I am not going to talk about which company it is, nor will the recording. And I am not going to read here nor on the recording will I give all my personal informa- tion that I was asked to give when I called. But here is how the conversation went, the first part of it, until they got me to that magic retention specialist. “Hello, and thank you so much for calling. Can I have your name, please?” “My name is Claire McCaskill.” “Can you spell that for me, please?” I proceeded to spell it. I proceeded to give the representative my service address. I proceeded to give her the name on the account and say that that was my husband’s name. And she asked what my relationship was to the account holder, and I said it was my husband. And then the woman said, “OK. And how can I help today?” I said, “I would like to have you remove — there is a fee on here — I am not sure how it got on here — for a protection plan. I do not recall buying that or being asked about it, and I would like to have it removed.” Now she wants to get my information about my account and my active credit card to make sure I am the person that I say I am. So she goes through what credit card I have on file. Then she says, “All right. So you said you are seeing a charge for the protection plan, and you would like to know what it is for.” I said, “No. I would like to take it off.” “Oh, you would like to take it off?” “Yes.” “All right. But you are aware that basically the protection plan covers equipment upgrades every 2 years, and if you lose your equipment, then we will replace it for you at no charge.” I said, “Well, are you saying that the equipment I have in my house now is mine, or is it yours?” “Well, it is ours, but basically if there are any issues — say, for example, spills or accidentally the cables get cut, then we will re- place that for you.” I said, “Well, yes, but let’s just say if it is your equipment and something goes wrong with it, don’t you have to fix it anyway if 6 I am going to be able to get the service I am paying for since you own the equipment?” “Well, let’s say if the remote fails or stops working. The protec- tion plan on the account will then fix that free of cost.” I said, “Well, what would that cost if the remote quit working? It is your remote that you own. What would it cost to get it fixed if I did not have the protection plan?” The woman says, “Well, information on that is actually done in our equipment department. So I would like to connect you there for more information.” I said, “No, no, no, no.” Because I knew better, right? “No, no, no, no. I do not want to do that because if you do that, I have to wait and tell the story all over again. I just want to find out why I cannot get you to take off the $7.99 for the protection plan.” “I am not saying I am not able to take it off. I am just letting you know the benefits you get with the protection plan.” “I understand. I think I understand. I think, frankly, it’s kind of a ripoff because you own all the equipment, and I think you have to fix the equipment since you own the equipment. And if you can- not fix the equipment, then I could not get the service, and then I would not pay for the service, and I would definitely go to another provider. So what I am asking is, will you just disconnect it? I do not want to pay the $7.99. I do not even know how it got on my bill. I think you just started putting it on my bill, and I was not paying close enough attention.” “All right,” she says. “But if I actually have the protection plan taken off, there will be a $10 disconnection fee.” “It would be a $10 disconnection fee for me to quit paying the $7.99 every month?” “That is correct.” “And it is a one-time disconnection fee? ” “Yes, it is one time.” “And what am I paying for? ” “Paying for?” she says. “Yes, what am I paying for? For you to just quit charging me for the service, I have to pay you $10?” “Well, no. Basically” And then I say, “I think what we ought to do probably, I think maybe now it is time for me to switch carriers. If you are going to charge me $10 to quit charging me for something I do not want anymore, I think it is time to switch carriers.” “All right. Well, basically that is just the policy. So once I take off the protection plan charge, it will be automatically on your ac- count.” “OK. So what you are saying is if I want to cancel $7.99 that you have been getting every month for the protection plan, you are going to charge me $10 to do that? You have no choice?” “I have no choice.” “You cannot waive that? ” “It is policy. That is correct.” “Do you have discretion to give me a one-time credit of $10 to do away with that? ” “I am really sorry.” 7 “I do not really think you want to lose me as a customer, do you, over $10?” “Well, we do value your business, but it is just the policy here. So once I take it off, then there will be the $10 charge.” “And there is nothing you can do about that? You do not have the option to waive? ” And she says, “No, I do not.” So then, finally, I said, “Well, who could waive the $10?” She says, “Well, I would have to give you to the retention spe- cialist. And I am not really sure how it works in that department.” So then she switched me over to the retention specialist. Now, this is typical. And, more importantly, when she switched me to the retention specialist, I knew what to say. I knew to keep threatening that I was leaving, to keep threatening I was leaving, not give up, keep threatening I was leaving. And, by the way, it was a long call. Even when we edited it to take out some of the things that are not personal, it was longer than 15 minutes, and at the end of the call, I managed to get the $7.99 off. I was told by the retention specialist I never should have been charged the $10. And, by the way, I got so mad and “escalated,” as it is called in the business, that the retention specialist ended up giving me $10 off a month for 12 months. Now, they were looking at a screen that told them all kinds of information about me, including the fact that I am a pretty good customer. My bill is pretty high. So I say this because I think this is what the industry maybe does not completely understand in terms of the anger. We found that customers are being charged a host of fees that are not in- cluded in advertising pricing, some of which are for programming that used to be included in a customer’s video package. We also found that just as many customers have long believed some of these fees, like high definition (HD) and the digital video recorder (DVR) service fees, are not really a true reflection of the cost to the company of the service but, rather, are based on the rev- enue goals of the company and the price a customer is willing to stomach. In fact, some of these fees are charged to old customers while new customers get the same services free of charge. Existing customers may not be informed of this. And when they finally fig- ure it out, they have to call and complain to get it taken off. We found that customers who called for help on their accounts face agents whose job it is not just to solve the customer problems but, in fact, to sell them additional services. At one cable company, even when the customer called in to ask about why their bill was going up, the company told them, “[t]he price adjustment brings with it an opportunity to upsell customers.” And these agents are compensated, in part, on their ability to sell you more. Then if the customer decide they want to cancel their service, they have to jump through more hoops. Although all the companies here today allow people to sign up for service or upgrade their serv- ice online, none of them provide customers an option to cancel serv- ice online without speaking to a company representative. And if they call, they have to speak to salespeople, like the one I spoke to this week, who are trained to prevent the customers from can- celing and hopefully selling you more product. Even when cus- 8 tomers say they do not want to have this discussion, the agents are expected to ask questions about why the customer is canceling. Customers trying to save money by lowering their level of service are often routed to the same agents and should be prepared to ne- gotiate aggressively. We found evidence that these companies train their agents to question customers’ decisions to drop channels and make offers in a “top-down” fashion so the customer must repeat- edly push and push and push to get the best deal. Finally, we found that two of the companies have failed to pro- vide their customers with notice that they have been overcharged or refunded of past overcharges. As the Chairman pointed out, thousands of people in our States have been impacted by that. The numbers for Missouri, Time Warner overbilled 4,232 Missouri cus- tomers last year for a total of $44,152, and Charter estimates that it has annually overcharged approximately 5,897 Missouri cus- tomers a total of $494,000 each year. I want to acknowledge the cooperation we have received from all the companies represented before us today as well as acknowledge the commitments they have made during the process of this inves- tigation to improve customer service. Unfortunately, our investiga- tion suggests that there is a long way to go, as did my conversation with one of my providers just 2 days ago. I thank the witnesses for their testimony and look forward to the opportunity to ask you questions. Senator Portman. Thank you. Senator McCaskill. We will now go to our panel of witnesses, and we appreciate you all being here. This morning we have with us Tom Karinshak. He is the Senior Vice President of Customer Service for Comcast where he oversees all call center operations and other customer service channels. We have with us John Keib. John is the former Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer (COO) of residential services for Time Warner Cable where he was in charge of customer service, service delivery, technical support, marketing, and sales. We have Kathleen Mayo with us, who is the Executive Vice President of Customer Operations at Charter Communications, where she is responsible for Charter’s customer care organization. We have Rasesh Patel, who is the Senior Vice President of Prod- uct Management for AT&T Entertainment Group, where he is re- sponsible for product strate^ and development for DirecTV. We have Kathleen Schneider with us, who is Senior Vice Presi- dent of operations for DISH Network, where she oversees customer service for all DISH and Sling TV subscribers nationwide and man- ages dish’s call centers and business process improvement oper- ations. Again, we appreciate you all being with us this morning, and we look forward to your testimony. It is the custom of the Sub- committee to swear in our witnesses, so at this time I would ask you all to please stand and raise your right hand. Do you all swear that the testimony you are about to give before this Subcommittee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you, God? Mr. Karinshak. I do. Mr. Keib. I do. 9 Ms. Mayo. I do. Mr. Patel. I do. Ms. Schneider. I do. Senator Portman. Thank you. Let the record reflect that each witness answered in the affirmative. All of your written statements will he made part of the record in their entirety. I would ask you to keep your oral testimony to 5 minutes today. Mr. Karinshak, we would like to hear from you first. TESTIMONY OF TOM KARINSHAK, i SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, CUSTOMER SERVICE, COMCAST CABLE Mr. Karinshak. Thank you. Chairman Portman, Ranking Mem- ber McCaskill, and Members of the Subcommittee, my name is Tom Karinshak, and I am the Senior Vice President of customer service at Comcast Cable. Thank you for the opportunity to be here today, and I also want to thank your staff for the courtesies ex- tended to us throughout this review. I understand why we are here. Comcast and the industry as a whole have not always made customer service the priority it should have been. Our ability to address customers’ needs in a timely fashion has been an issue. Our bills have not always been simple to read, and the range of choices and prices we have offered have not always provided customers with the options they want. I am sorry about that history. At Comcast, we have committed to our customers that we will change it, and we are taking steps to do just that. I want to reaf- firm that commitment to you all today and to outline some of the actions that we are taking. When I started this job, I made a decision to regularly spend time on the phones and in the stores with our employees and with our customers. That is the front line. That is the place where cus- tomer views about Comcast are shaped. When you contact us to get new service, you want to speak with someone who listens to what you say and who understands all of our product options. You want to know the full price, and you want time to change your mind if what you order is not exactly what you need. When you get bills from us, you want them to be easy to read, and you do not want to see surprises or changes that you do not understand. When you call with a question or a problem or to tell us we made a mistake, you want polite and responsive service. And you want the issue resolved the first time if at all possible. And if you move out of our service area or decide to choose service other than ours, you want to be able to do so without delays and without hassle. We have listened to what you have said. Yesterday I met with some of our front-line employees in a local store here in the D.C. area, and I took some calls directly from our customers, and I was heartened by what I experienced. I have submitted a longer statement for the record, and I will not repeat much of it here. But I do want to tell you just a few of the ^The prepared statement of Mr. Karinshak appears in the Appendix on page 49. 10 key components of our efforts to improve our customer service and to provide a better customer experience. First, we are investing in additional training and new technology for all of our employees. We are committed to ensuring that when our customers speak to Comcast representatives, they are speaking to representatives that have received comprehensive and consistent training. On the technology side, we have rolled out a new cloud-based platform that gives customer service representatives a better, holis- tic view of the customer’s account history so that customers do not need to keep repeating the same information when talking to some- body new. Second, we are reassessing policies and fees and simplifying our bills to improve the overall customer experience. For example, we have eliminated change of service and other fees, and we now allow customers to return equipment free of charge through our partner- ship with the United Parcel Service (UPS). We offer all customers a 30-day money-back guarantee, and in response to the Subcommit- tee’s concerns, we have reaffirmed in a policy statement sent to all of our retention specialists that we expect them to promptly facili- tate a disconnect for a customer who is not interested in answering questions. Third, we are giving all customers better access to products and services that work best for them. We have listened to our cus- tomers and are developing new products that better suit their needs. For example, we recently developed a cutting-edge XI plat- form which has completely enhanced and revamped our customers’ entertainment experience. And we have expanded our free on-de- mand programming to offer our customer more choices than ever before. And, finally, we are measuring all of our employees on customer satisfaction. Our compensation plan for front-line employees is now tied directly to the customer experience. In fact, the compensation for all company employees, including our company’s top executives, depends in part on these customer service scores as well. Comcast will spend an incremental half billion dollars this year alone on improving the customer experience. As part of that initia- tive, we are creating more than 5,500 new customer service jobs over the next 3 years, including positions that we have already filled at our new call centers in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and in Tucson, Arizona. Having spent over 6 years in the Army myself, I am particularly proud of the fact that we are looking to fill many of these positions with our Nation’s veterans and their families. We believe these and other steps we have taken to improve our customer experience are making a real difference. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions that you may have. Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Karinshak. Mr. Keib. 11 TESTIMONY OF JOHN KEIB,i FORMER EXECUTIVE VICE PRESI- DENT AND CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER, RESIDENTIAL SERV- ICES, TIME WARNER CABLE INC. Mr. Keib. Chairman Portman, Ranking Member McCaskill, other Members of the Subcommittee, good morning. My name is John Keib, and I am here today to testify on behalf of legacy Time War- ner Cable. Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this hearing. As you know. Time Warner Cable recently merged with Charter Communications and Bright House Networks to form a new com- pany. My role at Time Warner Cable ended when the parties com- pleted these transactions; I am no longer employed by Time War- ner Cable or Charter. As such, I am testifying today as a former Time Warner Cable executive, but also as a private citizen. My most recent position at Time Warner Cable was Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer for residential services. In this role, I led the service delivery, customer care, marketing, and sales operations for the company’s residential service. To the extent that questions arise relating to the future of Time Warner Cable and Charter, I will defer to Charter’s witness. Kip Mayo. Legacy Time Warner Cable serves approximately 15 million cus- tomers receiving video, Internet, or telephone services in 29 States ranging from Maine to Hawaii. We employ thousands of customer service representatives and field technicians whom we train, first and foremost, to serve our customers. Let me begin by acknowledging that we are well aware of some of the issues that will be discussed by the Subcommittee today. Those of you who live in a Time Warner Cable area have probably seen our most recent ad campaign in which we acknowledge — in- deed highlight — prior service challenges before explaining the steps we are taking as a company to address those historical short- comings. That campaign is the culmination of efforts made, during my ten- ure at Time Warner Cable, to improve our customer service per- formance in order to provide the best customer experience possible. Beginning in 2013, under an internal strategy we called “Winning on Service,” Time Warner Cable embarked on an aggressive plan to improve its customer service and took several steps toward that goal. We invested heavily in our network. We made several tech- nology augmentations for broadband and video. We also initiated an ambitious plan to reshape our customer service performance by investing in our greatest and most important asset — our employ- ees. We sought to make service the differentiator and to become the best service provider not just within the telecom space, but within any industry. Our goal is to keep customers, and we accomplish that goal by keeping them happy. To do this, we train our customer service rep- resentatives to provide excellent care to our customers. Upon hir- ing, our representatives receive 11 weeks of hands-on training, as well as weekly ongoing training and coaching sessions with our su- pervisors. These coaching sessions allow our representatives to learn from the actual calls they handle. Our focus on customer ^The prepared statement of Mr. Keib appears in the Appendix on page 57. 12 service has made a difference, as more than four in five customers report they are satisfied with their interaction with Time Warner Cable. And our surveys suggest that our customers are becoming increasingly satisfied. We have made great strides in addressing customer issues more quickly and efficiently. We have done this by improving our phone service levels through enhanced training and better staffing, im- proving our product and service performance, and introducing ap- pointment-based call-backs, which allow customers to schedule call- backs from Time Warner Cable at times that best work for them. As a result of these efforts, our total call volume is down. Over the past 3 years, the number of calls fielded by our customer service representatives decreased by 12 million, which is a testament to better and more efficient customer service. One measure of this improved customer service is known as “one- touch resolution” — or the percentage of calls that are managed by a single agent. Recent internal reports show that we achieve one- touch resolution in nearly 94 percent of the calls we handle. In addition. Time Warner Cable began offering industry 1-hour service and install windows, and in the first quarter of this year, our technicians were on time for these appointments 99 percent of the time. We also significantly reduced by 1.6 million the number of times a Time Warner Cable technician needed to visit a cus- tomer’s home to handle a repair. Are we there yet? No. Making such changes at a company our size is no small feat, and the desired changes cannot all happen at once. Still, the evidence suggests that our efforts are starting to pay off. In the latest American Customer Satisfaction Report, Time Warner Cable was ranked the fourth-best Internet provider. That is up from the 13th position 2 years previously. Although we did not have enough time to fully execute our plan, I am proud of the early results just as I am most proud of our tech- nicians and customer service agents who together are pursuing a single mission of winning on service. Moreover, I am very confident that Charter holds the same core tenets about prioritizing customer service and will continue to improve the customer service experi- ence. I look forward to answering any questions you have today about Time Warner Cable, and I would like to thank you for having me here today. Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Keib. Ms. Mayo. TESTIMONY OF KATHLEEN “KIP” MAYO,i EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, CUSTOMER OPERATIONS, CHARTER COMMU- NICATIONS, INC. Ms. Mayo. Thank you. Chairman Portman, Ranking Member McCaskill, and Members of the Subcommittee. I appreciate the op- portunity to testify here today. My name is Kathleen Mayo, and I am Charter’s executive vice president of customer operations. I am here to talk about the significant progress we have made improving the customer experience at Charter since the company’s ^The prepared statement of Ms. Mayo appears in the Appendix on page 60. 13 2009 bankruptcy and more especially since its change of leadership in 2012. As a result of its history, Charter’s infrastructure was in serious need of capital investment. The company’s financial situation meant that Charter had underinvested in repairs, which kept the product from performing reliably. At the same time, it had tried to cut costs by outsourcing thousands of customer service jobs over- seas. Since Tom Rutledge became the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in 2012 and brought in a new leadership team, we instituted a new playbook for success that included streamlining our video products, adding value to those products, and delivering the fastest minimum broadband speeds, all at highly competitive prices, with a focus on improving customer service. Our efforts over the last 3 or 4 years to improve customer serv- ice, have included insourcing customer and field service positions, which created thousands of American jobs. We have invested sig- nificantly in training our employees to be responsive to the needs of the customer. Since 2012, we have hired over 7,000 employees, a 40-percent in- crease, and the majority of those roles are customer-facing posi- tions, many of which were brought back from overseas. To date, nearly 90 percent of our customer calls are handled onshore and in-house, and 95 percent of our in-home service visits are per- formed by Charter technicians rather than by third-party contrac- tors. We are committed to locating our facilities in the communities we serve, most recently opening a $16 million state-of-the-art cus- tomer operations center in St. Ann, Missouri. As part of our transaction with Time Warner Cable, Charter ex- pects to hire 20,000 American workers, many of whom will fill cus- tomer service jobs that are currently outsourced to call centers lo- cated in other countries. This approach has given us greater qual- ity assurance in our representatives’ interactions with customers. Our representatives engage in conversations with our customers to understand their unique needs in order to properly assist them. We do not follow canned scripts. To improve the customer experience, we also have taken steps to simplify our bill by eliminating common industry fees, and we have expanded self-service capabilities. As a result of these steps and the $7 billion we have invested in our network, customer service calls have declined 25 percent since 2013. When our customers do need assistance, we have been able to resolve their issue on the first call 80 percent of the time. Those high-quality customer interactions are growing our cus- tomer base. In a very competitive environment, we have added more than 1 million customer relationships since the beginning of 2012, growing our total customer base by 18 percent, despite hav- ing no early termination fees to prevent customers from leaving us. Our churn is down. Our existing customers are staying with us longer, and our customer satisfaction has improved by 12 percent. We are pleased with our accomplishments to date and believe the results are beginning to show. But we also know that there is still 14 much work to do in order to provide our customers with the excel- lence in service that they expect and that they deserve. To eliminate accidental overcharges for video equipment, Charter instituted checks and balances that create controls in our order entry systems to ensure we get each order right. Our recent audit of video equipment determined our billing was 99.4 percent accu- rate. Out of 11 million boxes, we found approximately 63,000 boxes — less than 1 percent — where customers were overbilled. While 99.4 percent is a high accuracy rate, it remains unaccept- able. No accuracy rate short of 100 percent is acceptable. As a re- sult, we are reconciling every single account every single day to en- sure our billing is accurate. We are in the process of notifying over- charged customers, and we are issuing them a 12-month credit. In conclusion, we have made significant investments to improve our network, we have streamlined our products, we have simplified our pricing, and we have insourced thousands of jobs to strengthen our American workforce. At Charter, we are continuing to work every day to improve and show our customers that we are com- mitted to providing superior customer service. Thank you. Senator Portman. Thank you, Ms. Mayo. Mr. Patel. TESTIMONY OF RASESH PATEL/ SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, PRODUCT MANAGEMENT, AT&T ENTERTAINMENT GROUP (DIRECTV) Mr. Patel. Good morning. Chairman Portman, Ranking Member McCaskill, and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Rasesh Patel, and I appreciate this opportunity to speak with you, on be- half of AT&T and DIRECTV, about our commitment to customer service. The hallmark of our brand has been to offer customers the very best entertainment experience through our technology, unique content offerings, and good customer service, and we are proud of that heritage. But we need to get better, and we are working hard to do so. To that end, we need to complement our great product. I think we have a phenomenal product that offers customers the first dig- ital experience, Sunday Ticket, first to go to HD. But sometimes that great product is not complemented with great customer experi- ence, and it frustrates our customers. And so to that end, in 2012, I started a group that focused on being champions for the customer inside the organization, reporting directly to the CEO. And our goal was not just customer service. Our goal was to relook at the entire business through the customer’s eyes, to conduct a significant amount of analysis on what exactly customers are going through, and to be the internal voice of the customer in the organization so that as decisions are being made and as policies are being set, the voice of the customer is represented, and to be a champion for the change and really see improvements all the way through. To that end, we have made a lot of progress, but we have a long way to go. And so this is a very personal issue for me. I asked our CEO to really lead this organization, so I am glad to be here today. ^The prepared statement of Mr. Patel appears in the Appendix on page 67. 15 Our commitment to serving customers and giving them more value and choices has never been stronger. We recently announced in March plans to launch over-the-top services that will provide customers flexibility and increase choices in lower-cost offerings to customers. It will essentially allow them to enjoy our content dis- tributed over the Internet in a much more simple business model and offering. DirecTV has ranked higher in customer satisfaction than cable for 16 years in a row, but we recognize that we need to raise the bar in this ever-evolving competitive landscape, given rising con- tent costs. If customers are going to pay more for the service, they can, should, and will expect more. We believe service is an essen- tial component of our success and we have, accordingly, devoted and will continue to devote significant resources toward our goal of delivering a superior customer experience. I have been with the combined AT&T and DirecTV company for 15 years in a number of different roles, and as you noted Mr. Chairman, I am currently Senior Vice President of Product Man- agement, but from 2012 until AT&T’s 2015 acquisition of DirecTV, I served as Senior Vice President of Customer Experience. In that role, I led DirecTVs proactive, enterprise- wide, customer-centric ef- fort to improve the experience across all customer touch points. The initiative began with a comprehensive evaluation of all our policies and practices. We conducted detailed research on exactly what the customer was going through, and we have shared much of that research with the Subcommittee. We did an analysis on operational data in order to really prioritize our efforts to what was most important to customers. We have invested hundreds of millions of dollars in that cus- tomer experience initiative, which has produced real results for our customers. We have eliminated 18 million phone calls per year to our call centers over the last 3 years, which demonstrates cus- tomers are experiencing fewer issues. We have reduced over 300,000 service truck rolls per year, which I also look at as 300,000 fewer times someone has to take a day off of work in order to meet a service technician. We have reduced complaints to our Complaint Resolution Center by 44 percent, and we introduced a new simplified bill that clearly showed customers what the full retail price of their services was, what the discount amount was, and was very transparent every month about communicating when that discount expires. We made it a point on page 1 of that bill to proactively identify anything that has changed from the previous month so customers do not have to hunt for that information. DirecTV also maintains a dedicated team to proactively identify and address billing errors, and it is a continually learning process. If we find an issue that becomes part of a continuously monitoring inquiry, we will look for that problem going forward. It is our policy to proactively address billing errors, to notify customers that we made an error, and to reimburse affected customers. And we even do so if that person is no longer a customer with us. We will go back and credit their account. But we are not done yet. We have plenty of room for improve- ment, and in that regard, AT&T and DirecTV will spend more than 16 $1 billion toward enhancing the customer experience from 2016 to 2017. While we do take pride in the progress that we have made over the past 3 years, we know that customer satisfaction is a never-ending journey, and we can, should, and need to do better. In that regard, I sincerely welcome the Committee’s input. Through this process, I have run across a couple of things that I myself have discovered that will drive change in our organization. And we are confident that as a combined company we will further enhance our ability to provide our customers with the very best products and services that they deserve. So I thank you for the opportunity to appear here today, and I look forward to answering your questions. Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Patel. Ms. Schneider. TESTIMONY OF KATHLEEN SCHNEIDER, i SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, OPERATIONS, DISH NETWORK, L.L.C. Ms. Schneider. Chairman Portman, Ranking Member McCaskill, and Members of the Subcommittee, my name is Kathy Schneider, and I am the Senior Vice President of operations for DISH Network. In the 1980s, DISH’s three founders decided that consumers should have an affordable alternative to cable. We launched our service in 1996 and were successful in reinventing television dis- tribution and providing meaningful competition within the pay-TV industry. DISH is now the Nation’s fourth-largest pay-TV provider with about 14 million subscribers. We have 18,000 employees, plus relationships with over 6,000 independent retailers, most of which are small businesses providing community storefront operations for our customers. There are 146 of these retailers in Ohio and 167 in Missouri. We are proud that DISH is the only provider of local broadcast channels in all 210 U.S. media markets, ensuring that even the most rural customers receive the same high-quality television as customers in more urban areas. For DISH’s customer service, the issues we will discuss in this hearing are complex, but here is the simple truth for DISH. Our success as a business depends on satisfied customers. We have spent the last two decades working to provide a first-rate enter- tainment experience and making our customers happy. Happy cus- tomers understand and see the value of our products and services, understand our bills, receive a seamless installation of reliable products, and receive responsive repairs and service changes. At DISH, our sales, installation, customer service, billing, prod- uct development, and programming teams are constantly working hand in hand to make sure we satisfy these customer expectations. And we have received some outside recognition for these efforts, in- cluding an A-plus rating from the Better Business Bureau (BBB), J.D. Power awards for customer satisfaction for 4 years running, and a top ranking in several categories by the American Customer Satisfaction Index, including Lowest Customer Complaints. We diligently track the latest customer pain points and adjust our policies, procedures, training materials, and subscriber offer- ^The prepared statement of Ms. Schneider appears in the Appendix on page 73. 17 ings. We make sure our agents have the necessary tools to match each customer with the best programming, technology, and value for that customer’s needs. When a call comes in, our policy is to resolve, prevent, and pro- mote. First, resolve the customer’s issue, then prevent any future issues, and only after that promote the value of DISH. We also keep innovating and coming up with the best technology to meet customer demand for TV anywhere, anytime. That is what is behind our award-winning set-top box, the Hopper, and also Sling TV, our groundbreaking live TV Internet streaming service. We are in a highly competitive business with major up-front costs involved in acquiring each customer to the tune of $800 per subscriber at DISH. It takes us 4 years of having the customer for us to recoup those costs, and vying for our customers are often two to three other cable, telco, or satellite companies. Usually, one or more of those competitors is a company that, unlike DISH, can bundle its TV offerings with broadband and phone service. DISH’s way of beating the bundle has to be keeping our customers satis- fied with the quality of our service and value of what we are giving them. Unfortunately, DISH cannot alone address two of the biggest overall customer complaints that we face: one, the high price of programming; and, two, the inability for our customers to select which channels they receive. The content industry needs to be a part of that conversation. The main source of rising pay television rates is the skyrocketing costs of acquiring programming content, mostly due to the broad- casters’ ever-growing demands for retransmission consent fees. Pro- grammers have inflicted huge price increases leading to scores of channel blackouts when they withhold their signals and put con- sumers in the middle of their negotiations with us. DISH and other pay-TV companies have called on Congress and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to update the out- dated laws that govern how TV distributors negotiate for content with broadcasters. Reform would go a long way in stopping black- outs, addressing the anti-consumer effects of forced channel bun- dling, and moderating pay-TV prices and perhaps even lowering them. I will end with this: While DISH is proud of its customer service and billing practices, we are also committed to continued improve- ment and constantly ask ourselves what can we do better. We are not perfect. We make mistakes. But we do our best to fix the mis- takes that happen and learn from them. We welcome the advice of the Subcommittee on ways that the overall service experience can be made better for our subscribers. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. Senator Portman. Thank you, Ms. Schneider. I appreciate it. We are going to have the opportunity to ask questions from the panel. We have a 7-minute initial round of questions, and then we will do 5 minutes for the second round. Because we have a number of Members here, I am going to keep my initial questions shorter than that because I will be here until the end. Let me start, if I could, by saying that I really appreciate the tes- timony. We learned a lot, including on some issues that we may be 18 following up on, as I said earlier, in terms of competition and en- suring that people have choices. But let me zero in on this issue of not providing refunds to customers. Mr. Keib, I appreciate your being here. I know you are here real- ly in your capacity as a private sector individual now, not with any particular company but as a private citizen. And yet you were in charge during this time period that we looked into, which was be- fore Warner Cable had merged with Charter, and even going for- ward, some of the Time Warner practices that do not provide cus- tomers to get a full refund for charges they should not have in- curred, particularly with regard to equipment. So I guess my question to you would be, when you look at the data, 40,000 Ohio customers in 2015 were charged 430,000 bucks they should not have been charged, they are getting no refund for that. Even the first 5 months of this year, 11,000 Ohio customers are being overbilled over 100,000 bucks. Mistakes happen. We talked about that. And I mentioned, the checkout counter at the grocery store example of that where sometimes they make a mis- take, but then they correct it. And they do not say, “We are going to charge you less next time you come in.” They say, “We are going to make you good.” So it seems to me that the company could have looked into these overcharges, as other companies represented here have, and deter- mined, how long the customer had been billed for these charges and simply to provide them a refund for that. Do you agree with that? Mr. Keib. I think I agree with that. But I would, if given the op- portunity, like to give a quick overview of the situation that we are discussing and how we handle credits and refunds. Senator Portman. Yes, quickly, if you would. Mr. Keib. Sure. Well, first of all, I would like to bring up some- thing that did not come up, I think, when we started, which is that we are actually undercharging customers significantly more than we are overcharging them. At least that is what we found and sub- mitted as part of our revenue assurance program. And I do think that is noteworthy in the context of this discussion. Second, as a company, we provide over $150 million in credits a year to customers, and a lot of those credits are done in real time with our customer service agents, and many of them are done when we know the origination of the actual air date. And when we can quantify the exact customers impacted, we absolutely do provide notice, and we do provide the exact amount of what the actual credit is going to be. Several years ago, we built out something we called a revenue assurance program, and this revenue assurance program, as I think you may have mentioned, was really designed to find these kind of issues. And over time we found these issues, and what the revenue assurance program found as it looks to tie out whether our equipment is being charged properly on the accounts is that of the 37 million pieces of equipment that we have active on our network, a very small fraction were being improperly billed. And on top of that, if you bring it down to the customer level, it was about, I think, 0.07 percent of customers with video equip- ment had an issue and 0.03 percent of our modems. 19 So what I said earlier about winning on service, we take it very seriously. And it does not really matter if it is 10,000 out of 2.5 mil- lion customers. That 10,000 or 11,000 is what we have to get right. Senator Portman. Let me interrupt you, if I could, just for a sec- ond. We are talking about 40,000 customers in Ohio alone in 2015 who were overcharged. Mr. Keib. I apologize. Senator Portman. Forty thousand in Ohio alone, so you are talk- ing about many more thousands of that in other States represented around this panel. And it is easy to say, well, we undercharged some people, we overcharged others, it all kind of nets out. Not for those 40,000 families. Not for the family that is getting over- charged. I mean, you should not undercharge either. You should have business practices that take care of that I am not suggesting that there is any benefit to undercharging or overcharging. What I am suggesting is that if you are overcharged and you find out about it, you ought to make them good. And that is what other businesses do. I used the example of the checkout counter, but it is true in other businesses that you and I deal with every day. So my question to you is really simple: Shouldn’t you have, hav- ing identified those people, simply provided them — and, still, you are not doing it because what you are saying is you are going to give them a month credit where it could be years of having equip- ment that they were overcharged for? Isn’t that accurate? Mr. Keib. It is not accurate to say that they have been over- charged for years, and I will just Senator Portman. How do you know that? Mr. Keib. If I could just take time to explain that in the revenue assurance program, we are looking for mismatches of pieces of equipment, and what we are trying to figure out is whether the service charge on that piece of equipment ties to the actual equip- ment. Because of the amount of volume of equipment we are turn- ing over right now, whether we are upgrading our modems, up- grading our set-top equipment, or actually going all digital and have been launching DTAs, there is a lot of transactional volume. And what I am told and what I have learned through the revenue assurance process is that the mismatch is being driven when a cus- tomer is, during this transition window, putting equipment on ac- count and taking it off the account and matching that up to the ac- tual service charge. So what we are doing is proactively every month running a re- port to find those discrepancies, and that is why I say based on what I have heard from our team is that I would venture to say that the majority of those are more recent and within the actual 30-to 45-day span. Senator Portman. OK. A majority are more recent, but you do not know that it has not been years. You are now doing this monthly analysis, which is a step forward, as I said, and I do think this hearing has created some improvements in customer service both for you and for Charter, and based on what others have said, it sounds like all of you have looked at your processes and come up with some new suggestions. So that is positive. But, still, you are not providing people the money that they are owed even though you know that they deserve a refund. We will 20 get back into this with more specificity. I want to move to Ms. Mayo with my next round of questions because she is now at Char- ter and Charter is going to be responsible going forward for what Time Warner’s and Charter’s customer service procedures are. But I would hope that even though you have made an announcement today you are going to provide customers some relief, that you just simply do what you now have the data to be able to do, which is to tell the people I represent and people that are represented by people on this panel, look, if you get overcharged, you are going to get a refund for it, just as you would in other businesses. With that, I will turn to my colleague Senator McCaskill and then to other colleagues here. Again, I am cutting my time short with the hope that we can get eve^body’s questions in. Senator McCaskill. He is saying that because he is trying to send me a signal that I cannot go over. He knows me really well. He know that I am going to get carried away. It appears to me from a distance that the business model that has grown up in pay-TV is, figure out a way to make the entry price as low as possible, figure out how to roll people off that entry price as quickly as you can, and then deal with their anger once they realize the price has gone up. And, by the way, if they call to cancel, make sure you train your customer service people really well in how you deal with somebody who is angry, and the angrier they get, the more likely they are to get something from you; or de- pending on who they get, how skilled the retention agent is in hold- ing on to them and handing them goodies, sometimes temporarily, to calm them down and hope that you can hold on to them longer. Now, there are so many things about this business model that are asking for customers to be upset. Do any of you in your adver- tisements to try to get customers put the same size pricing on what they are going to pay after the promotion as you do for the pro- motional price? Do any of you do that? [No response.] So all of you do the promotional price, and then there is fine print. In fact, many of you do not even put what the price is going to be after the promotional price, correct? Is that correct? Yes? Does anybody disagree with that? [No response.] So the promotional price and transparency is the beginning of the journey that America has with their pay-TV providers. Let me ask about HD and other fees. Ms. Schneider, does DISH currently charge customers an HD fee? Ms. Schneider. So for new customers, we no longer charge HD fees. Senator McCaskill. So you do not charge HD fees for new cus- tomers. What about old customers? Ms. Schneider. So we have a small number of customers who, when they came into DISH, they had sort of different pricing ar- rangements. So for customers today, we include HD fees in the re- ceiver fees that they are paying for new Hopper equipment, so it is included there. For the subset of customers in earlier days of HD, we did not have that fee included in the receiver fees. So they are having lower receiver fees and then paying that HD fee as an offset. 21 Senator McCaskill. OK. So I guess what I am saying is, DISH no longer charges new customers HD, but you charge old customers HD, correct? Ms. Schneider. Well, in essence, we are charging both. They are just kind of in different Senator McCaskill. But isn’t it true if someone calls in and asks to have their HD fee waived, they get it waived? Ms. Schneider. If they call in, yes, we will waive it. Senator McCaskill. OK. So, once again, hide the ball. So if I am smart enough to know to call DISH, if I have an HD fee on my bill, if I am smart enough to call and ask for it to come off, you are going to take it off, aren’t you? Ms. Schneider. Agents will do that for longer-term customers. These are long-term customers for us, and so Senator McCaskill. So how long do you have to be a customer before you have the magic knock to get the fee taken off? Ms. Schneider. I do not know that there is a specific time that we have there. It is Senator McCaskill. See, this is exactly what I am talking about. Nobody knows how to get the best price from you guys. Nobody knows. There is a secret sauce somewhere, and I think it has to do with being really mad, which is really bizarre to me. All right. Let us go on to Mr. Patel. You all charge now an ad- vanced receiver service fee, right? Mr. Patel. That is correct. Senator McCaskill. So you took the HD thing off the bill, and then you put a brand-new thing on the bill. Now, how many of your customers do you think have any idea what the advanced receiver service fee is for? Mr. Patel. Yes, Senator, our intention was to really simplify the sales process, and what we tried to do is simplify the number of decisions a customer had to make, and we got it down to three, which was you pick your programming package, and the level of programming you pick dictates how much you are going to pay for the programming package. The second choice is, do you want basic services or advanced services? Basic services provide a good HD ex- perience but do not include DVR, On Demand, and other things. Senator McCaskill. OK. Mr. Patel. That is what that advanced service fee is. It provides the more advanced services. Then it is $7 per room. As a part of the customer experience effort, we found that the number of choices customers had to make was extremely complex and wanted Senator McCaskill. OK, so you wanted to lower the number of choices they make, but isn’t it true that not all customers are charged the same advanced receiver service (ARS) fee in your com- pany? Mr. Patel. That is correct. Senator McCaskill. And so how do I know whether I get a lower ARS fee? Do I have to call and ask you? If I call and ask you, will you lower my ARS fee? Mr. Patel. No, and it is Senator McCaskill. No? 22 Mr. Patel. It is kind of an apples-and-oranges comparison, and let me explain why. Senator McCaskill. Quickly, if you would. Mr. Patel. I will. So when the ARS fee was originally intro- duced, it was at a slightly higher price, and we have lowered it. But Senator McCaskill. Did you lower it for everybody? Mr. Patel. But the customers who came on board with the high- er price received their first room’s equipment for free. There are other components of their offer that were different, and so the chal- lenge is that it is a very competitive marketplace, and the offers from a marketing perspective change very quickly. Senator McCaskill. I understand that, believe me, and cus- tomers understand that. It is like shifting sand. OK. Let me talk about the secret rates offered by retention agents. In this investigation, we determined that there are actually rates that retention agents are authorized to give their customers that are never advertised. Does anybody disagree with that state- ment? [No response.] So that is what is really frustrating. Let me talk specifically about Time Warner. To handle customers that want to lower the cost of the service. Time Warner provided its agents with a chart that showed them how much to lower the price of a package each time someone objected. So the people actually had a script. Now, if they get mad the first time, you can go down this much. If they get mad again, you can go down this much. And then we found out, when we interviewed you, that if they asked, they would tell the price they just offered was the lowest price available at that time even though there was a lower price on the chart that they could still offer. And when we asked you about that, you said, “Well, at that moment that was the lowest price that agent could offer.” That is the kind of stuff that is driving people through the wall. Is it fair for customers to not be able to determine when they have reached the lowest price? How does a customer know when they have gotten the best deal? You can listen to my call. I kept getting mad, and I eventually got 120 bucks back, plus I got rid of the $7.99. I never would have known to do that if we had not done this investigation. So will you all make a commitment today to advertise the lowest price available? Any of you? [No response.] Will you publish it on your website, the lowest price available for your services? Any of you? [No response.] I will have more questions the next round. Senator Portman. Thank you. Senator McCaskill. Senator Paul. OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PAUL Senator Paul. One thing that is interesting about pricing is that if you go to a car dealer and you say, “What is the lowest price you will give me on the car?” nobody in their right mind is going to publish that. So the question is: Is there competition or not? It looks like there are a lot of choices and you can choose, and they 23 have various ways of presenting themselves to try to entice you. But that is the marketplace. It is buyer beware, and as long as you have choices, if you do not like one of the choices, you do not like their service, you simply in America choose another server. I think, though, that we need to put this particular problem or this particular hearing in sort of a context, the context of what kind of problems we have in our country. We have a $19 trillion debt. We have an anemic economy that is growing at a point and a half Millions of people are not getting jobs because we are not growing at a historic rate. We have a $7 trillion shortfall in Social Security and a 435 tril- lion shortfall in Medicare. But I do not think Congress is having hearings on any of these. I propose we ought to have a full perma- nent hearing on Social Security that meets all of the time just to address Social Security. I have been here 6 years, and there has not been one bill to the floor of the Senate to address the entitle- ment problem, the looming entitlement problem that we all ac- knowledge is there. So I think we do have important problems that we do need to face as a country. We are asked today to look at the tactics of television providers to see if they are unfair, their bills are too complex. We have point- ed to low customer satisfaction surveys. Well, one thing is very clear, though. Television providers’ customer satisfaction still ex- ceeds that of Congress. So I am not sure really if there is enough wisdom in Congress that we can impart to people who actually have a higher approval rating than we do. If we were to examine, though, organizations that fail the trans- parency test, we might want to start with government. The Pen- tagon has never been audited. It is enormous, it is this behemoth. And we have to have defense, but certainly we should audit it. They have told us they are too big to be audited, and we just say, “Oh, well.” That has been going on for over a decade. The Federal Reserve, completely unaudited. We cannot get an audit through. We have had very little cooperation in the Senate from people saying, “Yes, we need transparency in government. I mean, sure, this is an important problem, and it is frustrating. I have been there. I have been on the phone with people. In our household, we get frustrated calling consumer reps. But at the same time, we have big problems as a country. We have to figure out what are we going to do with the Fed, the Pentagon, the Con- sumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), and really Congress. Congress uses bills that are hundreds if not thousands of pages long, filled with wonky, technical jargon that is unapproachable to the average reader. Congress uses high-pressure situations to get people to accept bills they do not like. Few members actually read the bills before they agree to them. And, so I think maybe Congress might be one of our first items. Unfortunately, when you look at your government, you are un- happy with your government, you cannot change your legislative provider. A lot of people probably would if they could. But when it comes to television or cable or satellite, you have a choice. The satellite and cable industry in my State has a $4.7 billion impact on Kentucky. I think in the midst of unhappiness about things not being perfect — and nothing is ever perfect. We realize 24 you have a choice, but we should not lose sight of the fact of what the television industry does for our States as far as jobs and occu- pations and money for each of our States. Maybe we should be asking, How can we help them grow their business? The only way they grow their business is by having bet- ter consumer service, but maybe there are obstacles such as taxes or regulations that add costs to your bill, too. I know that when I look at my phone bill, I see a lot of govern- ment stuff on there, and so maybe there are ways that we could make the bills less by actually removing government obstacles. The fact is that the market for television content has evolved quite rapidly through its own technological advancement and ex- panding consumer choices. Milton Friedman once argued that the essence of an effective television industry, an effective telephone in- dustry, an effective computer industry, or an effective mail delivery industry, you name it, is competition. If there is an argument that there is not competition, then these can be really serious problems. As long as there is competition — and there appears to be vibrant competition — you have a choice. I have a choice in Bowling Green of two cable companies. I have two satellite companies. I can stream things. I have to have my son help me with that, but I can stream things as well. There is com- petition. There are now more subscriptions that you can get with- out a contract because it is becoming very competitive. We have one big cable company that was bankrupt. Apparently, there is not a huge amount, they are struggling to make enough profit. But, anyway, I think it has even come to the point now that we have simpler billing as a marketing tool. Some of the different com- panies here are actually marketing that they have simpler bills to try to get business away from their competitors who may not be doing as good a job. So, I do not know, I just think we need to put this hearing in perspective and not get too carried away. I have the same frustra- tions — I mean, everybody does in the modern world — of trying to call and get through to these companies. But we have to realize, first, do no harm. l3o we want to get involved with an industry and do it to such an extent that ultimately we screw up something that is actually working very well in many instances and acknowledge that, look, we have hundreds and hundreds of choices of channels, maybe the house is not on fire. Maybe things can get better and will get better through competition. But I for one want to make sure we do not go too far in one direction. Thank you. Senator Portman. Thank you, Mr. Paul. And as I said at the outset, competition is something we are looking into because at least in my home State of Ohio, we do not have the kind of com- petition I would like to see. I have some numbers here indicating how there is a lack of competition now. But, on the other hand, we heard from some of you about how competitive forces have been helpful, and some of you have even raised some things that could be done in terms of providing a more level playing field so there is more real competition. And I agree with you. That is how you ultimately get better service. Senator Lankford. 25 OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR LANKFORD Senator Lankford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for hosting this hearing and the conversation that is here, but as Sen- ator Paul has mentioned as well, there is a context of this. As I read through the notes and as we received this early this morning and late last night, one of my first thoughts on the section on not getting an answer the first time that you make a call in customer service, I wondered how many times that our constituent service folks on our staff have tried to call the U.S. Department of Vet- erans Affairs (VA) or Social Security or multiple other agencies and we will work for months to get an answer to a question that should be a straightforward issue. So there is a great deal within govern- ment right now that lacks in customer service as well, and I think that deserves a very public acknowledgment that all of us have a very long way to go, and dealing with cable customer service is the pot calling the kettle black as we work through this process. Saying all that, I have also had people call my office that have been incredibly frustrated by not getting attention with their cable provider, and they reached a point where they called their cable provider so many times and got non-answers that they eventually called their Senator, who we called someone that we knew, and they eventually got attention. And it was the oddest thing for me to think. Why does it take literally an act of someone in Congress to try to get attention on someone who has a billing problem, espe- cially for senior adults that call our office? Now, in the training — and one of the issues that I have is in the training, and I understand there is a lot of selling and there is a lot of work toward profit. Saying that the people that are on the phone want to actually sell you a program is not shocking to me. It is much akin to saying I am shocked there is gambling in Casa- blanca, that there are people that are in a for-profit business are trying to actually stay in business and sell a product. I do have a concern often when we deal with people that are sen- ior adults that do not understand the billing. So the request that I would have is whatever customer service upgrades that you have made — and all of you have made comments about increased train- ing and capabilities — would you please make sure that you are pay- ing attention to the fact that there are senior adults that are call- ing that have no idea about this billing practice and have no idea of all these packages, and they are being taken advantage of? And that is something intolerable in this process. Let me ask a couple of things, though. In the billing as it comes out itself, somebody give me a guess. In the typical customer pay- ing for cable services, what percentage of that is State, local, and Federal taxes that they are also paying when they pay that month- ly bill? Can somebody give me a guess? I see lots of thinking. Pen and paper is coming out. Mr. Keib. I could say that at a minimum we charge what is called a franchise fee, which is around 5 percent, at a minimum. And then there are other taxes and fees on top of that. The reason why it might be a little bit difficult to give you those exact num- bers, it varies by State sometimes. Senator Lankford. Sure it does. Right. 26 Mr. Keib. So on an average $100 bill, I think 5 percent is a min- imum number. And then I think you could work off of that number, depending on the market for fees and passthrough fees and things like that. Senator Lankford. Does anybody have a different number be- sides 5 percent there? Ms. Mayo. I would guess at least 10 percent. Senator Lankford. OK, at least 10 percent being State, local, and Federal taxes, some sort of fee that is attached to it. I want to talk about an ongoing challenge that we have with packaging, and then I also want to get to streaming, and so we are going to have a conversation coming about some of the streaming services that I know you all are also experimenting with a great deal right now. The cost of the actual content that is coming to you, there is an ongoing conversation about that as well, because as everyone com- plains about their cable bill, what I hear back typically from cable providers is, “Do you have any idea how much it costs for XYZ con- tent coming in?” Where does that fit into the typical billing prac- tice? And as you all are actually trying to forecast, let us say, 5 years from now when you talk about hardware, when you talk about fiber being put in the ground, and you talk about content, where does that rank? When you do your own strengths, weak- nesses, opportunities, and threat (SWOT) analysis and you are looking at the threats, where does content fit into that? Mr. Patel. I will take that. Senator. Senator Lankford. Yes, sir. Mr. Patel. Content costs rising is a really significant issue, and I do not think consumers truly understand the dynamic that is in place. We talked a lot about pricing, billing, and fees. But, for us, for 8 out of the last 11 years, the cost of the content has actually exceeded the pricing that we have passed on to the consumer. And so we are in a difficult position. It is a very challenging thing to do to pass on pricing to a consumer. No matter how you notify it, it is going to be something that causes a negative reaction from customers. From 2005 to 2015, content costs grew 95 percent, and to put that into perspective, it is growing at three times the rate of any other goods or services. And so I think it is an issue. I think it is exacerbated by the fact that the agreements require you to carry a lot of channels that consumers do not have demand for. And both of those things I think create pressure and create sort of a struc- ture that is not in the best interest of the consumer. Senator Lankford. So going back to Senator Paul’s conversa- tion — and Senator Portman and Senator McCaskill have all raised this issue about competition — the ongoing conversation in the coun- try right now is about just streaming content rather than actually buying from cable or buying from other satellite providers. You all are doing both, where you are actually streaming content as a sep- arate service with Sling — is that correct? — and then also through satellite. So tell me about modeling for that and trying to work through providing competition in that area for another completely different delivery device, because the key thing for me is can people get content that they choose to get in the medium that they choose 27 to get it in, so if they are ticked off about the latest $3 to $6 fee per room that they have to pay for, they have some other option to be able to go to. Ms. Schneider. Yes, so Sling is our over-the-top product that we have for streaming. Sling is a bit more modular in terms of what we can do to provide content. So where we have a bit more bun- dling with our traditional product. Sling is a bit more modular in that customers have more choice in terms of having a basic pack- age that is really affordable and then adding, slimmer packages to it so it gives them more choice along those lines. Does that answer your question? Senator Lankford. It starts that. This is a longer conversation that we can have that we do not have time for right now. I do have to tell you I, along with every other American, get incredibly frus- trated. Senator McCaskill did a great job of outlining a basic call on customer care. All of us get ticked off at that, not only the length of time but the frustration with it. But I am especially con- cerned about senior adults in my State and the potential for them to be taken advantage of in this process based on the complication but also the difficulty they have had, even seniors that have called me saying, “I cannot even disconnect my service or get an answer,” and they just want to say no, but they are so incredibly kind and nice, they cannot seem to turn things off. And so that has to be ad- dressed in the days ahead and should be addressed in a way that actually honors the people that have been a part of that service and paying customers all along. So thank you. Senator Portman. Senator Baldwin. Senator Baldwin. Thank you. I wanted to start based on Senator Lankford’s last comment. We certainly hear from our constituents with enormous frustrations, but almost all of us, I assume, have had our own frustrating expe- rience. We are not strangers to this. I am actually curious about your own experiences with your own companies, and I wonder if you get pay-TV from the company that you are with now or formerly were with. Why don’t you go across and let me know? Mr. Karinshak. Yes, Senator, I do. Senator Baldwin. John. Mr. Keib. Yes. Senator Baldwin. Sorry. That was way too informal. Mr. Keib. Ms. Mayo. Ms. Mayo. Senator, I subscribe to Comcast service. Senator Baldwin. OK. Mr. Patel. Yes, I do. Ms. Schneider. I am a DISH customer. Senator Baldwin. OK. Do you call the same service number that any of us or our constituents would if there is, to initiate the serv- ice or to deal with problems? Or as current or former team mem- bers, do you have an inside number, a colleague or somebody who takes care of that for you? Why don’t you go ahead, Mr. Karinshak? Mr. Karinshak. Yes, Senator, I have it as a normal paying cus- tomer, and myself and my team will also do calls into our system as well as normal customers. 28 Senator Baldwin. Yes, I was impressed in your testimony that you talk about you are sort of engaging in the different aspects of the business and sort of trying to figure out what the customer ex- perience is. If you had an outage, you would just go through the 800 number, or would you have, an inside way of fixing it? Mr. Karinshak. So I could go through the 800 number. I also use my account app, so I do some things online as well to be able to see the outage, when it would be cleared, but would experience it calling in as a customer. Senator Baldwin. OK. Mr. Karinshak. And I take calls from customers directly, too. Senator Baldwin. OK. What about you, Mr. Keib? Mr. Keib. All of our employees within Time Warner Cable, if they are in our footprint, have Time Warner or used to have Time Warner. And in terms of service, at the individual account level, ei- ther mine or my family or any relative that asks for help, I would go through the normal channels. If there is an outage that is, state- wide or something that happens on a large scale and it impacts me, I would make sure that we are on top of it but not really out of a self-serving, purpose. Senator Baldwin. How about you, Ms. Mayo? Ms. Mayo. I am sorry. Senator. I am a little bit abnormal. I do not live on footprint for Charter service, so I actually subscribe to two different cable operators. One is Comcast and the other one is Cablevision. Senator Baldwin. OK. Ms. Mayo. So I use their services. I call their lines. I get support just like any other customer. Senator Baldwin. OK. Mr. Patel? Mr. Patel. I have DirecTV service and generally will use the 800 number, the same 800 number our customers use, or our online tools. Like Tom, we also have access to being able to listen to calls, and so we will do that quite frequently to get a pulse of how the customer is being serviced. Ms. Schneider. So the same. If I have an issue, I would call in to our service as well. And I think a lot of us probably have the advantage of knowing — if we have technical issues, we know how to trouble-shoot those things ourselves. So there is probably a lot more self-service with the folks up on the panel than other cus- tomers. Senator Baldwin. Well, back to the original point. I hear con- tinuously from Wisconsin residents sharing their frustration with pay-TV, satellite and cable. One consistent complaint that I have heard over the years is that TV providers will not let customers purchase their converter box, and instead customers are forced to rent it, which costs them much more money over time. I also want to share a story from one constituent which has al- ready been — the issue has already been referenced in our hearing thus far, but the constituent explained that he was given a 2-year monthly rate for TV and phone by AT&T, but after a year his bill increased by more than $80 without his consent. This additional $80 gave him no added service, and, in fact, at that point three channels and music stations were removed. He said that AT&T told him that he would have to pay for computer service in order 29 to get his channels back and ultimately hung up on him. My con- stituent also explained similar billing issues with both Time War- ner and DISH. He ended his letter with this plea, and I quote: “Senator Bald- win, I hear these complaints from everyone. What can you and the Senate do to make all providers sign a contract so that they can be held to their words and finally remove all their false mar- keting?” Now, this is just a sample of what I hear regularly, but in light of Senator McCaskill’s earlier question about, how big is the price for the promotion versus how are you adequately explaining or are you adequately explaining to the customer what is going to happen in this 2-year promotion where the price goes up after the first year, in light of these concerns that we hear over and over again, I would like to hear from the entire panel what more are you doing to ensure that your companies are not promoting misleading pric- ing information? And what are you doing to grapple with these per- vasive billing issues? Why don’t we go across the panel once again? Mr. Karinshak. Senator, it is very important to make sure the customers understand exactly what they are getting. We do offer a wide array of products and a wide array of pricing, and so we have done some additional things from a disclosure perspective to help with that. First, whether you order our service online or with one of our employees, they are required to go through a full summary at the end of that interaction detailing all of your monthly recurring and nonrecurring charges. We also follow that up with an email that we send to the customer at their preferred email address detailing exactly the order and what is next as well, for example, things like the technician coming to their house. We also partner with a company called SundaySky to deliver a video that is a personalized tutorial for any changes they make to their package or for a new customer. And we also back it up with our 30-day money-back guarantee as well. Senator Baldwin. Thank you. Mr. Keib. Yes, I will try not to be redundant with anything that Tom mentioned, but what I would say is I think the most impor- tant thing is what the customer actually sees on the bill and mak- ing sure that what we are charging for is clear. And I would say one of the more recent things we did was try to show the pro- motional discount in relation to the full rate. So, for example, if the full rate was, say, $129, there would be a minus sign listing clearly what the actual discount amount was, let us say it was $40 or $20, and then it comes to a summary price of what that actual bill is so that that customer in any given month would be notified that there is actually a higher rate there and that this is a promotion of X dollars. And then when we come up on that window at that time, be it 12 months or whatever the expiration of that window is for that core service, they would see that actual discount go away. Or if it was a 2-year roll, as someone alluded to earlier, they would see it get reduced. Senator Baldwin. Ms. Mayo. Ms. Mayo. That is a good point, and that was part of changes that Charter made recently in an effort to be more transparent 30 about billing to show the full charge and then the discount that the customer is getting. So I agree with John, also with Tom. If you are dealing with a customer service rep on the phone, a sales rep, and you place your order, the sales rep will recap exactly what you should expect on your bill for and exactly any charges that you would see on your bill the first time. We also send an email to the customer confirming the bill. We are working on improving that with more information, but we have the core infrastructure set up. If you go into a Charter store, you obviously get confirmation of what your order is. If you have a direct conservation with a sales rep, you are getting confirmation of what your order is. But on our website, you will get an email, and with that, too, we are improving the content associated with the confirmation that comes from the website. Senator Baldwin. Mr. Patel. Mr. Patel. We try to disclose the terms at multiple touch points on the initial sales call, we have implemented a tool that essen- tially tells the customer and the agent what the required call com- ponents are relative to what the customer ordered. What we found is historically all the generic terms were disclosed and the cus- tomers were kind of losing attention. And so communicating the fewer things that were more relevant to the customer was impor- tant. No. 2, we record all of our sales calls in our direct sales call cen- ters. And so if a customer ever says, “I was told something else,” we make it a point to be able to pull that record and hold agents accountable. Agents are essentially given two opportunities to not make a mistake when it comes to the terms and agreements with the offer. If they do that twice, the consequence is they would lose their job. And so we try to hold the agents accountable. We have disclosures online, including a place where we spell out over the course of 2 years how your prices change. We send an email con- firmation. We have a written customer agreement. And then the last thing, and I think probably the most promi- nent, is on the bill. We made changes so that from the initial bill you know exactly what the full price of the product is, what the discount amount is, and we even show you that you are in Month 1 of 12 of that discount. And it changes every month, providing a constant awareness for consumers that I have 2 more months left for this discount. When the bill does, in fact, change, we spell it out for customers on the front page. And so, we have tried to do as much as we can to disclose this to customers and to also drive accountability and controls in the or- ganization if and when mistakes are made. Ms. Schneider. So I think DISH might be a little bit different in that we have an option for a 2-year price lock, so customers have a 2-year commitment to us, and we can align pricing and do a price lock for them during the entire term of their contract with us, ini- tial contract. But in addition to that, if they stay with us beyond that 2-year price lock, they will likely experience some price changes, so whatever the then-current pricing is. And so we follow form, kind of similar to what other panelists talked about with re- spect to during the sales call, we do all of the disclosures, cus- tomers get an email that outlines all of the things that they need 31 to understand, including pricing terms with their new service. We do something with our new customers where we do — either if they call in before 10 days or they — either they contact us within 10 days, or if they do not, we will outbound them and walk them through all of the things that they need to know as a new customer with DISH, including anything with pricing, installation, other things. We never want anybody to be surprised by anything that happens on their bill, and we also do the bill statement messages and things along those lines that other panelists talked about. So we really do try to make an effort to make sure people under- stand the terms of their new agreement with us and that they do not have any surprises. Senator Baldwin. Thank you. Senator Portman. OK. I would like to get back to some of the questions that we were talking about earlier that have to do with people getting overcharged and then companies knowing that they are being overcharged and not getting the refunds. First of all, with regard to the bills, I have a copy of a bill here. It happens to be from Ohio. It happens to be a bill that has over a dozen line items in it. One of the responses that we have gotten from companies is that people ought to look at their bills, so if you are being overcharged, you ought to be able to find that. First of all, I think it is very difficult to discover that you are being overcharged if you do not know what the equipment is, you do not know what the correlation is between the charge and the equipment. But, second, look at one of these bills. It is pretty darn complicated. And part of what I guess I would ask you, Mr. Keib — and I appreciated your answer earlier that you thought that. Time Warner could have done better in terms of allowing, say, these 40,000 Ohioans who in 2015 were overcharged, could have done a better job at dealing with that. You have come up today, as I understand, with a new policy proposal that Charter, being the new company, is, I guess, going to implement that there be a 1- month credit regardless of how far back it goes. We talked earlier about whether you would know how far back it went. I guess one question I would have for you, and to Ms. Mayo as well, is: Why not at least notify the customer, say, “Hey, look, we have overbilled you, we have overcharged you. Look at your bill. Tell us how long that has been” — if you cannot find out for them, at least give them the information, the notification to be able to find it themselves. Have you thought about that, implementing that kind of a notice procedure? Mr. Keib. Yes, and as I mentioned earlier, I think that we do — as I said, when we define the number of customers impacted — and it is not a dynamic number or constantly changing, like the equipment example we discussed earlier. We do provide notice that we overcharged and for how much. The example relating to equipment, because of the transactional nature and the volume of equipment that is moving in or out, it is a little bit harder to determine in our billing system and the way we run it to figure out the exact origin date of when those cus- tomers were impacted. But to your core question, as to should we notify or not, I think that is a natural progression of any revenue assurance program. 32 and I think that in hindsight we should notify customers if they were being overcharged. And as f