Hooking Up
: A Girl's All-Out Guide to Sex and Sexuality Amber Madison Prometheus Books, Publishers - Juvenile Nonfiction 0 Reviews Where does a young woman find straight talk about sex? From her friends, siblings, school? And how can you tell whether the information from those sources is accessible, accurate, and complete? Books will give facts, but the clinical approach of most books on sex makes the subject as approachable as a cold instrument in the gynecologist's office, and certainly offers little insight into the emotional issues and real-life dilemmas that surround sex and sexuality.Now Amber Madison gives you just what you've been looking for: comprehensive and accurate information delivered in a style so down-to-earth that it's just like talking to your older sister or one of your best friends. Now there is an educational book about sex that is as captivating as a novel, and as fun as a slumber party.Hilarious, uninhibited, and chock full of must-have knowledge about safer sex and sexuality, Hooking Up gives you a tour of female anatomy plus frank talk on a slew of meaningful issues concerning sexual activity and intimacy. Revealing her own experiences and sometimes humorous mishaps, Amber covers topics ranging from safer sex and avoiding sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancy to being comfortable with your own body; being aware of stereotypes surrounding female sexuality; and understanding guys' bodies, emotions, and their insecurities. She teaches you how to avoid being pressured into sex and equips you with the tools to be safe and responsible if you engage in sexual activities.All medical information has been reviewed and endorsed by both Margaret Higham, MD, medical director of Tufts University Health Service, and Diana L. Dell, MD, Duke University Medical School, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology.In a voice that is both informative and engaging, Amber will educate, entertain, and empower you-or a young lady you care about- to deal wisely with the questions, decisions, and consequences that surround sex and intimate relationships.Amber Madison (Somerville, MA) is a recent graduate of Tufts University, where she studied human sexuality through a degree in American Studies and Community Health. For two years she wrote a weekly column in Tufts Daily about sexuality, safer sex, and relationships. Cosmopolitan magazine, US News & World Report, and other publications have profiled her in regard to her column, and her work has been featured on University Wire (www.uwire.com).