Watch: Chris Collins compares John Lewis to 'spoiled child'
A Western New York congressman has interjected himself squarely into the escalating war of words between President-elect Donald Trump and Rep. John Lewis.

Rep. Chris Collins, R-Clarence, told Fox Business Network on Monday that Lewis – the Georgia Democratic congressman and civil rights icon – should be compared to a “spoiled child” after casting doubt that Trump had legitimately won the presidency.

[Related: Collins criticizes calls for probe of Russian election hacking]

“My opinion is, what John Lewis is doing, he’s pouting,” Collins said during the morning broadcast. “He lost. It’s like a spoiled child and we’ve seen it with the others. They can’t get over the fact that they lost. And what do spoiled little kids do? You know, they run around and throw a tantrum.

“That’s what we’re seeing,” he continued. “They are pouting. And frankly, it’s somewhat enjoyable to watch because it shows you again how upset they are, when they were so smug when they left Congress knowing that Hillary Clinton was going to win.

“We should all actually just kind of grin a little bit and understand that this is how hard this election hit them when Hillary lost,” he added.

Watch the latest video at video.foxbusiness.com

Lewis told “Meet the Press” on Sunday that Trump – who will be inaugurated on Friday – is not a “legitimate president” because of U.S. intelligence agencies’ claims that Russia interfered with the election process. That prompted a Twitter response from the president-elect, which has renewed debate about the election and prompted 24 Democratic members of Congress to say they will boycott Friday’s inaugural ceremonies. Lewis had said on the Sunday show that he would not attend.

[Related: Collins defends Trump’s attacks on slain soldier’s family]

“Congressman John Lewis should spend more time on fixing and helping his district, which is in horrible shape and falling apart (not to mention crime infested) rather than falsely complaining about the election results,” Trump wrote in two tweets. “All talk, talk, talk – no action or results. Sad!”

Since then some Republicans have defended Trump’s reaction in a vein similar to Collins, claiming Democrats are undermining the new presidency on the basis of the Russian hacking claims. Democrats, in turn, are lambasting Trump for criticizing a man Democratic National Chairwoman Donna Brazile over the weekend called “a living legend and a civil rights hero.”