Hurricane Workforce
Thank you for your interest in joining our Hurricane Workforce. When disaster strikes, America looks to FEMA to support survivors and first responders in communities all across the country. We are currently seeking talented and hard-working people to help support the hurricane response and recovery efforts.

Immediate temporary jobs are available in several locations listed below. This page is updated frequently and reflects the latest available positions for the FEMA Hurricane Workforce. Application instructions in the job announcement may vary depending on position. Where applicable, please read the full job announcement by clicking on the job title links.

Featured Position

Administrative Assistant, Hazard Mitigation - Austin, Texas This position will provide administrative support to the Hazard Mitigation Branch. They will establish and maintain administrative procedures, confirm that staff complete the appropriate check-in and check-out process, and maintian a personnel rotation schedule. They will also coordinate special events and control scheduling of conference areas. Learn more and apply.

Georgia

Albany

Environmental Specialist

Historic Preservations Specialist

Public Assistance Administrative Assistant

Public Assistance Site Inspector

If you are interested and a current resident of Georgia, visit employgeorgia.com/jobseekers, create a profile, and enter the position title OR email a resume to FEMA-DR4338GA-LocalHires@fema.dhs.gov and include the job title and "Albany" in the subject line.

Atlanta

Public Assistance Administrative Assistant

Public Assistance Site Inspector

If you are interested and a current resident of Georgia, visit employgeorgia.com/jobseekers, create a profile, and enter the position title OR email a resume to FEMA-DR4338GA-LocalHires@fema.dhs.gov and include the job title and "Atlanta" in the subject line.

Brunswick

Environmental Specialist

Human Resources Assistant

Public Assistance Administrative Assistant

Public Assistance Site Inspector

Travel Coordinator

Voluntary Agency Liaison Specialist

If you are interested and you are a current resident of Georgia, visit employgeorgia.com/jobseekers, create a profile, and enter the position title OR email a resume to FEMA-DR4338GA-LocalHires@fema.dhs.gov and include the job title and "Brunswick" in the subject line.

Savannah

Public Assistance Administrative Assistant

Public Assistance Site Inspector

Voluntary Agency Liaison Specialist

If you are interested and a current resident of Georgia, visit employgeorgia.com/jobseekers, create a profile, and enter the position title OR email a resume to FEMA-DR4338GA-LocalHires@fema.dhs.gov and include the job title and "Savannah" in the subject line.

Warner Robins

Congressional Affairs Specialist

Environmental Specialist

Human Resources Assistant

Media Relations Specialist

Public Assistance Administrative Assistant

Public Assistance Site Inspector

If you are interested and a current resident of Georgia, visit employgeorgia.com/jobseekers, create a profile, and enter the position title OR email a resume to FEMA-DR4338GA-LocalHires@fema.dhs.gov and include the job title and "Warner Robins" in the subject line.

Puerto Rico

We are hiring Puerto Ricans to help support disaster survivors and rebuild Puerto Rico. There are a variety of temporary local hire positions available in Aguadilla, Caguas, Manati, Ponce, and San Juan. You can either send your resume to fema-workforce-caribbean@fema.dhs.gov or apply online.

Texas

Austin

Corpus Christi

Houston

Virgin Islands

Customer Service

Disaster Survivor Assistance

Environmental Specialist

Historic Preservation Specialist

Information Technology

Logistics

If you are interested and a current resident of the Virgin Islands, email FEMA-DR4340USVI-localhires@fema.dhs.gov your resume.

Reservists (on-call)

We have deployed thousands of reservists to the affected areas and we would love to have more. Reservists work on an intermittent basis, due to the irregular nature of disasters, supporting survivors and first responders during disasters or emergencies. Reservists are hired to a position within a cadre based on their skills and experience. View cadres and learn more about becoming a reservist.

You can apply to be a reservist by emailing your resume to fema-careers@fema.dhs.gov and include "reservist" of interest in the subject line.

Frequently Asked Questions

Are the FEMA disaster response and recovery positions paid?

Yes. These are paid positions that are being filled within our temporary Local Hire and Reservist programs.

If a position type was not listed, such as medical support, does that mean the FEMA doesn’t need help in those areas?

No. If you have a specific skill that is not listed and you know will be valuable in response and recovery, please highlight on your resume and submit. You may also highlight any additional skills, such as bilingual capability.

How long are the deployments?

Deployments are 30 days at minimum can be up to 120 days depending on the job and circumstances.

Are the Hurricane Workforce positions permanent employment?

No. These are temporary positions only.

Once I submit my resume, how long will it be before I hear back?

The process time varies on position type and depends on how complete the applications are, how many applications are received and other critical needs. Applicants may hear back as early as 2-3 weeks.

How long do background checks take?

The duration of a background check is dependent on the type of security clearance required for the position being considered (i.e. public trust, secret). We have Security staff facilitating the background review process as expeditiously as possible.

Is my travel reimbursed?

Yes, for approved travel expenses. Once you are hired, you attend orientation, receive travel training and a travel credit card to use for your approved travel expenses. A written or electronic authorization is required prior to incurring any travel expense.

Will my current job salary and benefits be paid by FEMA while I am deployed?

No. If you are hired by FEMA, you will receive compensation as outlined in the tentative job offer. FEMA will not backfill, compensate or provide any assurance that your current position is held while you are deployed. These arrangements are made between you and your employer directly.

If I have a criminal record, can I still apply for a FEMA position?

A felony or criminal record does not immediately preclude you from getting hired. All employees will undergo a background check and some positions may have restrictions. Read more about ex-offender eligibility.

Where do I find out about opportunities to volunteer?

For volunteer opportunities, explore the National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster (NVOAD) website and read more about how to help survivors in Texas.

Other Ways To Help

If you would like to volunteer your talents to make a difference or are a business that would like to provide resources, please register with the Red Cross.

Official hurricane workforce job opportunities with FEMA are posted on this page. There is a lot of hurricane response and recovery misinformation circulating online and through social media. If you have questions, please review the rumors below or email fema-careers@fema.dhs.gov.