Usain Bolt tells Caster Semenya to accept testosterone rule, move on
Former athlete Usain Bolt has urged South African athlete Castor Semenya to accept the new rules on hormone levels implemented by the International Association of Athletics.

Bolt made his stand on the controversial landmark ruling on testosterone during the launch of his electric scooter brand on Wednesday, 15 May.

PAY ATTENTION: Click “See First” under the “Following” tab to see Briefly.co.za News on your News Feed!

Former athlete Usain Bolt takes part in the inauguration of the new track of Villa Deportiva Nacional (VIDENA) which will host the next Pan American Games Lima 2019 on April 03, 2019 in Lima, Peru.

PAY ATTENTION: Do you want to know what's trending on Briefly.co.za? Join our WhatsApp group today.

"I heard about her story without following it very closely. For me it's just the rules. I don't make the rules but I enforce them," the Jamaican firmly told AFP.

Bolt preferred this practical approach to the situation and believed it would be more strategic for Semenya to accept the new rules and move forward.

"When there is rule I never discuss it, I just bend over and move on," Bolt added.

Semenya, an Olympic and Commonwealth 800m champion, was born with intersex traits that makes her body naturally produce high levels of testosterone.

The Jamaican eight-time Olympic Champion is among the first athletes to publicly agree with IAAF over Semenya, while most are still coming to terms with the rule, labeling it discriminatory.

Semenya, an Olympic and Commonwealth 800m champion, was born with intersex traits that make her body naturally produce high levels of testosterone.

READ ALSO: Senzo's dad says Bucs will never win until spirit is at peace

The decision was announced by the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) and it came after the 28-year-old South African tried to challenge the new IAAF rules.

Semenya and other athletes with rare differences of sexual development (DSD) will now have to regulate their testosterone levels if they are to compete in track events ranging from 400 metres to one mile.

They will be required to lower their hormone levels below 5 nmol/L of blood as treatment for their natural levels.

Enjoyed reading our story? Download BRIEFLY's news app on Google Play now and stay up-to-date with major South African news!