Bush Leads Ceremony at the Intrepid
Updated, 3:22 p.m. | With a standing ovation for President Bush, a Texas country singer crooning about World War II, and commanders of the five branches of the Armed Services and thousands of veterans on deck, a spot off the West Side of Manhattan turned into a bit of patriotic Americana on Tuesday.

After a two-year, $115 million renovation and redesign, the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum was formally rededicated in a 90-minute ceremony led by Mr. Bush and the first lady, Laura Bush, and dedicated to the nation’s veterans.

“I’m honored to be with you today as we rededicate a great monument to freedom, the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum,” Mr. Bush, who was presented with the Intrepid Freedom Award, said in a ceremony at Pier 86, at 12th Avenue and 46th Street. Beside him was the retired aircraft carrier, which was commissioned in 1943 and served through World War II.

“At this ceremony we recognize that there were 55,000 Americans who served aboard the U.S.S. Intrepid, including some who are here today, and commemorate Veterans Day by honoring all those who have worn the uniform of the Air Force, Army, Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard,” the president said.

Mr. Bush acknowledged the presence of several lawmakers from the New York area, including Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton and Representatives Charles B. Rangel, Anthony D. Weiner and Peter T. King. “Looking forward to that lame-duck session, aren’t we?” he joked.

Addressing John Rich, the Texas musician who had just sung about a wounded veteran, Mr. Bush said, “Tell them we’re coming home, we’re coming home with our heads held high!”

Mr. Bush said, “I will miss being the commander in chief of such a fabulous group of men and women: those who wear the uniform of the United States military.”

He noted that the first Veterans Day was celebrated 90 years ago, when President Woodrow Wilson declared that Nov. 11 should be remembered as Armistice Day, to remember the service members who had fought in World War I.

He noted that the Intrepid took part in some of the fiercest naval battles in the Pacific theater during World War II. After the war, the carrier was used to retrieve astronauts returning to Earth. During the cold war, it was deployed in locations from the Caribbean to the coast off Vietnam.

He noted that the carrier was “destined to be scrapped” before it found a home in New York City, where it opened as a museum in 1982.

Mr. Bush noted that the Intrepid was used as an emergency command center after the attack on the World Trade Center on Sept. 11, 2001, and served as a base for rescue helicopters. The carrier, “which helped defeat the great totalitarian threats” of the last century, was part of the opening chapter of a new struggle against terrorism, the president said.

Citing several service members by name, Mr. Bush said, “Not only do we honor those who have worn the uniform, those who are wearing the uniform, we honor their families, and we thank them from the bottom of our hearts.”

He spoke of a “moral obligation” to assist veterans, and said his administration had doubled financing for veterans affairs, and expanded mental health care and educational assistance for veterans.

Mr. Bush cited Alonzo Swann, who in 1993 received the Navy Cross on the deck of the Intrepid for his heroic actions a teenage anti-aircraft gunner on the carrier during World War II. “If you think you’re right, fight your heart out,” Mr. Bush quoted Mr. Swann as saying.

The veterans of the Intrepid said they appreciated the president’s visit. “I’m happy that he was here,” said Frank R. Puccio, of Bensalem, Pa., who along with his twin, Leonard, was a barber on the Intrepid from 1956 to 1958. “He showed that he cared about the veterans and serving the country.”

Mr. Puccio said he was having a reunion in New York with others who had served on the ship with him, men he had not seen since then.

After the ceremony, several groups of veterans lined up along the West Side Highway and marched off across 42nd Street to join up with the city’s Veterans Day parade on Fifth Avenue. Mr. Bush toured the interior of the Intrepid before flying back to Kennedy International Airport, where Air Force One awaited.

On Oct. 2, the carrier returned to its berth along the Hudson River, at Pier 86. After several weeks of additional preparations, the museum reopened on Saturday with a weekend of special events, including the distribution of a commemorative coin to the first 1,000 visitors to the reopened museum.

The rededication ceremony on Tuesday began at 11:30 a.m., and the lead-up to Mr. Bush’s remarks lasted nearly an hour. The weather was brisk and clear, flags on the pier and on the ship snapping in a light breeze.

The ceremony started with an introduction from Bill White, the museum’s president (whom Mr. Bush later jokingly called “the Vanna White of the Intrepid”).

“Today is Veterans Day and today is about you, the veterans of our great nation,” Mr. White said. “We thank you. We love you. We owe you an eternal debt.”

Mr. White thanked the museum’s founders, Zachary and Elizabeth Fisher, and four members of Congress who helped finance the project: Representatives Carolyn B. Maloney and Jerrold L. Nadler of New York, John P. Murtha of Pennsylvania and Bill Young of Florida.

Walter B. Elcock, an executive from the Bank of America, which also helped finance the project, said the new Intrepid exhibits would help children “appreciate the sacrifices of our men and women in the military.”

Commanders from all five branches of the Armed Services attended: Gen. James T. Conway, commandant of the Marine Corps, Gen. Peter W. Chiarelli of the Army, Adm. Jonathan W. Greenert of the Navy, Lt. Gen. Richard Y. Newton III of the Air Force, and Vice Adm. Robert J. Papp Jr. of the Coast Guard.

Other dignitaries at the ceremony included Gov. David A. Paterson; Interior Secretary Dirk Kempthorne; Christine C. Quinn, the speaker of the City Council; and Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly. Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg did not attend, but several of his top deputies did.

Ms. Quinn said that veterans still face “battles to fight when they come home, injuries to overcome, and having the Intrepid back on our Hudson River on this great Veterans Day will make sure that none of us will ever forget that sacrifice.”

General Conway, the Marine Corps commandant, who said he was speaking in his capacity as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told Mr. Bush that “you have the admiration and respect of all servicemen and women” for his leadership and support.

“Nobody likes to fight, but somebody has to know how,” General Conway said.

“In our country today, with a population of over 300 million, less than 3 million Americans, less than 1 percent, wear the uniform of any service, but Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen, we will not fail you,” he said, adding that the ceremony was dedicated to veterans of all time: “Those who have gone before, those who have served, and those who wear the uniform.”

Governor Paterson, who is legally blind, said, “The best assessment of the Intrepid would come from the eyes of a child, for any of us who has ever brought their children to see the Intrepid notices their disbelief at the immensity of this structure. Even I can see how big this place is.” (Mr. Bush chuckled along with the audience.)

Mr. Paterson announced that he was signing an executive order creating a State Council on Returning Veterans and Their Families to help veterans from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan to readjust to civilian life.

Mr. Rich, a member of the duo Big and Rich, thanked President Bush, saying that he had made tough decisions. “Though they have been criticized, they were hard on you, guess what? Seven years without a terrorist attack on our side,” he told the president, as members of the gathering — some, but not all — stood and applauded. “The last time I checked, you can’t bat better than 1.000.”

In a patriotic song about a wounded veteran, Mr. Rich crooned that “we’d all be speaking German living under the flag of Japan if it wasn’t for the good Lord and the man.”

Mr. Rich brought along an assortment of cast members from “Gone Country,” a reality show he is hosting on the CMT cable channel. Before the president arrived on stage, several of them, including Mickey Dolenz of the Monkees and Prince’s one-time sidekick Sheila E., took turns at entertaining the crowd. The strangest moment came when George Clinton, of Funkadelic fame, attempted to sing Kenny Rogers’s big hit, “The Gambler.” Mr. Clinton, replete with a red, white, blue, orange and green wig, folded about halfway through.

The museum’s co-chairmen, Charles de Gunzburg and Richard T. Santulli, praised the president’s leadership after 9/11 in protecting America. After Mr. Bush spoke, they presented him with the Intrepid Freedom Award.

Mrs. Bush and a granddaughter of Vice Adm. John H. Hoover, a naval commander who served in the Pacific during the war, jointly rechristened the carrier.

Finally, the Irish tenor Ronan Tynan led the crowd with a rousing rendition of “God Bless America,” as several fighter jets flew overhead in formation.