CivicScience
Our Story We’re on a mission to power the world’s opinions and bring them to the decision makers who care.



In 2007, CivicScience emerged from the vision of founder and CEO John Dick that market research and opinion-gathering needed a new solution. Consumer and public-oriented businesses that had long relied on traditional polling and survey techniques found those methods were growing tired and less effective in reaching a representative audience. The emergence of social media sharing brought convenience and immediacy of the public’s voice to the table, but also inherent biases and untrustworthy information. Our ambitious goal was to develop a revolutionary new way to connect the real-time opinions of consumers to the decision makers who need that information every day – but to do so with depth, breadth, and reliability. With that vision, a small financial grant, and incubator space in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, we built our first polling website in early 2008 and, through extensive experimentation, database engineering, and software development, created what is now the fastest, most sophisticated, and most democratic polling solution ever invented. Today, we provide software and services to the world’s leading brands media companies, and investors, while giving a trusted and powerful voice to all people.

The Geeks Will Oberman, Chief Technology Officer Will is a veteran engineer and software architect with experience in several start-up ventures including Vivisimo and BodyMedia in Pittsburgh. A graduate of the Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science, Will has managed complex technology teams and product roll-outs. His work on high-volume customer data collection and analysis, combined with his expertise in consumer-facing web applications, uniquely position him to lead the technological architecture and build-out of CivicScience. Mike O’Toole, Chief Platform Officer Mike O’Toole leads platform efforts across the spectrum of client and publisher partner offerings. His job is to ensure that both clients and publisher partners get the most out of CivicScience’s data, platform, capabilities, and expertise. He has a proven track record of success in analytics, product management, and team leadership at Del Monte, Nielsen, and Smith Brothers Agency. Mike has a BS in Business Logistics from Penn State, as well as an MBA, with a focus on marketing and finance, from the University of Pittsburgh. Emerson Goncus, Research Manager Emerson works with clients to ensure they get the most out of CivicScience’s platform. After graduating from college in 2008, Emerson was an officer in the Air Force where he held an eclectic mix of engineering, managing and teaching jobs. In 2013, he was hired as a research and development engineer in the mining industry for two years before joining CivicScience in March of 2015. He holds a degree in Mechanical Engineering from Penn State University. Gene Frederick, System Development Engineer Gene brings to CivicScience a wide range of skills and experience in systems development and operations. He works on the team responsible for maintaining the back-end systems at CivicScience which provide quality service to customers as well as internal staff. Gene holds a B.S. in Information Sciences and Technology from Penn State University. Kelly Kilgour, Data Scientist Kelly is the newest data scientist at CivicScience. Prior to CivicScience, Kelly worked as the Senior Data Analytics Integration Developer at UPMC. Kelly earned her Masters of Science in Information Technology, Business Intelligence and Data from Carnegie Mellon University. Emily Stoner, Research Analyst Emily joins the team as a Research Analyst to support the Delivery and Client Success teams. She has over 2 years of market research experience across a variety of industries, including healthcare, CPG and higher education. Emily earned her Bachelor’s Degree in Marketing and Business Information Systems from the University of Pittsburgh. Shawn Wall, Director of Software Development Shawn is a software architect & engineer with a wealth of experience in all facets of software development for companies large & small. His past successes include Pittsburgh start-ups BodyMedia and Vivisimo, along with the founding of mobile services agency TwoTap Labs which produced over 30 iOS and Android applications for clients such as Adidas, HP, and USGBC. Shawn graduated from Allegheny College with a degree in Computer Science.

Andrei Marculescu, Research Analyst Andrei joins the team as a Research Analyst to support the Delivery and Client Success teams. He is a recent graduate from Carnegie Mellon with a B.S. in Decision Science. In his free time, Andrei runs a recording studio in the Southside of Pittsburgh.

The Suits John Dick, CEO and Founder John is a serial entrepreneur with extensive experience in new business formation, business development, marketing and communications. He is a frequent speaker at the Carnegie Mellon University Don Jones Center of Entrepreneurship, an accomplished writer with regular contributions to AdAge, the HuffingtonPost and Forbes and has appeared on Good Morning America, the AXS TV Grammy Prediction Special and as a speaker at numerous market research and business conferences. Pedro Barelli, Chief Operating Officer Pedro brings more than 20 years of executive and consulting experience to his role as CivicScience’s COO, where he leads company operations, financials, product roadmap planning, and human resources administration. Prior to CivicScience, he spent 16 years at Pittsburgh-based IT consulting and software development company Summa Technologies, where as one of its founding members, his role grew from a principal and technology consultant for client projects, to director of its Latin America operations, and then to Chief Delivery Officer and COO. He began his career in his home country of Brazil, as a software engineer and project consultant for several companies before joining Summa. He holds a B.C. in Electronic Engineering with a minor in Computer Science from Politechnic School at the Universidad de São Paulo, and an MBA from the Tepper School of Business at Carnegie Mellon University. Cyrus Krohn - Senior Vice President of Business Development Cyrus Krohn has been a cutting-edge communicator, digital innovator and new media executive for over 20 years. Krohn is currently Co-Founder and Chief Operating Officer at Element Data, focused on decision intelligence software leveraging machine learning and artificial intelligence. Most recently, he managed the acquisition of the Cheezburger Network, one of the world's largest millennial digital media companies focused on humor and entertainment, to Literally Media. Prior to Cheezburger, Krohn co-founded Crowdverb and sold the start-up to WPP, the world’s largest communication services group. Krohn has worked as a senior director and executive producer at technology companies including Microsoft and Yahoo. In his SVP of Business Development role, Cyrus uses his extensive media experience to scale the company's publisher products and partnerships. Amie Bolewitz, Vice President of Marketing Amie joins us as the VP of Marketing where she is responsible for a wide range of initiatives, including marketing and PR strategy, developing multi-channel campaigns, lead generation, and market analysis. Amie has spent over 10 years in domestic and international marketing program development and execution. She is experienced in multi-channel campaign execution, public relations, sales process development, lead generation, and management of multi-divisional marketing teams and budgets. Prior to joining CivicScience, Amie served as the Director of Marketing for Black Box Networking Service and Director of Marketing for ABM Industries, Inc.

Annette Brady, Vice President of Publisher Development Annette joins the team as vice president of publisher development and is responsible for increasing CivicScience’s publisher partnership network for our polling widget. She brings rich experience in both media sales and media publisher partnerships. Most recently, she was a television and digital Account Executive at Cox Media Group / WPXI, WPXI.com, and Local Solutions, and served as a Senior Account Executive for Hearst radio and TV. On the media publisher partnership side, she was responsible for building and managing a national media network, leveraging a content site to generate revenue for the media partners. Contact Annette at Annette@civiciscience.com. Casey Taylor, Vice President of Client Success Casey works with clients to proactively identify research objectives and areas of exploration so that CivicScience can help illuminate a strategic path with data-driven insights and inferences. He has spent the bulk of his career working with some of the biggest global brands in consumer electronics, social media, healthcare (among others) to help them uncover the story within data, and how they strategically position themselves relative to evolving and emerging markets. He received his Bachelor’s degree from Carnegie Mellon University in 2009. Steve Webb, Business Intelligence Steve is responsible for building tools that quantify the CivicScience network and optimize experiences for clients and partners. He holds a degree in Economics from Virginia Tech where he was an on air personality at WUVT, VT’s student run radio station. If there was a competition for knowing obscure facts about what lives in CivicScience databases, Steve would win it hands down. Mary Acklin, Content Creation and Social Media Manager Mary is responsible for writing engaging questions for polls, working with partners on poll engagement strategies, and finding opportunities to bolster response rates. With a background in Journalism, she has a huge passion for starting an engaging conversation and joins CivicScience with over 5 years of experience working in product marketing, social media and community management for various startups. Yoga and fiber art occupy her spare time — oh, and making really stellar coffee. Emily Laumer, Senior Account Manager Emily works directly with clients to design and implement research and data driven solutions to complex business problems. With more than 5 years of experience working in market research, Emily's background spans a multitude of industries, including finance, media, tech, healthcare, retail, CPG and more. She earned her Bachelor’s Degree in Integrated Marketing Communication with a minor in Sociology from Duquesne University.

Lauren Bickel, Account Manager Lauren works directly with clients to help them define and enhance their research goals, as well as produce data-based, consumer-driven insights. She joins CivicScience with 5 years of experience in data analysis and client service across a variety of industries including CPG, retail, hospitality services and technology/media. She graduated with her Bachelor of Science in Business Administration from the University of Pittsburgh in 2013 with a focus in Marketing and Economics. Kaitlin Augustine, Senior Marketing Specialist Kaitlin is a Senior Marketing Specialist at CivicScience. She brings over 3 years of experience from working in digital marketing and advertising. She earned a Bachelor’s Degree from the University of Pittsburgh with a major in Marketing, minors in French and Economics, and a Certificate in Leadership & Ethics. When she’s not at her desk, she’s volunteering or planning her next travel destination. Arie Paup Noah Brode As Marketing Specialist, Noah Brode writes interesting and engaging questions for our polls and contributes to the company blog. Noah comes to CivicScience following a five-year career in public radio as a reporter and host at 90.5 WESA. He likes classical music, board games, and all kinds of other nerdy things. Danielle Commisso, Content Writer Danielle is a freelance writer with a background in journalism, public relations, and serious game development. She has worked for a range of clients in science and tech R&D;, including startups, Carnegie Mellon University, and an award-winning research group at Duquesne University. She holds a BA from Carnegie Mellon. Laurnie Wilson, Content Writer As a freelance Content Writer, Laurnie researches, pitches and reports on insights that are valuable to the CivicScience audience. Her professional experience spans a wide range of industries, from hospitality to health and everything in between. With a BA in History and Creative Writing from Carnegie Mellon University, she brings her passion for the facts and knack for storytelling to each assignment, ensuring that content is relevant and relatable.

Business Advisors Scientific & Academic Advisors