Bananas are Chemicals, Too
Via a Facebook post by longtime science writer Boyce Rensberger of a piece on the science and technology website IO9 , I found a set of clever and provocative illustrations created by James Kennedy, a high school chemistry teacher in Melbourne, Australia.

Each shows a common fruit and lists the chemical constituents as if they were ingredients on the label of a manufactured food. Here’s the banana poster:

Photo

Kennedy’s website has many more, and brims with all kinds of interesting items, including a gallery of esters and their related smells and a batch of T-shirts.

I reached out to Kennedy and he explained his goals:

As a high-school chemistry teacher, I made these posters for my students as a visual introduction to our organic chemistry course. I want to erode the fear that many people have of ‘chemicals’, and demonstrate that nature evolves compounds, mechanisms and structures far more complicated and unpredictable than anything we can produce in the lab. This poster series breaks down all the major ingredients in popular natural foods — using E-numbers and IUPAC names instead of common names where they exist. Anthocynanins, for example, which are said to give blueberries their “superfood” status, are also known as E163. The constituent ingredients were found on a nutritional analysis website; the color and preservative components were from old botany books; and the flavor compounds were found in published, peer-reviewed gas spectroscopy analyses of the volatile aromatic compounds in each fruit. In other words, all the data were from reputable sources.

His posters bring to mind the important line of research on natural carcinogens pursued for decades by Bruce N. Ames and Lois Swirsky Gold at the University of California, Berkeley. (Gold died in 2012.)

They wrote a particularly eye-opening paper in 1990, published in the journal Mutation Research and titled “Paracelsus to parascience: the environmental cancer distraction.”

Here’s just one of many lines that were clearly meant to shake up conventional thinking on environmental cancer risk: