Trump Make America Great Again Committee (“TMAGAC”) is a joint fundraising committee composed of Donald J. Trump for President, Inc. (“DJTP”) and the Republican National Committee (“RNC”).

Contributions to TMAGAC or any member committee are not deductible for federal income tax purposes. Contributions to TMAGAC are subject to federal contribution limits and prohibitions. Federal law requires us to collect and report the name, mailing address, occupation, and employer of each contributor whose contributions aggregate in excess of $200 in a calendar year (RNC) or election cycle (DJTP).

Contributions made by an Individual or Federal Non-multicandidate Political Committee (Multicandidate PAC amounts in parentheses) shall be allocated according to the following formula:

75% of each contribution to DJTP, to be designated toward either its 2020 primary (which shall be the default) or 2020 general election account, up to a maximum of $2,800 ($5,000) per account. 25% of each contribution to the RNC’s Operating account, up to a maximum of $35,500 ($15,000).

Notwithstanding this allocation formula, a contributor may designate a contribution for a specific participant or participants. In addition, the allocation formula may change if any contribution would exceed applicable contribution limits.

By providing your phone number, you are consenting to receive calls and SMS/MMS messages, including autodialed and automated calls and texts, to that number from each of the participating committees in the Trump Make America Great Again Committee, Donald J. Trump for President Inc. and the Republican National Committee. Msg & data rates may apply. Participating committees’ terms & conditions/privacy policies apply: http://88022-info.com/ (DJTP); http://80810-info.com/ (RNC).

Neither printed nor produced at government expense.

To contribute by mail, please send a personal check made payable to the “Trump Make America Great Again Committee“ to:

Trump Make America Great Again Committee

310 First St SE

Washington, D.C. 20003

Please provide your full name, mailing address, email address, occupation, and employer with your mailed contribution.