Pastor drowns and gets eaten by crocodiles after attempting to walk on water
A pastor from Mpumalanga in eastern South Africa died after attempting to walk on water on Thursday, June 2, reports News SA.

The 35-year-old man of the cloth attempted to show off in front of hundreds of congregants who were part of a baptism exercise that was held at Mgwenya River in Kanyamazane.

Unfortunately, the minister identified as Jeremiah Mahlangu drowned and got attacked by crocodiles.

Referencing Mathew 14:22-33, Mahlangu said that he received a revelation which told him that with enough faith he could achieve what Jesus was able to.

However, on the second step into the water, Mahlangu drowned.

According to some congregants, the ‘prophet’ was disturbed by a ringing phone in the crowd, and as he turned his head to see who brought a phone to the baptism, he lost focus and drowned.

News SA reports that the ‘prophet’ had performed many other miracles in the past. The miracles include: turning peanuts into peanut butter and making lemonade out of lemons.

But this time, his ‘power’ did not work. Many of his followers are still in shock and some believe he will come back to life.

A family member has denied rumours claiming that the ‘prophet’s’ body will be auctioned.

He stated that Mahlangu would not be buried too soon, just in case he resurrects, as his mission on earth is not complete.

Paramedics arrived at the scene two hours later to save the ‘prophet’, but it was too late as the crocodiles had already torn him and his garments apart, leaving only his knee caps, elbows, ribs, and skull.

This is not the first incident of this nature in Africa. At Ibadon zoo in south-west Nigeria, a self-proclaimed ‘prophet’ claimed he was able to do what Daniel in the bible did by walking into a den full of lions.

Though he was warned severally by zoo keepers, the ‘prophet’ thought of them as nothing more than enemies of progress, said Nigerian newspapers.

The ‘prophet’, with a crowd of people watching, put on a long red robe and proceeded to enter the cage full of lions. Within seconds of opening the door, the lions ripped him from flesh to bone.

For eDaily updates

Join @edailykenya Telegram channel

EDITORIAL POLICY: Permission to use quotation from this article is granted subject to full credit of source being given by referencing the direct link of the article on edaily.co.ke