Canada wants to welcome more than 1 million new immigrants in the next three years
Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Tombstone Territorial Park – When the Yukon government advises you to leave a hiking plan before traveling into the Tombstone Park area, you're in for a wild time. This park, located 90 minutes from Dawson City, is filled with rugged peaks and wildlife. Hide Caption 1 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Capilano Suspension Bridge – British Columbia's Capilano Suspension Bridge is only a few minutes away from Vancouver's city center. Built in 1889, it stretches 137 meters across and 70 meters above the Capilano River. Hide Caption 2 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Prince Edward Island – Prince Edward Island, which is Canada's smallest province, gained global fame after Lucy Maud Montgomery's 1908 novel "Anne of Green Gables." More than 100 years later, PEI remains as glorious as ever with beautiful beaches, fresh seafood and historic architecture. Hide Caption 3 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Nahanni National Park – A UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1978, this national park in the Northwest Territories consists of deep river canyons cutting through mountain ranges, huge waterfalls and complex cave systems. Hide Caption 4 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Peggy's Cove – Famous for its natural scenery, fresh seafood and working fishing village, Peggy's Cove in the eastern coastal province of Nova Scotia is best known for its historic lighthouse, built in 1915. Hide Caption 5 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Lake Louise – An alpine lake with sparkling blue waters, Alberta's Lake Louise in Banff National Park sits at the base of a cluster of glacier-clad peaks. The lake offers paddling in summer and an outdoor skating rink in winter. Hide Caption 6 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Avalon Peninsula – Iceberg viewing is a popular activity in the province of Newfoundland and Labrador. On a sunny day, you can view these 10,000-year-old glacial giants from many points along the northern and eastern coasts of the province, including the Avalon Peninsula (pictured). Hide Caption 7 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Fogo Island – For a traditional Newfoundland and Labrador fishing port experience, turn to Fogo Island. The largest island on Newfoundland and Labrador's vast coast, it's home to 11 communities and was first settled by the Irish in the 18th century. Hide Caption 8 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Niagara Falls – Niagara Falls refers to three different sets of falls on the border between Canada and the United States. Horseshoe Falls (pictured) is the most famous. Hide Caption 9 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Toronto waterfront – For the best views of Canada's 553.33-meter-high CN Tower and Rogers Centre sports stadium you need to hit Lake Ontario (pictured). Hide Caption 10 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Lakes of Saskatchewan – The province of Saskatchewan has more than 100,000 lakes. Otter Lake (pictured) is an excellent destination for fishing, camping and, obviously, sunsets. Hide Caption 11 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Jasper National Park – Canada's Glacier Skywalk in Jasper, which opened in 2014, is a fantastic place to catch views of the surrounding mountains. Hide Caption 12 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Notre Dame Basilica – Located in Montreal, Notre Dame Basilica is one of Canada's most stunning churches. Completed in 1891, it was designated a National Historic Site of Canada in 1989. Hide Caption 13 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Sirmilik National Park – Located in Nunavut Territory -- Canada's northernmost region -- Sirmilik National Park features rugged mountains, glaciers, fjords and river valleys. April to June is the best time to visit the edges of the ice floes (pictured). Hide Caption 14 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Rideau Canal – Historic Rideau Canal, a UNESCO site built in the early 19th century, is made up of a chain of lakes, rivers and canals stretching 202 kilometers from Kingston to Ottawa. Hide Caption 15 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Yukon – Canada's remote Yukon, the smallest of the country's three federal territories, is one of the best places to check out the northern lights, as seen here on the Eagle Plains. Hide Caption 16 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Old Quebec – Founded in the early 17th century, Quebec City's historic Old City is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and North America's best example of a fortified colonial city. Hide Caption 17 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Whistler, British Columbia – Horstman Hut (pictured) on Blackcomb Mountain, sits in front of Horstman Glacier and Black Tusk Mountain at the Whistler Blackcomb Ski Resort. Hide Caption 18 of 20

Photos: Canada photos: 20 of the most beautiful places Bay of Fundy's Hopewell Rocks – Canada's Bay of Fundy in the Atlantic Ocean is home to the highest tides in the world. As a result, New Brunswick's incredible, eroded Hopewell Rocks are covered in water twice a day. Hide Caption 19 of 20