State Long-Term Care: Recent Developments and Policy Directions
Barbara Coleman, Wendy Fox-Grage and Donna Folkemer

National Conference of State Legislatures

This report was prepared under contract #HHS-100-97-0015 between the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Office of Disability, Aging and Long-Term Care Policy (DALTCP) and George Washington University. George Washington University. For additional information about this subject, you can visit the DALTCP home page at http://aspe.hhs.gov/office_specific/daltcp.cfm or contact the office at HHS/ASPE/DALTCP, Room 424E, H.H. Humphrey Building, 200 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20201. The e-mail address is: webmaster.DALTCP@hhs.gov. The Project Officer was Hunter McKay.

The opinions and views expressed in this report are those of the authors. They do not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of Health and Human Services, the contractor or any other funding organization.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

State Long-Term Care: Recent Developments and Policy Directions is the first of two reports of an 18-month project funded by the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. This report provides a thumbnail sketch of long-term care budgets, legislation and planning in the 50 states and the District of Columbia. The goal of the project is to obtain insights into recent state long-term care public policy reforms, as evidenced by their proposed or recently enacted legislation, task forces and budgets.

The focus of this first report is mainly on state legislation, expenditures and policy activity in fiscal year 2001 to provide the most current perspective possible in fast-changing state environments. However, it also previews fiscal year 2002 (when the data were available and appropriate). In some cases, reference is made to prior years to provide context for review and analysis. In the summer of 2003, NCSL will publish a second report that will update subsequent long-term care budgets, planning and implementation strategies in the states.

The fiscal analysis in this report was derived from the responses to a NCSL long-term care expenditure survey sent to legislative fiscal offices in 2001. Twenty-six states responded to the survey. For the other states, fiscal information was gathered from the FY 2000 and FY 2001 Medicaid long-term care expenditures reports compiled by Brian Burwell of MEDSTAT Inc., who uses HCFA 64 reports that the states file annually with CMS (formerly HCFA). While HCFA 64 data are the most accurate available on Medicaid expenditures, there are several important caveats associated with the information. HCFA 64 data are based on date of payment rather than date of service and thus may not accurately reflect the specific services actually delivered in a particular year. In addition, HCFA 64 data are derived from submitted claims and may include some claims that are subsequently disallowed. Finally, HCFA 64 data include only fee-for-service expenditures; any services provided through managed care are not included.

Other fiscal information was gathered from state Web sites and state legislative reports. Information on the number of Medicaid home and community-based waiver programs came from a report for The Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured by Charlene Harrington, Medicaid 1915(c) Home and Community-Based Waivers: Program Data, 1992-1999.

State reporting of long-term care expenditures (primarily Medicaid) can present challenges in conveying an accurate overview of a state's long-term care system. In particular, specific events may distort the picture from one year to the next. For instance, a large increase in nursing home spending may be due to a state's use of a specific strategy to maximize federal dollars, rather than to an increase in the nursing home population or to a sudden surge in nursing home costs in that state. Rates of change in state Medicaid spending for specific services can be due to factors related to state payment policies as well as to real change in service utilization. Therefore, expenditure data need to be considered with caution.

Information on 2001 legislative activities in the states comes from NCSL's Health Policy Tracking Service. The section on long-term care planning was drawn largely from NCSL's "The States' Response to the Olmstead Decision: A Work in Progress," published in December 2001, and from information on state Web sites.

Elizabeth Devore, Corina Eckl, and Arturo Perez of NCSL contributed material used in this report. The authors thank the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE) of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for its generous funding and Ruth Katz and Hunter McKay of ASPE for their insight and advice. We also are grateful to our review committee Diane Braunstein with the National Governors' Association, Brian Burwell with The MedStat Group, Kurt DeWeese with the Illinois House Democrat staff, and Susan Reinhard with Rutgers Center for State Health Policy for their valuable comments and feedback.

Long-term care policies and programs are determined in the United States by 50 separate state governments, each with different demographics, economies and political philosophies. For many years, the main direction of long-term care state policy was to support institutionalization of frail elders and people with disabilities. As individuals with disabilities and their families began to advocate and push for greater choice and for increased opportunities to remain in their homes and communities, states began to broaden their focus on home and community-based care services. These programs and services run the gamut from in-home care to adult day services to supportive housing and transportation.

Today, most states are seeking to curb increasing costs for nursing homes that are largely paid through the Medicaid program.1 States also are expanding the range of home and community-based services (HCBS) that they offer to provide greater options for the elderly, people with physical disabilities, people with mental retardation or developmental disabilities, and other diverse populations with disabilities. The trend toward greater state spending on HCBS encountered a major obstacle in 2001, however, as state revenues began to shrink at the same time as Medicaid spending was rising.

State officials face several major challenges as they try to slow rising Medicaid costs and meet demands from other state services:

A slowing economy has increased the number of people who are turning to public services for help.

Shortages of direct care workers have increased pressure on state governments to provide incentives to attract and retain workers.

Court decisions, most notably the U. S. Supreme Court Olmstead ruling, have stimulated many states to increase community-based alternatives to institutionalization for people with disabilities of all ages, particularly people with mental retardation or developmental disabilities (MR/DD).

There are more frail elderly and people with disabilities who need assistance.

A number of states have used creative approaches to expand the options for frail elders and people with disabilities to receive services and supports that enable them to live in their homes and communities rather than be institutionalized. In the report that follows, the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) traces state long-term care policy developments in 2001, looking backward to the late 1990s and forward to 2002 to add context to the issues discussed in this report.

Most states have been forced in recent years to grapple with budget shortfalls resulting from declining revenues and escalating costs, particularly Medicaid costs. From FY 2000 to FY 2002, states realized about 5 percent revenue growth, according to the National Association of State Budget Officers (NASBO). Over the same period, NASBO reports that states saw a 25-percent rate of growth in Medicaid expenditures. Medicaid is second only to education in terms of state spending, accounting for about 20 percent of all state spending. In addition, Medicaid is the single largest source of public funding for long-term care.

NASBO surveyed the states in May 2002 regarding their Medicaid budgets.2 Of the 49 states that responded to the survey, 39 states had Medicaid shortfalls in FY 2001 and 28 states were anticipating shortfalls in FY 2002. The survey indicated that 47 of the 49 states that responded took action in fiscal 2002 or proposed action in fiscal 2003 to reduce Medicaid expenditures.

NASBO reported that total Medicaid expenditures increased about 10.6 percent in FY 2001 over FY 2000 levels and were estimated to have risen another 13.3 percent from FY 2001 to FY 2002. The federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) attributed the expenditure growth to prescription drug spending, nursing home costs, community-based long-term care costs, and payments to health plans.3

Institutional and community expenditures. For many years, Medicaid long-term care spending was almost exclusively for institutional services. In FY 1990, more than 90 percent of Medicaid long-term care expenditures was allocated to institutional care (nursing homes and intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded [ICF/MR] facilities) and only 10 percent to HCBS programs.4 By 2001, the percentage of Medicaid long-term care dollars for institutional care had decreased to 71 percent and HCBS had risen to 29 percent. Medicaid spending for nursing home care increased by 8.8 percent (from $36.4 billion to $39.6 billion) from FY 1999 to FY 2000, and then by 13.5 percent to $42.7 billion in FY 2001, despite the fact that occupancy has been declining nationally.

Home and community-based services waivers. The Medicaid long-term care benefit that has been growing rapidly in recent years is HCBS waiver programs, which increased from $10.6 billion in FY 1999 to $12.7 billion in FY 2000 (a 14.6 percent increase) and to approximately $14 billion in FY 2001. Implementing Medicaid waiver programs allows states to tap federal matching funds for services that otherwise cannot be covered under the regular state Medicaid plan.

About three-fourths of waiver expenditures in FY 2001 (about $10.5 billion) were allocated to services for people with mental retardation and developmental disabilities. Although the caseloads in many states for MR/DD programs are smaller than for Aged/Disabled programs, the costs are higher because many people with MR/DD receive 24-hour support.

State variations. States differ considerably in their allocation of Medicaid long-term care funds to institutional care versus HCBS. Vermont apportioned only 45 percent to institutional care in 2001, for example, and 55 percent to home care. Washington allocated 52 percent to institutional care in 2001 and 48 percent to home care. In contrast, Mississippi spent 91 percent of its Medicaid long-term care funds on institutional care and only 9 percent on home care.

It should be noted, however, that reviewing state spending on long-term care services from the perspective of Medicaid expenditures distorts the fiscal picture in several states that commit significant state general revenues to home and community-based services (home care and residential services). For example, Illinois spent 88 percent of its Medicaid long-term care expenditures on institutional care in 2001 and only 12 percent on HCBS. In addition to the $293 million of Medicaid money that went to home care in 2001, however, the state also committed $200 million in general revenues for its Community Care Program in FY 2001; this program served 38,000 older adults each month. Although the Community Care Program consists almost exclusively of chore-homemaker support services that may not in and of themselves serve as deterrents to institutionalization, the program nevertheless represents a significant commitment by the state to community services.

State general revenue and federal funds. Several states fund significant HCBS programs from their state general revenues; federal Older Americans Act funds also are a major source of funding. Indiana and Pennsylvania offer two other examples of the use of non-Medicaid funds for long-term care services in the community. For its home and community-based OPTIONS program in 2000, Pennsylvania provided $175 million in lottery revenue. The state also committed $45 million in tobacco settlement revenue for expanding HCBS in FY 2001-2002 to serve an additional 11,000 people. The state-funded CHOICE program in Indiana, which served more than 12,000 people in FY 2000, was funded at more than $40 million that year.

Another major source of funds for long-term care community services is the Older Americans Act program, under which $1.25 billion in funding was distributed in FY 2001 through Area Agencies on Aging throughout the country. Of that total, about two-fifths was allocated to congregate and home-delivered meals ($530 million) and another $125 million went to the new National Family Caregiver Program, which provides support services such as information and assistance, respite, and education and training to family caregivers.

Lawmakers in 2001 pursued long-term care reforms in the context of tight budget constraints and growing concern about health-related expenditures. A number of legislative initiatives involved expanding home and community-based options for people with disabilities. State legislatures also took a number of major actions to regulate nursing homes and assisted living facilities.

Home and community-based services expansions. Perhaps the most ambitious effort took place in Minnesota, where the Legislature created a comprehensive framework for reshaping the state's long-term care system, acting on the recommendations of the Long-Term Care Task Force. The legislation resulted in $183 million in appropriations for long-term care reforms for FY 2002-2003, of which more than $75 million was invested in expanding home and community-based service options and $108 million provided cost-of-living increases for nursing facilities and continuing care providers. Increased spending was to be partially offset by $44 million in savings from downsizing the nursing home industry by 5,100 beds.

In Iowa, legislators appropriated more than $25 million to fund long-term care development initiatives through the state's Senior Living Trust Fund. The Senior Trust was created to encourage the development of assisted living and community-based services, at the same time decreasing the number of nursing home beds in the state. In addition to providing grants for the conversion of nursing home beds into assisted living, the fund pays for home-delivered meal programs, adult day services and respite care.

The Maryland General Assembly created a new program to provide community attendant services and other supports to individuals with physical or cognitive disabilities who qualify for Medicaid. Participants will be able to obtain services in a variety of settings- such as in their own homes or in a supported living environment- and will be permitted to hire their own personal assistant.

Pennsylvania lawmakers dedicated a significant portion of the state's tobacco settlement revenue ($45 million) to expand HCBS to 3,000 additional people eligible for Medicaid-funded waiver services. A portion of the funds also will be used to establish a new program to provide HCBS for individuals with low incomes who do not qualify for Medicaid services.

Nursing home quality. Concern about continuing reports of poor quality of care in many of the nation's nursing homes led lawmakers in many states to take actions related to quality improvement. Nineteen state legislatures considered nursing home staffing proposals in 2001. Of these states, Arkansas and Florida enacted laws to increase nursing home staffing standards beyond previously enacted standards. Both states will phase in staff-to-resident ratios for licensed nurses and nurse aides during the next few years. The Wyoming Legislature initiated a study to examine wages and salaries of nonprofessional, direct care workers in nursing homes, assisted living and mental health care facilities, and developmental disability programs.

Several states adopted other measures aimed at improving nursing home quality. Texas, for example, became the first state to permit nursing home residents to use video cameras to monitor the care they receive. The "Grannycam" law, as it is known, stipulates that individuals who view a tape that reveals abuse or neglect must report these crimes; it also allows videotapes to be used as evidence in court.

Legislation enacted in Arizona allows nursing homes that receive an "excellent" quality rating on the state's annual facility compliance and licensure survey for two consecutive years to receive grant money for quality improvement. Minnesota will develop a system of quality profiles for all long-term care providers, while Texas will establish pilot centers for advancing quality in long-term care through research, education and outreach programs.

Nursing home liability insurance. Another nursing home issue liability insurance received significant attention from state legislatures in 2001. Nursing homes have faced a growing number of liability cases in recent years, often resulting in costly settlements. With the cost of liability insurance skyrocketing, insurers were pulling out of the market in some states.

In Arkansas, lawmakers authorized the state insurance commissioner to establish a voluntary liability insurance pool for long-term care facilities. Florida lawmakers added mandatory liability coverage requirements for nursing homes and implemented tort reforms, including caps on punitive damages and attorneys' fees. As of September 1, 2003, the Texas Legislature requires nursing homes to maintain professional liability insurance coverage annually of at least $1 million per occurrence of a violation and $3 million total coverage. The Florida and Texas legislation also addressed quality improvements in nursing homes.

Assisted living regulation. A number of state legislatures addressed issues related to assisted living facilities. The Arkansas Legislature established licensure and oversight standards for assisted living facilities, provided that facilities currently licensed as residential care facilities could switch all or a portion of their beds to assisted living, and directed the state to apply for a Medicaid waiver to cover assisted living services for at least 1,000 Medicaid beneficiaries.

Alabama legislators enacted several assisted living laws in 2001, following regulatory reforms in 2000 that created a two-tiered assisted living structure with separate standards for facilities that provide care to residents with dementia. The new Alabama laws established licensure standards for assisted living administrators and appropriated $200,000 to fund assisted living inspections. The Maine Legislature established a commission to study options for developing high-quality, cost-effective assisted living housing and service programs in community center locations across the state. New Jersey lawmakers enacted a policy requiring providers that operate new assisted living or comprehensive care facilities to reserve at least 10 percent of their beds for Medicaid residents.

Long-term care insurance. States have begun taking significant steps to ensure the protection of consumers who purchase long-term care insurance policies, primarily by focusing on premium inflation protection. For example, Utah established standards for disclosure relating to federally tax-qualified policies, notification when a policy does not include certain premium inflation protections, and written notification when an insurer denies a policyholder's claim. The Utah legislation also specifies a time frame for delivery of a policy and mandates inclusion of nonforfeiture benefits.

Idaho created a tax deduction for half of a purchaser's long-term care insurance premiums, and Michigan required long-term care insurers to define more clearly their assisted living and home care benefits. The Minnesota Legislature established standards for rating practices, rate schedule increases, contingent benefits upon lapse, and nonforfeiture benefits.

As a follow-up to the 1999 Supreme Court ruling in L.C. & E.W. vs. Olmstead, 40 states had task forces, commissions, or state agency work groups assessing their current long-term care systems in 2001. In its interpretation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the court ruled that states must provide services in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified individuals with disabilities. The ruling directs states to make "reasonable modifications" in programs and activities. Modifications that would "fundamentally alter" the nature of services, programs or activities are not required.

As a result, the federal government has encouraged states to plan for reforms not only in the health arena but also in the areas of transportation, housing, education and other social supports to fully integrate people with disabilities into the least restrictive settings. Of the 40 states that were reviewing their long-term care systems in 2001, 18 states issued long-term care plans or significant papers addressing options for serving more people with disabilities in home and community-based settings (as of January 2002).

State Olmstead activities. Each state approached Olmstead in a different way. Some states developed specific strategies designed for implementation over a number of years, some identified key priorities for more immediate actions, and others set forth broad policy recommendations upon which to base future action. Eight additional states were expected to issue reports in 2002. The recommendations embodied in the reports issued to date included the following:

Strengthening consumer choice and information;

Developing a continuum of housing options;

Addressing transportation barriers;

Improving quality of care in nursing homes;

Increasing awareness of home and community-based services;

Moving toward a long-term care system based on person-centered assessment and planning;

Ensuring that funding follows the person regardless of whether he or she lives in an institution or in the community; and

Using Medicaid waivers to expand and create new opportunities for people with disabilities to live in the community.

Plans in four states Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio and Texas stand out because they contain a clear vision for systems change; include specific strategies and goals; identify the state agencies responsible for each strategy; and include timelines and budgets. For example, Mississippi's 59-page plan contains recommendations for the next 10 years and proposed budgets for FY 2003 to FY 2011 for each recommendation. The 79-page Ohio report contains short-term and long-term recommendations. It contains the proposed executive budget for FY 2002-2003 of $145 million for new initiatives and expansion of programs for people with disabilities.

Study commissions. Not all state long-term care planning in 2001 was a consequence of the Olmstead decision. Minnesota embarked on a program of comprehensive long-term care reform initiated by the work of a Long-Term Care Task Force that began meeting in 2000. The task force, composed of state legislators and state agency commissioners, issued its report, Reshaping Long-Term Care in Minnesota, in January 2001. Its recommendations are limited to the aging population. A number of the task force proposals were enacted into law in 2001. These included funding of community service grants to pay start-up, capital, and other costs of developing supportive housing and home and community-based services and promoting the elimination of excess nursing home beds.

North Carolina offers another example of long-term care planning. In 1999, the North Carolina General Assembly asked the state Department of Health and Human Services to develop a long-term care system that could provide a continuum of care for people with disabilities. The department called on the North Carolina Institute of Medicine to convene a statewide task force to assist in developing the plan. That 49-person task force produced a report in March 2001 containing 47 recommendations that relate to issues of infrastructure, quality, work force and access/financing.

Other. As in the past, some states also continued implementing moratoria on new nursing home beds or continued to administer certificate-of-need laws that effectively restricted the addition of more institutional beds. Others provided financial incentives for divestiture by institutional providers and diversification or reinvestment in home and community-based services.

Decreasing revenues and rising Medicaid costs caused tight budgets in most states in FY 2001 and continued concern in FY 2002. The effect of these developments on long-term care reforms in the states is uncertain. A number of states have had to consider cost-containment options, many of which affect long-term care programs and services.5

Cost containment. As in the past, states are paying particular attention to nursing home costs, which are the largest single item in their Medicaid long-term care package. One strategy involves reducing or freezing rate reimbursement for nursing homes in FY 2002 and FY 2003. Maine, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa and Virginia reported on the NASBO survey that they were taking such actions or would be in the near future. Pennsylvania was revising income eligibility requirements for nursing homes to tighten admissions. Other strategies involved imposing provider taxes and transforming reimbursement systems from cost-based methods to prospective payment systems.

Other cost-containment actions that states were considering in the long-term care area included enhanced estate recovery and asset transfer recoupment from Medicaid beneficiaries (Kansas, Maine and Vermont), capping the enrollment of some waiver programs (Kentucky), placing tighter limits on personal care services (North Carolina), and maintaining long-term care per diem prices at FY 2001 levels (Michigan).

Systems change. Still, not all state activity in regard to long-term care was restrictive in 2001. With impetus from the Olmstead decision and seed money from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services under the Systems Change Grant Program, a number of states were exploring options for helping people in nursing homes make the transition to community settings (if they wished to do so and were found to be capable of living more independently). States also were enhancing personal attendant care options and reforming the delivery of long-term care services.

For example, Washington planned to support up to 300 people under age 65 to make the transition out of nursing homes, including partnering with independent living consultants to provide peer support, skills training and advocacy. The Colorado Transitions Project will create a state infrastructure for transition efforts and provide choice information to more than 1,200 people in nursing homes, resulting in 130 transitions to the community. Maryland plans to coordinate with local housing authorities and housing providers to obtain housing for a minimum of 150 people to leave nursing homes; this program is targeted to individuals with physical disabilities who are age 65 or younger.

States also propose using Systems Change grant money to advance consumer direction in many of their HCBS programs, to develop incentives for recruiting and retaining direct care workers for home care and nursing homes, to improve assessment systems, and to strengthen outreach efforts that will inform people with disabilities about community-based alternatives to nursing homes. The Systems Change Grant Program was allowing states to test new strategies and approaches to their long-term care services.

Several themes emerge from this review of state long-term care actions in 2001. In future months, states are likely to:

Continue to assess quality of care in nursing homes and assisted living facilities and endeavor to improve quality through more stringent regulation and inspection and through incentives to the facilities to hire more staff and upgrade their training.

Attempt to enable more people who can live in community settings to move out of nursing homes and ICF/MR facilities. This effort also may force many states to consider housing and transportation issues in conjunction with more traditional long-term care services.

Consider ways to increase the numbers of direct care workers in long-term care and provide incentives to nursing homes, home care agencies, and other long-term care providers for recruiting and retaining these workers.

Increase the number of publicly funded programs that allow and encourage consumer direction of services.

Improve information dissemination to consumers about long-term care options and alternatives.

Uncertainty about the economy may limit state long-term care initiatives that require greater spending in the near future. However, states are showing that they can still design innovative programs and services that expand options for the frail elderly and people with disabilities to live independent lives.

Medicaid paid for 48 percent of nursing home costs in 2000. National Association of State Budget Officers. Medicaid and Other State Healthcare Issues: The Current Situation. (Washington, D.C.: NASBO/NGA: May 2002). Cited in the NASBO report. HCBS refers to three Medicaid programs: Home Health, Personal Care, and Home and Community-Based Waiver programs. Information on state cost-containment actions comes from the NASBO survey and other sources, which did not become available until after the individual state summaries were completed. Therefore, those state summaries may not include mention of these strategies.

APPENDIX A: STATE SUMMARIES

Overview

The long-term care system in Alabama relies heavily upon institutional services, although the state has been making strides toward increasing home and community-based services (HCBS) in recent years. More than 10,000 people were receiving Medicaid waiver services in 2001, compared to about 16,700 people in nursing homes. The state has waiting lists for the waiver programs however, and has not been filling all available waiver slots because of funding difficulties.

Fiscal Analysis

The state spent more than $673.6 million for nursing home care for about 16,700 nursing home residents in FY 2001. (By contrast, Arkansas spent $396.6 million for approximately 14,000 residents.)1

Expenditures for the state's Medicaid waiver programs totaled $153 million in FY 2001, more than double the FY 1995 expenditure of $61 million. Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

The largest waiver program, the MR/DD program, has seen major increases in funding since 1995, more than tripling from $38.3 million that year to $106 million in FY 2001. Approximately 4,400 people were receiving waiver services under this program in 2001.

The state spent about $43.7 million on the Aged/Disabled waiver program in FY 2001, with a caseload of about 5,760 people. (The state had 7,000 slots for this program.)

Legislative Activity

State legislators enacted several laws in 2001 that affected assisted living facilities, following extensive reforms to the assisted living industry in 2000. One measure set licensure standards for assisted living administrators and established a board of examiners for the administrators. Another measure strengthened the Department of Public Health's authority to inspect unlicensed assisted living facilities and established penalties for operating an unlicensed facility.

Regulations issued by the Public Health Department created a two-tiered assisted living licensing structure that established separate standards for facilities that provide care for people with dementia.

Long-Term Care Planning

With a grant from the Center for Health Care Strategies, the Olmstead Core Workgroup was formed. The 40-member body is comprised of representatives from state agencies, advocates, providers, consumers, and family members; the Alabama Medicaid Agency serves as the lead agency. The workgroup has four subcommittees: Needs Assessment, Best Practices, Consumer, and Resource Development. Each subcommittee was expected to submit recommendations by September 1, 2001, after which public forums were to be held. The final plan was to be completed in January 2002. Beyond expanding home and community-based care for people with disabilities, the state plans to review its entire Medicaid program during the next few years.

Plans for moving institutionalized disabled people into the community had already begun through a settlement agreement in the Wyatt vs. Sawyer lawsuit signed in January 2001. The agreement established specific assessment procedures and called for a plan to be developed to identify people with mental illness and with developmental disabilities. The plan discusses reduction of institutional beds, discharge planning procedures, development of community placement, and certification of providers.

Future Outlook

Two grants totaling more than $3 million under the federal Systems Change Grant Program should help enhance access to community services in 2002 and move people out of nursing homes who would rather live in the community and who are capable of doing so. Alabama expects to use the $2 million Real Choices grant, which the state developed in conjunction with its Olmstead planning process, to enhance access to HCBS through improved information dissemination and service coordination. Another goal is the creation and expansion of system-wide opportunities for consumer-directed care.

Specifically, the state plans to develop a community-based information and referral clearinghouse, develop advocacy and informational materials for consumers and family members, and establish an Outreach and Education Unit within the Medicaid Agency's Long-Term Care Division. Training goals include developing a Service Coordination Core Training Module for Medicaid service coordinators, and training and support for person-centered planning for consumers with developmental disabilities.

The other $1 million that the state received will help the state to assist nursing home residents in the Birmingham area to make the transition into the community. A community transitional advocate will assist nursing home residents to plan their move and obtain required supports.

Notes

Expenditure and caseload figures from Burwell using HCFA Form 64 and Harrington HCFA form 372.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

Although the total numbers are small, Alaska has seen an almost 60 percent increase in the number of people age 65 and older from 1990 to 2000--from about 22,370 people to 35,700. Still, older people represent only 5.7 percent of the total population, making Alaska the youngest state in the country.

The nursing home caseload has remained relatively constant at about 900 residents, expenditures have risen by about $14 million since 2000 to a projected total of $53.5 million in 2002. During the same period, however, spending for home and community-based services (HCBS) is projected to soar to more than $120 million, largely through dramatically increased spending on the state's four Medicaid HCBS waiver programs.

Fiscal Analysis

The bulk of HCBS spending in Alaska is for the Medicaid waiver programs, particularly for the developmentally disabled. Spending on that program has increased by more than 70 percent from 2000 to 2002, from $26.1 million to a projected $45 million in 2002. Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

Expenditures for the Medicaid Personal Care Program totaled $8 million in 2001 and are expected to increase to $9.2 million in 2002.

The HCBS waiver program for the elderly was expected to serve about 1,300 people in 2002 at an expenditure total of more than $18 million.

Spending for the HCBS waiver program for developmentally disabled people constituted about three-fifths of total spending for all waiver programs. The state expected to provide services to more than 600 people in the DD program.

Legislative Activity

The 2001 Legislature adopted a resolution urging the state to disseminate information about the availability and costs of long-term care insurance. However, lawmakers did not enact any other long-term care insurance legislation in 2001.

Long-Term Care Planning

Alaska is building partnerships among various state departments to improve the continuum of care for beneficiaries. During FY 2001, the state authorized funds for planning services for people with disabilities, including home and community-based services.

During FY 2002, the Department of Health and Social Services plans to continue taking public comment on the Comprehensive Integrated Mental Health Plan, In-Step, and to use the information to shape the next planning process. The department also expects to contract for a needs assessment to identify the type of services needed to serve as many children and youth as possible within their home communities so that they will not have to go out of state for residential psychiatric treatment services.

Future Outlook

In October 2001, the state implemented a consumer-directed personal assistance program, which gives consumers an option to hire, train and supervise their personal assistants. Changes are also being proposed to the agency-based program, which will result in greater consumer choice and availability of services. The state received a $900,000 Systems Change grant under the Community-Integrated Personal Assistance Services and Supports category, which the state plans to use to improve personal assistance services that are consumer-directed or controlled.

The state will develop statewide training standards and competency testing for personal assistants and will increase training opportunities for these workers. Funds also will be used to implement strategies to increase the recruitment and retention of personal assistants.

The state also received a grant of $1,385,000 from the Systems Change Program in 2002.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

The Arizona Long-Term Care System (ALTCS) is the state's alternate system to Medicaid. Arizona has been operating this system since the late 1980s. By 2001, the system was serving more than 29,000 people at a cost to the state of about $568 million.

Fiscal Analysis

The ALTCS is comprised of two populations: elderly and physically disabled (EPD) and developmentally disabled (DD). Each population is contracted for separately. ALTCS is a managed care program that pays its contractors by member month capitation. The capitation amount includes payments for all covered services, including nursing facilities, acute care, and home and community-based services (HCBS). Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

Expenditures for nursing homes for the elderly population totaled $231.5 million in 2000, rising to about $253 million in 2001, and projected to increase to $267 million in 2002. For the developmentally disabled population, nursing home spending remained at about $2 million throughout this period.

Combined expenditures for HCBS for the elderly and for developmentally disabled people totaled more than $200 million in FY 2001, with more than 80 percent of the total allocated to DD services.

Spending on services for the elderly rose from $45.1 million in 2000 to $61.5 million in 2001, and was projected to increase further in 2002 to almost $71 million.

Legislative Activity

During 2001, lawmakers approved the creation of a grant program that will allow nursing homes that receive a quality rating of "excellence" on the state's annual facility compliance and licensure survey for two consecutive years to receive grant money for costs related to non-administrative direct care staff. The program will be funded by $1.5 million in tobacco tax revenue.

Long-Term Care Planning

Three state agencies that have been involved in long-term care planning at the behest of the governor released their goals and recommendations in September 2001. The three agencies are the Department of Human Services, the Department of Economic Security, and the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System (AHCCCS). Each agency developed plans, then consolidated and revised those plans and sought consumer input in regional stakeholder meetings and statewide public forums. Several major issues that emerged from this planning process discussed below:

Labor Force Shortages . According to the plan, solutions to labor force problems will require legislative and fiscal support, changes in credentialing and scope of practice limitations, and an adequate labor market. Proposals include using Medicaid funds to pay spouses and parents as personal care attendants, developing consumer-directed services, and providing pay increases for home and community-based providers.

Consumer Education and Information . The agencies are considering developing and distributing informational materials to help consumers make informed choices, and providing training for consumers and providers. In October 2001, AHCCCS began requiring all contractors to convene member/provider councils to obtain input and feedback on Long-Term Care plans.

Consumer-Centered Care Management . The goal is to provide ongoing training to consumers on consumer-centered care management and to encourage self-advocacy.

Provider Networks. Agencies are conducting an ongoing analysis of the state's service networks, including the development by AHCCCS contractors of formal network development and management plans.

Future Outlook

In her 2002 state-of-the-state speech, Governor Jane Dee Hull (D) proposed that the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, in collaboration with business and other public and private agencies, develop a statewide education and public awareness campaign on long-term care. The program would be designed to assist citizens to learn about their long-term care service needs, potential costs and funding mechanisms, and community assistance opportunities.

State officials have indicated that any program or service changes that may come out of the Olmstead planning process will need to be-cost neutral.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

Arkansas officials and lawmakers have launched a major effort to respond to the Supreme Court Olmstead decision through a planning process aimed at expanding opportunities for people with disabilities to remain in the community.

Although the Olmstead planning work continues (see below), legislators have focused on nursing home reform and regulation of assisted living facilities. On the fiscal side, the state appears to have been able to restrain growth in its nursing home resident caseload, although nursing home expenditures have continued to increase significantly. The state currently is serving almost as many people in home and community-based services (HCBS) as in nursing homes, totaling about 9,000 participants in its Medicaid Personal Care and HCBS waiver programs, compared to about 14,000 nursing home residents.

Arkansas also is one of three states participating in a major Medicaid consumer-direction initiative known as "Cash-and-Counseling," sponsored by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Under this demonstration project, more than 2,000 Medicaid beneficiaries are able to select their own personal care worker and receive cash to pay the worker or use a fiscal intermediary to handle payroll functions. The state currently is seeking to expand the program.

Fiscal Analysis

Institutional caseloads in Arkansas have remained fairly steady since the year 2000 at about 14,000 nursing home residents and about 1,700 ICF/MR residents. During the same period, caseloads have slightly declined for the Medicaid Personal Care program, but have significantly increased for the HCBS waiver programs for the elderly and the MR/DD populations.

The state has made a major commitment to HCBS services through the Personal Care program, which was the fifth highest in the country in 2000 in per capita spending for these services. In 2002, Arkansas spending on HCBS is allocated largely to the HCBS waiver programs ($100.7 million), the Personal Care program ($62 million), and other community-based care ($62 million). Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

Spending for nursing home care was expected to rise from $324 million in fiscal year (FY) 2001 to $426 million in FY 2002, a 30 percent increase. This follows spending increases for nursing homes of only about 4 percent from 1999 to 2000 and about 6 percent from 2000 to 2001.

Spending for home and community-based care waiver services increased by about $20 million (from $71.9 million to $91.4 million) from FY 2000 to FY 2001, and then by another $9 million from FY 2001 to FY 2002.

The state expected to spend about $50 million in 2002 on the MR/DD waiver program, and more than $35 million for its Aged waiver program.

Legislative Activity

The two main long-term care issues debated by the legislature in 2001 concerned regulation of assisted living facilities and minimum staffing standards for nursing homes.

Arkansas was one of two states (North Dakota was the other) that established a regulatory framework for assisted living in 2001 by establishing licensure and oversight standards for these facilities. The legislature also required nursing homes to maintain sufficient staff to maintain minimum staff-to-patient ratios, a goal to be phased in during several years. Nursing homes that do not comply with the new ratios will face stiff monetary penalties and may be ordered to stop admitting new residents.

In other actions, the legislature:

Approved the establishment of a voluntary liability insurance plan for long-term care providers that have difficulty obtaining liability insurance. Coverage will be provided on an occurrence basis, limited to $1 million per occurrence with a $3 million aggregate amount per year.

Directed the state to apply for a Medicaid waiver to cover assisted living services for at least 1,000 Medicaid beneficiaries.

Required a study to determine the reasonableness of nursing home rules and regulations; levied a quality assurance fee on nursing facilities, and increased civil penalties for abuse, neglect or exploitation of long-term care facility residents.

Long-Term Care Planning

In May 2000, Governor Mike Huckabee (R) directed the Arkansas Department of Human Services (DHS) to develop a working group to conduct a comprehensive review of the state's existing services for people with disabilities and to identify ways to increase community-based services for this population. On February 15, 2001, the working group delivered a series of recommendations to the governor. The recommendations call upon the state to:

Identify legislation and funding priorities to improve access to home and community-based services.

Fund existing developmentally disability waiver programs.

Give people with disabilities the option of receiving home and community-based services if desired, and develop an assessment program to gauge a person's ability to receive services in the community.

Organize transition teams to assist people who are making the transition from institutional to community-based care.

The Governor's Integrated Services Task Force was created to replace the working group and to guide implementation of the recommendations. The Department of Human Services hoped that a plan would be completed by spring 2002 so that its recommendations could be reflected in the budget for the 2003 legislative session.

Future Outlook

Arkansas has not been free from the budget difficulties faced by most states in 2001 and 2002. In the fall of 2001, Governor Huckabee announced that $142 million in across-the-board cuts were necessary due to revenue shortfalls. Nevertheless, the state's commitment to expansion of home and community-based care appears to remain strong, as evidenced by increased spending on the state's Personal Care program and HCBS waiver programs for the elderly and for the MR/DD population.

The state also has received almost $2 million from the Systems Change Grant Program in 2001. One grant for $900,000 will be used to develop an advisory council to the Division of Developmental Disabilities. The council, to be composed of consumers and families, will provide guidance to the division and train and support self-advocacy networks. Another activity under this grant calls for developing an advertising campaign and materials for recruiting direct support professionals to provide community-based services.

With the other $1 million grant, Arkansas will address the need for a single point of contact for home and community-based care, timely and flexible eligibility determination, and ease of access to services. Activities under this grant include a feasibility study to integrate Medicare and Medicaid services for senior citizens and training for Department of Human Services staff about available alternatives to institutionalization.

To encourage recruitment and retention of paraprofessional workers, the state proposes to explore the options for providing insurance to these workers and to develop a state worker registry. The state also will create a public awareness campaign to elevate the status of frontline workers with the general public.

The state received additional grants of $598,444 and $360,000 from the Systems Change Grant Program in 2002.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

California's governor and Legislature have directed significant attention to nursing home reform and expansion of community-based long-term care during the last two years. Governor Gray Davis (D) proposed an "Aging with Dignity Initiative" soon after he took office to improve services to the elderly. The Initiative included recommendations to improve nursing home care through increased nursing home inspections, focused nursing home quality reviews, and a rapid response system for nursing home complaints. Other parts of the initiative called for higher pay for long-term care workers, caregiver recruitment and training, and a $500 tax credit for family caregivers.

The Legislature subsequently enacted several components of the initiative, with the most contentious issue being minimum nursing home staffing levels (see below). A study by the Department of Health Services (DHS), released in June 2001, did not recommend higher minimum staffing levels, citing lack of "adequate empirical data" to make the case that higher minimums would improve quality of care. (Effective January 2000, the minimum nursing staff requirement had increased to 3.2 hours of direct care per patient day.)

The report proposed, however, that the state address the development and stability of the long-term care workforce and explore facility-specific rate setting instead of the current flat-rate reimbursement system for nursing homes. The state also continued to increase spending for home and community-based care services, with the major focus on the In-Home Supportive Services Program, which serves about 250,000 people annually and is funded through both Medicaid and state general revenues. In March 2001, the governor announced more than $14 million in funding to expand long-term care options for senior citizens. The funding will provide grants for nursing home quality improvement and the development of innovative home and community-based care alternatives.

Fiscal Analysis

California is third among the states in Medicaid spending for nursing home care, with total expenditures expected to reach close to $3 billion in FY 2002. However, the FY 2002 total would be only a 4.3 percent increase over FY 2001 spending.

The next largest long-term care expenditure is for Personal Care, which is budgeted at $1.7 billion for FY 2002. Personal care services are provided through the In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) Program (Medicaid-funded) and the Residual IHSS Program, which serves people who are not eligible for Medicaid (state-only funded). State-only funds are about 20 percent of total funding under this category. Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

The state was spending close to $700 million for Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) waiver programs in FY 2001, about 14 percent higher than the previous year (compared to a 19 percent increase for Personal Care during that period).

More than 80 percent of total HCBS waiver spending went to the waiver program for the mentally retarded/developmentally disabled program (almost $600 million in FY 2001). The program served about 32,000 people in fiscal 2001.

Legislative Activity

The Legislature heatedly debated the nursing home staffing issue in 2001 and in October passed legislation (AB 1075) requiring DHS to develop regulations effective August 1, 2003, that establish staff-to-patient ratios for nursing homes by converting the existing 3.2 hours per patient day into such ratios. The legislation also requires DHS to implement a facility-specific rate-setting system by August 1, 2004. (AB 1075 makes implementation of the staffing ratios contingent upon appropriation in the Budget Act or other statute.)

Other long-term care legislation enacted in 2001 includes:

Revised standards for adult day centers to improve the qualifications of owners/operators.

Establishment of a state centralized consumer response unit to respond to consumer inquiries and complaints about long-term care facilities.

Creation of a $10 million award program for nursing homes that serve a high proportion of Medi-Cal residents. The money must be passed on to exemplary direct care employees in the form of bonuses.

Development of a plan by the Health and Human Services Agency to improve access to mental health services for individuals with Alzheimer's disease or treatable mental health conditions.

Long-Term Care Planning

The California Health and Human Services Agency Long-Term Care Council has been assigned the central role in Olmstead planning and implementation. The council has six work groups that handle such issues as coordination among home and community-based supportive services, creating an inventory of long-term care data, increasing the quality and availability of consumer long-term care information, and other long-term care issues. One work group is focusing on developing and conducting a nursing home assessment and transition pilot project. The council's Web site reports that the state " ... plans to take steps to modify the existing assessment process (for nursing homes) to assist individuals who wish to transition into more independent living settings."

The Council held four public forums in different part of the state in 2000 and 2001 to gain input from consumers, family caregivers and others. Recommendations from these forums provided input to the development of grant proposals to the federal government for the Systems Change Grant Program.

Future Outlook

State officials and legislators report that the issues of increasing nursing home staff ratios and providing incentives for recruiting and training nursing home workers will continue to be high priorities, as will initiatives to advance home and community-based care as related to the Supreme Court Olmstead decision.

The state received three grants totaling more than $2 million from the Systems Change Grant Program in 2002. Two grants totaling $937,500 will be to assist individuals who wish to leave nursing homes to return to community settings.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

Colorado has been making a major effort since the mid-1990s to expand home and community-based services (HCBS) and slow the growth of nursing home use. From 1995 to 1999, the number of nursing home residents decreased by 1.6 percent and the number of nursing home beds increased by only 1.8 percent during that period.

In 1994, the state was allocating 69 percent of its Medicaid long-term care funds to institutional care and 31 percent to HCBS. By 1999, the proportion of Medicaid Long-Term Care funds going to institutions had decreased to 53 percent, and HCBS was receiving 47 percent.1 Three times as many people with disabilities are being provided services in their homes and in the community than are receiving nursing home services (about 30,000 people in HCBS programs to about 10,000 people in nursing homes).

Fiscal Analysis

Colorado spent $305 million for nursing facility care in FY 1996; that figure had risen to $359.6 million in FY 2001. From FY 1996 to FY 2001, total spending for all the state's Medicaid waiver programs has almost doubled from $166 million to $319.6 million.2 Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

In 2001, Colorado was operating 10 Medicaid waiver programs, including an Aged/Disabled program and other programs covering peoples with AIDS, brain injury and mental illness and larger programs for the aged and disabled and people with mental retardation or developmental disabilities (MR/DD). Three programs were specifically directed at children with various disabilities and two provided services for people with developmental disabilities, including a Supported Living Services Program.

The number of people in the state's Aged/Disabled waiver program rose from about 5,000 peoples in 1995 to more than 21,000 in 2001.

In terms of expenditures, the largest waiver program in 2001 was the MR/DD program at $184 million; the next largest was the Aged/Disabled program at $74.8 million.

Legislative Activity

Legislation enacted in June 2001 creates new quality improvement incentives for nursing homes. One measure allows nursing homes to apply for funding to create "resident-centered" activity programs that focus on enhanced communication and better understanding of resident needs. A second quality improvement initiative requires nursing homes that receive public funding to survey residents to determine their level of satisfaction with the care they receive. Facilities will be required to make their results available to new residents and the public. The law also requires state officials to develop a program to reward providers who achieve the highest quality-of-care standards within their facilities.

In 2001, lawmakers also directed the legislative Colorado Health Care Task Force to study innovative housing options, home and community-based services, and assisted living services for older people who can no longer live independently in their communities. The task force is to identify possible funding sources for these levels of care, and make recommendations to the legislature in 2002.

Long-Term Care Planning

Colorado state officials have been developing a plan to address the problem of individuals receiving care in institutions who are assessed as appropriate for community-based care but are on waiting lists, and individuals with developmental disabilities who are on Medicaid waiting lists. The Department of Human Services has been overseeing the development of the plan in regard to developmental disabilities and mental illness, while the Department of Health Care Policy and Finance has responsibility for the areas of physical disabilities and aging.

The various components have been melded into one plan, which was available for public comment in April 2002.

Future Outlook

Colorado received a $800,000 Nursing Facility Transitions Grant from the federal Systems Change Grant Program, which the state expects to use help 130 nursing home residents make the transition to the community. The Colorado Transitions Project will create a State Transitions Resource Team to oversee the project and establish 10 support networks through independent living centers to coordinate services, referrals and follow-up. The state will provide choice information to more than 1,200 individuals in nursing facilities to reach the goal of 130 transitions.

Notes

American Association for Retired Persons, Across the States 2000. (Washington, D.C.: AARP, 2000). Expenditure and caseload data from Burwell, using HCFA Form 64 and Harrington using HCFA Form 372.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

Although Connecticut is spending more than a $1 billion on nursing homes, the growth in this component of the state's long-term care system has been relatively flat during the past few years, as has the number of residents in nursing homes. A moratorium on nursing home beds has been extended until June 30, 2007.

A major state priority has been nursing home reform, with the legislature focused on nursing home staffing. At the same time, the state has devoted considerable resources to home and community-based services (HCBS), particularly on spending for a Medicaid waiver program for mentally retarded individuals, on which the state expects to spend about $360 million in FY 2002.

Fiscal Analysis

The state has been controlling the potential growth of nursing home beds through a moratorium on further construction, and the number of nursing home residents has remained steady at about 20,000. Total expenditures for nursing home care reached $1 billion in 2001 and were expected to remain at a similar level in 2002.

State spending for ICF/MR facilities was expected to reach about $185 million in 2002, with these facilities serving about 1,200 people. Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

The Medicaid MR/DD program is expected to serve about 6,000 people in 2002, an increase of about 1,000 people over the 2000 totals. Expenditures were expected to remain fairly static, however, rising only by about $8.6 million from $349.4 million in 2000 to a projected $358 million in 2002.

The state reports a considerable caseload in 2001 of about 25,000 people in residential care facilities, at a state cost of about $95 million. These figures cover assisted living facilities, board and care homes, and congregate living settings.

Legislative Activity

In 2001, the Connecticut General Assembly focused on nursing home staffing for the second straight year. Legislation signed into law in July authorizes the state's commissioner of social services to provide rate relief to chronic and convalescent nursing homes and rest homes with nursing supervision to enhance staffing. The commissioner will give priority in the use of funds to facilities with lower staffing levels.

A legislative committee completed a major study of the Medicaid rate setting system for nursing homes. The report recommends more frequent re-basing of rates and use of a simplified case mix system to ensure that the severity of a nursing home resident's needs is factored into reimbursement.

Long-Term Care Planning

A Community Options Task Force, comprised on individuals with disabilities and advocates, was created to help develop a comprehensive long-term care community integration plan. Officials with the Department of Social Services and the Connecticut Council of People with Disabilities are co-chairs of the task force.

The task force, which released a draft plan (Choices Are for Everyone) in September 2000, has held public hearings and a forum to gain input on the plan and prepared grant applications to secure funding for community initiatives. The task force also is working with the Long-Term Care Planning Committee, established by the Legislature in 1998 and comprised of legislators and eight state agency representatives.

Choices Are for Everyone outlines the following goals:

Developing new options related to community integration approved in the 2000 legislative session, such as assisted living services, increased housing options for people with psychiatric disabilities, and pilot programs for seniors and certain people with severe physical disabilities.

Providing additional services and supports for the future.

Developing a system for monitoring quality and outcomes.

Developing targets for deinstitutionalization.

Future Outlook

State officials and legislators have indicated that nursing homes and assisted living issues remain among their major priorities, particularly increased reimbursement for both types of facilities. High-priority issues include tax credit or deductions for private long-term care insurance and increases in long-term care insurance for state employees. The legislature also is interested in authorizing consumer-directed personal care assistant services for the Home Care Program.

Connecticut received two grants under the Systems Change Grant Program, one for $800,000 to facilitate transitions from nursing facilities to independent living in community settings and another for $1,385,000 in the second round of Real Choices grants. The nursing facility grant will be used to identify 150 nursing facility residents who want to return to independent community living and to help them make the transition. The Connecticut Association of Centers for Independent Living will be responsible for the overall management and administration of grant activities, including the provision of financial support for project staff in the five Centers for Independent Living that will implement the project's activities.

Activities under the grant include: 1) designing and implementing an outreach campaign with materials that inform nursing facility residents and their families about long-term care alternatives and 2) developing and implementing a volunteer peer support network to provide technical assistance to people who are making the transition to the community.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

Delaware appears to be keeping its nursing home population from growing, but waiting lists exist for community-based programs. Delaware is serving about half as many people in community settings as in nursing homes--about 1,800 people receive home and community-based services (HCBS) compared to between 3,300 to 3,400 nursing home residents. State officials expect that the caseload for HCBS will increase to about 2,200 individuals in FY 2002 but that the nursing home population will remain constant.

Fiscal Analysis

Delaware spent about $100 million for nursing home care in FY 2000, an amount the state estimated would increase to $132.4 million in FY 2002. Expenditures for ICF/MR care were expected to increase only slightly during those years, from $33.2 million to $37 million. Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

For the three HCBS waiver programs (Developmentally Disabled, Elderly and Physically Disabled, and AIDS), the state spent $40.6 million in FY 2000. State officials estimated an increase of almost a third for the three programs in FY 2002, to $53.8 million.

In terms of expenditures, the largest HCBS waiver program in Delaware is the program for people with developmental disabilities, on which the state spent $31.6 million in FY 2000 and expected to spend $42.4 million in FY 2002.

Legislative Activity

After implementing staffing standards for nursing homes in 2000, lawmakers amended those requirements during the 2001 session. The amendments eliminate the requirement that nursing homes have a nursing supervisor on duty at all times and permit nursing homes to count toward minimum staffing ratios those individuals who have completed all but the final 37.5 hours of classroom and clinical certification training in facility-sponsored certified nursing assistant training programs.

While the state implements these changes, the Division of Long-Term Care Resident Protection is studying Certified Nursing Assistant training programs in the state. The study is examining the percentage of each training program's graduates who passed the CNA certification test, the number of attempts it took each graduate to become certified, and the total number of hours spent in the overall CNA training program. The division also will make a recommendation on whether the state should count nursing assistants in training toward minimum staffing requirements.

Long-Term Care Planning

In May 2000, Governor Ann Minner (D) issued an executive order expressing the state's commitment to providing community-based services for people with disabilities. The executive order required the Delaware Department of Health and Social Services to submit three separate plans for different population groups: people with developmental disabilities and mental retardation, the elderly and people with physical disabilities, and people with mental illnesses.

The plans were issued in the summer of 2001. Each plan became part of the five-year strategic plan of the agency responsible for its management.

Future Outlook

One of the principal issues that Delaware is facing is waiting lists for home and community-based services. Like other states, Delaware is also faced with a shortage of workers for both community and institutional providers.

Delaware received a $1.2 million grant under the federal Real Choice Systems Change Grant Program, which the state plans to use expand the range of assistive technology options and alternatives for people with one or more disabling conditions.

Led by the Delaware Division of Developmental Disabilities Services, a work group comprising key stakeholders developed a three-year plan to expand access to assistive technology. The state plans to conduct a needs analysis and an awareness campaign and training activities for various target groups and to design a tracking system for assistive technology.

Delaware also received two grants in the second round of the Systems Change Grant Program in 2002, one for $270,000 and another for $566,772, to help people make the transition from nursing facilities to the community.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

The District of Columbia is second only to Mississippi in percent of persons age 65 and older with incomes below 100 percent of poverty, 16.8 percent compared to a national average of 10.1 percent and Mississippi's 17.6 percent ratio.

The District has had high institutional costs in recent years. The city's per capita rate for ICF/MR facilities was the highest in the country in FY 2000 ($122.85) and its per capita rate for nursing homes was the fifth highest that year ($245.34). Because of its high per capita costs for institutional care, the District ranked sixth in the country in per capita long-term care expenditures in FY 2000.

Fiscal Analysis

Ninety-four percent of the District's Medicaid long-term care expenditures went to institutional care in FY 1999, and only 6 percent to home and community-based services, mainly through spending on Medicaid home health services. The city's Medicaid Personal Care Program went from total expenditures of $6 million in FY 1995 to only $1.8 million in FY 2000.

The District applied for and was approved by the federal government in 2000 to operate three Medicaid waiver programs- Aged and Disabled, Mentally Retarded, and AIDS. By FY 2001, expenditures for the waiver programs totaled $1.5 million.

Highlights of the fiscal picture include:

The number of nursing home residents in the District increased by 11.5 percent from FY 1995 to FY 1999 to total about 2,400 persons. However, the number of nursing facility beds per 1,000 of the 65+ population decreased by 4 percent over that period.

The nursing facility occupancy rate was 93.3 percent compared to a national average of 82.7 percent in 1999.

Legislative Activity

There was no significant long-term care legislation in FY 2001.

Long-Term Care Planning

The Medicaid agency within the Department of Health convened a "Real Choice Systems Change Advisory Committee" to oversee the redesign of the District's long-term care system. The advisory committee includes consumers, providers, and various District government agencies.

The Department of Health's 2002 budget included funding for initiatives aimed at improving long-term care service delivery. Specifically, the Department is designing a resource center to help the city create a service delivery model similar to Wisconsin's Family Care program. The intent is for the model to start with frail elderly people and persons with physical disabilities, and then extended to people with developmental disabilities and mental illness. The city is also seeking to expand its 1915(c) waiver for persons 65 and older to adults under age 65 with physical disabilities, and to provide attendant care and assisted living.

The District recently settled a case, Evans vs. Williams, on behalf of individuals with developmental disabilities who were not receiving adequate community supports. The settlement requires detailed actions that the District must take to provide community services, and establishes a set of measurable outcomes to gauge the effectiveness of these services.

Future Outlook

The District received two grants in 2002 from the Systems Change grant program, both of which will be administered by the Department of Health, Medical Assistance Administration. One grant for $725,000 was in the category of Community-Integrated Personal Assistance Services and Supports; the other grant for $1,385,000 was in the Real Choice Systems Change category.

The grants should help the city move forward with its projects to expand home and community-based care.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

Florida is first in the nation in the percentage of total population that is age 65 and older (18.1 percent compared to the national average of 12.7 percent in 1999). Its allocation of Medicaid long-term care funds is heavily slanted toward institutional care (81 percent institutional compared to 19 percent for home and community-based care services in 1999). However, the state has plans under way to help people make the transition from institutions into the community and to increase home and community-based options for people with disabilities.

In January 2001, Governor Jeb Bush (R) partly unveiled his "elder-friendly" initiative, which called for significant increases in funding for nursing homes and nursing home quality of care reform. The state faced a serious situation in regard to liability insurance for long-term care providers when a number of insurance companies threatened to pull their business out of Florida because of mounting lawsuits against nursing homes. The Legislature took action in 2001 to stabilize financial risks for long-term care facilities and initiated several key quality-of-care actions, including establishing higher nursing staffing standards and creating a trust fund to support quality improvement initiatives in nursing homes and assisted living facilities (see below).1 The governor signed the legislation into law in May 2001.

Fiscal Analysis

Florida spent almost $2 billion on institutional care in FY 2001, which consisted of $1.7 billion for nursing facilities and $290.5 million for ICF/MR facilities. This total compared to $384 million for home and community-based services (HCBS) that year.

However, given the high proportion of elderly people in the state, Florida had a lower nursing facility bed ratio per 1,000 people age 65 and older in 1999 than the national average (30.3 beds compared to 52.3 beds for the nation as a whole) and a smaller percentage of the age 65 and older population residing in nursing homes than the national average (2.5 percent compared to 4.3 percent nationally).

The state operated seven Medicaid waiver programs in FY 2001. The total $551 million expenditure for waiver programs was triple the amount spent in FY 1995 ($151.4 million). The largest waiver program in terms of expenditures was the MR/DD program, which accounted for $419 million in FY 2001 and a caseload of about 13,000 people.

Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

The state spent $74.4 million on its Aged/Disabled waiver program in 2001, with a caseload of about 13,800 people.

Although the state's Medicaid Personal Care program was small compared to the HCBS waiver programs, the $17.6 million total expenditure in FY 2001 was almost five times as much as the state spent on the program in FY 1995 when the total was $3.7 million.

Legislative Activity

The Task Force on Availability and Affordability of Long-Term Care, established in 2000, reported recommendations to the Legislature in January 2001. Many of the task force proposals were adopted by the Legislature.

Major legislation in 2001 addressed the liability insurance issue in regard to nursing homes. The measure provided a clearly defined negligence standard, established a claims evaluation process, revised the statute of limitations on when actions could be initiated, and set caps on punitive damages.

In terms of quality of care issues, the Legislature accepted a task force recommendation for higher nursing home staffing standards for direct care workers. The legislation provided for minimum staffing standards of 2.3 hours of direct care per resident, per day beginning January 1, 2002, increasing to 2.6 hours beginning January 1, 2003, and to 2.9 hours beginning January 1, 2004.

Other steps to improve quality included new training requirements for certified nursing assistants, increased penalties for nursing homes with deficiencies, increased reporting requirements for nursing facilities and assisted living facilities, and a study of the use of electronic monitoring devices to monitor quality of care in nursing homes.

Long-Term Care Planning

Florida has developed an Olmstead coalition that includes state agencies, consumers and other key stakeholders. Long-term planning and implementation are moving on several different fronts. On one front, the state settled a class action suit in August 2000 (Wolf Prado Steiman vs. Bush), agreeing to improve services for individuals with developmental disabilities on Medicaid waiting lists. Under the settlement agreement, if a waiver slot and funding are available, eligible people will be provided the waiver services within 90 days of application.

Other actions the state planned to implement in FY 2001 included doubling the number of developmental disability waiver slots from about 13,000 to 26,000, implementing a nursing home transition grant for people with traumatic brain injuries in nursing homes, and amending the Medicaid state plan to include assisted living. The state also planned to make a demonstration program available statewide on assertive community treatment for people with behavioral health needs.

Future Outlook

The state received a $2 million Systems Change Grant, which it expects to use to expand the implementation of a Clearinghouse on Disability Information. The clearinghouse will be a comprehensive single point of contract system that consumers can use to obtain information about long-term care services and links to state and local resources. The state also will create local grassroots long-term care resource networks in three demonstration areas, which will provide technical assistance and local community resources to address barriers and share best practices.

Another initiative the state will pursue involves the disability and aging communities, housing administrators and providers to increase housing choices for people with disabilities. Through this initiative, Florida hopes to establish partnerships and cross-train on the housing needs of people with disabilities, develop an effective tool to assess the need for home modifications and assistive technology, and increase the number of Section 8 vouchers for public housing.

Notes

Expenditure and caseload data from Burwell using HCFA Form 64 and Harrington HCFA Form 372.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

Georgia has the fourth fastest growing population of people age 60 and older and the third fastest growing population of people age 85 and older in the United States. Although the state has been paying for the care of about 28,000 nursing home residents, the caseload for home and community-based care services (HCBS) was expected to reach almost 21,000 people in FY 2002.

Fiscal Analysis

The state expected to spend about $914 million on institutional care in FY 2002, composed of almost $797 million for nursing facility care and $118 million for ICF/MR facilities. The FY 2002 total was $94 million more, or about 11 percent higher than the FY 2000 totals for institutional care ($708 million for nursing facilities and $111.5 million for ICF/MRs).

Although Georgia has been steadily expanding its funding for HCBS since the 1990s, spending for these services still is lagging considerably behind total expenditures for institutional care. The state spent about $160 million for home and community-based waiver services in 2000, for example, and had no Medicaid Personal Care program.1 However, the caseload for all the waiver programs totaled almost 17,000 in FY 2001, compared to a Medicaid caseload in nursing homes of about 28,000. Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

The state spent $60.7 million in FY 1999 for its MR/DD waiver program. 2

The state expanded funding from $64.5 million in FY 2000 to an estimated $76.4 million in 2002 for the Aged/Disabled Medicaid HCBS waiver program, called the Community Care Services Program.

The state's FY 2002 budget included additional funding to expand the caseload of the Community Care Services Program by another 2,000 people. The budget also included an additional $4 million to provide home and community-based services for another 2,000 people who are not eligible for Medicaid coverage.

Legislative Activity

Lawmakers enacted several nursing home measures in 2001. One new law requires civil monetary penalties against a nursing facility to be suspended if state surveyors do not re-survey the facility within 48 hours from the time a facility completes its corrective plan of action. After the 48-hour period, if surveyors find the facility is not in substantial compliance with standards, state officials may impose penalties from the date penalties were suspended.

Another 2001 law prohibits nursing homes from employing individuals with criminal records determined by a criminal background check. Lawmakers also adopted a resolution urging officials in the Georgia Department of Community Health to provide nursing homes with incentives and wage "pass throughs" to increase the number of nursing staff.

Long-Term Care Planning

The Georgia Department of Human Resources is heading a planning effort to improve access to community services for people with disabilities and has been working with the Georgia Department of Community Health and an Olmstead Planning Committee. The planning committee is composed of representatives of a number of state agencies, consumers and family members, advocates, and service providers.

The committee was charged with developing a set of recommended action plans for state implementation to facilitate service delivery in the most integrated setting for people with disabilities. The committee's initial recommendations include establishing a policy that people of all ages with disabilities who can be served in the community not be institutionalized.

Other recommendations include:

Training treatment professionals to assess and determine the supports needed by each individual to live in the most integrated setting possible.

Amending the state's Nurse Practice Act to permit nurses to delegate certain nursing tasks to other trained personnel.

Developing programs to enhance family supports and case management for people with high-end physical and medical needs.

Supporting legislative and regulatory changes that allow for community living options and increasing flexibility in Medicaid home and community-based waiver programs.

Maintaining a trained, and competent long-term care provider network.

Future Outlook

The Georgia Division of Aging Services has been awarded an Innovative Program Grant from the U.S. Administration on Aging. The Georgia project will increase service options for consumers by developing five self-directed care voucher projects in rural areas of the state. The project will evaluate caregiver satisfaction with self-directed care by comparing consumers who receive the vouchers and use them to purchase services or supplies to those who receive services through more traditional methods.

Georgia also has received two federal grants in 2001 totaling more than $1 million for nursing facility transitions under the Systems Change program and another $1,385,000 in the second round of grants in 2002. More than $600,000 of the first-year grants will be used to conduct a comprehensive community resource mapping project and workforce development project in 18 county pilot areas to identify barriers and opportunities for increased community services and direct care workers. The project will include the relocation to the community of 24 individuals who presently are residing in nursing homes.

Notes

Burwell figures from Form 64 reports. Harrington figures from Form 372 reports. More recent figures were not available from the state.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

Hawaii has taken a number of actions in recent years to expand home and community-based services for people with disabilities, particularly for those with mental retardation and developmental disabilities. Hawaii became the first state in the nation to put the concepts of self-determination and person-centered planning into its developmental disabilities law in 1998.

Person-centered planning and self-determination also have been built into the development of a five-year strategic plan for services and supports for people with developmental disabilities and mental retardation that the Department of Health submitted to the Legislature in December 2001. The plan responded both to the Olmstead decision and to a lawsuit (Makin vs. Cayetano) over waiting lists for community services for persons with developmental disabilities. The state has agreed to fund 700 additional community placements for people with DD over three years.

Fiscal Analysis

Hawaii's spending for ICF/MR facilities has gradually decreased from $11.6 million in FY 1996 to about $8 million in FY 2001. Spending for nursing home care has experienced only moderate increases from about $134.8 million in FY 1996 to $148.3 million in FY 2001.1

Expenditures for Medicaid home and community-based waiver services totaled $20 million in FY 1996, rapidly increasing to a total of $51.7 million in FY 2001. Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

Hawaii spent $28.6 on its MR/DD waiver program in FY 2001 and a total of $22.4 million for two Aged/Disabled programs.

In 2001, Hawaii allocated 74 percent of its Medicaid long-term care money to institutional care and 26 percent to HCBS.

Hawaii had a nursing facility occupancy rate of 92.2 percent in 1999, compared to the national average of 82.7 percent.

Legislative Activity

The Legislature renewed its efforts in 2001 to address reforms for the state's long-term care system. Lawmakers began the 2001 session by declaring long-term care as their number one priority; in the end however, they were unable to agree on major reform proposals that would have created a unified, state-sponsored long-term care system. Instead, the Legislature approved several resolutions expressing the need to develop and implement a dedicated revenue source for ensuring a comprehensive long-term care structure.

The 2001 Legislature authorized the licensing of home and community-based case management agencies and the certification of community care foster family homes. Lawmakers also created a case management demonstration project. The project will involve home and community-based case management agencies that will locate, coordinate and monitor comprehensive services for Medicaid recipients and other adults in the community.

Long-Term Care Planning

The Hawaii Legislature passed a concurrent resolution in May 2000 to establish an Olmstead planning task force. In response, the state set up a planning committee chaired by the directors of the departments of Human Services and Health and the executive director of the Center for Independent Living.

The Olmstead planning task force held four meetings and set up four task forces based on different planning areas: 1) assessment, 2) information, 3) finance and 4) infrastructure. The planning committee's top priority was information, which includes developing an awareness of available resources and development of a single point of entry system. The infrastructure task force covers housing, transportation and personnel.

The planning committee has decided to focus on the development of an information portal to expand information dissemination and accessibility to individuals, and on an assessment mechanism to be used as a basis for using the portal. The portal will help people to find and link to available resources.

Future Outlook

Hawaii received a Systems Change Grant for $1,350,000 in the first round of the grants and another $725,000 Personal Assistance Services and Supports grant in the second round. The first grant will be used by the Hawaii Real Choices Partnership, which will involve all key stakeholders in developing a cross-agency Web-based Single Entry Point. The state will establish and support a governing council and workgroups to be chaired by a consumer with at least 51 percent consumer membership.

The goal of the system will be to provide consumers with information about all their available options, including services offered by private and public agencies. The system will include an interactive assessment process to help consumers identify services for which they are eligible; a unified database showing all long-term care services, with open slots listed by geographical location; and a quality assurance component that will identify service gaps by tracking service requests.

Notes

Expenditure and caseload figures from Burwell, using HCFA Form 64 and Harrington, using HCFA Form 372.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

Since FY 2000, Idaho has been steadily increasing the caseloads of the Medicaid Aged and Disabled waiver program and Medicaid Personal Care program. By FY 2002, Idaho had reached the point where the number of people receiving home and community-based services (HCBS) exceeded the number of people in institutional facilities by more than two to one (a total of almost 8,000 people in HCBS compared to slightly less than 4,000 people in institutional facilities).

Fiscal Analysis

The caseload for the Medicaid Aged/Disabled waiver program increased by more than 60 percent from FY 2000 to FY 2002, from 1,380 people to 3,589 people. The caseload for the Medicaid Personal Care program rose by more than 40 percent during the same period, from 2,331 people to 3,295 people.

Expenditures and caseloads for nursing facilities have increased fairly slowly from FY 2000 to FY 2002. Nursing home expenditures climbed by about 10 percent from FY 2000 to FY 2001 ($107.6 million to $119.1 million) and by about 5 percent from FY 2001 to FY 2002 ($119.1 million to $124.3 million). Nursing home caseloads also have shown only small increases, from 3,031 people in FY 2000 to 3,312 people in FY 2002. Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

Expenditures for institutional care totaled $181.5 million in FY 2002, compared to a total of $86.1 million for HCBS ($72.1 million for the two waiver programs and $14.0 million for Personal Care).

The state's Medicaid Personal Care program was expected to serve 3,295 people in FY 2002, almost 1,000 people more than the FY 2000 total of 2,331 people. Expenditures for this program have decreased, however, from $18.8 million FY 2000 to $14.0 million in FY 2002.

Legislative Activity

In 2001, Idaho became the 24th state to create a tax incentive for the purchase of long-term insurance. A new law established a tax deduction that allows purchasers to claim 50 percent of their premiums paid for a long-term care policy for themselves, a dependent or employees.

Long-Term Care Planning

Idaho is developing a comprehensive, long-term care plan through the Community Integration Committee, composed of representatives from the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare, the divisions of Family and Community Services and Medicaid, other agencies, advocacy groups, and consumers, including the Idaho Commission on Aging. The overall number of consumers on the committee will be increased, so that consumers comprise at least 50 percent of committee members.

The committee is assessing the state's current service delivery systems with regard to community integration, with no projected date for plan completion. Initial findings have focused on issues that cross disability groups and cover a wide span of community and personal issues such as housing, transportation, medications and community-based supports. Idaho officials believe that crossover issues such as housing and transportation have the greatest effect on successful community living and independence.

Future Outlook

Idaho received a grant for more than $1.1 million from the federal Real Choice Systems Change Grant Program. The state plans to use the money in two phases. The first phase will involve a needs and resources assessment, culminating in a plan for change; the second phase calls for an effectiveness study to test and refine the plan.

Four objectives for the plan include increasing access in all forms, increasing availability and adequacy of services, increasing or maintaining the value of services across the system, and increasing or maintaining the quality of services across the system.

The final product will be a plan for statewide implementation and a monitoring system for continuous quality improvement.

Choose Another State:

AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT

NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

Overview

In 1994, Illinois was allocating 92 percent of its Medicaid long-term care funds to institutional care and only 8 percent to home and community-based services (HCBS). In 2001, the distribution of Medicaid funds had not changed significantly: 86 percent to institutional care and 14 percent to HCBS. The state had 74.2 nursing facility beds per 1,000 of the age 65 and older population in 1999, compared to a national average of 52.3 beds.

However, the state estimates that it is providing home and community-based services to about 40,000 people through its state-funded Community Care Program ($205.5 million in FY 2002) and through its Medicaid waiver programs.

Fiscal Analysis

Illinois spent about $2.2 billion on institutional care in FY 2001, consisting of $1.5 billion for nursing facilities and about $669 million for ICF/MR facilities. The nursing home population was about 53,000 people in 2000.1

The state spent a total of $348.6 million in FY 2001 for its Medicaid waiver programs. In 1999, the following caseloads were estimated for the largest waiver programs: Aged waiver, about 17,400 people; Physically Disabled waiver, about 12,400 people; and the MR/DD waiver, 7,000 people. Highlights of the fiscal picture include the following:

Expenditures for nursing homes, which totaled $1.2 billion in FY 1995, increased by only about 2 percent to 3 percent in the late 1990s, until there was a 8.4 percent increase from FY 1999 to FY 2000.

Of the state's eight HCBS waiver programs, expenditures were highest for the program for persons with physical disabilities, for which spending totaled $87.9 million in FY 2001. The next highest expenditure total was for the Aged program with $70 million in spending.

Legislative Activity

In two major actions affecting long-term care, Illinois lawmakers established new standards for the state's long-term care insurance industry in 2001 and addressed the issue of reimbursement rates for nursing homes. The law on long-term care insurance expands the definition of such insurance to include a policy or rider that provides benefits based on cognitive impairment or loss of functional capacity and establishes provisions for a " ... qualified long-term care insurance contract or federally tax-qualified long-term care insurance contract." Insurers must deliver contracts or certificates within 30 days of approval and provide written notification of the reasons for denying coverage within 60 days of receiving a policyholder's written request for such information.

Responding to nursing home industry concerns that the current reimbursement system was not adequately paying facilities for their costs, the legislature approved a measure in June 2001 that requires the state to use more updated cost reports to determine reimbursement levels. Effective July 1, 2001, rates were based on 1999 cost reports rather than on rates set in 1994. The law also extended the period during which reimbursement for skilled and intermediate care services may include an inflation factor from July 1, 2001, to July 1, 2002.

Long-Term Care Planning

In the spring of 2000, the legislature directed the Department of Human Services to convene a working group to plan for Olmstead compliance. Six groups produced broad recommendations in the following areas: financing, universal prescreening and community reintegration, housing, service coordination and public policy, community infrastructure, and best practices.

The highest priorities of the Illinois plan are housing, population identification, consumer education, making the transition from institutions to community care, and assessment and person-centered planning.

Future Outlook

Illinois received an $800,000 Real