Cross pattée
Not to be confused with Bolnisi cross

Standard form of the cross pattée

A cross pattée (or "cross patty" or "cross Pate", known also as "cross formée/formy" or croix pattée) is a type of Christian cross, which has arms narrow at the centre, and often flared in a curve or straight line shape, to be broader at the perimeter. The form appears very early in medieval art, for example in a metalwork treasure binding given to Monza Cathedral by Queen Theodelinda (d. 628), and the 8th century lower cover of the Lindau Gospels in the Morgan Library. An early English example from the start of the age of heraldry proper (i.e. about 1200) is found in the arms of Baron Berkeley.

Etymology [ edit ]

The word pattée is a French adjective in the feminine form used in its full context as la croix pattée, meaning literally "footed cross", from the noun patte, meaning foot, generally that of an animal.[1] The cross has 4 splayed feet, each akin to the foot, for example, of a chalice or candelabrum. In German it is called Tatzenkreuz from Tatze, foot, paw. Planché provides a dubious suggestion that the term comes from the Latin verb pateo, to lie open, be spread. He states it to be discernible on the standard of King Stephen (1135–1154).[2]

Variants [ edit ]

Several variants exist as follows:

With the edges of the arms concave throughout; the "Iron Cross", as generally used on Luftstreitkräfte aircraft in 1915

A cross pattée with a sharp point added to the lower limb, as if for use in staking into the ground.

With less curvature, used on Luftstreitkräfte aircraft into April 1918, and the basis for the similar cross by the Bundeswehr of modern Germany

Bolnisi cross, official national symbol of the republic of Georgia, used on flag, coat of arms and various official and unofficial organizations of this country.

With the ends of the arms convex and curved; sometimes called "Alisee" (French croix pattée alésée arrondie )

With triangular arms which come close to filling the square

With triangular arms that do not fill the square (see also variation of the St George's cross)

With straight parallel lines at the centre (considered pattée by Rudolf Koch in Book of Signs)

Use in crowns [ edit ]

Many crowns worn by monarchs have jewelled crosses pattées mounted atop the band. Most crowns possess at least four such crosses, from which the half arches rise. Some crowns are designed so that the half-arches can be detached, allowing the circlet to be worn separately on occasion.

A cross pattée is particularly associated with crowns in Christian countries. It is often heavily jewelled, with diamonds and precious stones. The Koh-i-Noor diamond is set in a cross pattée on the Crown of Queen Elizabeth (Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon). The British Imperial State Crown has a base of four crosses pattée alternating with four fleurs-de-lis. A cross pattée on the Imperial State Crown holds the Black Prince's Ruby. The cross pattée also features in many of the other British Crowns including the St Edward's Crown, used for coronations, and the Imperial Crown of India created for George V as Emperor of India to wear at the Delhi Durbar of 1911.

Use by Crusaders, Prussia and Germany [ edit ]

Knights Templar [ edit ]

Cross of the Knights Templar

The cross pattée is sometimes[by whom?][year needed] associated with another Crusader order, the Knights Templar, though as with the Teutonic Knights, it was not used consistently. The Templars did adopt a red cross on their white robes in 1147,[3] but there was no specific style designated. The cross patty variant does appear in the context of the Knights Templar towards the very end of the order's existence, in the late-13th-century frescoes at San Bevignate, Perugia. Modern Freemasonry adopted Templar symbolism, and some organisations use the red cross patty as representing the Knights Templar.[citation needed].

Teutonic Knights [ edit ]

This cross is often associated with the Crusades. The heraldic cross pattée was sometimes used by the Teutonic Knights, a Crusader order, though their more usual emblem was a plain straight black cross on white,[citation needed].

Iron Cross [ edit ]

Schwarzes Kreuz of the Bundeswehr (since 1956) of the(since 1956)

In 1813, King Frederick William III of Prussia established the Iron Cross as a decoration for military valor. It remained in use as a military decoration, in various forms, by Prussia and later Germany until 1945.

Prussian and German Imperial Landwehr and Landsturm troops used a Cross Pattée cap badge to distinguish them from regular army troops. A stylized version of the Cross Pattée is used by the modern German military (Bundeswehr) as its symbol of nationality, and is found on vehicles, aircraft and publications, with no border of any kind at the ends of each arm, much like the March/April 1918-May 1945 Balkenkreuz used.

Georgia [ edit ]

The Bolnisi cross (Georgian: ბოლნისის ჯვარი bolnisis ǰvari) is a cross symbol, taken from a 5th-century ornament at the Bolnisi Sioni church, which came to be used as one of the oldest national symbol of Georgia. It is used on the flag and coat of arms of the Republic of Georgia as well as by various organizations and administrative divisions.

Montenegro [ edit ]

The Montenegrin cross-flag (Krstaš-barjak) has been used in Montenegro since medieval times to represent the state, and lately its military divisions. The earliest documented use of this flag has been recorded in 1687.[4][better source needed] During the 1990s, it has been used as a symbol of Montenegrin independence movement, most notably by the Liberal Alliance of Montenegro. Nowadays, Montenegro's Royal Capital City Cetinje uses krstaš flag as its flag. It is also used as an unofficial alternate Montenegrin flag, as well as by local trademarks and societies related to Montenegro.

Regions in Ukraine [ edit ]

Volhynia [ edit ]

Eastern Podolia [ edit ]

Poltava (Myrhorod [Cossack] Cross) [ edit ]

Other uses [ edit ]

The cross pattée is also placed before the name of the bishop who issues a Catholic imprimatur, and is occasionally found as a map symbol indicating the location of a Christian site.

It appears in the emblem of:

It is also associated with the Alpha Tau Omega Fraternity.

Derivatives of the cross pattée are popular amongst bikers, surfers, hot rodders and metalheads.

Firefighters, especially in the United States, commonly use a version with triangular arms for patches and medals, though the cross pattée and the cross of St. Florian are both commonly mistaken for the Maltese cross. The cross pattée is used on the Marksmanship Badge in the United States Army, and United States Marine Corps.

He-Man has a Cross pattée on his chest.

Encoding [ edit ]

In Unicode, a Cross pattée character is encoded under the name "Maltese Cross" in the Dingbats range at code point U+2720 ( ✠ ).

The character "X" is rendered as a cross pattée in the Microsoft Wingdings font.

See also [ edit ]