Definition of tag in English by Oxford Dictionaries
1A label attached to someone or something for the purpose of identification or to give other information.

‘he gave his pet a collar with a metal name tag’

‘he took off his identity tag and inserted it into a machine’

1.1 An electronic device that can be attached to someone or something for monitoring purposes, e.g. to track offenders under house arrest or to deter shoplifters. Example sentences ‘You never know, maybe our house arrest electronic tags will have sequential serial numbers!’

‘But instead of custody the two will be confined to their homes in the evenings and at night, their compliance monitored using electronic tags.’

‘Prisoners are now released two months early and spend that period under a 12 hours a day home detention curfew order, monitored by an electronic tag.’

‘The vehicle then must drive in a restricted toll-booth lane that ‘reads’ the tag.’

‘Privacy activists warn that police will use the tags to track suspects, and that criminals will obtain tag-readers to locate valuables.’

‘The most worthy community penalty is the curfew order, monitored by an electronic tag attached to the defendant's ankle, which requires him to be at home for up to twelve hours a day.’

‘The little tags can transmit an electronic product code to a wireless receiver, speeding up scanning, and making the inventory process almost automatic.’

‘Cohen said that one of their customers is a hospital that has attached Wi-Fi tags to wheelchairs so it can track them.’

‘OK, so what we're going to do is we're going to give him a transponder tag, which is essentially the same as the microchips that vets will put in a dog.’

‘Testers also expressed worries that offenders appeared to be able to ‘shield’ their tags from detection devices, allowing them to go to places where they had been banned.’

‘One of the most important recent technological developments in radio tagging has been increased use of satellite tracking and GPS tags.’

‘Each tag has 128 bytes of memory that can be accessed one billion times, giving it a continuous work life of about ten years.’

‘All suppliers will be required to put radio tags containing electronic product codes on pallets and cases by the end of 2006.’

‘The tags consist of an electronic circuit, antenna and memory chip.’

‘Approaching the toll bridges, electronic sensors read the tags, debit the customer's account with the toll fee and automatically lift the barriers.’

‘There is also the opportunity for including a universal tag in new cars.’

‘A security tag is a small electronic device that triggers an alarm if the product is smuggled outside the showroom.’

‘One system had a permanent electronic identification neck tag on each cow, which increased the total system cost.’

‘The birds have been bred in captivity and will be fitted with radio tags to monitor their survival.’

‘The system is believed to feature electronic ankle tags with wireless connections to special mobile devices that must be carried by the offender at all times.’

1.2 A nickname or description popularly given to someone or something. ‘he lived up to his tag as the team's saviour’ More example sentences ‘So it is little wonder that he chose Bonobo as his DJ tag, especially given the nature of the music he produces.’

‘In 2002, the pair made a documentary entitled Ballet Boyz, and they haven't been able to shake off the tag since.’

‘Everyone spoken to for this story agrees - the politically correct tag has stuck and is damaging.’

‘Wild Child was a phrase created to describe her beloved twin, but Callie's lips curved slightly as she realised that Stacie was right, bookworm would be a better tag.’

‘At the very least, he's a far richer playwright than the dour tag would imply.’

‘He's never been too comfortable with the superstar tag, he's never been too keen to bare his soul in public and he has never done anything unless it was on his own terms.’

‘Make the appointment on the basis that every pound spent on sport is a contribution to the health of the nation and part of the effort to lose our tag as the sick man of Europe.’ Synonyms designation, denomination, label, description, characterization, identification, identity View synonyms

1.3 informal A nickname or other identifying mark written as the signature of a graffiti artist. ‘scrawled felt-tip tags on city walls’ More example sentences ‘I often see other small stores with tags written across their windows, not even well done.’

‘When officers see a fresh graffiti tag on a street wall, they send an image in real time by phone to the crime management desk.’

‘Troubled Temple Hill is scarred by youth crime, most notably with graffiti tags all over walls and homes.’

‘Hundreds of new graffiti tags are appearing all over Haydon Wick and Greenmeadow.’

‘Gang tags and general graffiti had been scrawled everywhere a vandal with a spray can could reach.’

‘The tags, writing and art style are all collected so in the event of a sprayer being caught, officers may be able to use a portfolio of evidence of other offences.’

‘Leigh has become the biggest problem area and clean-up teams have been photographing graffiti and tags so evidence will be available if the culprits end up in court.’

‘Anyone who can identify vandals responsible for these tags can call the council's 24-hour graffiti hotline.’

‘York Police have created a database of distinctive graffiti tags which they hope will help them link offences and target offenders.’

‘Young vandals have scrawled their tags along Malden Road for years but the problem has got worse in recent weeks, particularly since the start of the school holidays.’

‘The white cement walls are spray-painted with images of red and blue bicycles, like miniature graffiti tags.’

‘The tags have been seen throughout Morden and elsewhere in Merton but the council's graffiti team say tags may also appear in schoolbooks, on bags or on other personal possessions.’

‘His graffiti tag is a common sight around Bexley.’

‘Martin looked around him at the stained sleeping bags covering patches of worse stained carpet and the walls scrawled with tags, taunts and empty boasts.’

‘Now she doesn't even bother washing the tags from her property as the 48-year-old is resigned to the fact that the graffiti vandals will return.’

‘The police believe that one group of people is responsible for the graffiti across West Swindon as the same graffiti tags keep appearing.’

1.4 Computing An instruction appended to a piece of text in a markup language in order to specify how it is displayed or interpreted. Example sentences ‘As anyone with a collection of songs on their computer knows, the information contained in the information tags isn't always perfect.’

‘While you're rewriting your title and description tags, don't forget the keywords meta tag.’

‘The XML tags describe the content, unlike HTML, which presents and formats information.’

‘In XML, the tags describe the structure and the meaning of the data.’

‘HTML was invented with the specific purpose of providing a universal set of tags for displaying of information.’

1.5 A word, phrase, or name used to identify digital content such as blog and social media posts as belonging to a particular category or concerning a particular person or topic. ‘you can easily add tags to photos en masse’