Executive Order 11000
(a) Civilian manpower mobilization. Develop plans and issue guidance designed to utilize to the maximum extent civilian manpower resources, such plans and guidance to be developed with the active participation and assistance of the States and local political subdivisions thereof, and of other organizations and agencies concerned with the mobilization of the people of the United States. Such plans shall include, but not necessarily be limited to:

(1) Manpower management. Recruitment, selection and referral, training, employment stabilization (including appeals procedures), proper utilization, and determination of the skill categories critical to meeting the labor requirements of defense and essential civilian activities. (2) Priorities. Procedures for translating survival and production urgencies into manpower priorities to be used as guides for allocating available workers. (3) National guidance. Technical guidance to States for the utilization of the nationwide system of public employment offices and other appropriate agencies for screening, recruiting, and referring workers, and for other appropriate activities to meet mobilization and civil defense needs in each community. (4) Improving mobilization base. Programs for more effective utilization of limited manpower resources, and in cooperation with other appropriate agencies, programs for recruitment, training, allocation, and utilization of persons possessing specialized competence or aptitude in acquiring such competence.

(b) Wage and salary stabilization. Develop plans and procedures for wage and salary stabilization and for the national and field organization necessary for the administration of such a program in an emergency, including investigation, compliance and appeals procedures; statistical studies of wages, salaries and prices for policy decisions and to assist operating stabilization agencies to carry out their functions.

(c) Worker incentives and protection. Develop plans and procedures for wage and salary compensation and death and disability compensation for authorized civil defense workers and, as appropriate, measures for unemployment payments, re-employment rights, and occupational safety, and other protection and incentives for the civilian labor force during an emergency.

(d) Resources. Periodically assess manpower resources in total, by specific skills categories and occupations, and by geographical locations, in order to estimate availability under an emergency situation, analyze resource estimates in relation to estimated requirements in order to identify problem areas, and develop appropriate recommendations and programs. Provide data and assistance before and after attack for national resource evaluation purposes of the Office of Emergency Planning.

(e) Requirements. Develop, in coordination with manpower-using agencies, plans, procedures and standards for presenting claims for civilian manpower; periodically obtain and analyze or make estimates of requirements for manpower, in total and by specific skill categories and occupations currently and for any emergency, taking into account the estimates of needs for military and civilian purposes; and advise other agencies on the manpower implications of alternative program decisions. Such evaluation shall take into consideration the geographical distribution of requirements under emergency conditions.

(f) Claimancy. Prepare plans to claim materials, equipment, supplies and service needed in support of assigned responsibilities and other essential functions of the Department from appropriate agencies, and work with such agencies in developing programs to insure the availability of such resources in an emergency.

(g) Skill development and training. Initiate current action programs to overcome or offset present or anticipated manpower deficiencies including those identified as a result of resources and requirements studies.

(h) Labor-management relations. Develop, after consultation with the Department of Commerce, the Department of Defense, the National Labor Relations Board, the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, the National Mediation Board, and other appropriate agencies and groups including representatives of labor and management, plans and procedures including organization plans for the maintenance of effective labor-management relations during a national emergency.

(i) Damage assessment. Maintain a capability to assess the effects of attack upon manpower resources, departmental installations, and State Employment Security agencies, both at national and field levels, and provide data to the Department of Defense.