Safari Club International
For the CIA-led conspiracy, see Safari Club

Safari Club International (SCI) is an international organization composed of hunters dedicated to protecting the freedom to hunt and conserving wildlife worldwide. SCI has more than 50,000 members and 180 local chapters. SCI members agree to abide by the organization's code of ethics which includes making a positive contribution to wildlife and ecosystems, complying with game laws and assisting game and fish officers. SCI and its sister organization, the SCI Foundation, have put more than $70 Million on the ground for conservation since 2000. In the U.S. and abroad, hunters are part of a system that keeps the rivers, forests and fields intact and maintains the wildlife. Hunting is a highly regulated activity. Government agencies set hunting quotas based on scientific standards that insure that the wildlife will thrive. The fees paid by hunters in many forms support conservation work by governments around the world. In many cases, these funds are critical to assure conservation.

In addition to its headquarters office on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C., SCI has business, membership and support offices in Tucson, Arizona. Its sister organization, the SCI Foundation, operates a wildlife museum in the Tucson facility. It also owns the Granite Ranch in the Bridger-Teton National Forest, south of Jackson Hole, Wyoming, where it hosts the American Wilderness Leadership School.

Leadership [ edit ]

Safari Club International was founded by C.J. McElroy and fellow hunters in 1972. Early chapters were founded in Los Angeles, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Houston, Arizona and Mississippi. McElroy was an accomplished hunter

SCI's organizational structure consists of the Executive Committee, which includes the Officers, and a Board of Directors composed of SCI Chapter Presidents, Regional Representatives, Directors at Large and International Directors. All are elected to their posts from within the membership. The organization's headquarters is in Washington, D.C.. Safari Club International holds an annual convention, which is the Ultimate Hunters' Market.

Hunting and conservation [ edit ]

SCI's website explains that people hunt for many reasons. For most hunters, it is a tradition handed down through their families. For all hunters, it is an unparalleled way of participating in the real nature of life in the world, being self-sufficient and providing natural food for their families, friends and communities. All hunters are keenly aware of the natural world and the requirements of land and water that make it vibrant and that support a wide variety of wildlife. The hunter-members of SCI support legal and ethical hunting based on the concepts of science based sustainable use.

Hunters continue to support the revolution in wildlife management in the USA started by Theodore Roosevelt and his fellow sportsmen that has brought species such as white-tailed deer, wild turkeys and elk back from the brink of extinction to plentitude. Hunters willingly pay a tax on sporting goods in the US that provides billions of dollars of support to wildlife management and conservation. On a global scale, hunters support the concepts of sustainable use and community-based natural resource management that conserve iconic species such as the lion, elephants, rhinoceros, leopards and cheetahs.

SCI's sister organization, the Safari Club International Foundation, is a non-profit organization "dedicated to wildlife conservation, outdoor education, and humanitarian services."[1] Although this foundation was set up by SCI and shares some board members with SCI, it is a separate legal entity.

Humanitarian services [ edit ]

The SCI Foundation operates a number of programs that demonstrate the constructive role of hunters in society. Sportsmen Against Hunger began in 1989,[2] and through the network of SCI chapters, provides food banks with meat from harvested animals. In 2006, over 250,000 pounds of wild game were donated to charitable relief organizations.[2] The Sensory Safari program allows sight-impaired individuals to get a “visual” perspective of what animals are like by feeling mounts, skins, skulls, horns, and antlers.[3] The National Federation of the Blind (NFB) asked SCIF to host a Sensory Safari at its annual convention. In 1997, the NFB signed a memorandum of understanding with SCI to host Sensory Safaris at all future NFB national and state conventions.[4] Hunters who participate in the SafariCare program take bags filled by SCI chapters with medical, school and relief supplies to clinics and schools in remote regions of the developing world.[5] The SafariWish program, part of the SafariCare program, is designed to give children with life-threatening illnesses a chance to go hunting.[5] The Disabled Hunter program, through SCI chapters, provides sponsorship for hunting trips for disabled sportsmen.[6]

Annual hunters convention [ edit ]

Taxidermy display from SCI 2011 Hunter's convention

Since 1973, SCI has hosted an Annual hunters' convention. The Convention is usually held in a Western city in early February. It is a members-only event that features nearly 1,000 exhibitors who display and offer everything imaginable in the world of hunting. The Annual Convention is also a meeting place for government agencies and organizations from the U.S. and around the world with an interest in hunting and wildlife conservation.

Publications [ edit ]

The organization publishes a bi-monthly magazine titled Safari that features hunting stories, issues affecting the hunting sportsman, reviews of books and equipment, as well as conservation reports. Safari has a special awards issue, which honors trophy hunters each year.

The news publication of the organization is Safari Times.

Awards [ edit ]

The Safari Club International Record Book is the largest such record keeping system in the world. Trophies are measured and listed according to size (horns, antlers, tusks, and/or body size) where taken (free range or estate), how taken (bow and arrow, rifle, muzzleloader) and whether typical or non-typical for the species. Medals and awards are presented dependent on ranking within species. This book ranks every species of game animal using the SCI official scoring method. The Record Book allows hunters to gain recognition for their hunting skills. It is also used by scientific institutions and governments to provide an index of the health of wildlife populations.

Political lobbying [ edit ]

SCI maintains an active advocacy program for hunting and its benefits for wildlife conservation. SCI is active at all levels: federal, state and international.