Sean Penn: The Legal and Ethical Repercussions He Faces After El Chapo Interview
Long before he sought out kingpin Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman, Sean Penn caught flak for his encounters with prominent figures overseas. When he trekked to Baghdad in 2002 to meet with senior Iraqi officials in the run-up to the U.S. invasion of Iraq, one Wall Street Journal wag wrote, he “evokes something more fatuous and vain even than Chamberlain’s return from Munich.”

This time around, Penn faces more than mere criticism for his sojourn. By visiting with a man who was wanted in both the United States and Mexico, the actor has stirred up significant ethical — and legal — questions.

Mexican authorities want to know the details about how Penn came to meet El Chapo, who was captured Jan. 8 in a deadly gun battle with security forces in the city of Los Mochis, in Sinaloa; five other suspects were killed. La Jornada, a daily newspaper in Mexico City, reported that the country’s attorney general had launched a preliminary inquiry as to whether Penn and the actress who led him to Guzman, Kate del Castillo, may have violated the law of encubrimiento — or concealment — which pertains to meeting with a known fugitive without notifying authorities.

Legal experts doubt such an investigation will lead anywhere, but according to Mexican media accounts, authorities may issue a citation to del Castillo that seeks an interview with her, and may ask the cooperation of U.S. officials in setting up a meeting with Penn.

Javier Muñoz

Such a dialogue could be weighed against reportorial privilege. Part of the Mexican constitution protects the expression of an idea “unless it offends good morals, infringes the rights of others, incites to crime or disturbs the public order.”

Gary Bostwick, a First Amendment lawyer in Los Angeles, doubted that the U.S. government would do anything that would put Penn under the control of Mexican authorities.

“I find it difficult to imagine that there are any laws he broke in going to talk to a source,” he said. “I thought it was a tour de force on his part and on the magazine’s part as a matter of investigative journalism. What if this happened in the United States? You are not aiding and abetting a criminal to do anything if all you do is go and talk to him. But you have to be very careful that you are not helping them in some fashion.”

Greg Aldisert, an attorney at the L.A. firm of Kinsella, Weitzman, Iser, Kump & Aldisert, said: “Maybe there is a moral issue about interviewing a guy like that, but as far as Sean Penn or Rolling Stone getting into trouble legally, I am not sure. The irony is it may have helped (Mexican authorities) get him. It’s almost funny in that sense.”

Ignacio Pinto-Leon, assistant director of the Center for U.S. and Mexican Law at the University of Houston, doubts Penn or del Castillo would face criminal liability.

“If you are asking if someone commits this crime just by meeting and interviewing, I do not think so,” he said.

He pointed to an interview that Mexican drug lord El Maya Zambada gave to journalist Julio Scherer in 2010 for the news magazine Proceso. “Just as Mr. Scherer was not guilty of a crime, neither Kate and Sean are,” Pinto-Leon said.

Where Penn could run into legal wrangling is if Guzman is extradited to the United States. Mexican officials launched extradition proceedings Jan. 10, in what could be a lengthy process. If Guzman is brought to the U.S., Penn could be subpoenaed to be interviewed or testify as part of a U.S. investigation. The New York Post reported on Monday that prosecutors in New York are seeking a subpoena to search Penn’s cellphone, having uncovered his relationship with El Chapo in October.

“You are not aiding and abetting a criminal to do anything if all you do is go and talk to him. But you have to be very careful that you are not helping them in some fashion.” Gary Bostwick, attorney

There’s a good reason why they would be interested. In the Rolling Stone interview, Guzman was quoted as saying: “I supply more heroin, methamphetamine, cocaine and marijuana than anybody else in the world. I have a fleet of submarines, airplanes, trucks and boats.”

In the article, Penn also wrote that Guzman cited Mexican corporations through which his money has been laundered, and “who take their own cynical slice of the narco pie.”

Should El Chapo face a trial in the United States, Penn could be called to the witness stand, setting up a conflict over reporter’s privilege. No journalistic-shield law exists at the federal level.

Given that Penn already has written a comprehensive story about his visit and his dealings with El Chapo, there may be a question as to just what confidential information could be gleaned from deposing him.

Read More