Nope, It Looks Like Zuckerberg Bought No Yacht [Corrected]
Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg apparently did not buy a 350-foot yacht as initially claimed by this post. The Hürriyet Daily News, which first reported that Zuckerberg purchased the vessel, deleted its story from its website after a spokesperson repeatedly denied to various media outlets that Zuckerberg had bought the boat. There’s no evidence that he made any purchase. We have updated our headline to reflect the correction. The original post follows.

According to a report by Hürriyet Daily News, Mark Zuckerberg quietly bought a 350-foot exploration yacht for $150 million in September. However, a Zuckerberg spokesperson has soundly denied the Facebook CEO bought the ship.



According to the Turkish newspaper, the massive ship “can sail halfway around the world without refueling and is designed to endure the toughest weather conditions”—making it the perfect vessel to wait out an impending apocalypse that only you, the billionaire creator of Facebook, know about.

Zuckerberg reportedly bought the yacht, named “Ulysses,” from New Zealand billionaire Graeme Hart. And Ulysses sure is something. Among other features, the passenger yacht is equipped with a helicopter deck, eight dining locations, five lounges, five bars, a gym, a day spa, a sauna, a massage room, a wine tasting room, and a cinema, all inside a hull reportedly designed to withstand “the arctic circles and the world’s hottest regions.”

And Zuckerberg won’t—if he bought the yacht, and his spokesperson denies he did—have to enjoy these amenities alone: According to the ship’s spec page, Ulysses is commercially approved to carry up to 36 tech overlords who all saw this coming across the high seas after this all falls apart.

Advertisement

Additionally, the yacht has a storage space filled with a shit-ton of water toys, including “Harleys, Superbikes, KTMs and ATVs, jets skis and all the traditional toys,” per the website. All and all, it sounds like the perfect getaway vehicle for when the big flood comes.

Update 6:22pm: Speaking to TechCrunch, a Zuckerberg spokesperson refuted the Hürriyet report, saying, “The reports related to Mark purchasing a yacht are completely inaccurate as he did not purchase a yacht.” Gizmodo has reached out to the yacht’s brokers for more information.

Update 11:09pm: Asked if the Facebook CEO or his family were involved in the yacht or its sale in any manner, a Zuckerberg spokesperson told Gizmodo: “Mark did not buy it, does not own a yacht and was not involved in the sale.” The headline of this story has been updated to reflect the new information.

Advertisement

[TechCrunch]