What's going on with Kawhi Leonard: A strange timeline
The baffling saga of Kawhi Leonard’s 2017-18 season should likely be the biggest story in sports, but for a variety of reasons – he plays in San Antonio and isn’t exactly an outspoken personality – the curious case of Leonard’s complete absence from the Spurs has gone mostly under the radar until now.

With the Spurs now facing the defending champion Golden State Warriors in the playoffs, San Antonio needs Leonard more than ever, yet the popular MVP pick from a season ago isn’t even cheering on his team in the arena.

Where is Kawhi Leonard? Let’s look back at a timeline of his 2017-18 campaign.

May 14th, 2017 – Leonard leaves Spurs-Warriors Game 1 with a season-ending ankle injury

Kawhi Leonard led the Spurs to a 25-point lead over the Warriors in Game 1 of the Western Conference Finals on the road, but he was forced to leave the game in the third quarter after landing on Zaza Pachulia.

June 20th – Leonard has resumed physical activity

Spurs GM R.C. Buford told MySA that Leonard would be in a “good position” to prepare normally for the upcoming season.

September 30th – The Spurs announce Leonard is out with right quadriceps tendinopathy

The Spurs just announced Kawhi Leonard will miss the entire 2017-2018 preseason pic.twitter.com/HGDgeFLSCL — Paul Garcia (@PaulGarciaNBA) September 30, 2017

Gregg Popovich said that the problem first occurred during the 2016-17 season, and that the Spurs wouldn’t put a timetable on his return.

October 18th – Leonard misses the Spurs’ season opener

Via NBA.com:

”He’s still rehabbing and when he’s ready, he’ll be ready,” Popovich told reporters in Houston before San Antonio’s preseason finale.

October 20th – A video of Leonard struggling to go up a set of stairs onto a team plane hits Twitter

October 25th – Popovich says he’s not thinking about Leonard’s return

The Spurs coach told reporters that Leonard could potentially return in November, but only when doctors say that he’s ready

Via MySA/Bleacher Report:

“Anything is possible.But I don’t spend a lot of time thinking about when somebody is going to come back. Because they are going to come back when they are ready, when the docs say they are ready. So when that happens, that happens.”

November 8th – Popovich says Leonard is “not totally confident”

With still no real update on Leonard’s return, Popovich said that his star is “going in the right direction.”

Via MySA/Slam:

“It’s just been more difficult for him to get through the rehab routine. His body hasn’t reacted the same way. Tony is at the point where he has been going five on five and that sort of thing. He’s not totally confident. It will be a few more weeks. But he’s definitely going in the right direction, and so is Kawhi. It’s just been taking a little bit longer.”

November 28th – Tony Parker says Leonard is “close” to a return

After coming back from his own quadriceps injury, Tony Parker said that Leonard had been looking better in rehab, but that the Spurs wouldn’t rush him back.

Via NBA.com:

“He’s close, but it’s still going to be a process. You know the Spurs, they are going to take no risks. It’s going to be … a couple of weeks, three weeks, they are not going to take any risks.”

December 12th – Leonard returns to action

Pop just now: "Kawhi is back." He'll be on a minutes restriction. https://t.co/L7UlTzYZ5s — Michael C. Wright (@mikecwright) December 12, 2017

Leonard scored 13 points in 16 minutes in a loss to the Mavericks.

Via ESPN.com:

“I’m just happy to be out there, just to play the game and enjoy the things I missed — missing shots, losing games, making mistakes, just everything. I missed everything on the court.”

January 5, 2018 – Leonard suffers partial tear in left shoulder

The Spurs had opted to not allow Leonard to play consecutive games over a three-week stretch, while slowly ramping up his minutes to the mid-20s. In his eighth game of the season, Leonard scored 21 points in a win over the Suns, but injured his left shoulder and missed the next three games. The Spurs said the injury wasn’t serious.

January 13th – Leonard plays final game of the season

Leonard helped the Spurs beat the Nuggets with 19 points, 8 rebounds, 4 assists, 4 steals in what would be his last game of the season – though there was no reason to think Leonard wouldn’t play after the game. In his postgame comments, Popovich sounded optimistic about Leonard’s future.

Via ESPN:

“He looks confident. He looks confident in his body and he wasn’t really winded tonight either, which surprised me. He’s coming along well.”

January 17th – The Spurs announce Leonard is out indefinitely

Kawhi Leonard Update: pic.twitter.com/2jb5svTAR2 — San Antonio Spurs (@spurs) January 17, 2018

January 22nd – ESPN reports there is a rift between Leonard and the Spurs

In a story that sparked a thousand Trade Machine deals, Adrian Wojnarowski reported that Leonard had become “disconnected” from the Spurs.

ESPN:

“Months of discord centering on elements of treatment, rehabilitation and timetables for return from a right quadriceps injury have had a chilling impact on San Antonio Spurs star Kawhi Leonard‘s relationship with the franchise and coaching staff, league sources told ESPN…. Multiple sources describe Leonard and his camp as “distant” and “disconnected” from the organization.”

Early/Mid February – Leonard heads to New York for consultation on injury

ESPN reported that Leonard spent time in New York away from the team to seek further consultation on his injury, but planned to return to the team and potentially play again in March.

Via ESPN:

“Leonard decided to step away from playing following a nine-game return to the Spurs that ended on Jan. 13. His return to the lineup continues to be based on his comfort level with managing the injury.”

February 21 – Leonard is reportedly cleared to return, but Popovich says he’d be “surprised” if Leonard played again

This is when the Leonard saga really got weird. According to Adrian Wojnarowski, the Spurs had medically cleared Leonard to return to action, but left the decision to return up to Leonard.

Via ESPN:

“Leonard has been medically cleared to return from the right quad tendinopathy injury, but since shutting down a nine-game return to the San Antonio Spurs that ended Jan. 13, he has elected against returning to the active roster, sources said. If Leonard returns, it will be because he has decided he can manage the discomfort of the injury, according to the sources.”

Popovich, meanwhile, said he’d be “surprised” if Leonard returns, but wouldn’t rule him out for the season.

Here is the Popovich comments on Kawhi. Not ready to say he’s out for the season…just would be surprised. So, there’s that … pic.twitter.com/C22ntHgbOY — Jabari Young (@JabariJYoung) February 21, 2018

March 7th – Leonard tells reporters he should return “soon,” downplays report of friction between his group and the Spurs

Leonard finally spoke about his situation with the media in March.

Asked when he hopes to return, Leonard said, "Soon. I don't have a set date right now. I just have to keep doing what I'm doing. The progression that I am making has been great. I just have to keep doing what I'm doing." #Spurs — Tom Orsborn (@tom_orsborn) March 7, 2018

Asked if his course of treatment has created friction between him and the #Spurs, Kawhi said, "Everything was done as a group. I don't feel like nothing was friction. I talk to Pop everyday. He knows what the progressions were, he knew what I am doing the whole entire time." — Tom Orsborn (@tom_orsborn) March 7, 2018

March 23rd – Tony Parker says his injury was “100 times worse” than Leonard’s

In a not-so-subtle jab at Leonard, Tony Parker compared his own quad injury and said he fully trusted the Spurs’ medical staff.

Tony Parker on his return from the career-threatening quad injury he suffered last May: I’ve been through it. It was a rehab for me for eight months. Same kind of injury (as Kawhi), but mine was a hundred times worse. But the same kind of injury. You just stay positive." — Tom Orsborn (@tom_orsborn) March 23, 2018

Tony also said he never considered getting a second-opinion after he tore his quad: "I could have gone anywhere, but I trust my Spurs doctors. They have been with me my whole career. They know my body better than anybody…I feel like we have the best medical team in the world." — Tom Orsborn (@tom_orsborn) March 23, 2018

Late March – Leonard leaves team, returns to New York for rehabilitation

According to ESPN, Leonard returned to the NBPA facility in New York to continue his rehab on the injury, and still had no timetable for a return.

April 11th – The Spurs finish the regular season 47-35 as the seventh seed in the West

April 15th – Popovich says Leonard’s “group” will determine his status

With Leonard still removed from the Spurs and reportedly in New York rehabbing, Popovich had no answers as to why Leonard wasn’t even watching the games with his team.

Via the San Antonio Express News:

“Questions about whether Leonard would rejoin the team during the season — even as a spectator — continued to hang over the team on Sunday’s off day. “You’ll have to ask Kawhi and his group that question,” coach Gregg Popovich said.”

So what happens next?