The 115th Congress in Review
Speaker of the House Paul Ryan argued that “it’s been one of the most productive sessions of Congress in a generation,” a claim we fact-checked as false . Ryan’s reasoning was that the House had passed over 1000 bills, which is true, but only 443 of those bills meant anything. The rest weren’t enacted.

In this article we summarize the activity of the 115th Congress policy by policy by looking at the 388 bills signed into law to date, plus the 55 expected to be signed into law in the coming days. Be warned: it’s long.

Every Congress is subject to scrutiny on productivity, partisanship, and policy. But in the wake of the highly controversial Trump Administration and a growing sense of national partisanship, perhaps the 115th Congress (January 3, 2017-January 3, 2019) has been more scrutinized than most. Now that it’s almost over let’s take a moment to examine what really happened.

When you look at the actual policy, the 115th Congress was underwhelming. There was bipartisan policy reforming the federal criminal justice system, responding to the opioid crisis, imposing sanctions on Russia, North Korea, and Iran, and legalizing industrial hemp via the 2018 farm bill. Republicans also managed to overcome Democratic opposition and pass their tax reform legislation, which we summarized here. If that would have left the 115th Congress on par with past Congresses, the three government shutdowns dashed that. Congress’ most basic duty to fund the federal government went unmet, leaving funding for a quarter of the government to be the first problem for the 116th Congress

Was the 115th partisan?

The Republican tax reform bill was one of a few legislative victories for the majority party. Despite controlling both chambers of Congress, Republicans were unsuccessful in their high-priority goals of repealing and replacing the Affordable Care Act (despite ending the individual mandate, the Affordable Care Act remains essentially intact), comprehensive immigration reform, and restricting SNAP benefits. In fact, there were only three notable success stories for the Republican majority this Congress: tax reform, the appointment of two controversial Supreme Court Justices, and the repeal of 16 Obama-era regulations (we wrote about 13 of them). There was no significant new law regarding immigration, healthcare, infrastructure, education, or social security. A handful of new laws were passed with more Democrats in support than Republicans, including major federal funding bills as noted below, and many laws contained provisions originally authored by Democrats.

Economy and Labor

Perhaps the most significant legislative achievement of the Republican party this Congress was the tax reform bill H.R. 1, which we summarized here. It was a highly controversial piece of legislation because, among other things, the Congressional Budget Office has estimated it will increase the deficit by over $1.4 trillion. That almost lost it support from enough Republican Senators to kill the bill, but it ultimately passed with a party-line vote. The bill also ended the Affordable Care Act’s individual mandate by zeroing-out the tax penalty.

A cartogram of the House vote on tax reform. Dark red hexagons represent the Republicans who voted yes.

The tax law was not the only controversial bill to influence the economy. Four other economy bills received roll call votes in both chambers, three of which barely passed with the support of the Republican majority. A bill to allow consumer finance companies to protect themselves from class action lawsuits by having their customers sign waivers passed with a tie-breaker vote from the Vice President.

There were also four partisan votes on labor, including legislation removing the responsibility of employers to maintain records of work related injury and illness. Congress also passed a 437-page bill of miscellaneous tariffs and a bill changing copyright law for music.

Opioids and Healthcare

Congress unanimously passed two bills to respond to the opioid crisis. These included regulations for detecting and treating substance abuse in recipients of Medicaid and Medicare, research into non-addictive substitutes for pain treatment, and efforts to intercept illegal synthetic opioids. Both bills passed with bipartisan support.

There were three controversial healthcare bills among the seventeen passed by the 115th Congress. They were: A bill that allowed terminally ill patients to use experimental drugs unapproved by the FDA, a bill that capped funding for the Children’s Health Insurance Program, and a bill that extended existing suspensions of the Affordable Care Act’s medical device excise tax and the tax on high cost employer-sponsored health coverage. The House votes on these bills were controversial and partisan, split with Republican support and Democratic opposition. The Senate votes were decisive and bipartisan. And the 115th Congress ended the Affordable Care Act’s individual mandate as a part of the tax bill mentioned above.

The other twelve healthcare bills reauthorized the Food and Drug Administration, required that patients have access to drug prices, and funded medical research. There were also several new laws regarding children’s health, such as treatment for cancer and hearing loss.

Veterans’ Issues

Congress decisively passed 25 bills relating to veterans’ issues. The only bill to receive some pushback was the 86-page VA MISSION Act, which 70 House Democrats opposed. The House GOP wrote that the bill was intended to strengthen the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) healthcare system through a variety of changes. However, in a letter of opposition National Nurses United argued that the bill “would allow for the VA system to be dismantled and privatized, endangering healthcare for millions of veterans.” It still passed with the majority of House Democrats voting in favor.

The other 24 bills passed were meant to improve the lives of veterans and the efficiency of the VA. They included efforts to improve veteran access to medical treatments, employment opportunities, and educational assistance. They also attempted to streamline the process for veterans to appeal a disability claim and added new protections for VA whistleblowers, among other changes.

Funding the federal government

A significant amount of the legislating Congress does is called “appropriations” and “authorizations”: deciding how to spend federal dollars. These are typically considered the bare minimum of legislating, since when they don’t pass federal government agencies run out of funding and shut down.

In the eleventh hour, the 115th Congress failed to agree on a funding bill resulting in a partial government shutdown. The shutdown was the result of a push by President Trump to secure $5 billion in funding for a southern border wall, which passed in the House but lacked the votes to pass in the Senate.

The Senate vote 79–18 on the 2017 Consolidated Appropriations Act.

The Senate vote 65–32 on the 2018 Consolidated Appropriations Act, the largest funding bill in the 115th.

Over half of the pages of legislation passed by the 115th Congress were appropriations, including specific spending bills such as two National Defense Authorization Acts, which are passed annually, as well as several Consolidated Appropriations Acts, which can contain legislation for a wide variety of spending measures, and short-term stop-gap funding called “continuing resolutions.” Several of these were passed with more Democrats voting for them than Republicans in one or both chambers (FY2017; FY2018; Sept 2017 CR; Sept 2018 CR; disaster relief; flood insurance). Federal spending by the 115th Congress reached an all-time high of $4.1 trillion compared to $3.9 trillion two years earlier.

Women’s Issues

The Senate vote on allowing states to withhold funding for Planned Parenthood. The black square represents the tiebreaker vote cast by Vice President Mike Pence.

The 115th Congress passed four bills relating to women’s issues, promoting women’s involvement in international peacemaking, space exploration, and entrepreneurship. Congress also passed a highly controversial bill allowing states to withhold funding for Planned Parenthood. It was the second of many Senate votes to end with a tiebreaker from Vice President Mike Pence. Republican Senators Lisa Murkowski (R-AK) and Susan Collins (R-ME) voted against the bill to force the tiebreaker vote.

Crime, Justice, and Law Enforcement

At the end of its two years the 115th Congress managed to pass a significant bill on criminal justice reform meant to meet more humane standards in federal prisons and to focus prison efforts on redemption rather than punishment. It includes risk assessments for shortening sentences of prisoners who are unlikely to be repeat offenders, prohibits restraints being used on pregnant prisoners, and reduces enhanced sentencing for prior drug felonies, among other changes. It would impact 181,000 federal inmates of the 2.1 million total in the U.S. The bill was bipartisan: More Republicans voted against the bill than Democrats in both chambers. Congress also passed a separate reform bill specific to juvenile justice.

Cartogram of the House vote on Criminal Justice Reform. Dark hexagons mean yes votes.

There were 31 other bills relating to crime, justice, and law enforcement. Many of these bills were preventative measures for human trafficking, domestic abuse, and sexual assault, such as protections for children and elders, and a bill to protect religious institutions.

There were also bills to research and use new technologies in law enforcement, including technology to speed up DNA analysis and the establishment of a National Computer Forensics Institute for studying cyber crime.

Two bills included assistance for the mental health and wellness of law enforcement officers, one of which was specifically to assist the two Capitol Police officers who were wounded when a gunman opened fire on the Congressional Baseball Game in 2017.

Congress also passed — — and the President signed — — a joint resolution condemning the Charlottesville terrorist attacks and urging the President to use all available resources to address the threats posed by “White supremacists, the Ku-Klux Klan, neo-nazis, and other hate groups.”

Foreign Affairs

The largest of the fourteen foreign affairs bills to pass Congress was a 70-page list of sanctions on Iran, Russia, and North Korea. The law was enacted — — with more Republicans voting against it than Democrats — — in part as a punitive response to Russian meddling in the 2016 election. It became the subject of controversy when President Trump refused to impose any additional sanctions, despite having signed the law.

One bill amended the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act to enhance foreign intelligence collection and the safeguards, accountability, and oversight of foreign intelligence acquisition. It was opposed by small bipartisan groups in both chambers, but passed.

The remaining seventeen bills were apparently uncontroversial. Many included policy in regard to specific countries, such as a bill on North Korean Human Rights. There were also bills on international travel, rejoining the Bureau of International Expositions, and returning lost assets to Holocaust survivors.

Agriculture, Energy, and Environment

House vote 369–47 on 2018 Farm Bill.

Senate vote 87–13 on 2018 Farm Bill.

Every five years Congress passes a comprehensive agriculture and food assistance spending bill known as the Farm Bill. This year the 115th Congress’ $867 billion Farm Bill came with some significant changes, and lack thereof. In a win for Republican Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, the bill legalized industrial hemp and hemp-based CBD. However, the bill did not include restrictions on SNAP benefits. More Republicans voted against it than Democrats in both chambers.

In other agriculture bills, the Global Food Security Act was reauthorized and there were a few changes regarding marine fishing.

The most notable environmental changes were the removal of water protections that blocked coal mining within 100 feet of streams and of protections for Alaskan wildlife that prohibited hunting endangered species of wolves. These passed with only a few supporting Democrats.

Another bill that passed by a partisan vote removed a rule that allowed members of the public, such as Indian Tribes, to have a say during the planning phase of major landscaping projects.

Most of the bills relating to energy, environment, and land jurisdiction were mundane and bipartisan. There was a bill reauthorizing an existing program to promote clean oceans, a bill for weather research, and several bills regarding research and jurisdiction of parks and wildlife refuges. A few called for new research, while others dealt with regulations for certain consumer goods, like ceiling fans.

Emergency Response

The 115th Congress passed eleven bills responding to and preparing for emergency situations such as hurricanes, floods, and fires. Three bills responded to the devastating 2017 hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria. One provided additional funding for disaster relief, and was opposed by 17 Republican Senators. The other two provided education relief and aid for Americans returning from overseas.

In the Senate and House votes on the National Flood Insurance Program, more Democrats voted in favor of the bill than Republicans, despite the Republican majority.

Two other bills made changes to the accountability and transparency of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. There were also bills reauthorizing certain fire safety programs and extending the National Flood Insurance Program, which passed with more Democrats voting for it than Republicans. The latter also received some Republican opposition, this time in both chambers.

Education

The 115th Congress passed two bills reducing federal oversight of state education by removing certain requirements for states to demonstrate student success and teacher preparation. These bills gave states more authority to judge student success and teacher preparation without federal guidance, and were passed in close partisan votes with Republican support and Democratic opposition. Congress also unanimously passed the 61-page Strengthening Career and Technical Education for the 21st Century Act which increased federal aid to state career and technical education.

Indian Affairs

The 115th Congress passed twelve bills related to Indian and tribal affairs. Some of these bills affected all Indian tribes, including legislation on energy development, social security, employment and training, and AMBER alert grant eligibility. Other bills only affected particular tribes or groups of tribes, including legislation recognizing Virginia tribes, expanding land rights for Oregon tribes, and clarifying water rights of the Arizona White Mountain Apache Tribe.

Transportation and Infrastructure

First page of FAA Reauthorization Act of 2018

Almost all legislation relating to transportation passed by the 115th Congress was about aviation. Of the eight transportation bills passed, the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2018 was by far the largest at 462 pages long. It reauthorized federal aviation programs and made various changes to aviation and aircraft regulations, such as the aircraft safety certification process.

The remaining transportation bills included deregulation to allow multiple local and state transportation planners to make separate plans despite being in the same metropolitan area. They also established a safety commission for the DC Metro subway system, and made changes to information security and worker identification laws.

In infrastructure, Congress passed the 129-page America’s Water Infrastructure Act of 2018, which included legislation on water resource development, drinking water systems, and hydroelectric energy. It also called for studies of the impact of water infrastructure projects on the environment. Congress passed ten other infrastructure bills, almost all of which were deadline extensions for the construction of specific hydroelectric dams.

Federal Aid

There were five federal aid bills passed in the 115th Congress, one of which was highly partisan and controversial. It allowed states to drug test recipients of unemployment insurance or SNAP benefits, formerly called food stamps, and then deny those services based on the results. It passed the Senate without a single opposing Republican or supporting Democrat.

The other four bills were uncontroversial. They included assistance for family caregivers and grandparents raising grandchildren, and strengthened protections for Social Security beneficiaries.

Firearms, Internet Privacy, and Space Exploration

There were several topics where Congress only passed one relevant piece of legislation. Most notably there was one bill making it easier for people with mental illness to purchase firearms, one allowing internet service providers to sell customer internet and search history, and one authorizing funding for NASA to go to Mars by 2033 among other things. The former two bills were barely passed in partisan votes, while the latter was unanimous in both chambers.

Cartogram for the House vote on allowing ISPs to sell search histories.

Oversight

Image of S. 3749: Congressional Accountability Act of 1995 Reform Act which addressed sexual harassment in Congress

The most significant government oversight bill passed by the 115th Congress reformed the procedures for protecting the rights of Congressional employees, in particular from sexual harassment. The bill was passed three months after former congressional employees who had experienced harassment in Congress wrote an open letter calling for action.

As for the rest, there were 24 bills passed mostly promoting transparency or prohibiting wasteful spending. They included legislation removing transparency and accountability regulations for federal contractors and subcontractors, making it easier for the Government Accountability Office to obtain federal agency records, prohibiting taxpayer money from being spent on paintings of federal employees or officers, and requiring that federal agency websites be mobile friendly. There were also protections for federal whistleblowers to prevent supervisors from punishing federal employees for calling out bad practices. The final bill signed into law by President Obama was the first law passed by the 115th Congress, the TALENT Act, which we summarized.

Except for the sexual harassment legislation, none of these bills were particularly significant because the 115th Congress was Republican controlled during a Republican Presidency. In this coming Congress, however, it is far more likely that the Democrat-controlled House will take significant oversight action over the executive branch.

Appointments, Monuments, Memorials, and Naming Post Offices

The most notable of five appointments bills passed by Congress was a special exception to allow Secretary of Defense James Mattis to serve, which we summarized. The other four were for positions at the Smithsonian, and one for the Office of Compliance. If you’re wondering about the confirmation of Justices Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh, those don’t quite fall under the category of legislative appointments since the House has no say. Those are nomination votes, and you can find all 80 of them from 2018 here.

There were twelve bills passed by the 115th Congress meant to honor individuals and historical events of national importance. Three bills established commissions to teach about 400 years of African-American history and the work of Frederick Douglass, and a network of sites, programs, and research facilities for important spots related to the Civil Rights movement. Another bill called for a Global War on Terrorism Memorial located in Washington, DC, and another for a $1 coin to celebrate American Innovation.

There were 109 bills passed to name assorted post offices, courthouses, and other federal government locations.

This article was written by GovTrack staff member Benjamin Hammer.

Like our analyses? Want more? Support our work!