Warner C. Greene, MD, PhD
Demonstrated that unsuccessful HIV infection of “bystander” CD4 T cells results in an accumulation of abortive HIV reverse transcripts that elicit innate antiviral and inflammatory responses and cell death in non-permissive cells.

Demonstrated that abortively infected cells activate caspase-1 to produce a fiery cell death known as pyroptosis, causing significant inflammation as they release their entire cytoplasmic contents, including inflammatory cytokines, into the extracellular space.

Identified interferon-gamma–inducible protein 16 (IFI16) as a host DNA sensor required for CD4 T-cell death due to abortive HIV infection.

Showed that semen contains at least two distinct amyloid fibrils that greatly increase HIV infection in vitro.

Established a Jurkat cell model of HIV latency (5A8 cells) that is inducible by T-cell receptor cross-linking and displays drug reactivation profiles resembling that from resting CD4 T cells from aviremic patients. These cells could be conveniently used for high-throughput screening for novel HIV anti-latency compounds.

Demonstrated that Vif subverts the antiviral activity of APOBEC3G by promoting its degradation in the 26S proteasome and by impairing its synthesis.

Demonstrated that ABOBEC3G, in conjunction with RNA granules, functions to regulate endogenous mobile genetic elements (e.g., Alu RNAs), whose mobility contributes to a variety of human diseases including cancers and leukemias.

Discovered that APOBEC3 encodes Rfv3, a gene influencing production of neutralizing antibody responses in retrovirus infection.

Discovered that HIV-1 virions transmitted in trans from dendritic cells to T cells principally involves virions located on the surface of DCs instead of internalized virions.

Demonstrated that laboratory-adapted CCR5-tropic 81A virions fuse rapidly and efficiently to immature MDDCs, whereas NL4-3, the isogenic CXCR4-tropic counterpart of 81A, fuse slowly and inefficiently to both immature and mature MDDCs.

Identified NF-κB as a modulator of inhibitory tone in the brain by regulating expression of GAD65 in inhibitory GABAergic interneurons.

Discovered NF-κB p50/HDAC1 as a transcriptionally repressive complex promoting HIV-1 latency.

Showed that Vpr can disrupt nuclear envelope architecture and integrity.

Cloned first cytokine receptor (alpha chain of IL-2 receptor).

Demonstrated that IκBα undergoes stimulus coupled degradation and that the activation of NF-κB in turn induces de novo IκBα synthesis.

Showed that acetylation/deacetylation of RelA subunit of NF-κB functions as an intranuclear switch controlling both the magnitude and duration of its transcriptional response.

Demonstrated that HIV Nef inhibits ASK-1 dependent death signaling providing a mechanism for protecting infected cells from premature death.

Described deregulated expression of IL-2 receptors on HTLV-I induced adult T cell leukemia lymphocytes.

Described how p50 subunit of NF-κB is generated by a cotranslational action of the proteasome.