Plants Database
By Baja_Costero on May 21, 2019 4:00 PM, concerning plant: Echeveria (Echeveria pulidonis) Popular small glaucous blue-green Echeveria with distinctive bright yellow flowers on an unbranched shepherd's crook. Leaf tips and edges are marked with brownish red highlights. From Puebla and Veracruz. Plants originally from Puebla were distributed as ISI 421 in 1963. Hybrids (named and unnamed) may be difficult to distinguish from the species, especially based on flower color. In this category are "Deranosa" (other parent unknown) and "Blue and Yellow" (with E chihuahuensis "Ruby Blush"), among others. [ | Reply to this comment ]

By DebraZone9 on May 21, 2019 3:58 PM, concerning plant: Porcelain Berry (Ampelopsis brevipedunculata) A variegated version of this plant also exists but I don't see it listed although there are a few photos of one in the photos for this one. Same colorful blue, pink, cream, and purple berries, but with flashy white variegated leaves that have a little more interesting shape. [ | Reply to this comment ]

By Baja_Costero on May 21, 2019 3:50 PM, concerning plant: Echeveria (Echeveria chihuahuensis 'Ruby Blush') Freely offsetting cultivar of Echeveria chihuahuensis from Cusarare Falls in Chihuahua. Named by Myron Kimnach and distributed as ISI 642 in 1970. A different cultivar from the E. chihuahuensis distributed as ISI 492 in 1966 (from Cerocahui, Chihuahua). Not to be confused with the cultivar of E. pulvinata by the same name. [ | Reply to this comment ]

By Baja_Costero on May 21, 2019 3:45 PM, concerning plant: Echeveria 'Blue and Yellow' John Pilbeam hybrid of Echeveria pulidonis and E. chihuahuensis "Ruby Blush" (not the pulvinata cultivar of the same name) with glaucous blue, red-edged leaves and yellow flowers. May be identical to "Blue Fairy". May be easily confused with the pulidonis parent, especially floral features. [ | Reply to this comment ]

By Baja_Costero on May 21, 2019 2:39 PM, concerning plant: Miniature Desert Rose (Trichodiadema densum) Weird cactus-like ice plant from South Africa. Forms a low mat with time. Spines occur in groups at the tips of flattened near-cylindrical succulent leaves (resembling spines at the tips of cactus tubercles) and on flower parts below the petals. Vivid pink-purple flowers open in the sun. [ | Reply to this comment ]

By ILPARW on May 21, 2019 10:53 AM, concerning plant: Narrow-leaved Spicebush (Lindera angustifolia) I've only seen this species from the woodland slopes of China once, and that was several shrubs planted in a big parking lot island in the front parking lot of Longwood Gardens in southeast Pennsylvania. It is a very pretty, neat, clean plant. Shiny, handsome lanceolate leaves that turn a good yellow to red fall color. The leaves are supposed to hang onto the shrub deep into the winter, as sort of a gray-beige color, that I don't think I would like. The shiny black berries are nice looking, but I would worry that some kind of bird might eat them and spread around a new east Asian invasive plant. [ | Reply to this comment ]

By ILPARW on May 21, 2019 10:00 AM, concerning plant: Chinese Neillia (Neillia sinensis) This Chinese Neillia is a rare shrub to be found in the USA that is native to central China. It is a member of the Rose Family (Rosaceae). I've only seen one specimen grown in the backyard of my biggest customer in southeast Pennsylvania, who likes to collect some rare and uncommon plants. It is grown in some arboretums and botanical gardens. It is offered by a few specialty nurseries. It is much like the Common Ninebark (Physocarpos) of eastern North America that is also in the Rose Family, with similar leaves and stems, but very different nodding raceme clusters of small, pink, tubular flowers. It is not strongly floriferous. I've never seen a good fall color here. It is a nice, clean, basically neat, upright shrub that ground suckers some. Its scientific name comes from being named in honour of Patrick Neill, a Scottish naturalist of the late 18th century to the mid-19th century; "sinensis" means "of China." [ | Reply to this comment ]

By farmerdill on May 21, 2019 8:16 AM, concerning plant: Cabbage (Brassica oleracea 'Gallican') Gallican is a second early variety. Very hard heads uniform in time and size. Advertised at 3-5 lbs, mine are running around 4 lbs consistently. Plants are vigorous. [ | Reply to this comment ]