Center of Military History
Medal of Honor Recipients The President, in the name of Congress, has awarded more than 3,400 Medals of Honor to our nation's bravest Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen, Marines, and Coast Guardsmen since the decoration's creation in 1861. For years, the citations highlighting these acts of bravery and heroism resided in dusty archives and only sporadically were printed. In 1973, the U.S. Senate ordered the citations be compiled and printed as a Committee on Veterans' Affairs report. This book was later updated and a reprint published in 1979. The citations provided here are taken from the U.S. Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs Report, Medal of Honor Recipients: 1863-1978 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1979).

For awards made after 1978, the citations are taken either from the CRS Report for Congress: Medal of Honor Recipients: 1979-2008 dated 4 June 2008, or in some cases, from the citations officially released and published at the time of award by the White House; U.S. Army Human Resources Command, Awards and Decorations Branch (usarmy.knox.hrc.mbx.tagd-awards@mail.mil); or the Congressional Medal of Honor Society.

Note: Some minor misspelling and other errors unfortunately, may be duplicated from the 1979 government publication. These were likely the result of the original transcriptions and reflect the nature of the published compilation. Other errors, however, may have crept into the citations during the course of digitizing the original report for website posting, every effort will be made to identify and correct those conversion errors.

Please be aware: The Medal of Honor entries on this website are posted as a courtesy to our users. CMH is not responsible for the factual content of the citations (see our posting policies above), but if you have questions the Congressional Medal of Honor Society may be able to assist. Other points of contact are provided at http://valor.defense.gov/. Please do not contact CMH ANSWERS regarding MOH issues unless reporting an obvious typo or broken link in the posted citations.

Index of Citations top