U.S. Department of the Treasury
WASHINGTON – Today, pursuant to the Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act of 2017 (CAATSA), the U.S. Department of the Treasury delivered the following five reports to appropriate Congressional committees:

Section 241: Report on Senior Foreign Political Figures and Oligarchs in the Russian Federation;

Section 104(e): Report on Contributions to Iran's Ballistic Missile Program;

Section 242: Report on Effects of Expanding Sanctions to Include Sovereign Debt and Derivative Products;

Section 273: Examining the Counter-Terror Financing Role of the Department of the Treasury in Embassies; and,

Section 311(d): Designation of Additional Persons Related to North Korea.

Additional background on senior foreign political figures and oligarchs in the Russian Federation report:

Under CAATSA Section 241, Congress required Treasury, in consultation with the Department of State and the Director of National Intelligence, to provide a report regarding senior political figures and oligarchs in the Russian Federation and Russian parastatal entities. Treasury worked closely with State and the intelligence community in drafting this report.

This report is not a sanctions list. The inclusion of individuals or entities in any portion of the report does not impose sanctions on those individuals or entities. Nor does it create any other restrictions, prohibitions, or limitations on dealings with such persons by either U.S. or foreign persons.

The names of senior political figures and oligarchs in the unclassified version of the report were selected based on objective criteria drawn from publically available sources.

The classified version of the report includes other items required by CAATSA Section 241.

Q: What was the methodology for including:

Senior political figures: The report included individuals who are: i) senior members of the Russian Presidential Administration; ii) members of the Russian Cabinet, Cabinet-rank ministers, and heads of other major executive agencies; iii) other senior political leaders, including the leadership of the State Duma and Federation Council, other members of the Russian Security Council, and senior executives at state-owned enterprises.

The report included individuals who are: i) senior members of the Russian Presidential Administration; ii) members of the Russian Cabinet, Cabinet-rank ministers, and heads of other major executive agencies; iii) other senior political leaders, including the leadership of the State Duma and Federation Council, other members of the Russian Security Council, and senior executives at state-owned enterprises. Oligarchs: The report included Russian individuals with an estimated net worth of $1 billion or more.

The report included Russian individuals with an estimated net worth of $1 billion or more. Parastatals: The report analyzed entities that are at least 25% owned by the Government of Russia and that had about $2 billion or more in revenues in 2016.

Q: Will the individuals on the list be subject to sanctions?

As noted above, this report is not a sanctions list. The inclusion of individuals or entities in any portion of the report does not impose sanctions on those individuals or entities. Nor does it create any other restrictions, prohibitions, or limitations on dealings with such persons by either U.S. or foreign persons.

Furthermore, inclusion in the report does not constitute the determination by any agency that any of those individuals or entities meet the criteria for designation under any sanctions program.

The Treasury Department will rely on all available sources of information, including the classified version of the CAATSA report when making determinations about additional sanctions.

####