Julia Roberts – Hillary Clinton Speeches
On Monday, Senator Bernie Sanders campaigned on behalf of Hillary Clinton in Colorado. At a Get out the Vote event on the campus of Colorado State University in Fort Collins, he spoke about a variety of issues including the rising cost of a higher education, income inequality, immigration, and health care. Sanders addressed how Clinton and the Democratic platform would address of each of the issues and urged them to get out and vote on November 8th. “Politics and political engagement does not end on Election Day. We need you on the day after the election,” he said urging the crowd, most of them student, to remain politically active following the election. A video of Sanders’ speech is below.

Anne Holton, wife of Clinton’s running mate Tim Kaine, was in Florida where she held two events in Pensacola. Her first stop was a Women for Hillary event during which she spoke about a number of Clinton’s platform points including plans to increase the minimum wage, create new jobs, ensure equal pay for women, and provide paid family leave. She praised the campaign run by Clinton and Kaine saying, “It is important to have that person-to-person contact, it is even more important with the negativity we have had this campaign season. Holton also spoke with volunteers and supporters at a local canvass kick-off. She encouraged them to keep knocking on doors, putting up signs, and making phone calls. Videos from Holton’s events will be added when/if available.

Meanwhile, three fundraisers were held on behalf of Hillary for America as the final fundraising deadline approaches. The first was in Bethesda, Maryland where Tim Kaine attended a private fundraising event. Then, in Dallas, Texas, a LGBT and Allies event was held featuring a conversation with Vic Holmes, Mark Phariss, and Steve Rudner. In New York City, a Broadway for Hillary event was held. The event featured an appearance by Chelsea Clinton but a number of performances. The performers included: Sara Bareilles, Angela Bassett, Emily Blunt, Matthew Broderick, Ayodele Casel, Alan Cumming, Cynthia Erivo, Renée Elise Goldsberry, Josh Groban, Jake Gyllenhaal, Neil Patrick Harris, Anne Hathaway, Hugh Jackman, Sarah Jones, Andrea McArdle, Sienna Miller, Lin-Manuel Miranda, Helen Mirren, Sarah Jessica Parker, Bernadette Peters, and Julia Roberts. A video from the fundraising event is below.

For all the latest, follow our Scheduled Events page and follow Clinton on Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and Instagram. Also, be sure to subscribe to the campaign’s official Podcast, With Her.

News source: Coloradoan, CBS Denver, Pensacola News Journal