Baya Weaver Count 2018

Baya Weaver Count

(10 to 24 June 2018)

Organized by BNHS

Weavers are highly social birds; these species are very similar to House Sparrows Passer domesticus and these are known and famous for their nest-weaving skills. Four species of weavers, belonging to family Ploceidae, are resident in India, these are, Baya Weaver Ploceus philippinus, Streaked Weaver Ploceus manyar, Black-breasted Weaver or Black-throated Weaver Ploceus benghalensis and Finn’s Weaver or Yellow Weaver Ploceus megarhynchus.

Among the four species of weaver birds, Baya Weaver Ploceus philippinus is the most familiar and common bird in the country. This species builds overhanging nests built in colonies, usually above water or in a well. It’s food includes grains, seeds, and small insects. The breeding season ranges between April to August. The male weaver appears yellow in breeding plumage, male builds their retort-shaped nests in colonies, they continuously sing during nest building. The Baya Weaver has a polygamous breeding system means one male builds multiple nests and mates with many females (not necessarily at the same time). Urbanisation, agricultural practices, industrialization, development, human population, deforestation are the major threats to this species.

All Indian Weaver species are protected and listed in Schedule IV of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.

Objectives of Baya weaver count

1) To gather information on year-to-year and longer-term changes in population levels for a wide range of Baya Weaver across different habitats across India.

2) To understand whether the population trends.

3) To promote bird conservation through the involvement of a large number of volunteer observers in survey work.

4) To collect the data, ideally every year during breeding season of Baya Weavers, so that in the long run we can get information about the changes in the population of the Baya Weavers.

Count the Baya Weavers

To know their current status Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS) announces a pan-India Baya Weaver Count during 10 to 24 June 2018. BNHS invites all Indian bird watchers, ornithologists, NGOs, Forest Officials and nature lovers to record and report the sightings of Baya Weavers in their areas.

BNHS, under Common Bird Monitoring Programme (CBMP), a citizen science initiative has organized this bird count to involve common people in bird monitoring and gathering data about Baya Weavers. The participants can select any location of their choice and record the sightings of Baya Weavers. The collected data can be reported to us (Nandkishor Dudhe, n.dudhe@bnhs.org) in a simple format which is given at the end of this page.

How to participate:

(1) Select a site and go for bird watching

(2) Record the sightings of Baya Weavers in your chosen location

(3) Send your records to us on n.dudhe@bnhs.org

(If possible then send us photos of your field visit)

For further details please contact:

Mr. Nandkishor Dudhe: – n.dudhe@bnhs.org

We request you to participate in this count. The data has to be recorded in an Excel spreadsheet given below:

Data sheet for participants Baya weaver count June 2018