Slender Man: how a modern urban legend came to haunt a generation
With his eerie blank face, tentacle-like arms and stark black suit, internet urban legend Slender Man has become a modern cultural phenomenon.

A forest-dwelling, child-stalking bogeyman for the digital age.

The sinister, supernatural phantom, conceived by a blogger in 2009, has gone on to inspire widespread fan art, a cult web-series, and a number of video games.

He has also inspired, if reports are to be believed, a particularly shocking crime.

In the summer of 2014, two 12-year-old girls from Wisconsin were arrested after stabbing their friend 19 times during a game of hide-and-seek in the woods.

Their motive was allegedly to ‘earn favour’ with the Slender Man.

An HBO documentary exploring this disturbing case, Beware The Slenderman, is now about to be broadcast.

That a creepy figure created eight years ago via a Photoshop contest could still be haunting the web, and the wider public consciousness, may seem bizarre.

The origins of Slender Man In 2009, a thread appeared on comedy site Something Awful inviting users to create supernatural creatures in Photoshop. Eric Knudsen, under the alias ‘Victor Surge’, came up with two striking, supposedly historical images, depicting a mysterious and sinister figure haunting groups of children. The pictures were soon being widely circulated around the web. This in turn inspired further images, and an in-depth mythology behind Slender Man began to emerge through internet fan fiction.

But urban legends can exert a powerful pull.

Andrea Kitta is an Associate Professor in the English department at East Carolina University, a folklorist, and an expert on the Slender Man myth.

“There is something inherently creepy about Slender Man,” she says. “He looks human, but he is not human.

“His appearance is uncanny in many ways. Everything about him highlights both his sameness and difference from us.”

A compelling urban legend

Urban legends have impact because they often speak to a widespread fear in society. And there are usually stark consequences for breaking social norms too.

“When we engage in an activity that is not sanctioned by our culture, like picking up a hitchhiker or parking at lover’s lane, we are punished in some way,” says Kitta.

“Legends allow us to talk about our fears without actually talking specifically about those fears.”

In the case of Slender Man, what this ghoulish onlooker represents is open to interpretation. But he seems especially compelling.

“He certainly reaffirms the idea that the woods are a dangerous place and that we should fear strangers,” explains Kitta. “But he may also represent other things as well.

“I’ve theorised that to some people, the idea that he is a faceless white man in a suit watching you on the internet might show our fear about the internet itself. Specifically being spied on by large organisations or corporations.

“Conversely, to a different group of people, he might mean something else.”

A convenient scapegoat?

HBO’s true crime documentary Beware The Slenderman examines the case of the two girls accused of attempting to murder a friend in the woods.

The film features interviews with the families of the defendants, whose ongoing prosecution has been a complicated and sometimes controversial affair.

The children spoke of their belief that killing their victim would be a sacrifice to Slender Man, would prove their loyalty to him, and would prevent him from harming their families.

Kitta believes that urban legends are sometimes wrongly blamed for shocking events. However, she also suggests it is possible they can exert an influence too.

“Sometimes people use folklore as a scapegoat, perhaps most famously in the Satanic Panic of the 1980s.

“But we would be remiss to assume that folklore is safe or benign.”

“Slender Man demonstrates some of the fears of modern society, in many different forms. Some of us are afraid of faceless men in suits. Others are afraid of things found on the internet. And some are afraid of the forest.” Andrea Kitta

Fascination and horror

The internet is certainly helping to spread modern urban myths wider and faster than before. Kitta argues, however, that they are more or less exactly like traditional folklore.

“The only difference in some cases is that people may include a picture with the story, which adds to its believability.

“But all of these forms of folklore share many similarities. They tend to be set in the local or historic past, they are believable, and they contain variation.”

Whatever the facts of the Wisconsin case – and a trial is still yet to take place – it is clear that Slender Man has become this generation’s most enduring, powerful urban myth.

“I think Slender Man demonstrates some of the fears of modern society, in many different forms,” says Kitta.

“Some of us are afraid of faceless men in suits. Others are afraid of things found on the internet. And some are afraid of the forest.

“I am currently working on research that links Slender Man to cyberbullying, which has been fascinating and frightening.

“Slender Man has grown beyond his original intentions. There’s something there that both fascinates and horrifies us.”

Beware The Slenderman is coming to HBO on January 23, and will be available to UK viewers via HBO Now.