Pro-migrant protest in Paris church causes controversy

Since 2002, the Basilica of Saint-Denis has been a place that is symbolically very connected to the welcoming of refugees

The disruption occurred on Sunday March 18, at precisely 15.00. About 80 demonstrators — or 200, according to one of the participants contacted by La Croix — entered the Basilica of Saint-Denis. They were members of the collective “Coordination for Undocumented Migrants,” an autonomous network of several associations lobbying for the welcoming of migrants. Carrying huge banners, they gathered to campaign for the welcoming of refugees and to protest the legislation “Immigration Asylum” (Asile Immigration), recently proposed by the government.

Considered too repressive by the collective and too lenient by the right and the National Front, this new bill, presented on Feb. 21 by the Minister of the Interior, Gérard Collomb, advocates a “control of immigration” and an “acceleration of the judiciary procedures” for the examination of asylum-seekers’ cases.

The legislation is aimed at speeding up the process for asylum requests and for expelling migrants who aren’t unable to claim asylum. It would also double to 90 days the time a person without papers can be kept in a holding center.

“The proposed law will make things even harder,” stated Father Jean-Yves Leroy, Deacon of the Diocese of Saint-Denis.

For the past 20 years, Father Leroy has been committed to helping refugees, and he was present at the gathering in the Basilica on March 18. “Today, there is an average wait of 18 months before an undocumented migrant receives a response from the prefecture, whether it be negative or positive,” he said.

The demonstration took place without any major incidents – “only two people were slightly injured” according to the deacon. The protesters were evacuated from the church by security forces after an hour. One of them was arrested and taken to police headquarters. Some tourists who were present in the building left on their own accord. In order to avoid any overflow, the police chose to close the building at 17.30. The 18.30 Mass was canceled. The protesters then re-gathered further away, near the police headquarters.

Why was the decision made to enter the basilica on a Sunday to protest against this bill?

“Since 2002, the basilica has been a place that is symbolically very connected to the welcoming of refugees,” explained a member of the Diocese of Saint-Denis.

It was in 2002 that more than 130 refugees of over 19 nationalities, all awaiting processing, decided to camp inside the basilica – with the support of the curate at the time, Father Bernard Berger.

“The basilica has thus remained emblematic,” said Father Leroy, “especially for migrants without documents and for community activists in Ile-de-France.”

As they walked behind the deputy leader of the leftist populist party La France Insoumise (France Unbowed), Éric Coquerel, the protesters aroused the anger of the National Front.

“In calling upon migrants to profane the Basilica of Saint-Denis, the necropolis of our kings, La France Insoumise and the extreme left are demonstrating that, in their pro-migrationist madness, they are prepared to trample on our civilization and to desecrate a holy and historical place,” stated the National Front leader, Marine LePen, in a tweet early in the week.

Coquerel immediately reacted to this angry statement in a tweet aimed at LePen, in which he quoted the words of Pope Francis: “Any stranger who knocks at our door is an occasion for us to encounter Jesus Christ, who identified himself with rejected or welcomed strangers of all times.”

Coquerel’s argument was strongly criticized on social media by many Catholics.

“Your comment could not be more stupid. Just because the pope supports migrants, does this mean that they can forcibly enter a church? Interrupt Mass? The church does not agree with you,” tweeted Lawyer Erwan Le Morhedec (Koz), author of the blog, Koztoujours.

So far, the Diocese of Saint-Denis has chosen not to inflame the controversy any further.