SB-610 Firearms: license to carry concealed firearm.
Existing law establishes an application process, including a determination of good cause and completion of a training course, for persons seeking a license to carry a concealed firearm. Existing law authorizes the licensing authority of any city, city and county, or county to charge a fee in addition to the application fee in an amount equal to the actual costs for processing the application for a new license, excluding fingerprint and training costs, but in no case to exceed $100. Existing law provides that no requirement, charge, assessment, fee, or condition that requires the payment of any additional funds by the applicant, other than those costs already specified in those provisions, may be imposed by any licensing authority as a condition of the application for a license.

This bill would provide that the applicant would not be required to pay for any training courses prior to a determination of good cause being made, as specified. The bill would clarify that the application fee for a new license includes the costs of required notices. The bill would also provide that no applicant would be required to obtain liability insurance as a condition of the license.

The bill would require the licensing authority to provide written notification of the determination of good cause to the applicant, as specified.

Existing law requires the licensing authority to give written notice to the applicant indicating if the license is approved or denied within 90 days of the initial application for a new license or a license renewal, or 30 days after receipt of the applicant’s criminal background check from the Department of Justice, whichever is later.

This bill would also require that the notice provide which requirement was not satisfied if the license is denied.

By imposing additional burdens on local government entities, this bill would impose a state-mandated local program.

The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement.

This bill would provide that, if the Commission on State Mandates determines that the bill contains costs mandated by the state, reimbursement for those costs shall be made pursuant to these statutory provisions.