Colorado Springs hotel apologizes after employees refuse to serve military
COLORADO SPRINGS – The DoubleTree by Hilton in Colorado Springs posted an apology to its Facebook page Friday afternoon for refusing to serve members of the military at the hotel’s bar Thursday night.

Hundreds of Facebook users shared a photo of a sign at the bar that read “NO LONGER SERVING MILITARY PERSONNEL & THEIR GUEST(S)” posted by Aimee Osbourne this morning.

The woman who posted the photo with commentary about the sign has since removed the post due to all of the negative commentary.

News5 spoke with Osbourne about her post and the reaction by staff. The number one thing Osbourne wants everyone to know is there is no ill will towards Doubletree Colorado Springs. She says she did not write the post with the intent of starting problems.

“I’m regretful that anyone had to lose their livelihood,” Osbourne said.

Daniel Kammerer, General Manager of the hotel, said two employees “acted without the proper authority” to exclude service members from the bar. According to the post, both employees are “no longer employed at the property.”

Statement from Daniel Kammerer, General Manager of the DoubleTree by Hilton Colorado Springs:“Our property has a proud… Posted by DoubleTree Colorado Springs on Friday, March 15, 2019

He went on to say the hotel has reached out to the leaders of the group to apologize, and “our property is one that welcomes all, especially the men and women who serve our country.”

Osbourne, a disabled veteran whose husband is currently serving, says the group was in the process of an army grog. That’s a ceremony in which a unit honors those who have served, POWs/MIAs status, and those lost.

Based on unit tradition some odds and ends are added to the alcoholic and non-alcoholic mixes. The chain of command can also call for someone to drink from the grog if they violate etiquette.

According to Osbourne, there was no bad behavior on the part of the roughly 600 people in attendance. She says the hotel staff started blocking access to the grog, an incident that the attendees tried to handle in a professional manner, but soon the bars were closed and the signs posted at 9 p.m.

The staff told everyone they would only serve hotel guests after that, according to Osbourne. The ball was a private event that Osbourne tells News5 the group paid tens of thousands of dollars to have at the Doubletree, and that this is not the first time the hotel has hosted this exact type of ball.

She and others who organized the event did speak with General Manager Daniel Kammerer about the actions of employees. Which as he stated in a Facebook post “two of our team members acted without proper authority to close and exclude military guests from our hotel’s bar.”

Osbourne says she fully accepted Krammemer’s apology.