Shoemaker, James Thomas - Invasion of Privacy
At 8:55 PM, April 14, 2016, Lancaster City Police officers were dispatched to the Sheetz Mini Market, 1180 Manheim Pike for a report of suspicious activity. A 10-year-old girl told her mother (who was waiting outside the bathroom door) that while she was in the bathroom, a man was in the adjoining stall, and the victim saw the man holding his phone over the top of the stall. Employees stated that this man had been in the bathroom for approximately an hour. Upon arrival Sgt. Roland Breault found the suspect, James Thomas Shoemaker, 19-year-old male, inside of a bathroom stall in the women's bathroom. Shoemaker was found to be in possession of a phone as described by the victim.

Further investigation revealed that Shoemaker intentionally went into the women's bathroom, and that while in the women's bathroom he used his phone to access pornographic images on his web browser. Shoemaker then used his phone’s camera to look over the stall to see into the adjoining stall that was occupied by the victim. The suspect also used his phone/camera to look under the stall door to see if anyone else was in the women's bathroom. Shoemaker gave consent for officers to examine his phone, which is currently being forensically analyzed. As of this time, no pictures of the victim have been located on the phone. This investigation is ongoing.

Shoemaker, a resident of the 200 blk. of Blackburn Rd., Quarryville, PA was charged with (1) count of Invasion of Privacy, a 3rd degree misdemeanor, by Officer Mark Gehron before MDJ Sponaugle. He was released with a summons to appear in court.

Anyone with information on this incident or any similar incidents involving this suspect is urged to call Lancaster City Police at (717) 735-3300 or Lancaster City-County Crime Stoppers at 1-800-322-1913. You can also click the Submit a Tip button on our website, www.lancasterpolice.com, or Text a Tip to Crime Stoppers by texting LANCS plus your message to 847411. Tipsters may remain anonymous and do not have to give their names.

***The Lancaster Bureau of Police is respectfully requesting that the media limit what is published to that which is on this news release. Should the media become aware of any additional information, particularly the names of any witnesses, victims, or Lancaster residents in this case, it is requested that they refrain from publishing that information so as not to jeopardize the safety of anyone nor this ongoing investigation.***

All persons accused of a crime are considered innocent until proven guilty in court.