Trinity Play Park
Southwest corner of Corinth Street and Cockrell Avenue

In 1907, the Dallas Federation of Women’s Clubs established a playground committee headed by Olivia Allen Dealey, wife of the publisher of the Dallas Morning News. The committee initiated a citywide fund-raising activity to pay for children’s needs, including playgrounds. The resulting “Tag Day” on February 29, 1908, saw an army of clubwomen selling tags with the words “To Help the Children of Dallas, I’m Tagged.” The federation also brought Lee F. Hammer of the National Playgrounds Association to Dallas to advise them. Additional money for the playground fund was raised by a lecture by Williams Jennings Bryan. By 1909, Isadore Callaway has assumed the role of chair of the playground committee. With public support demonstrated by Tag Day sales, the committee convinced the city to purchase a 300-square-foot piece of property at the corner of Corinth Street and Cockrell Avenue in the cotton mill district. Using federation funds, the committee provided the salaries for a playground supervisor and assistant to oversee Dallas’s first municipal playground, named Trinity Play Park and dedicated on Thanksgiving Day, 1909. : And Progressive Reform in Dallas; Jacquelyn Masur McElhaney; Texas A&M University Press, 1998; pg. 115-116}

The park eventually covered an area of 4 ½ acres. Owing to the lack of funds, the first improvements consisted of a temporary bath house and combination kindergarten and assembly room. Later, a Milk Station was established here. In cases where mothers were unable to purchase milk, it was furnished free of cost. This institution was under the direction of the Dallas Infants’ Welfare and Milk Association. {Dallas (Tex.). Park and Playground System, Dallas, Texas, 1921-1923 [Annual Report]. Dallas, Texas. The Portal to Texas History. http://texashistory.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metapth129156/. Accessed June 5, 2016.}

The photo above is of the Trinity Park Field House, opened in July of 1915. This structure was a state-of-the-art recreation center. It contained an auditorium, “motion picture projecting box”, athletic supplies, hot and cold showers, and a day nursery among other things. {Photo courtesy of the Dallas Library Photo Archives}

The park was renamed in honor of retiring Park Board member Emil Fretz in 1927. The park was dismantled in 1964 and the land exchanged for the current Fretz Park at Hillcrest and Belt Line in North Dallas. The circa 1920 Lang and Winchell designed field house was razed in the 1980’s.