Chip and Joanna Gaines from Fixer Upper Our Story
It’s with a grateful heart that I welcome you to magnoliamarket.com. Chip and I run a few businesses here in Waco, Texas, but Magnolia Market holds a special place in my heart. This entire business idea was born completely out of a dream I didn’t know could ever come to life. It’s truly only because a fiercely faithful, brave and bold husband pushed me to pursue my dream that it ever came to be.

In 2003, we bought our “Little Shop on Bosque” and opened the first Magnolia Market. In that store, I developed and sharpened my design style and skills, grew as a business owner, and gained much needed confidence in Magnolia Market and myself.

After Chip and I had our first two kiddos, we made the tough decision to close the Market and focus on growing and raising our family. During this time, we really honed in on Magnolia Homes, our construction business, for many years. This is where we were able to learn the construction side of things, and we loved the idea that we were “making Waco beautiful one home at a time.” This work was meaningful to us, and we worked together for many years as a team; Chip in construction, and myself in the design. Soon HGTV’s Fixer Upper came along. But something began tugging at my heart, and I began feeling a pull toward reopening Magnolia Market. So in May of 2014, we pulled the trigger, and the Little Shop on Bosque reopened for business.

Fast forward a couple of years, and here we are! To think that my business plans scribbled on scratch paper have turned into this online store is unbelievable to say the least. Not to mention the fact that we’ve recently outgrown our Little Shop on Bosque, and moved into our new Magnolia Silos location in downtown Waco! What an amazing season this has been!

Thank you for taking the time out of your day to visit Magnolia Market. We love hosting you, and hope you might even come on out to Waco for a visit soon! Please don’t hesitate to reach out to our all-star customer service team if you have any questions or comments at shop@magnoliamarket.com. We appreciate you guys.

Bless your home,



Joanna Stevens Gaines

Lead Designer and Owner Joanna Gaines is co-owner, co-founder and lead designer of Magnolia Homes, and co-stars in HGTV’s Fixer Upper with her husband Chip. She appreciates the old ways of living, simple and hard-working with home at the center. Joanna Gaines is co-owner, co-founder and lead designer of Magnolia Homes, and co-stars in HGTV’s Fixer Upper with her husband Chip. She appreciates the old ways of living, simple and hard-working with home at the center. Joanna was born in Kansas and raised in the Lone Star State. She graduated from Baylor University with a degree in Communications and was inspired to join the world of design while interning in New York. Off-the-beaten-path boutiques felt like home in the midst of the big city. These shops were the influence for what came next. Joanna decided to open her own shop in 2003, bringing her NYC-inspired ideas and eye for design back to her roots—Waco, Texas. She soon discovered this emerging passion complemented Chip’s experience, and together they began remodeling and flipping homes. Joanna self identifies as a driver, and takes pride in her work. But she also loves to have fun with Chip and appreciates his hilarious antics. Joanna’s design preference is simple, fresh and timeless. She loves the use of industrial pieces that are a glimpse of how life used to be. Her specialty is making old things new and seeing the potential in every project-no matter how hopeless it may seem in the beginning. By preserving and highlighting the character of each home, Joanna keeps things original and one of a kind. Her passion is to create functional rooms that inspire and encourage others to own their space. In between filming for Fixer Upper, their many renovation projects, and running Magnolia, Joanna enjoys life on the farm and spending time cooking family recipes in her kitchen. Gardening soothes her soul and being with her four kids dominates all other favorites.