New Ford Transit-Based Motorhomes Ready to Carry Families and Gear for Adventures
DEARBORN, Mich., Nov. 10, 2015 – Recreational vehicle manufacturers are offering all-new motorhome models based on Ford Transit – America’s best-selling commercial van.

The newest Transit RV is the Winnebago Fuse, a Class C motorhome built on the new Ford Transit cutaway chassis. It is the latest in a growing number of Transit-based options for active families.

“Many of these customers are interested in outdoor adventures like kayaking, mountain biking, snowboarding and such — more national park than RV park,” explains Yaro Hetman, Ford brand manager for Transit, Transit Connect and E-Series. “Sales of smaller Class C motorhomes have been on the rise for the last few years as younger, more active buyers enter the market.”

Class C motorhomes include vehicle frame, suspension, powertrain and cab, with the living area accessible behind the driver’s compartment. The all-new Ford Transit cutaway offers customers additional options for lighter-weight chassis in Class C motorhomes – a segment where Ford is already a popular choice. Ford E-Series cutaway is the top-selling chassis in this market.

“Outdoor adventure-seeking RV customers want compact, maneuverable motorhomes that can comfortably carry their families and gear from one adventure to another,” Hetman says. “Transit’s efficiency, comfortable ride and affordability make it a great choice as a motorhome for these outdoor enthusiasts.”

Winnebago Fuse goes on sale in January, offered in two configurations – one with a rear bedroom slide-out featuring a queen-size bed, and another with a front slide-out, two twin beds and a rear bath. Each is available with the Ford Power Stroke® 3.2-liter five-cylinder diesel.

Other manufacturers building motorhomes on the new Transit platform include Thor Motor Coach and Forest River Inc. brands Sunseeker, Forester, Coachmen Freelander and Coachmen Orion.

Transit also gives customers additional choices for Class B motorhomes.

Commonly called camper vans, Class B motorhomes are built using OEM vans or panel trucks. Class B motorhomes drive like vans, and retail for between $60,000 and $130,000, according to the Recreation Vehicle Industry Association.

Transit’s choice of three roof heights, two wheelbases and three powertrains gives customers the ability to customize their camper van cost-effectively, as choosing the high-roof Transit model eliminates the need to raise the roof or drop the floor of a traditional van.