Little Caesars
Veteran’s Day Promotion 2018

1. Promotional Offer: The Veteran’s Day and Little Caesars® Pizza (“Promotion”) will take place on November 11, 2018. Sponsor will give away free $5 HOT-N-READY Lunch Combos in accordance with these Terms & Conditions (“Terms”). Sponsor will give away one (1) $5 HOT-N-READY Lunch Combo® (“Promotional Item”), which includes four slices of DEEP!DEEP! Dish pepperoni pizza and a 20 ounce Pepsi product, on November 11, 2018 (“Promotion Day”) to each veteran or active member of the United States military (limit one (defined below)) who comes into a Participating Store (defined below) between 11:00:00 a.m. and 2:00:00 p.m. (local time) and mentions this offer at the check-out counter along with presenting proof of service (defined below). Offer good during each Participating Store’s 11:00:00 a.m. to 2:00:00 p.m. (local time) window (“Promotion Window”) on November 11, 2018 or while supplies last, whichever occurs first. Offer expires and will not be redeemable after 2:00:00 p.m. (local time) on November 11, 2018. THIS MEANS THAT YOU MUST PLACE YOUR ORDER NO LATER THAN 2:00:00 P.M. (LOCAL TIME). IF YOU PLACE YOUR ORDER AFTERWARDS EVEN IF YOU WERE IN LINE AT 2:00:00 P.M. (LOCAL TIME), THE OFFER HAS EXPIRED AND WILL NOT BE FULFILLED. Offer redeemable only in Participating Stores and not redeemable in any manner other than provided herein, including, but not limited to, via online, app, or delivery.

2. Eligibility: Offer good only in participating Little Caesars stores (“Participating Stores”) in the fifty (50) United States (and D.C.). Void outside of the 50 United States and District of Columbia and where prohibited, taxed, or restricted by law. Employees, officers and directors of Little Caesars Enterprises, Inc. (“Sponsor”), and its parent company, subsidiaries, affiliates, partners, franchisees, advertising and promotion agencies, manufacturers or distributors of promotion materials and their immediate families (parents, children, siblings, spouse) or members of the same household (whether related or not) of such employees, officers, directors are not eligible to participate. All federal, state and local laws and regulations apply.

3. Promotional Item: Limit one (1) Promotional Item per veteran or active member of the United States military. There is no coupon required to redeem the offer. Veterans and military personnel must present proof of service (such as ID card with veteran designation, DD-214 form, or current military issued ID card). No substitutions or cash redemptions. In the case of unavailability, Sponsor reserves the right to substitute a Promotional Item of equal or greater value, in its sole discretion. All applicable taxes are the sole responsibility of the participant. Additional toppings and any other items are extra. Custom orders are not available as Promotional Item.

4. General Conditions: Participating Stores each reserve the right in their sole discretion to prohibit admission to and/or not give a Promotional Item to any individual they find to be engaging in fraud or undermining the legitimate operation of this Promotion or acting in an abusive, fraudulent, deceptive or disruptive manner or in violation of these Terms. Any attempt by any person to undermine the legitimate operation of the Promotion may be a violation of criminal and civil law, and, should such an attempt be made, participating Stores reserve the right to seek damages from any such person to the fullest extent permitted by law. Each Participating Store reserves the right to make the final decision with respect admission and/or redemption and fulfillment of Promotional Item, in its sole discretion. Not all Little Caesars stores or franchisees participate in this Promotion and Released Parties cannot be held responsible for this decision.

Sponsor reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to cancel, terminate, modify, extend or suspend this Promotion should (in its sole discretion) virus, bugs, non-authorized human intervention, cheating, fraud or other causes beyond its control corrupt or affect the administration, security, fairness or proper conduct of the Promotion. Void where prohibited or expired. Sponsor is not responsible for late, non-compliant, or misdirected requests. Requests not complying with all offer requirements will not be honored. Duplicate requests will constitute fraud.

By participating, you agree to release and hold harmless Sponsor, its franchisees, Participating Stores, and their respective parent companies, subsidiaries, affiliates, partners, representatives, agents, successors, assigns, employees, officers and directors (collectively, the “Released Parties”), from and against any liability, loss, claims or causes of action arising out of participation in the Promotion and/or receipt or use of a Promotional Item, including, but not limited to: (a) unauthorized human intervention in the Promotion; (b) technical or printing errors; (c) errors in the administration of the Promotion or the processing, fulfillment or redemption of requests; (d) injury or damage to persons or property which may be caused, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, from your participation in the Promotion or receipt or use of any Promotional Item; or (e) a store or franchisee’s non-participation in this Promotion or failure to provide the Promotional Item for whatever reason. You further agree that in any cause of action, the Released Parties’ liability will be limited to the cost of entering and participating in the Promotion, and in no event shall the Released Parties be liable for attorney’s fees. You waive the right to claim any damages whatsoever, including, but not limited to, punitive, consequential, direct, or indirect damages.

5. Disputes: Except where prohibited, you agree that any and all disputes, claims and causes of action arising out of, or connected with, the Promotion or any Promotional Items awarded shall be resolved individually, without resort to any form of class action, and exclusively by the appropriate court located in Michigan. All issues and questions concerning the construction, validity, interpretation and enforceability of these Terms, your rights and obligations, or the rights and obligations of the Sponsor in connection with the Promotion, shall be governed by, and construed in accordance with, the laws of Michigan, without giving effect to any choice of law or conflict of law rules (whether of Michigan or any other jurisdiction), which would cause the application of the laws of any jurisdiction other than Michigan.

6. Sponsored by: Little Caesar Enterprises, Inc., 2211 Woodward Avenue Detroit, MI 48201.