Bumble bans Pizzagate-pusher Jack Posobiec, and his reaction is really something
The dating app and social network Bumble has banned a profile connected to conspiracy theorist Jack Posobiec.

The account came to the attention of Bumble when Twitter user Lindsey Ledford‏ shared an image of a profile on the app for a 33-year-old man named Jack, which looks an awful lot like Posobiec.

SEE ALSO: Bumble just made it way easier to stalk people on Instagram

is @bumble_app still a feminist dating app or the place where white nationalists / nazis go to cheat on their wives? pic.twitter.com/FUb8dwQVs6 — Lindsey Ledford (@deborahlindseyl) January 24, 2018

"Is @bumble_app still a feminist dating app or the place where white nationalists / nazis go to cheat on their wives?" she wrote, along with screengrabs of his profile.

In response to the tweet, the Twitter account for Bumble slid into Ledford's DMs, asking for proof on her claims that Posobiec is a white nationalist.

Later, the Twitter account publicly responded, stating that the profile has been removed from the platform. This is not the first time Bumble has removed an account with alleged ties to white supremacy.

Bumble has a strong stance against hate, and our team will continue to do our very best to maintain our platform as a safe, inclusive, and empowering place. Thank you so much for helping us protect the Hive! — Bumble (@bumble_app) January 24, 2018

Posobiec denied the account belonged to him, and blamed it on "some troll" when Mashable reached him on Twitter.

Image: mashable screenshot

"I have a hot eastern European wife, as everyone knows," he added.

However, a representative for Bumble confirmed to Mashable that the Bumble account was tied to an active Facebook account for Posobeic, but noted the profile had been inactive since 2016. Posobiec was married in November 2017.

Posobiec went all-in though, and later sent out a tweet claiming he intends to file an identity theft report with the FBI over the account.

I am filing an identify theft report with the FBI over fraudulant accounts made of me online



The criminals behind this will not get away with it, they will be found, and they will be brought to swift, exacting justice.



This criminal fraud stops now — Jack Posobiec 🇺🇸 (@JackPosobiec) January 24, 2018

Posobiec also denied being part of the so-called alt-right, a conservative offshoot with white nationalist and populist tendencies, and claimed he "debunked" Pizzagate when he messaged Mashable. The history of Pizzagate and his views say otherwise. In the past, Posobiec doxxed a Roy Moore accuser on Twitter, and he was also an organizer of the DeploraBall inauguration party, which invited prominent alt-right figures as special guests.