Get Ready for Summer on Netflix US
Summertime = Movies. Well, on Netflix, anytime = movies...but we do see about a 20% increase in movie watching by our members in the US around Memorial Day weekend. This Friday, you’ll be able to enjoy Adam Sandler’s new movie, The Do Over. It’s our second Sandler comedy, starring him and David Spade as old friends who reunite at their 25th high school reunion for the ultimate mulligan: wiping the slate clean by faking their deaths and it’s available exclusively on Netflix this Friday all around the world.

Many of our long time U.S. members might recognize that summer is a time when we refresh a large part of our film catalogue. This year is no exception, but there is one difference; a batch of non-exclusive titles are leaving while what is arriving is exclusive to Netflix among streaming subscription video services.

Here are some of the great and varied selection of films coming to our U.S. service in the next few months:

June: Sci-fi adventure classics Jurassic Park , Jurassic Park: The Lost World , Jurassic Park 3 (June 1) Academy Award Best Picture winner, Spotlight (June 22), the true story of how the Boston Globe uncovered long-standing child abuse at the Catholic Archdiocese, featuring Mark Ruffalo and Rachel McAdams. Sundance hit and Netflix Original film The Fundamentals of Caring (June 24), follows Paul Rudd playing Ben, a writer-turned-caregiver, and his charge, a foul-mouthed British teen with muscular dystrophy played by Craig Roberts, as they take an impromptu road trip.

July: The Big Short (July 6) with Steve Carell, Ryan Gosling and Christian Bale, brings to life the collapse of the U.S. mortgage bubble in an unforgettable and amazingly entertaining way. Brahman Naman (July 7), another Netflix Original film, brings the ribaldry of American Pie and takes it to India in the 1980s. Tallulah (July 29), another Sundance breakout and Netflix Original, unites Allison Janney and Ellen Page, in the story of a dissatisfied Beverly Hills housewife and the babysitter she hires. Also arriving in July for the first time are such classic family favorite franchises such as Back to The Future & Lethal Weapon .



August:

Netflix will premiere The Little Prince , a stunning animated film based on the beloved children’s book, featuring the voices of Jeff Bridges, Rachel McAdams, Ricky Gervais, Marion Cotillard and James Franco.

, a stunning animated film based on the beloved children’s book, featuring the voices of Jeff Bridges, Rachel McAdams, Ricky Gervais, Marion Cotillard and James Franco.

Also appearing: The Fast & The Furious, The Wedding Planner and St. Vincent

From September onwards, Netflix will become the exclusive US pay TV home of the latest films from Disney, Marvel, Lucasfilm and Pixar. And we’re excited to be bringing you new and exclusive Netflix Original movies including Mascots from the master of low-key comedy Christopher Guest (Waiting for Guffman, Best in Show, A Mighty Wind) and War Machine, from acclaimed Australian director David Michod and starring Brad Pitt, in the serio-comic tale of the U.S. military adventure in Afghanistan.

Enjoy!

-- Ted Sarandos