Media Bias/Fact Check
These media sources are moderately to strongly biased toward conservative causes through story selection and/or political affiliation. They may utilize strong loaded words (wording that attempts to influence an audience by using appeal to emotion or stereotypes), publish misleading reports and omit reporting of information that may damage conservative causes. Some sources in this category may be untrustworthy. See all Right Bias sources.

Overall, we rate the Daily Caller strongly right biased based on story selection that almost always favors the right and Mixed for factual reporting due to numerous failed fact checks. The Daily Caller is a source that needs to be fact checked on a per article basis.

Detailed Report

Factual Reporting: MIXED

Country: USA

World Press Freedom Rank: USA 45/180

History

Founded in 2010, the Daily Caller is an American news and opinion website based in Washington, D.C.. It was founded by Tucker Carlson, a libertarian conservative political pundit, and Neil Patel, former adviser to former Vice President Dick Cheney. The current editor-in-chief is Geoff Ingersol.

Funded by / Ownership

The Daily Caller is owned by The Daily Caller, Inc., which does not list its ownership or members. The website was initially launched after raising $3 million in funding from businessman Foster Friess. Currently, the Daily Caller is funded through native online advertising, averaging 30 million+ page views per month.

Analysis / Bias

In review, The Daily Caller is a strongly right leaning news and opinion website that has been involved with publishing controversial and false stories. For example, they routinely publish misleading or false information regarding climate change that goes against the consensus of science. The Daily Caller has also published articles by Jason Kessler, a white supremacist who organized a rally of hundreds of white nationalists in Charlottesville. They subsequently scrubbed those articles after the Charlottesville vehicular homicide incident.

The Daily Caller frequently uses loaded emotional language that typically favors the right such as this: DEM NOMINEE FOR FLORIDA GOVERNOR IS PROGRESSIVE MAYOR WITH CORRUPTION INVESTIGATION SWIRLING AROUND HIM. The Daily Caller usually sources their information to credible media outlets, but sometimes they utilize sources that are factually mixed such as the Daily Wire and Questionable sources such as Judicial Watch. In reviewing story content, virtually all favored the right in story selection and wording, while denigrating the left. The Daily Caller also promotes a favorable view of President Donald Trump through promotion of his policies.

A factual search reveals a very poor track record with fact checking. Here is a short list of some failed fact checks:

The Daily Caller has failed numerous fact checks, however they post a significant amount of articles each day. Based on the volume of articles published, versus failed fact checks, they do not fall into the Questionable category, though they are close.

Overall, we rate the Daily Caller strongly right biased based on story selection that almost always favors the right and Mixed for factual reporting due to numerous failed fact checks. The Daily Caller is a source that needs to be fact checked on a per article basis. (7/19/2016) Updated (D. Van Zandt 8/29/2018)

Source: http://dailycaller.com/