Media Bias/Fact Check
These media sources are moderately to strongly biased toward liberal causes through story selection and/or political affiliation. They may utilize strong loaded words (wording that attempts to influence an audience by using appeal to emotion or stereotypes), publish misleading reports and omit reporting of information that may damage liberal causes. Some sources in this category may be untrustworthy. See all Left Bias sources.

Overall, we rate the Daily Kos strongly Left Biased based on story selection that almost exclusively favors the left. We also rate them Mixed for factual reporting due to non-vetted content as well as a failed fact check and misleading claims.

Detailed Report

Factual Reporting: MIXED

Country: USA

World Press Freedom Rank: USA 48/180

History

Founded in 2002 by Markos Moulitsas, Daily Kos is an outlet for Political Blogging. It functions as a discussion forum and group blog for a variety of netroots activists whose efforts are primarily directed toward influencing and strengthening progressive policies and candidates. In addition to being a blogging, news, and digital media platform, Daily Kos is a political organization that has raised money for Democratic candidates.

Funded by / Ownership

The Daily Kos is held through Kos Media, LLC and is funded through advertising, sponsored content, donations, fundraising and subscription fees for ad free browsing.

Analysis / Bias

In review, Daily Kos reports news through bloggers, who generally lean strongly left. There is moderate use of loaded language in headlines such as this: Voting Rights Roundup: Michigan GOP attempts to sabotage redistricting reform by withholding funding. This particular article is properly sourced to credible mainstream media outlets and newspapers. In some articles there is very strong use of emotional wording such as this: This is how Republicans get away with their lies: The media lets them do it, again and again.

Most articles are written by community members with the rest written by staff members. Editorially, there is very strong left bias with mostly positive articles in favors of left leaning positions and denigration of conservatives. In general, all information tends to favor the left and most articles are sourced, however some of the information written by community members is not vetted by Daily Kos and may contain factual errors or extreme bias.

A factual search reveals that the Daily Kos has one verified failed fact check and few misleading claims.

Overall, we rate the Daily Kos strongly Left Biased based on story selection that almost exclusively favors the left. We also rate them Mixed for factual reporting due to non-vetted content as well as a failed fact check and misleading claims. (5/13/2016) Updated (D. Van Zandt 5/17/2019)

Source: https://www.dailykos.com/