Man who says he cures people through crystals and star magic facing jail
Jerry Sargeant claimed to be able to heal cancer patients over Skype (Picture: Central News)

A man is facing a possible jail sentence after he claimed on his website that he could cure people’s cancer.

Jerry Sargeant, who called himself The Facilitator, said that he was self-taught in healing using star magic and his hands after witnessing a woman’s soul leave her body in a car crash.

Roofer ends up in hospital after swallowing £1 coin in bizarre party trick

He claimed that it gave him the ability to ‘edit your karmic blueprint’ in sessions starting at £90 for 15 minutes.

When he was arrested and asked about his cancer-healing abilities, Sargeant, 39 told detectives it could take up to an hour because ‘you can’t put a time on magic’.

Prosecutor Kirsty Panton said one of the adverts on his website offered ‘energy healing for cancer treatment’ and his site was ‘where the best cancer treatment can be found’.

Advertisement

Advertisement

When asked how he gained his powers he said ‘I’m self-taught. I just know these things’.

He ran a website called ‘Star Magic Healing’ which claimed to use ‘energy healing for cancer treatment’ (Picture: Central News)

He said that he discovered he had healing hands in Romania when a taxi he was in knocked down two women, one of whom went through the windscreen, hit him then flew through the back window.

That’s when he said he saw her soul, kick-starting his abilities.

He says he has:

Pulled a migraine out of his wife’s head

Used crystals to help a woman walk again

Visited Alpha Centaui after being taken there in a space pod that landed next to his friend’s pyramid

While at Alpha Centaui had light downloaded through the top of his crown chakra

Visited ancient mystery schools to learn to heal (in his mind)

Edited people’s karmic blue prints through distance healing

Referring the testimonials of people who claimed they were ‘cured’, Sargeant told police: ‘I created them with people who had good experiences.’

Ms Panton added: ‘We don’t know if they are genuine people.’

Sargeant told police that he was not aware he had committed an offence under the Cancer Act, saying: ‘I didn’t realise that I couldn’t put these adverts on there.’

Victim gets revenge on milk thief by peeing into bottle and leaving it on doorstep

Ms Panton said that, when officers asked him when he sees customers, he replied: ‘I don’t need to see them, I do it over Skype.’

Advertisement

Advertisement

Officers began investigating in June last year and found that Sargeant’s website was ‘purporting to offer treatment for cancer.’

The adverts and YouTube video the charges relate to have since been removed.

A three-month ‘Energy Healing Journey Together’ package, which claims to be able to ‘dissolve an illness or disease, enhance your business performance [or] take your energy and vitality to the next level,’ costs £1,999.

Sargeant, from Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, was found guilty of four counts of taking part in the publication of an advertisement containing an offer to treat a person for cancer relating to three pages on his business website and one video on YouTube.

A warrant, backed for bail, was issued in March this year after he failed to appear in court for the second time.

Star Magic Healing Limited, of Hanover Square, Mayfair, was found guilty of two counts of the same charge relating to two pages of the company website.

Sargeant and Star Magic Healing Limited are due to be sentenced today.