What it means when you spot a blue pumpkin or bucket this Halloween
Whether you’re out and about this Halloween or staying home to hand out sweets to well-costumed kiddos, you might spot a blue pumpkin today – whether it’s a plastic version used as a sweets-holder or carved and sitting outside someone’s home.

This isn’t just a fun style choice.

A blue pumpkin is used to symbolise autism, and will be carried by trick or treaters to signal that they may have certain needs.

One mum shared her decision to use a blue pumpkin this Halloween on Facebook, explaining that her 21-year-old son, BJ, has autism and absolutely loves Halloween.

‘Please help us keep his spirit alive & happy,’ wrote Alicia Plumer. ‘So when you see the blue bucket share a piece of candy. Spread awareness! These precious people are not “too big” to trick or treat.’

Trick or Treat….the BLUE BUCKET…if you see someone who appears to be an adult dressed up to trick or treat this year… Posted by Alicia Plumer on Thursday, October 25, 2018

Others have picked up on Alicia’s idea, and will have blue pumpkins outside their homes, or give their children blue buckets, to raise awareness of autism and make sure everyone can go trick or treating safely.

Advertisement

Advertisement

If you spot a trick or treater with a blue bucket, show them kindness and understanding, and appreciate that they may not enjoy a scare or loud noises.

Some children with autism may struggle to respond verbally, so don’t judge if they take a while to say ‘trick or treat’, don’t respond to your Halloween-themed puns, or struggle to make eye contact.

You can make your Halloween decorations more autism-friendly by avoiding bright flashing lights, loud noises, and scares that jump out and startle.

The blue bucket is a similar scheme to the Teal Pumpkin Project, which encourages people to put teal pumpkins outside their homes to show that they’re offering allergy friendly treats, such as stickers and toys.

How to make Halloween more accessible If you have stairs leading to your house, make sure to walk down them when offering treats, or put a bucket of treats at the bottom of steps. It can be difficult for those with disabilities to navigate stairs, which may mean they don’t get any sweets.

Create a clear path to your door. It might seem very Halloween-y to create scary obstacles people have to surpass to get to their treats, but it makes trick of treating difficult for those with physical disabilities

Avoid bright lights, loud noises, and startle scares

Have allergy-friendly treats ready, such as stickers, play-doh, small toys, and colouring pencils

Don’t put nuts in your bowl of treats

Put out a sign or blue or teal pumpkin to show that your home is accessible for all trick or treaters

MORE: How does Halloween affect our mental health?

Advertisement

Advertisement

MORE: This entire amusement park is up for sale

MORE: Why do we celebrate Halloween in the UK and where did ‘trick or treat’ come from?

Advertisement Advertisement