The Details About "Federal Rent Checks" Everyone Needs to See
You already know that it's your tax dollars paying for each building and facility being used by the DOJ, CIA, NASA, FDA, Congress, and even the White House.

At one time or another, citizens like you graciously covered the construction costs.

And you are footing the bill for their maintenance and upkeep.

Sometimes, you even paid for the land to be acquired in the first place.

This money is coming out of our paychecks, Social Security checks, and the checks we cut to the Internal Revenue Service every April.

It's not a bad deal for Uncle Sam.

However, here's something you may not be aware of…

Currently, over 100 federal agencies are required by law to pay rent for the properties they occupy.

This cash is flooding into the Treasury Department, where it's being stockpiled in the Federal Buildings Fund.

This year it will have $11.1 billion in it.

That's worth repeating…

It's an enormous, $11.1 billion pool of money.

Don't Miss Out: The Treasury is sitting on an $11.1 billion cash pile, and a loophole entitles Americans to a sizable portion. Some are collecting $1,795, $3,000, or $5,000 every month thanks to this powerful investment…

And some very smart Americans have discovered an investment that allows them to tap into a large portion of it.

Their reward: a hefty monthly check.

Which is why we like to refer to them as "Federal Rent Checks."

It's also why people are asking, "How do I start receiving 'Federal Rent Checks'?"

Here's what you need to know…

Here's the Truth About "Federal Rent Checks"

"Federal Rent Checks" are issued around the second week of every month, January through December.

And by implementing a simple strategy, you can collect them every month!

So you may be wondering, "Why does the government have to pay rent?"

Back in 1972, Congress included a special provision in the Public Buildings Amendments – otherwise known as Public Law 92-313.

If you've never heard of it, don't worry – you aren't alone.

When Public Law 92-313 was passed, it wasn't exactly a headline grabber.

It was sandwiched between a law authorizing the sale of land to the Southern Ute Indian Tribe and an appropriations bill for the Atomic Energy Commission.

So it was easy to overlook on Congress' legislative schedule.

But here's why Public Law 92-313 is so important to you.

It stipulated that, for the first time ever, certain government agencies would be legally required to pay the equivalent of commercial rent for the space that's been assigned to them.

Altogether, the U.S. government is legally required to pay rent for 9,600 federal buildings this year.

And as we just mentioned, the money will be funneled into one place…

… the $11.1 billion Federal Buildings Fund.

But here's where things get even more interesting.

You'll want to pay very close attention to this.

Public Law 92-313 stipulates that over 100 federal agencies must pay rent…

It does not require the government to advertise or even mention they're doing so.

However, by law, large portions of this cash pile must automatically be sent to certain agencies in the private sector for distribution.

And there is a way for you to receive a "Federal Rent Check" every month from these "private agencies."

Depending on your investment…

Each of your "Federal Rent Checks" could initially be made out for $1,795.

But over time, those checks could be worth much, much more.

In this short presentation, we're going to tell you everything you need to know about Public Law 92-313.

And most importantly, how you could begin collecting Federal Rent Checks…