Support for DACA and Dreamers - We Stand with our Partners

Kevin Johnson, Starbucks president and chief executive officer and Lucy Helm, Starbucks chief partner officer, shared the following letter with all partners on September 6, 2017.

Yesterday, the Administration announced that it is ending the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program. We know that many of you have questions and are also deeply concerned about your fellow partners and their futures. We share that concern.

One of our core values at Starbucks is to create a culture of warmth and belonging, where everyone is welcome. That is one of the reasons why we have long supported both our DACA partners and all Dreamers. Earlier this year, Howard wrote a letter on this matter to U.S. Senators Lindsey Graham and Richard Durbin in support of their bipartisan “Dream Act.” Starbucks will continue to stand with the hundreds of thousands of Dreamers impacted by yesterday’s announcement, including those we are proud to call Starbucks partners. These young people are in America through no fault of their own. They are contributing to their community and to the economy – this is their home.

Starbucks commits to supporting Dreamers in the following ways:

Continue to offer Starbucks partners benefits and immigration advice. Starbucks will continue to reimburse all DACA partners for the biennial fee required to stay in the program. Current DACA beneficiaries whose DACA benefits expire before March 5, 2018 may file renewal requests by October 5, 2017. For more information on DACA benefits, the Immigration Advisor Program, and related questions, partners can visit the Partner Hub.

Encourage bi-partisan support in Congress to find a solution. Forcing productive members of our community to leave is unacceptable. We urge lawmakers to come together and pass legislation that keeps our Dreamers home.

Lend our voice to those who are a champion for DACA and Dreamers. Just last week, we signed onto a pledge with many other CEOs and companies committing to stand with Dreamers. We are also joining other companies to actively support legal action by the State of Washington and a coalition of employers to protect Dreamers from potential deportation.

As stated previously, we strive to create a company and culture that treats everyone - partners and customers alike - with respect and dignity. From Veterans, to Opportunity Youth, to Refugees and Dreamers, Starbucks will continue to build on our culture of inclusion as we seek to inspire and nurture the human spirit – one person, one cup and one neighborhood at a time.

Proud to be your partners,

Kevin Johnson

president and ceo

Lucy Helm

chief partner officer

Share