In North Carolina, a Democratic state official speaks out

Atty. Gen. Roy Cooper condemns Republican-sponsored laws on voter identification and same-sex marriage. Even so, he vows to defend them in court.

Cooper, in his 13th year as the state's elected attorney general, says he will defend in court laws he personally opposes. But he says he will also continue to criticize the public policy behind those laws.

Further complicating matters, Cooper plans to run for governor in 2016. That has prompted Republican charges that he's more interested in being governor than upholding North Carolina's laws.

Now those Republicans have put Cooper in an awkward spot. He has publicly condemned GOP-sponsored laws on voter identification and gay marriage, yet must defend those same laws in court.

RALEIGH, N.C. — Roy Cooper is in a very lonely place. He's a Democratic state attorney general surrounded by conservative Republicans who control North Carolina state government.

"If I believe a law is bad for North Carolina, I will say so," Cooper, 56, said in an interview at his downtown office. "I have a responsibility to say so."

At the same time, he said: "It is the duty under the law for this office to defend the state when it gets sued — even if I personally disagree with the public policy. This office is going to follow the law."

Cooper's office in this bustling state capital is just down the street from the Legislature, where both houses are controlled by Republicans. A few blocks away is the governor's mansion, occupied by Republican Pat McCrory.

The geography underscores Cooper's outsider status and the difficult maneuvering he faces in court — and in the court of public opinion in a state almost evenly divided between conservative and liberal voters.

Last week, Cooper took his battle against Republicans onto the national stage. In a Huffington Post op-ed, he accused the party of destroying North Carolina's reputation as a leader of the progressive South.

"It's as if the tea party created its own playground of extremist fantasies," Cooper wrote.

Democrats and liberals have been marginalized here since November, when Republicans seized control of the governor's mansion and Legislature for the first time since Reconstruction.

Lawmakers passed a flurry of laws reflecting conservative views on taxes, the environment, education and abortion.

In July, the Legislature passed one of the nation's most restrictive voting laws.

The measure requires voters to show a government-issued ID, shortens the early voting period, and ends same-day registration and pre-registration of high school students. It also weakens political contribution disclosure rules and allows political parties to rake in unlimited corporate donations.

Democrats and civil rights groups have said the law is intended to suppress voting by blacks, the poor, students and the elderly — reliably Democratic voters who are more likely to lack a state-issued ID and rely on early voting, early registration and same-day registration. Republicans have said the law helps prevent voter fraud, although they have not cited instances of widespread fraud.

In September, the Justice Department sued North Carolina, saying elements of the voting law discriminated against minorities. Civil rights groups have also filed lawsuits against the measure in state and federal court.

Cooper has called the law "regressive" and says it restricts voting rights. But he says his office will be in state and federal court to defend it.