NPC Daily
About NPC Daily

NPC Daily is a satire site, providing political and cultural commentary with wanton sarcasm. NPC Daily pokes fun of modern journalism and liberalism. If you believe one of our articles is real, it’s because the content is not too far adrift from what is published by mainstream news outlets. But, alas, our content is totally fictitious and is created to elicit laughs and bemusement.

NPC Daily doesn’t support physical or verbal attacks against anyone for any reason. We can assume no responsibility for anyone’s feelings or thoughts. We are blessed to live in a country that allows free speech, with laws that specifically shield humor from defamation and libel lawsuits. If you feel the need to complain about our content, we suggest you talk to your mother or a women’s study professor. If content might trigger negative emotions or if you choose to take offense, we recommend you exit the site and do not further consume the award-winning humor created by our authors, who have been specially trained in long-form sarcasm.

There are many options to find humor in this world: some look to CNN, others choose Saturday Night Live. If you enjoy our brand of humor consider becoming subscribing to us on SubscribeStar or buying NPC Daily merchandise.

Frequently Asked Questions

How can I contact NPC Daily?

Click here to contact us. Please note that unsolicited bulk email, email attachments, and junk email of any kind are not accepted, and will be filtered and immediately discarded upon receipt.

How can I trust that NPC Daily is real and legitimate?

NPC Daily is not a not a legitimate or real news site. However, it is a legitimate source of a good laugh.

I read something in NPC Daily that is in fact completely fake and slander/libel is not appreciated. How can I sue NPC Daily?

Please do not do that. The First Amendment protects satire as a form of free speech and expression. NPC Daily uses invented names in all of its stories, except in cases where public figures are being satirized. Any other use of real names is accidental and coincidental. NPC Daily is not intended for readers under 18 years of age.

Can I submit an article or an idea for an article to NPC Daily?

Absolutely. Click here to submit an article or click contact to pitch an idea. If we like it, we will use it with your permission. If we don’t, we regretfully apologize. We have no intention of hurting your feelings to the point that you are in need of a safe space. The suicide hotline is 1-800-273-8255.

Submit an Article

Can I advertise on NPC Daily?

Yes! NPC Daily is kept alive by your support through Subscribestar and our shop but we also get a ton of traffic. If you would like to purchase some ad space on NPC Daily, you can see how here!

Advertise on NPC Daily