HIV Positive Women Infects 324 Men With HIV As Revenge
11.6k SHARES Share Tweet Share

HIV Positive Women in Kenya has revealed that she has infected a total of 324 men with the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).

The HIV positive girl, who attends the Kabarak University in Nakuru, is said to have been infected by a man at a party. The unidentified 19-year old is allegedly aiming to infect a total of 2000 men in revenge.

According to reports:

The girl allegedly contacted Kenyan Scandals on Facebook and claimed she had something to confess.

After she was assured her identity was going to be protected she wrote: “Sep 22nd 2013 is a day I”ll never forget, we went clubbing in town and got drunk with some senior students then went back hostels for party round 2″.

She then explained that when she woke up, the morning after, she realized a boy named Javan had had sex with her while she was drunk.

“I only asked if he used a condom and he said yes, however when taking bath I noticed sperms down there, I wanted to commit suicide, I feared getting pregnant and HIV.”

When she discovered she was HIV positive, the girl confronted Javan who insisted he was clean.

“I was so depressed and took alcohol to die, I even bought poison, the pain was just unbearable how was I gone face the world, I let my parents down, I gave up on the world and just wanted to end my life. My future had been ruined, somehow someone had to pay,” the girl said.

“I accepted my fate and promised to make all men I come across suffer, I know I’m attractive and men both married and unmarried chase me left right and center. I buried the good girl in me and became the bad girl, my goal was to infect as many as possible,” she explained.

The girl then confessed she had already infected 324 men, 156 of which are students at the Kabarak University where she studies, the rest are married men, lecturers, lawyers, celebrities and politicians.

“Not a day passes without me having sex, mostly 4 people per day,” she continued in her confession. “Your day is coming, you men destroyed my life and I will make you and your people pay for it”

SOURCE