Men are sealing their penises shut to prevent pregnancy
An alarming new product lets men seal their urethras shut before sex, supposedly in order to protect their penises and stop anything getting out.

The new product, called a Jiftip, has raised concerns among health experts, who warned there is no evidence that the penis sticker is safe or effective.

Jifitip is a trademarked product described as an “adhesive flexible sticker covering just the urethra for the containment of urine and semen.”

The stickers, which are currently being sold in three-packs for $6, were designed to replace condoms as a more convenient and less intrusive way to cover yourself up.

However, as the Jiftip website notes, sealing your penis shut is not an effective form of contraception — and health experts advise it’s not safe either.

The site’s small-print also notes that the product is “not a condom and it is not approved for STI’s or pregnancy prevention purposes.”

But despite that, the controversial penis stickers are sold with the slogan: “Feel your partner, Feel Freedom, Feel Safe.”

This has prompted some concern among health experts — despite the disclaimers on the site that the Jiftip is only to be used “for pleasure enhancement and convenience.”

The registered company behind the products, Sumina Global Limited, have even included a timeline of the Jiftip’s development on their site.

They note that the Jiftip began as “a desperate attempt to avoid condoms,” and evolved in to the product which is available to be Beta-tested today.

Alongside the Jiftip development timeline, the site includes a blow-by-blow diagram showing how the penis stickers are used.

The product is supposed to bond to the skin, which lets you temporarily close up your urethra to “enjoy real sex,” according to the site.

A spokesperson for Jiftip told The Sun Online: “Don’t knock it until you’ve tried it.”

They added that feedback from customers has been positive so far, and claimed their product “has the potential to change the world,” provided it passes the Beta.

However, health experts are far from convinced.

Natika Halil, chief executive of sexual health charity the Family Planning Association, told The Sun Online: “There’s no evidence to suggest that this product is safe or effective, and it could potentially be very painful.

“As the company themselves say, it isn’t approved to prevent pregnancy or sexually transmitted infections — so if you want to avoid either of those, we’d recommend avoiding this product as well.

“It’s quite concerning that the company implies that sex without condoms isn’t ‘real sex,’ as condoms are the only form of contraception that can help prevent sexually transmitted infections.”