Trump invites young black conservatives to White House
WASHINGTON – President Trump has invited hundreds of young black conservative leaders to the White House Friday to hear him speak, The Post has learned.

The president will address attendees of the first ever Young Black Leadership Summit, being put on by conservative student group, Turning Point USA.

It’s not a big surprise that Trump would take a breather from his bustling rally schedule to address the young people – he’s shown support for the group in the past – and there’s a Kanye West connection.

Charlie Kirk, Turning Point’s 25-year-old founder and president, interviewed Trump in March as part of the “Generation Next” forum, a day’s worth of programming in the Eisenhower Office Building for young conservative leaders.

And in May, the president tweeted his approval of the group’s 29-year-old Director of Communications Candace Owens.

Owens, who was gaining traction as a black YouTube star with right political leanings, wanted to hold a forum for young black Americans who were “conservative curious,” as she once was, from day one.

“So my mission was always really clear when Charlie and I met. One of the first things he asked me was, ‘What do you want to do?’ And I said, really, in plain words, ‘I’d like to lead the black revolution against the Democrat Party,’” Owens told The Post.

While Owens joined the group in November, the plan to hold a conference for young black people got a shot of dragon energy in April.

Just days before he would put on the MAGA hat and pronounce his love for Trump, rapper Kanye West tweeted, “I love the way Candace Owens thinks,” the first online suggestion that he was more Republican-leaning.

Kirk said that West’s tweet made both Owens and Turning Point more prominent.

“And kind of gave more reinforcement to the idea of a black leadership summit because during that moment we saw hundreds of blacks across the country come out and say to Candace, ‘Oh my goodness, this is an amazing thing that you’re doing, we love you, we’re afraid to voice our mind,” Kirk explained to The Post. “Candace and I wondered, ‘I wonder how many there really are?’”

Turns out there are at least 350 to 400 young black people interested in hearing Trump speak.

Donald Trump Jr. will also speak to the group Thursday night to kick-off the conference, which will include appearances from black conservatives including HUD Director Ben Carson, “Clueless” actress-turned-pundit Stacey Dash and radio show host Larry Elder, among others.

In recent decades, Republicans have fared terribly among black voters. Trump’s engagement with the community has consisted of talking up black unemployment numbers on the campaign trail and hosting high profile meet-and-greets, like the one he had with West earlier this month.

There was a bright spot in August when it looked like his approval rating among black voters had climbed up to 36 percent, but the Rasmussen poll was quickly called out as being an outlier, with both Gallup and Ipsos/Reuters surveys saying that Trump’s approval numbers with the population segment hover around 13 percent.

Owens suggested that Trump’s strong economic performance would bring black voters to the table.

And he has another asset, Owens argued.

“We need to bring you to the black community because, in my opinion, President Trump is the most marketable president in the history of all presidents to the black community because he’s funny,” she said. “They really respond well to humor and self-deprecation.”

Trump will address the youth conference at 11 a.m. in the East Room.