US military intervention in Venezuela is not imminent: Bolton
National security adviser John Bolton said Friday that US military intervention in Venezuela is not imminent — but that all options remain on the table, according to a report.

“No,” Bolton said when asked by conservative talk radio host Hugh Hewitt if a military intervention by the US — or by Brazil or Colombia, or a combined force — is imminent in the South American country wracked by social and political turmoil.

“The president said all options are on the table. But our objective is a peaceful transfer of power,” he added. “When we say all options are on the table, we want to keep it at that level. And going beyond that, I think, would be imprudent.”

Team Trump is seeking to squeeze Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro out of power and has backed opposition leader and self-proclaimed interim president Juan Guaidó, leader of the National Assembly.

For months, Trump has floated the possibility of invading Venezuela, saying in August 2017 that the US has “many options for Venezuela, including a possible military option, if necessary.”

Bolton was photographed at a White House news briefing this week holding a notepad with the phrase “5,000 troops to Colombia” written on it.

The US has imposed sanctions on Venezuela’s state-run oil firm Petroleos de Venezuela SA, and Bolton has warned other countries not to deal with Maduro’s government regarding other assets.

“We’ve been imposing economic sanctions, increasing political pressure from around the world,” Bolton told Hewitt. “The overwhelming majority of the people of the country want the Maduro regime thrown out. That’s what we hope and expect to do.”

A senior official told Reuters that Venezuela plans to sell 15 tons of gold from central bank vaults to the United Arab Emirates.

Bolton responded to the report in several tweets Friday.

“Not only does Maduro require foreign paramilitary support to keep remaining threads of a failed dictatorship, but reports show he is flying out Venezuelan assets by the plane full,” he wrote. “Is he stealing resources from the people to pay for Russian intervention?”

“The National Assembly wants to use this gold to pay for food and basic needs of the people of Venezuela, including the families of soldiers in Venezuela,” he said.