Fourth of July
1. "One of the best perks about being President is anyone will hand you their baby."

July 4, 2012

President Barack Obama holds a baby while greeting guests during an Independence Day celebration on the South Lawn of the White House. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

2. Fun and games on the South Lawn!

July 4, 2009

The South Lawn of the White House as military families enjoyed the holiday. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

3. The VP visiting the troops in Iraq.

July 4, 2010

Vice President Joe Biden, center, congratulates a soldier on becoming a U.S. citizen during a naturalization ceremony in Al Faw Palace on Camp Victory, Iraq. Biden's wife, Dr. Jill Biden, and Army Gen. Raymond Odierno, left, commander of U.S. Forces Iraq, also attended the event during which more than 150 U.S. servicemembers became U.S. citizens. (by Elaine Wilson)

4. POTUS and FLOTUS cutting a rug.

July 4, 2010

President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama pretend to march to music in the Blue Room of the White House, before delivering remarks to military families during a Fourth of July celebration. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

5. Special celebrity performances!

July 4, 2012

Brad Paisley performs on the South Lawn of the White House. (Official White House Photo by Chuck Kennedy

6. Jimmy Fallon being Jimmy Fallon.

July 8, 2009

Jimmy Fallon can't believe he's at the White House on the Fourth of July. Watch part of his stand-up performance from that evening.

Watch on YouTube

7. Marching bands.

July 4, 2010

President Barack Obama delivers remarks to military service personnel and their families during the Fourth of July celebration at the White House. (Official White House Photo by Lawrence Jackson)

8. Saluting the President.

July 4, 2011

"I'm always trying to capture how people react to the President especially when he works a rope line. On the Fourth of July, the President was greeting members of the military and their families on the South Lawn when a young girl struck a salute as the President approached." (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

9. And saluting new American citizens.

July 4, 2012

President Barack Obama listens as Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano administers the oath during a military naturalization ceremony for active duty service members in the East Room of the White House.

10. Fireworks. (Who doesn't love fireworks?)

July 4, 2014

First Lady Michelle Obama, left, Malia Obama and President Barack Obama watch the Fourth of July fireworks from the roof of the White House, July 4, 2014. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

July 4, 2010

President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama watch the fireworks over the National Mall from the roof of the White House. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)