Bryan County accused of having too many voters
The Public Interest Legal Foundation (PILF), a non-profit organization out of Plainfield, Ind., has included Bryan County along with 247 other counties in the nation on a list of jurisdictions they say have more registered voters than adult residents in the county.

According to the PILF registered voters in Bryan County for the 2016 Election equaled 101 percent of the adults in the county of voting age.

"During the 2016 Election, 24 states had bloated voter rolls," PILF President and General Counsel J. Christian Adams said. "Voter fraud begins with corrupted voter rolls. Our nation's voter rolls have records that cannot be distinguished between living or dead; citizen or alien; resident or relocated. We hear about possible cyber-attacks, but we aren't doing enough to fix voter rolls that are certainly corrupt. The voter rolls are so bad in some states that election officials would have a hard time telling the difference between sabotage and negligence."

After learning of the accusation Bryan County Election Supervisor Cindy Reynolds released a statement saying that the Bryan County Board of Elections is not aware of the data used by the PILF to make the claim. And, that in Georgia, voter rolls are maintained by the state through the Secretary of State - not local the elections boards.

"On July 28, 2017, the SOS purged our files, and removed 2,934 voters from our roll due to no activity for two General Election cycles. This is a regular process of the SOS provided by Georgia laws to ensure that our voting rolls are as accurate as possible. The SOS also uses the vital records to remove, on a regular basis, individuals who have passed away," said Reynolds.

"The board takes its obligations very seriously and makes every effort to make sure that all citizens have their right to vote," she added.

Letters mailed to the counties and locales in question note that it appears they are violating the National Voter Registration Act (NVRA) because they are not properly maintaining the voter rolls.

"Federal law requires election officials to conduct a reasonable effort to maintain voter registration lists free of dead voters, ineligible voters, and voters who have moved away," the notice letters state.

"Based on our comparison of publicly available information published by the U.S. Census Bureau and the federal Election Assistance Commission, it appears that your jurisdiction is failing to comply with these federal law requirements."

The notices seek a variety of documents including noncitizen voters; numbers of dead, duplicate, relocated, and felon removals; evidence of use for databases which better identify relocated or alien registrants; and third-party communications about voter rolls, among others.

If a local official fails to respond to PILF's letter or declines to allow inspection of election records, they risk a federal lawsuit.

Other Georgia counties listed by the PILF are: McIntosh (154 percent), Marion (137 percent), Oconee (103 percent), Lee (102 percent) and Fayette (102 percent).