The First Lady's Trip to China
The First Lady will travel to China from March 19-26, 2014. She will be visiting Beijing from March 20-23, Xi’an on March 24, and Chengdu from March 25-26. And she's inviting students and classrooms across the U.S. to follow her trip.

During her trip to China, as on previous international trips to Africa, Asia, Europe and Latin America, the First Lady will be focusing on the power and importance of education, both in her own life and in the lives of young people in both countries.

She will also be visiting important historical and cultural sites in China, and will share with students in the U.S. the stories of the students she meets in China, as well as interesting facts about China’s history and culture — emphasizing the importance of students learning from one another globally.

Related: The First Lady Travels to China and Invites Young People to Participate

Video of the Trip

Raw Video: Behind the Scenes at Chengdu Panda Base with First Lady Michelle Obama Go behind the scenes with the First Lady at Chengdu Panda Base in Chengdu, China, on the last day of her official visit to China.

Michelle Obama: The iReport interview

The First Lady sits down and answers your questions from Beijing. Watch it on CNN.COM.

On Board: Travels with the First Lady in China, Day Three Go on board with the First Lady, Michelle Obama, as she answers your questions from the road in China.

The First Lady on the Importance of Studying Abroad Hear from the First Lady Michelle Obama visiting Peking University and speaking with Chinese students and American students studying abroad in China.

Exercise in China? First Lady Michelle Obama Answers Your Questions From China. In this video she answers "How do the people of China stay in shape? What type of exercises do they do?"

On Board: Travels with the First Lady in China, Day One Hear from the First Lady Michelle Obama as she recaps day one of her trip to China and previews her upcoming address on study abroad and connecting students across continents.