Boyfriend arrested in grisly murder of pregnant woman
The boyfriend of the pregnant woman who was stabbed to death in her Queens apartment building turned himself in and was charged with murder on Friday, authorities said.

Anthony Hobson, 48, surrendered at the 104th Precinct station house in Ridgewoodwith his lawyer, police said.

The Rego Park man was ordered held without bail on charges of second-degree murder, tampering with physical evidence and fourth-degree criminal possession of a weapon over the death of Jennifer Irigoyen, 35.

Irigoyen, who was five months pregnant, was killed early Sunday after she was ripped from her apartment in a Myrtle Avenue building in Ridgewood and knifed in the building’s vestibule, according to police.

Hobson was captured on surveillance video at around 1 a.m. as he dragged Irigoyen from the hallway of her third-floor apartment to a stairwell, officials said.

“He’s got a knife! He’s going to kill the baby!” Irigoyen had shouted, a witness previously told The Post.

The expectant mother was then knifed multiple times in the torso, neck and abdomen, authorities said.

She was rushed to Wyckoff Heights Medical Center, but neither she nor her unborn baby could be saved.

Irigoyen worked as a real-estate agent selling luxury homes and also doubled as a professional Latin ballroom dancer and Zumba instructor. She was also a classically trained pianist.

She is survived by a young child from a previous relationship, according to Queens District Attorney Richard Brown.

In a statement Friday, Brown called Irigoyen’s killing “a heinous crime.”

“A woman was brutally stabbed — killing her and the unborn child,” Brown said.

“The defendant is alleged to have shown no mercy and no regard for human life when he repeatedly and purposely plunged a knife into this expectant mother’s abdomen, torso and neck.”

Hobson, dressed in a blue blazer and button-down shirt, held his head down and did not say a word to reporters as detectives walked him from the 104th Precinct station house to a waiting police car on Friday.

He has at least two prior arrests — one on Sept. 13,, 2009, for aggravated unlicensed operating of a motor vehicle and another on July 12, 2009, for operating a motor vehicle while under the influence, police said.

“Domestic violence seized Jenny’s life too soon and in such a tragic way,” a GoFundMe set up for Irigoyen by relatives reads. “As her family members, we cannot Fathom the fear and anguish that she must have felt during her final moments. It is a thought that continues to chip away at our hearts.”

“She did not deserve this. She deserved to be happy. She deserved to be loved. She deserved to raise her son,” the page read, adding, “We want to see justice serviced.”

Additional reporting by Stephanie Pagones and Nick Fugallo