The invasive land planarian Platydemus manokwari (Platyhelminthes, Geoplanidae): records from six new localities, including the first in the USA
Variation within localities was strikingly different between Dodo Creek, Solomon Islands and the rest of the studied localities. All specimens from France (3), New Caledonia (9 from different localities), Singapore, Florida and Puerto Rico (2 in each case) were identical and displayed the World haplotype; all specimens from Townsville had the Australian haplotype with a minor difference of one base for one specimen (haplotype Australian 2). Sequences from Henderson (Solomon Islands) were identical in the five specimens, with haplotype Australian 1. In contrast, the ten specimens from Dodo Creek included three animals with haplotype Australian 1 and seven with haplotype World. The Solomon Islands were thus the only country in which genetic variation among specimens was observed.

The analysis of the 21 long sequences also revealed the same two haplotypes, World and Australian. The difference between the two haplotypes was 42 bases, on a total of 848 ( p -distance: 4.8%; kimura-2 parameter distance: 5.0%). A minor variation was found in the Australian haplotype, with one specimen having a one-base difference (distance from this specimen to the World haplotype: p -distance: 5.0%; kimura-2 parameter distance: 5.2%); this haplotype is designated as “Australian 2” and the other, major haplotype is designated as “Australian 1”. No variation was found in the World haplotype (15 sequences from four countries) for these long sequences. A tree constructed from these sequences shows two well differentiated branches, with identical sequences in the World haplotype branch and minor variation in the Australian haplotype branch ( Fig. 6 ).

The analysis of the 38 “short” sequences showed that only two haplotypes were present. One haplotype was found in specimens from France, French Polynesia, New Caledonia, Singapore, Florida and Puerto Rico, and certain specimens from the Solomon Islands; we designate it as the “World haplotype”. One haplotype was found only in specimens from Australia and certain specimens from the Solomon Islands; we designate it as the “Australian haplotype”. The difference between the two haplotypes was 15 bases, on a total of 401 ( p -distance: 3.7%; kimura-2 parameter distance: 3.8%); no individual variation of these “short” sequences was found in any of the two haplotypes. A tree constructed from these sequences shows two well differentiated branches, with identical sequences in each of the branches ( Fig. 5 ).

We obtained COI sequences from 38 individuals. Of these, 21 were “long” sequences, obtained with two pairs of primers, and 17 were “short” sequences, when only one pair of primers provided results.

The dimensions and characters that were compared between specimens of the two haplotypes included body length and width, the distance of the mouth and gonopore from the anterior end, the lengths of the oesophagus, pharynx and pharyngeal pouch, distance between the common sperm duct and common ovovitelline duct, distance from the common sperm duct to the tip of the penis papilla, penis length and penis width at it base, length of the male atrium, length of the female atrium, length of the glandular canal, length of the common ovovitelline duct and depth of the viscid gland. Sexually mature specimens of P. manokwari from the Solomon Islands were found to be considerably smaller (22–28 mm long) than those from Caen, France (44.5 mm long) and Townsville, Australia (45 mm long). The only characters that were found that may possibly differentiate between the two haplotypes are the length of the penis papilla expressed as a percentage of the total body length ( Table 2 ), and the shape of the penis papilla. Specimens of the World haplotype generally exhibited a finger-shaped or elongate conical penis papilla that was 1.4–1.7% of the body length, similar in appearance of the copulatory organs of P. manokwari figured by de Beauchamp (Figs. 1A and 1B in de Beauchamp, 1962 ) whereas in specimens of the Australian haplotype the penis papillae tended to be a low regular conical shape with a length less than 1% of the total body length (0.7–0.9% of the body length), closely resembling the copulatory organs of P. manokwari figured by de Beauchamp (Fig. 1 in de Beauchamp, 1972 ) and by Winsor (1990) (Fig. 1 in Winsor, 1998 ).

The flatworms ( Figs. 1 – 4 ) presented the following morphological characteristics: body broadest in the middle, tapering evenly anteriorly but more abruptly posteriorly; two large prominent eyes back from the tip of the elongate snout-like head; dorsum a dark olive brown colour; pale cream median dorsal longitudinal stripe beginning just behind the eyes and continuing to the posterior tip; olive brown colour grading to grey at anterior tip; two thin submarginal cream stripes with fine lower greyish margin running laterally from the anterior end along the length of the body; ventral surface a pale finely mottled light brown. These features are consistent with those of Platydemus manokwari de Beauchamp, 1963 (Platyhelminthes, Continenticola, Geoplanidae, Rhynchodeminae) ( de Beauchamp, 1962 ; Justine et al., 2014 ; Kawakatsu, Ogren & Muniappan, 1992 ; Winsor, 1990 ).

Time of invasion and other remarks

In France, after the first finding of P. manokwari (October 2013), the hothouse of the Jardin des Plantes in Caen in which the species was found was closed and public access restricted. In April 2014, a thorough search was performed in the same hothouse. Several species of land planarians were found (some are still unidentified), including four adult specimens of P. manokwari. A citizen-based survey of land planarians in France (Thévenot, Justine & Rome, 2014), supported by important media involvement (list of links: https://peerj.com/articles/297/#links), yielded hundreds of records of non-indigenous land planarians in France (Justine, 2014; Justine, Thévenot & Winsor, 2014) but never a record of P. manokwari in the wild.

The presence of the species in Singapore had already been noted in 2010, according to unpublished observations listed in Table 1, and the species is probably spreading; according to the observations of one of us (AWKH), the species was not present in his garden before 2013. Local observations show that P. manokwari predates the introduced giant African snail, Achatina fulica Bowdich, 1822.

The detection of P. manokwari in New Caledonia is recent (2014). After the discovery of the first specimens in the capital city, Nouméa, in April 2014, a survey was conducted from September 2014 to April 2015. Specimens were found in several places in the mainland, including Southern and Northern Provinces, and in two of the three Loyalty Islands, Maré and Lifou. The current extensive distribution of such a cryptic species, evidenced after only eight months of survey, suggests that the introduction of P. manokwari is not recent. Moreover, discussions with scientists involved in the observation of soil species revealed that the flatworm had been observed several years ago, but no substantiated proof of these observations could be found. Since a number of endemic land planarians exist in New Caledonia (Schröder, 1924; Winsor, 1991), it could not be ascertained if these earlier observations were actually of P. manokwari, or of other species. P. manokwari was not detected when large surveys were conducted in the 1990s (Gargominy et al., 1996)—it is thus likely that its introduction occurred in the last 20 years. Local observations show that P. manokwari predates introduced A. fulica.

In Wallis and Futuna, our records of P. manokwari are based only on two photographs taken by one of us (JYM), in 2007 in Uvea (Wallis Islands) and in 2008 in Futuna (Hoorn Islands). These two island groups are separated by more than 100 km of sea. No more recent records are available.

The presence of P. manokwari on Guam has been known since 1977 (Eldredge & Smith, 1995; Hopper & Smith, 1992). Our records, dated 2004, confirm the continuing presence of the species; to our knowledge, no more recent records are available.

In the USA, the accidental introduction of P. manokwari through human agency to Florida is probably recent, with our first specimens found in August 2012. The species is apparently now well established, with several different locations found in 2014 in Miami Dade County (Table 1). The introduction of P. manokwari to Puerto Rico is also probably recent, with the first specimens found in December 2014, in a single locality, San Juan (Table 1). To our knowledge, no survey aiming specifically at detecting P. manokwari has been done in other parts of Florida or in other US states. Land planarians are often photographed by amateurs; however, a survey of various websites and various Google searches (December 2014) did not reveal any photographic report of P. manokwari in the US.

The introduction of the species to Guadalcanal, Solomon Islands also seems recent (2014). Specimens of P. manokwari were found in fields invaded by the introduced Giant African snail, Achatina fulica. Although the report of these flatworms in Guadalcanal is recent, we do not know if this is truly an indication of a recent introduction or not. The case of New Caledonia, where the species was found in many localities after a coordinated participative survey was initiated, and, on the contrary, the case of Guam, for which we have no report for the last decade, show that land planarians are detected and reported only when an appropriate survey is undertaken. It is obvious that land planarians in Solomon Islands, a country with low income and expensive internet access, are less often photographed by amateur photographers who post their findings on the internet than they are in the US or Singapore.

Figure 7 shows all available records of P. manokwari in the world. The spread of the species mainly concerns countries and territories in the Pacific Area; Florida and Puerto Rico are the first records in the Americas. The record in Florida is the first on the American mainland.