Angewandte Chemie International Edition
As the most important skeletal component in plants, the polysaccharide cellulose is an almost inexhaustible polymeric raw material with fascinating structure and properties. Formed by the repeated connection of D‐glucose building blocks, the highly functionalized, linear stiff‐chain homopolymer is characterized by its hydrophilicity, chirality, biodegradability, broad chemical modifying capacity, and its formation of versatile semicrystalline fiber morphologies. In view of the considerable increase in interdisciplinary cellulose research and product development over the past decade worldwide, this paper assembles the current knowledge in the structure and chemistry of cellulose, and in the development of innovative cellulose esters and ethers for coatings, films, membranes, building materials, drilling techniques, pharmaceuticals, and foodstuffs. New frontiers, including environmentally friendly cellulose fiber technologies, bacterial cellulose biomaterials, and in‐vitro syntheses of cellulose are highlighted together with future aims, strategies, and perspectives of cellulose research and its applications.

1. Introduction In 1838 the French chemist Anselme Payen described a resistant fibrous solid that remains behind after treatment of various plant tissues with acids and ammonia, and after subsequent extraction with water, alcohol, and ether.1 He determined the molecular formula to be C 6 H 10 O 5 by elemental analysis, and observed the isomerism with starch. The term “cellulose” for this plant constituent was first used in 1839 in a report of the French academy on the work of Payen.2 Thousands of years prior to the discovery of the “sugar of the plant cell wall”, cellulose was used in the form of wood, cotton, and other plant fibers as an energy source, for building materials, and for clothing. Since the Egyptian papyri, a considerable part of human culture has been shaped by cellulose materials. As a chemical raw material, cellulose has been used for about 150 years. The formation of cellulose nitrate by reaction with nitric acid3 and the corresponding technical synthesis of the first thermoplastic polymer material called celluloid (camphor used as plasticizer) by the Hyatt Manufacturing Company in 1870 demonstrated that new materials could be produced on an industrial scale by the chemical modification of cellulose.4 With this knowledge came an increased use of synthetic fibers based on wood cellulose, instead of native cellulose fibers, for textiles and technical products. The first example herein is the production of regenerate cellulose filaments by spinning a solution of cellulose in a mixture of copper(II) hydroxide and aqueous ammonia, in which tetraamminecopper(II) hydroxide (cuprammonium hydroxide) [Cu(NH 3 ) 4 ](OH) 2 is formed,5 followed by the currently most important large‐scale technical process in fiber production, the viscose process.6 In this process, cellulose is transformed into cellulose xanthogenate (see Scheme 16 and Figure 18) followed by spinning its solution in aqueous sodium hydroxide (viscose). From the current point of view, cellulose is the most common organic polymer, representing about 1.5×1012 tons of the total annual biomass production, and is considered an almost inexhaustible source of raw material for the increasing demand for environmentally friendly and biocompatible products.7 Wood pulp remains the most important raw material source for the processing of cellulose, most of which is used for the production of paper and cardboard. Approximately 2 % (≈3.2 million tons in 2003) were used for the production of cellulose regenerate fibers and films, as well as for the synthesis of a large number of cellulose esters and ethers. Such cellulose derivatives produced on an industrial scale (see Schemes 16 and 17 in Section 4) are used for coatings, laminates, optical films and sorption media, as well as for property‐determining additives in building materials, pharmaceuticals, foodstuffs, and cosmetics. In the field of synthetic fibers, the Lyocell process made an industrial breakthrough as an environmentally friendly alternative to the viscose process, whereby cellulose is regenerated from solution in N‐methylmorpholine‐N‐oxide (NMMO) monohydrate by spinning (Section 5). Numerous new applications of cellulose take advantage of its biocompatibility and chirality for the immobilization of proteins,8 antibodies,9 and heparin,10 and for the separation of enantiomeric molecules11 as well as the formation of cellulose composites with synthetic polymers and biopolymers.12 The fascination of the cellulose biopolymer is a result of its specific structure, which is described in more detail in the following section. The fusion of both carbohydrate and polymer chemistry in a macromolecule composed of repeating glucose units generates surprising specificity and impressively diverse architectures, reactivities and functions. In contrast to carbohydrates of low molar mass, the reactions and properties of cellulose are determined by intermolecular interactions, cross‐linking reactions, chain lengths, chain‐length distribution, and by the distribution of functional groups on the repeating units and along the polymer chains. Cellulose differs from synthetic polymers by virtue of its distinct polyfunctionality, its high chain stiffness, and its sensitivity toward the hydrolysis and oxidation of the chain‐forming acetal groups, which determine its chemistry and handling. The elucidation of the polymeric structure of cellulose can be traced back to 1920 with the pioneering work of Hermann Staudinger.13 Through acetylation and deacetylation of cellulose, he recognized that its structure does not merely consist of an aggregation of D‐glucose units. Rather, the glucose units were found to be linked to each other covalently to form long molecular chains. This, along with Staudinger′s research with other chain molecules, marked the discovery of the polymeric state of molecules and of the corresponding reactions that are unique to polymers and represents the origin of polymer science. Figure 1 shows the molecular structure of cellulose as a carbohydrate polymer generated from repeating β‐D‐glucopyranose molecules that are covalently linked through acetal functions between the equatorial OH group of C4 and the C1 carbon atom (β‐1,4‐glucan), which is, in principle, the manner in which cellulose is biogenetically formed. As a result, cellulose is an extensive, linear‐chain polymer with a large number of hydroxy groups (three per anhydroglucose (AGU) unit) present in the thermodynamically preferred 4C 1 conformation. To accommodate the preferred bond angles of the acetal oxygen bridges, every second AGU ring is rotated 180° in the plane. In this manner, two adjacent structural units define the disaccharide cellobiose. Figure 1 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Molecular structure of cellulose (n=DP, degree of polymerization). The chain length of cellulose expressed in the number of constituent AGUs (degree of polymerization, DP) varies with the origin and treatment of the raw material. In case of wood pulp, the values are typically 300 and 1700. Cotton and other plant fibers have DP values in the 800–10 000 range, depending on treatment; similar DP values are observed in bacterial cellulose. Regenerate fibers from cellulose contain 250–500 repeating units per chain. By acid treatment and cellulase‐catalyzed hydrolysis, cellulose can be quantitatively decomposed to D‐glucose. Partial chain degradation yields powdery cellulose substrates of the microcrystalline cellulose type14 (such as Avicel) with DP values between 150 and 300. A β(1→4) linked glucan with 20–30 repeating units offers all properties of cellulose.15 The cellulose chain consists at one end of a D‐glucose unit with an original C4‐OH group (the nonreducing end); the other end is terminated with an original C1‐OH group, which is in equilibrium with the aldehyde structure (the reducing end). Technical celluloses, such as bleached wood pulp, contain additional carbonyl and carboxy groups as a result of the isolation and purification processes that play a significant role in the processing of cellulose.16 The molecular structure imparts cellulose with its characteristic properties: hydrophilicity, chirality, degradability, and broad chemical variability initiated by the high donor reactivity of the OH groups (Section 3). It is also the basis for extensive hydrogen bond networks, which give cellulose a multitude of partially crystalline fiber structures and morphologies (Section 2). The properties of cellulose are therefore determined by a defined hierarchical order in supramolecular structure and organization. Scheme 1 presents the four different pathways by which cellulose is accessed today. As described above, the dominant pathway is the production of cellulose from plants. In the seed hairs of cotton, cellulose is available in almost pure form. In contrast, wood cellulose forms a native composite material with lignin and other polysaccharides (hemicelluloses) from which it is isolated by large‐scale chemical pulping, separation, and purification processes. Scheme 1 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Principle pathways to cellulose formation. Apart from plants, certain bacteria, algae, and fungi produce cellulose as well. Because of their specific supramolecular structures, these cellulose forms are frequently used as model substances for further research on cellulose structure, crystallinity, and reactivity, as well as for the development of new materials and biomaterials (Section 6). On this basis, the biosynthesis of cellulose has been investigated in detail over the past decades.17 Therefore, it is known that the biosynthesis of cellulose has been part of the life cycle of cyanobacteria for over 3.5 billion years.18 The synthesis of cellulose in vitro should be highlighted as an additional important development in recent years.15 The first reported cellulase‐catalyzed formation of cellulose was based on cellobiosyl fluoride,19 and the first chemosynthesis was carried out through a ring‐opening polymerization of substituted D‐glucose pivalate moieties, followed by deprotection (Section 7).20 A considerable stimulation of scientific and technological research in the field of cellulose has been triggered over the past 10 years in response to the growing global importance in renewable resources and environmentally compatible materials. With its foundations in the knowledge contained in monographs, books and review articles,21 this review presents important current developments and discusses the aims, strategies, and perspectives in the field of cellulose. The topics highlighted herein were chosen for their current importance to the field of cellulose research and the nature of the innovative impetus associated with a given development; their selection reflects the experience of the authors. Thus, a collection of current cellulose research and development has been created that combines discussions of structure, synthesis, innovative products, and new frontiers in an updated contribution to the scientific literature.

2. Structure and Properties of Cellulose in the Solid State and in Solution The hierarchical structure of cellulose, formed by the hydrogen bond network between hydroxy groups, has been the subject of intense research for more than 100 years, marked with frequent controversy over results and a consistent supply of new insight.22 Directly from the beginning, progress was closely connected with the introduction and continued development of structure‐analysis methods, such as X‐ray diffraction, electron microscopy, high‐resolution 13C solid state NMR spectroscopy, and neutron diffraction analysis. A detailed analysis and modeling of the various structural levels of cellulose is essential for synthetic reaction procedures, and for the controlled structure formation and properties of cellulose‐based chemical products (man‐made cellulosics). 2.1. Solid‐State Structures of Native Cellulose As shown in the molecular structure represented in Figure 1, the hydroxy groups of β‐1,4‐glucan cellulose are placed at positions C2 and C3 (secondary, equatorial) as well as C6 (primary). The CH 2 OH side group is arranged in a trans‐gauche (tg) position relative to the O5C5 and C4C5 bonds. As a result of the supramolecular structure of cellulose, the solid state is represented by areas of both high order (crystalline) and low order (amorphous). 2.1.1. Crystal Structure As a first approximation, the crystal structure of native cellulose (cellulose I) determined by X‐ray diffraction can be described by a monoclinic unit cell (space group P2 1 ) which contains two cellulose chains in a parallel orientation with a twofold screw axis.23 In the 1980s, 13C‐CP/MAS NMR spectroscopy was used in the initial discovery that native cellulose is present in two different crystalline cellulose I modifications (I α and I β ), which can be found alongside each other; the I α /I β ratio depends on the origin of the cellulose.24 Investigations with electron microbeam diffraction25 and combined X‐ray and neutron diffraction26 recently revealed the corresponding crystalline structures to have triclinic (I α ) and monoclinic (I β ) unit cells. Figure 2 shows a schematic representation of the I β crystal structure. In the side view (Figure 2 b) of the central chains of a unit cell, two intramolecular, chain‐stiffening hydrogen bonds are revealed. Notably, one of the most recent reports on the I β structure27 describes different conformations for neighboring chains as well as different H‐bonding systems inside neighboring molecular layers. Figure 2 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Crystal structures of cellulose I β and cellulose II: a) projection of the unit cell (UC) along the a–b plane; b) projection of the UC parallel to the (100) lattice plane (cellulose I) and the (010) lattice plane (cellulose II).22c Apart from the thermodynamically less stable cellulose I, cellulose may occur in other crystal structures (cellulose II, III, and IV),21 of which cellulose II (Figure 2) is the most stable structure of technical relevance. It can be formed from cellulose I by treatment with aqueous sodium hydroxide (mercerization) or by dissolution of the cellulose and subsequent precipitation/regeneration, as is done in the formation of fiber and film. This monoclinic crystal structure28 with two antiparallel chains in the unit cell is characterized by the specific unit cell geometry with a modified H‐bonding system. The alkalization of cellulose is of considerable importance to commercial‐scale cellulose production as a method for increasing the reactivity (activation) of subsequent reactions as well as for the mercerization of cotton. Depending on the concentration of lye, the temperature, and mechanical load, it is possible to convert cellulose I into various crystalline alkali forms, each with a different crystal structure and variable NaOH and water content.29 All forms will then convert into crystalline “hydrato cellulose” (water cellulose) during washout, and to cellulose II through drying (Figure 3). It is not yet understood how the parallel chain arrangement of cellulose I undergoes transition into the antiparallel orientation of cellulose II without an intermediate dispersion of cellulose molecules. Figure 3 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint X‐ray wide‐angle scattering curves of cellulose modifications formed during alkalization and regeneration29c (I rel =relative intensity, 2 θ=diffraction angle). There are currently only a few reports on the structure of noncrystalline random cellulose chain segments.30 More knowledge in this area is required, as these structure elements have a significant influence on the accessibility and reactivity of cellulose, as well as on the properties of man‐made cellulose fibers. 2.1.2. Morphology The biological function and numerous applications of cellulose are based on its distinct fiber morphology. The morphological hierarchy is defined by elementary fibrils, microfibrils, and microfibrillar bands.31 The lateral dimensions of these structural units are between 1.5 and 3.5 nm (elementary fibrils), between 10 and 30 nm (microfibrils), and on the order of 100 nm (microfibrillar bands). The length of the microfibrils is on the order of several hundred nm. Figure 4 shows electron micrographs of the fibrillar structure of samples of varying origin; a structural model of an initially hydrated bacterial cellulose sample is shown in Figure 28 (Section 6.1). Figure 4 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Electron micrographs of cellulosic microfibrils of varying origins:32 left, Valonia spp. (algae) cellulose; center, cotton linters; right, spruce sulfite pulps. The fringed fibrillar model with crystalline regions of varying dimensions (crystallites) and noncrystalline regions has proven successful for the description of the structure of microfibrils and the partial crystalline structure of cellulose in connection with the reactivity of this polymer29c (Figure 5). Figure 5 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Various models of the supramolecular structure of cellulose microfibrils.29c The degree of crystallinity of cellulose and the dimensions of the crystallites have been the subject of extensive investigations for many years;33 some results of X‐ray diffraction measurements of native celluloses have been compiled in Table 1. The corresponding values of regenerated cellulose in the form of filaments and films are given in Table 4 (Section 5.5.1). Table 1. Degrees of crystallinity (x c ), crystallite sizes (D (hkl) ), and lateral dimensions (d) of microfibrils of native celluloses Cellulose Source x c [%] crystallite sizes [nm] d [nm] D (110) D (020) algal cellulose >80 % 10.1 9.7 8.9 10–35 bacterial cellulose 65–79 5.3 6.5 5.7 4–7 cotton linters 56–65 4.7 5.4 6.0 7–9 ramie 44–47 4.6 5.0 3–12 flax 44 (56)[a] 4–5 4–5 4–5 3–18 hemp 44 (59)[a] 3–5 3–5 3–5 3–18 dissolving pulp 43–56 4.1–4.7 10–30 Notably, the lateral crystallite dimensions of regenerated cellulose (cellulose II) are in the range of ≈4–5 nm regardless of the production process (Table 4), whereas in native celluloses, values of up to 20 nm have been observed. The reasons for the formation of nearly uniform cross‐sectional dimensions of these cellulose II crystallites from different structure‐forming processes still have to be clarified. The pore structure can be considered the counterpart to the fibril morphology of cellulose. It is considerably important for the accessibility in chemical reactions and enzymatic degradation.34 The controlled variation of pore structures enables cellulose products to meet the needs of a wide range of applications, from highly specialized membrane and carrier materials to consumer goods, such as nonwovens35 with excellent absorption properties. 2.1.3. Growth Architectures and Material Design As the skeletal component in all plants, cellulose is organized in a cellular hierarchical structure. In combination with the accompanying substances hemicelluloses, lignin, and pectin, this structure leads to the extraordinary properties of native composite materials, such as wood, cotton, flax, and hemp. Figure 6 schematically illustrates the cell walls of cotton and wood with differently structured layers, in which the secondary cell‐wall layer S2 contains the main quantity of cellulose. Figure 6 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Structural design of plant cell walls exemplified by a) cotton and b) wood fibers:21b C=cuticula layer, L=lumen, ML=middle lamella, P=primary cell wall layer, R=reversing point, S1=secondary cell wall layer 1, S2=secondary cell wall layer 2, T=tertiary cell wall, W=wart layer. The cellulose molecules organized in the cell walls in the form of microfibrils have characteristic orientations (helix angles), which differ as a function of the cell wall layer, and according to the plant type as well. Figure 7 shows X‐ray fiber diffraction patterns of cotton and bast fibers (flax, hemp, and jute), which reflect the different average orientations of the crystalline spectra of these natural fibers. Figure 7 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint X‐ray fiber diagrams of various natural cellulosic fibers.36 The lower orientation of the cellulose microfibrils in cotton fibers (helix angle ≈18°) gives rise to a smaller module of elasticity and a higher elongation at breakage compared with bast fibers, which have a much higher microfibril orientation (helix angle ≈4°–5°) and fiber strength. The adaptation of the mechanical properties of wood to environmental conditions through corresponding helix angles is fascinating, and has yet to be rivaled in technical composite materials.37 However, it is already possible to adapt the parameters of cellulosic man‐made fibers to user requirements through a targeted influence on the orientation (with particular respect to the noncrystalline chain segments). It is therefore possible to develop man‐made cellulose fibers similar to cotton with low orientation (high elongation), and technical fibers with high orientation and a high modulus of elasticity, similar to bast fibers. 2.2. Solution Structures of Cellulose and Cellulose Derivatives An understanding of the structure of cellulose and cellulose derivatives in solution is not only a matter of scientific interest, but has great practical importance as well. Examples include the shaping of cellulose from spinning solutions,38 modification of the synthesis of cellulose derivatives (Section 3) and the properties of water‐soluble cellulose ethers (Section 4), which all are dependent on the solution structure. For this reason, questions regarding the structure of cellulose in solution have been the subject of intense research and discussion over the past decades. According to Schurz,38a a differentiation is made initially between molecularly dispersed and network solutions, to which a portion of gel particles may be added. Figure 8 illustrates suggested models of the different solution states of cellulose derivatives, which may depend on the type of solvent, polymer concentration, chain length distribution, and the type, pattern, and degree of cellulose substitution. Figure 8 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Scheme of the potential dissolution states of cellulose.38a As a rule, cellulose derivatives with free OH groups are not molecularly dispersible. Investigations with partially substituted cellulose carbanilates and benzoates revealed, however, that aggregate‐free solutions can occur through specific polymer–solvent (e.g. DMF) interactions.39 On the other hand, completely substituted products (such as cellulose tricarbanilates) can be molecularly soluble or, owing to strong intermolecular interactions, insoluble as is the case with trimethylsilyl cellulose with DS 3.0. Whereas highly diluted solutions have been used for fundamental research of solution structures, applied practices, such as the viscous process, employ concentrated systems with polymer concentrations of 8–12 %, which are described as network solutions with gel‐particle portion in accordance with model assumptions.38b,38c Apart from rheological examinations, gel‐particle characterizations are also normally carried out to determine the quality of a given spinning solution.38 Over the past few years the research group of Burchard, in particular, has carried out extensive fundamental research into the structure of cellulose and cellulose derivatives in solution by means of static and dynamic light scattering.40 With regioselective modified cellulose ethers, new insight was gained into the entropy effect during the dissolution of cellulose derivatives (Section 3.2.3).39, 40 The initial research results on the solution state of cellulose in N‐methylmorpholine‐N‐oxide (NMMO) monohydrate as a technically relevant system (Section 5) substantiate the presence of bimodal molecule aggregations with up to 1000 chains, which can be attributed to incomplete dissolution of crystal structures of the starting cellulose material.41 In the first approximation, the average number of molecules in the smaller aggregates corresponds to that of crystallites (50–100), whereas the average number of molecules in larger aggregates correlates with the number of molecules found in a microfibril (250–1000).42 In a ternary solvent system composed of NMMO, water, and diethylenetriamine [bis‐(2‐aminoethyl)‐amine], cellulose is molecularly soluble within a temperature range of 25–60 °C. Therefore, the average molar mass and other properties of the dissolved molecules could be determined by means of light scattering.43 2.3. Liquid‐Crystalline Cellulose Structures Owing to chain stiffness, cellulose and certain cellulose derivatives in solutions of higher concentration may form cholesteric (chiral‐nematic) structures. Since the discovery of the lyotropic liquid‐crystalline state of hydroxypropyl cellulose in water,44 a multitude of cellulose derivatives were found, which produce lyotropic or thermotropic liquid‐crystalline phases.45 Chiral‐nematic films and gels are formed from the solutions. The influence of the solvent and of the chain stiffness on the pitch and handedness of the chiral‐nematic structures was examined.46 Regioselectively substituted (position 2, 3 or 6 of the AGU) cellulose phenylurethanes with F, Cl, or CH 3 groups in the phenyl ring form lyotropic liquid‐crystalline mesophases in highly concentrated solutions, the structure and optical properties of which depend strongly on the site of substitution, as well as on the concentration and temperature of the solution.46 The photo‐cross‐linking of cellulose‐(3‐chlorophenyl)‐urethanes in mixtures with acrylate monomers produces semi‐interpenetrating polymer networks, which can change their selective reflection under compression.47 Cellulose urethanes with azo‐dye substituents and acrylates of hydroxypropyl cellulose are other well‐analyzed lyotropic liquid‐crystalline cellulose products. The latter form gels in water through photo‐cross‐linking, and their resulting color is determined by the water content.47 The optical properties that can be controlled by the pitch of cholesteric phases open up important fields of application, such as color pigments in car paints and as copy protection color for document papers. Liquid‐crystalline states of unsubstituted cellulose are significant with particular respect to new spinning methods and the production of high‐performance fibers. Suitable solvents for this include NMMO, a mixture of trifluoroacetic acid and chlorinated alkanes, DMA/LiCl, ammonium rhodanide in liquid ammonia,48 and concentrated phosphoric acid. However, any spinning process based in these liquid‐crystalline systems has yet to gain industrial acceptance. The cellulose concentrations in NMMO used in the Lyocell process are below the liquid‐crystalline phase range (Section 5). Recently, developments appear to have emerged in conjunction with the possible production of chiral‐nematic suspensions from cellulose crystallites or microfibrils.46a

4. Innovative Commercial Esters and Ethers of Cellulose Cellulose esters of inorganic and organic acids (Scheme 16) as well as cellulose ethers (Scheme 17) were pioneer compounds of cellulose chemistry, and remain the most important technical derivatives of cellulose.4, 21a,21d, 109 Present developments are therefore aimed at a more detailed understanding of the structure–property relationships, an improved adaptation of these cellulose products to specific and new applications, and to the decreased use of chemicals from an economical and ecological perspective. Continuous investments into the improvement of technical syntheses (pilot and production plants), into sophisticated analysis, and into improved testing methods determine the course of these developments. Scheme 16 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Typical technical cellulose esters. Scheme 17 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Examples of commercial cellulose ethers. 4.1. Progress in the Development and Application of Cellulose Esters 110a 4.1.1. Coatings and Controlled‐Release Systems Materials such as metal, plastic, wood, paper, and leather are coated with polymers primarily for protection and for the improvement of their properties. For this purpose, cellulose acetate (CA), cellulose acetate propionate (CAP) and cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB) are the most important classical and solvent‐based cellulose esters of the coating industry. To decrease the amount of organic solvents used in coating systems, there has been an increased development over the past few years of high solid‐content coatings, water‐based coatings, powder coatings, and radiation‐curable polymers as key elements in new technologies. These technologies now meet the requirements of commercial products as well. In view of the EU directive on volatile organic compounds (VOC), solvent‐based lacquers are under special scrutiny. In the case of nitrocellulose (NC) lacquers, the aim is to retain these solvent‐containing lacquers as powerful alternatives within the provisions of the EU directive through the establishment of a solvent management system.111a Various concepts were pursued in the development of water‐based cellulose ester coatings. Notable examples include the use of conventional as well as high hydroxy group‐containing esters in water, the introduction of carboxy groups by radical‐initiated graft copolymerization,112 acylation with dicarboxylic acid anhydrides, and the esterification of carboxymethyl cellulose (Table 3). As the complex structures of these commercial products cannot be characterized completely in many cases, the functional groups are listed without information about their distributions along the polymer. The DS values of the various residues are used for product descriptions. A cellulose acetate butyrate succinate is thus characterized with DS acetate =0.09, DS butyrate =1.94, DS OH =0.58 and DS succinate =0.38. Radiation‐curable coatings are synthesized from common cellulose esters by introduction of polymerizable and cross‐linkable functionalities (Table 3). Table 3. Examples of water‐based and radiation‐curable cellulose ester coatings. Substrate Reagent Product, R in cell‐OR cellulose acetate propionate (CAP) H H 3 CCO H 3 CCH 2 CO cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB) H H 3 CCO H 3 CCH 2 CH 2 CO OCCH 2 CH 2 COOH cellulose acetate (CA) H H 3 CCO carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) (H 3 CCO) 2 O, (CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CO) 2 O H H 3 CCO H 3 CCH 2 CH 2 CO H 2 CCOO−Na+ cellulose butyrate succinate (CB‐SU) H H 3 CCH 2 CH 2 CO OCCH 2 CH 2 C(O)OCH 2 CH(OH)CH 2 OC(O)CHCH 2 cellulose acetate propionate (CAP) H H 3 CCO H 3 CCH 2 CO cellulose acetate propionate (CAP) H H 3 CCO H 3 CCH 2 CO OCCHCHCOOH In the field of controlled‐release systems, cellulose ester is in an excellent position as a result of its established process and application safety, its readiness toward chemical modifications, and its good handling properties.110a New systems were therefore developed on this basis as enteric coatings, hydrophobic matrices, and semipermeable membranes for applications in pharmacy, agriculture, and cosmetics. 4.1.2. Composites, Films, and Membranes Since the commercial production of celluloid, the classical application of cellulose esters has been as thermoplastic materials, and is currently under intense advancement for the creation of high‐performance materials that are based on renewable resources.110a Topics include the production of long‐chain cellulose esters and the development of blends with other polymers. Cellulose esters are widely used in composites and laminates as binder, filler, and laminate layers. In combination with natural fibers, they can be used to some extent as composites from sustainable raw materials with good biodegradability. Cellulose ester films have been used in large quantities as optical media by virtue of their very good mechanical and optical properties and ease of accessibility.110a Although other products with a favorable balance of performance and cost have partially replaced cellulose esters in this field, cellulose acetates in particular continue to be an excellent material for photographic films owing to their excellent properties. The development of LCDs were a result of innovations in this field. An additional domain of cellulose esters is their use as membranes and other separation media.110a Cellulose nitrate and cellulose acetate were the first materials to be fabricated into useful membranes. Today, cellulose esters are used in all techniques of separation. Their applications concern water supply, food and beverage processing, as well as applications in medicine and in bioscience research. They cover the entire filtration spectrum from particle‐, micro‐ and ultrafiltration up to nano‐ and hyperfiltration (reverse osmosis). Superabsorbers are also a form of sorption media in the broadest sense, characterized by their high swelling and water retention capacities and insolubility (through cross‐linking).110b 4.2. Developments in the Field of Cellulose Ethers 111 The synthesis of cellulose ethers is an important aspect of commercial cellulose derivatization. The production of methylcellulose (MC) was described for the first time in 1905, followed by other nonionic alkyl ethers of cellulose in 1912, and of carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) and hydroxyethyl cellulose (HEC) after 1920. Shortly thereafter, the industrial production of these most important cellulose ethers was started. They have the outstanding properties good solubility and high chemical stability, and are toxicologically innocuous. The especially important matter of water solubility can be controlled to a certain extent by the constitution and combination of the ether groups, the degree of substitution, and the distribution of substituents. Cellulose ethers are processed in a dissolved or highly swollen state. They are the dominant polymers in numerous industrial applications and in convenience goods for matters in which consistency in the quality of aqueous media and water‐containing systems is required. Etherification of cellulose on the industrial scale is performed in aqueous alkaline media in which cellulose is present in a highly swollen state. The dominant approach for this process is O‐alkylation with alkyl halides according to Williamson; other approaches include epoxide addition and Michael addition of reagents with activated double bonds. Scheme 17 highlights some typical examples. In contrast to methyl cellulose, carboxymethyl cellulose, and hydroxyalkyl cellulose, the commercial importance of cyanoethyl cellulose remains limited to a few special applications: as an additive in the paper and textile industry, and in the formation of membranes. 4.2.1. Cellulose Ethers for Drilling Technologies and Building Materials 111a The use of cellulose ethers as additives to drilling fluids for consistency control is of considerable importance to the drilling of wells for mineral oil, natural gas, and water. Drilling fluids supplemented with cellulose ethers keep rock dust in suspension, cool the drilling head, and stabilize the bore. Another significant core business in which cellulose ethers are used is the building materials market, which involves a multitude of tailor‐made versions of methylhydroxyethyl (MHEC) and methylhydroxypropyl celluloses (MHPC) that control the rheology and processing of plaster systems. As additives that are admixed to the mortar in the range of 0.02–0.70 % by mass, they make up a market share of about 90 %. Cellulose ether permits the silo transport and machine processing of dry mortar as well as the effective handling of gypsum plasters, knifing fillers, tile adhesives, and joint fillers. They determine the water requirement, the water‐retaining power, and the development of consistency in plaster systems. 4.2.2. Pharmaceuticals, Cosmetics, and the Food Market 111a In addition to carboxymethyl cellulose, high‐purity hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose (HPMC) was synthesized and introduced onto the market for this demanding area of application. HPMC binds water, has good stability in freeze/thaw cycles, mediates the viscosity of liquids, and is odorless and tasteless. In products of this kind, purity and permanent quality play a critical role, as their production must adhere to GMP standards. Carboxymethyl cellulose is used as a stabilizer in beverages. It has improved the consistency, texture and storage quality of milk products, and ensures that the solids added are kept in suspension. It is also used to stabilize whey‐based beverages.

6. Bacterial Cellulose as a Model Compound and High‐Performance Material 6.1. Formation and Structure The biosynthesis of cellulose takes place not only in plants, but, as already mentioned in Section 1, also in bacteria (such as Acetobacter, Acanthamoeba, and Achromobacter spp.), algae (Valonia, Chaetamorpha spp.), and fungi.134 The formation of cellulose by laboratory bacterial cultures is an interesting and attractive access to pure cellulose for both organic and polymer chemists. By selecting the substrates, cultivation conditions, various additives, and finally the bacterial strain, it is possible to control the molar mass, the molar mass distribution, and the supramolecular structure. Thus it is possible to control important cellulose properties, and also the course of biosynthesis (e.g. kinetics, yield, and other metabolic products). Amongst the cellulose‐forming bacteria, Acetobacter strains (reclassified as the genus Gluconacetobacter) are especially suitable for the production and investigation of cellulose. These gram‐negative and strictly aerobic bacteria form ellipsoidal, straight, or slightly bent rods in the size range of 0.6–0.8×1.0–4.0 μm. They are not pathogenic and are commonly found on naturally grown fruits and in fruit products. Strains of the Acetobacter xylinus species produce extracellular cellulose that is easily isolated as fiber material. Under static immersed cultivation conditions, a biofilm of varying thickness (fleece) is produced which helps the colonized bacteria to maintain a high oxygen content near the surface, and which serves as a protective barrier against drying, natural enemies, and radiation. The metabolic products of A. xylinus were initially described by A. J. Brown in 1886.135 He identified a gelatinous mass, formed on the culture solution during the course of vinegar fermentation as cellulose. Thanks to systematic and comprehensive research over the past decades,17 recent knowledge about the formation and structure of bacterial cellulose is extensive. Moreover, this work is an important part of research investigations of the integration of biotechnological synthesis methods in polysaccharide chemistry and the development of cellulose products with new properties and application potentials. The synthesis of the bacterial cellulose occurs between the outer and plasma membranes of the cell by a cellulose‐synthesizing complex (terminal complex) starting with uridine diphosphate glucose (UDP glucose).136 This complex is associated with bacterial cell surface pores, which have a diameter of about 3.5 nm. Cellulose synthase catalyzes the addition of UDP glucose to the end of the growing cellulose chain, which exits the cell as an elementary fibril, and then forms a 3D network with other elementary fibrils through formation of microfibrils and ribbons.136 Crystallization and polymerization of the elementary fibrils are closely linked. One single cell can convert over 100 glucose molecules into cellulose per hour. As the culture medium contains millions of bacteria, the polymer is synthesized practically “before your eyes”. The details of the polymerization catalyzed by cellulose synthase have been the subject of controversy.137 The latest studies seem to indicate that the β‐(1→4) linkage starts with the formation of cellobiose as an intermediate at a dual UDP glucose binding site. A detailed model of the structure (Figure 28) of the bacterial cellulose of A. xylinus (strain NCIB 8034) in a never‐dried state was determined by synchrotron X‐ray diffraction experiments and studies carried out by electron microscopy.138 Anhydrous units (nanofibrils) with cross‐sectional dimensions in the nm range appear hydrated as a whole, and are aggregated to flat microfibrils with a width of 70–150 nm. This model was basically substantiated by means of small‐angle X‐ray diffraction, and was expanded by the fact that a shell of noncrystalline cellulose chains passes around neighboring microfibrils to produce a microfibril band with a width of about 500 nm.139 After drying, the initially wet and highly swollen cellulose fleece becomes a uniplanar oriented foil with microfibrils partially twisted around the longitudinal axis (Figure 28) which consist of ≈80 % I α cellulose. Figure 28 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint SEM image of dried bacterial cellulose (top) and model of an initially hydrated bacterial cellulose microfibril (bottom). 6.2. Properties and Applications Although identical to cellulose of plant origin in terms of molecular formula, bacterial cellulose is quite different. The degree of polymerization is very high, with DP values of 2000–8000. Crystallinity is also high, with values of 60–90 %. Bacterial cellulose is characterized by its high purity (no association with accompanying substances like hemicelluloses, lignin, or pectin) and by an extremely high water content of 90 % or more. Upon complete removal of water by air drying, the bacterial cellulose will only rehydrate to the same low extent as that of plant celluloses after re‐exposure to water: about 6 %. After gentle freeze‐drying, however, it can absorb up to 70 % of the original water content by re‐swelling.140a Through a stepwise exchange of water for other solvents, it is possible to introduce methanol, acetone, or n‐hexane, for example, at the same volume as water in bacterial cellulose, while maintaining the hollow space and network structure.140a Bacterial cellulose highly swollen with water gives well‐resolved 13C NMR spectra without additional pretreatment with conventional techniques (CP/MAS) of solid‐state NMR spectroscopy.138, 140a,140d,140e Figure 29 shows a typical example. Detailed NMR spectroscopic examinations of bacterial cellulose and of its biosynthetic route were carried out by using 13C‐labeled D‐glucose.141a Figure 29 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint 13C‐CP/MAS NMR spectrum of a purified never‐dried bacterial cellulose fleece (swelling agent: water).140a,140e Because of its crystalline nano‐ and microfibril structure, bacterial cellulose has excellent mechanical properties142 (Table 5). It is therefore well‐suited as a reinforcing agent for paper and fibers made from glass, carbon, phenol resin, and silicon at small quantities (5 %). Owing to the high modulus of elasticity in combination with a large internal loss factor, it is also a superior material for headphone and loudspeaker membranes (Sony Corp.). Table 5. Mechanical properties of bacterial cellulose and other organic layer materials (from Gilbert[142]). Material Young's Modulus [GPa] Tensile Strength [MPa] Elongation [%] bacterial cellulose (BC) 15–35 200–300 1.5–2.0 polypropylene (PP) 1–1.5 30–40 100–600 polyethylene terephthalate (PET) 3–4 50–70 50–300 cellophane 2–3 20–100 15–40 Over the past few years, there has been an increased interest in commercial applications of bacterial cellulose. Important examples include supports for proteins, cell cultures and microorganisms, products for temporary skin and tissue replacement (Biofill, Bioprocess, and Gengiflex), calorie‐free food such as Coco de Nata, and additives in the production of lattices and paper. These activities are accompanied by the isolation of new bacterial strains, genetic modifications, and a wide variation of all laboratory culture parameters.143 6.3. Biotechnological Synthesis of Blood Vessels from Dextrose The investigations described below required for the formation, characterization and application of innovative biomaterials for surgery140 have taken advantage of the powerful A. xylinus AX5 strain as a particularly suitable “cellulose factory in the laboratory”.140a As shown in Figure 30, this strain produces water‐soluble D‐glucose (dextrose) in static culture with the conventional Schramm–Hestrin culture medium140a within eight days, with a yield of 40 % cellulose in the form of a high swollen fleece at the interface between the culture medium and air. Figure 30 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Biotechnological synthesis of bacterial cellulose of varying design: a) substrate D‐glucose; b) static culture with cellulose fleece at the interface between Schramm–Hestrin culture medium and air after eight days of cultivation at 28 °C; c) never‐dried (top) and completely air dried (bottom) cellulose fleece viewed from the top; d) colony of an Acetobacter xylinus strain; e) glass matrix for shaping the bacterial cellulose directly in the culture medium with cellulose tubes formed (see Figure 31); f) cellulose tubes of different dimensions after removal from the matrix and purification (arrow: implants for experimental microsurgery; scale values in cm).140a Thus it was demonstrated that bacterial cellulose can be suitably shaped for application during biosynthesis. With the patented matrix reservoir technology developed for this purpose, it is possible to synthesize the cellulose in the shape of formed hollow bodies directly in the culture medium without subsequent treatment.144 Figure 31 shows a schematic diagram of the cultivation vessel, in which the glass matrix is immersed in a larger volume of nutrient solution. The tube‐shaped bacterial cellulose is produced in the nutrient medium which has entered between the outer and inner matrices, and is supplied with oxygen by a second opening to the air space. Figure 31 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Matrix reservoir cultivation technique for the production of shaped bacterial cellulose (BASYC): a) basic sketch; b) example of the building units of a glass matrix: (1) Schramm–Hestrin culture medium in the reservoir and within the matrix, (2) outer matrix, (3) inner matrix, (4) cultivation space between outer and inner matrix, (5) spacer, (6) opening to the reservoir, (7) opening to the air, (8) stopper; c) ready‐to‐use matrix.140a The cellulose tubes (brand name BASYC, Bacterial Synthesized Cellulose) formed biotechnologically in this way were investigated for their application as a new type of biomaterial for microsurgery in a cooperative effort between physicians, biologists and chemists.140c Tubular implants with an internal diameter of less than 3 mm were used (Figure 30 f, arrow). This application is derived from new microsurgical techniques that can repair nerves and blood vessels by sutures in a very small diameter range with optical equipment. The well‐known synthetic implant materials from the surgery of larger vessels made of polytetrafluoroethylene, polyethylene terephthalate, polyethylene, and polyurethane have been insufficient for the requirements of microsurgery, often resulting in thromboses. The wall of the BASYC tubes consist of the bacterial cellulose loaded with water at 90 % or greater in the nanofiber network, as described above. The hollow spaces of the BASYC material transport water, monovalent ions, and small molecules, but not biopolymers or corpuscular blood constituents. The stored water not only stabilizes the cellulose network, it also contributes to the tissue and hemocompatibility of BASYC. For the BASYC vessel implants, the low roughness of the inner surface (feature variations of ≈15 nm) is especially significant, and can be obtained with the matrix‐reservoir technique. This degree of roughness is within the order of magnitude of that for typical blood vessels in rats. BASYC tubes also meet other significant demands for microvessel replacement: they have a constant shape, are sufficiently stable against internal and external pressure, are flexible and elastic, and are capable of handling a tight microsurgical suture. Figure 32 a shows an example of the microsurgical work with shaped cellulose material. Results of investigations of the microsurgery of nerves and vessels of the rat as an experimental model are shown in Figure 32 b–f. Figure 32 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Application of bacterial cellulose tubes (BASYC) for training in microsurgical techniques and for animal experimental microsurgery on nerves and vessels: a) end‐in‐end connection (anastomosis) of BASYC tubes; b) nervus ischiadicus of the rat directly after operation of the dissected nerve (white arrows: anastomosis, black arrow: suture) with BASYC protective cover; c) operating field 10 weeks after the nerve dissection (arrows: new connective tissue and new blood vessels); d) BASYC implant in the carotid artery of the rat directly after operation (white arrows: anastomosis, black arrows: free blood flow, visible through the cellulose tube); e) cross‐section of the middle part of a BASYC implant from the carotid artery of the rat after four weeks of residence time in the body as a histological preparation (cf. text); f) SEM image of a longitudinally cut BASYC implant with a homogeneous surface in the cellulose (left) and natural vessel region (arrow: remaining suture material). Magnification: 10 ×: (a, b, c); 6 ×: (d); and 32 ×: (e).140c Upon dissection of the nervus ischiadicus and subsequent reconnection by a microsurgical suture, a protective cover (cuff) of BASYC prevents connective tissue from growing into the nerve gap, and favors the adhesion of the fascicles, which facilitates early regeneration of the nerve and a rapid return of muscle function. The good incorporation of bacterial cellulose‐forming connective tissue and new blood vessels on the surface of the protective cover is worthy of particular emphasis. Upon reconnection of a dissected carotid artery (in a rat model) with a BASYC tube, the internal surface of the BASYC material becomes completely covered by an endothelial cell layer after a residence time of four weeks, as determined by histological examination of the preparation along with a specific test for endothelial cells (Figure 32 e). Blood remnants can be found in the lumen. As observed by electron microscopy, the complete colonization of the BASYC region with endothelial cells covering both parts of the suture (Figure 32 f) can be substantiated. Apparently, the BASYC material is a good substrate for the anchoring of autologous cells. Upon coverage of longitudinally cleaved tubes with bovine endothelial cells in cell culture tests, a distinct sprouting of the initially spherical cells takes place within 24 h. Electron microscopy shows that the resulting filaments barely differ from the fibers of bacterial cellulose (Figure 33). This structure apparently also benefits the rapid endothelial colonization of BASYC. Figure 33 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Scanning electron microscopy of the growth of bovine endothelial cells on a BASYC surface 24 h after spreading: a) overview; b) section at 4 × enlargement.140c Notably, further investigations have shown that BASYC microvessel implants can be applied toward vessels under low or high pressure, and that in all cases, thromboses were never observed. 6.4. Bacterial Cellulose for Veterinary Medicine and Cosmetics The supramolecular structure of bacterial cellulose depends on the method of formation applied. Apart from the methods employed in static cultures and by the matrix‐reservoir technique described above, an optimized surface cultivation of A. xylinus has been developed.145 This cultivation system overcomes the transport barrier at the interface between nutrient solution and air for the introduction of the necessary nutrients (carbon and nitrogen sources, inorganic salts, and oxygen) as well as for the removal of the products formed by spraying a substrate aerosol directly on the surface of the immersed culture without causing a mechanical impairment. The cellulose layers of about 10 cm thickness thus obtained are tested and respectively used for veterinary and cosmetic applications.146

7. In‐Vitro Syntheses: Ways to New Horizons The synthesis of a polysaccharide requires frequently repeated glycosylations, including the total control of the configuration at the anomer C atom and of the regioselectivity of the reacting hydroxy group. For this reason, it has only been within the past few years that cellulose could be produced synthetically. 7.1. Enzyme‐Catalyzed Cellulose Structure After many attempts to synthesize cellulose outside organisms, Kobayashi and co‐workers19b succeeded in 1992 with the enzymatic polymerization of β‐cellobiosyl fluoride in the presence of purified cellulase as catalyst in an acetonitrile/buffer solution at 30 °C. Cellulose with a yield of 54 % and a DP value of 22 was formed. The polymer structure as determined by 13C and 1H NMR spectroscopy corresponds well with that of natural cellulose. Scheme 22 demonstrates that this in‐vitro synthesis principle can also be extended to the preparation of amylose and chitin.19 In continuation of this synthesis work, the in‐vitro formation of crystalline cellulose I in an optimized solution system with purified cellulase has been described for the first time.19d The generation of this thermodynamically less stable allomorph had been known up to this point in living cells only. Scheme 22 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Enzyme‐catalyzed in‐vitro synthesis of cellulose and related polysaccharides. 7.2. Ring‐Opening Polymerization of Glucose Derivatives By stepwise synthesis147 and particularly by cationic ring‐opening polymerization of glucose orthoesters, cellulose was synthesized in a purely chemical manner by Nakatsubo and Kamitakahara in 1996 for the first time.20 Starting with 3‐O‐benzyl‐α‐D‐glucopyranose‐1,2,4‐orthopivalates with different groups at position 6, cellulose (after deprotection) is accessible according Scheme 23, as well as regioselectively substituted cellulose derivatives. Scheme 23 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Chemosynthesis of cellulose by ring‐opening polymerization of 3,6‐di‐O‐benzyl‐α‐D‐glucopyranose‐1,2,4‐orthopivalate and the influence of substituents at positions 2 and 3 on the course of the reaction. Scheme 24 shows the corresponding synthesis of uniform methyl celluloses. The DP values of these celluloses are in the range of 20–50. The influence of the glucose substituents on the regio‐ and stereochemistry of the polymerization could be identified and optimized through systematic work, as well as the availability of the glucose derivatives required and the deprotection chemistry of the product.148 Scheme 24 Open in figure viewerPowerPoint Synthesis of regioselectively substituted methyl celluloses starting from 3‐O‐benzyl‐α‐D‐glucopyranose‐1,2,4‐orthopivalates.

8. Summary and Outlook Science and technology continue to move toward renewable raw materials and more environmentally friendly and sustainable resources and processes. Cellulose, cellulose derivatives, and polysaccharides as a whole are of growing importance in the development and application of polymer materials. This progression has triggered a distinct renaissance of cellulose research and application all over the world over the past 10 years. In this context, it has been essential to increase the current knowledge of organic and polymer chemistries as well as in the chemistry of low‐molecular‐weight carbohydrates and other polysaccharides in the basic and application‐oriented work in the field of cellulose. Moreover, it has been important to intensify the interdisciplinary interactions between biology, physics, pharmacy, medicine, and the wood industry and chemical engineering. In consequence of this expanding development, groundbreaking insight has been gained on the complex structure of cellulose and cellulose derivatives in the solid state and in solution, on cellulose reactivity, reaction control, and selective syntheses, and regarding supramolecular structure formation as well as the biosynthesis and in‐vitro synthesis of cellulose. This includes the rapid development of polysaccharide instrumental analysis and a deeper understanding of the relation between reaction conditions, product structure, and application‐oriented properties. Thus, it has been possible to develop new types of cellulose esters and ethers as “polymers of the future”, for example, toward a wide range of high‐quality applications on the industrial scale, which have been established in the market. Fundamental research on the cellulose/NMMO/water system has led to a novel, environmentally friendly technology (Lyocell process) for the production of cellulose regenerate products, which has revolutionized the processing of cellulose, and has at least partially removed the previous disadvantages in comparison with the process steps in the production of synthetic polymers. All signs and symptoms seem to indicate that the impressive rate of development in the field of cellulose will continue or will even accelerate. The establishment of centers of excellence, new pilot, process, and production plants, the expansion of large‐scale technical products, a close cooperation of fundamental and applied research, as well as an effective international cooperation of scientists and facilities are distinct evidence of this fact. New insight into the processes of wood pulping and overall wood processing, into the production of cellulose from other plants as well as into the analysis of cellulose products will help to ensures that the quality, variety of products, and ecological acceptance of the starting materials will grow, along with the consistent ecological orientation of industrial cellulose chemistry. Fundamental changes regarding the access to cellulose as a raw material are predictable because of the fast growth in understanding cellulose biosynthesis. Indeed, efforts are being made to purify and sequence cellulose synthase and associated proteins to generate a reproducible cell‐free system capable of generating crystalline cellulose. By introducing genes to modify cellulose biosynthesis in important cellulose‐forming organisms (trees, cotton crops, and bacteria), it should be possible to tailor various types of cellulose for pulp, paper, building materials, textiles, and other fields of application. If cellulose‐forming bacteria could be cultivated on a large technical scale, the requirement of cellulose could be satisfied entirely by this source in the future. The aim of this paper is to demonstrate the current state of development in the field of cellulose research and application through examples. It should be also pointed out that cellulose as a natural product belongs to the polymers, which hold an impressive future potential for fundamental knowledge as well as for large‐scale production in a wide range of applications.

Glossary AGU anhydroglucose unit BF blow film CMC carboxymethyl cellulose CA cellulose acetate CAB cellulose acetate butyrate CAP cellulose acetate propionate CE carbohydrate esterase CF cellulose formate CTFA cellulose trifluoracetate DCC dicyclohexylcarbodiimide DP degree of polymerization DS degree of substitution HEC hydroxyethyl cellulose HMDS hexamethyldisilazane HPC hydroxypropyl cellulose HPMC hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose MC methyl cellulose Ms mesyl NC nitrocellulose NMMO N‐methylmorpholine‐N‐oxide NMP N‐methylpyrrolidone NTA nitrilotrieacetic acid PDA 1,4‐phenylenediamine Piv pivalate TDS thexyldimethylsilyl TEA Triethylamine Thexyl 1,2‐dimethyl‐butyl‐1 TMS trimethylsilyl TMSC trimethylsilyl cellulose Tr triphenylmethyl, Trityl Ts tosyl Tf triflyl UDP uridine diphosphate

Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft for the financial support of the Priority Program “Cellulose and Cellulose Derivatives—Molecular and Supramolecular Structure Design” from 1996 to 2002 as well as for the support by the Fachagentur Nachwachsende Rohstoffe and the German Federal Ministries BUEL and BMBF. A lot of the work described herein was carried out on this basis. Moreover, we express our gratitude for the effective and helpful cooperation with the colleagues in these programs as well as for the stimulating interaction with Professor Dieter Schumann (Clinic of Maxillofacial and Plastic Surgery, University of Jena), Professor Wolfgang Glasser (Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, USA), Professor R. Malcolm Brown (University of Texas, Austin, USA), and Professor Fumiaki Nakatsubo (Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan). We thank Wolff Cellulosics GmbH (Germany), the German subsidiaries of the Acordis‐Group, Lenzing AG (Austria), and Eastman Chemicals Company (Kingsport, TN, USA) for the trusting cooperation and for the versatile information on commercial products and processes.

Dedicated to Professor Burkart Philipp

Biographical Information

Dieter Klemm received his master's degree (diploma) in 1964 from the University of Jena, and received his PhD in 1968 from work in the stereospecific synthesis of nitrogen‐containing steroids conducted with Prof. G. Drefahl at the Institute of Organic Chemistry. He obtained his habilitation in 1977 after conducting research in synthetic polymer chemistry with H.‐H. Hörhold. After work in the pharmaceutical industry and initial activities in polysaccharides as a university lecturer, he has been a professor of organic chemistry at the University of Jena since 1987. He is associate editor of the journal Cellulose and columnist of Polymer News. In 2004 he became the first German scientist to receive the Anselme Payen Award of the American Chemical Society for contributions to the development of new cellulose‐based materials.

Biographical Information

Hans‐Peter Fink studied physics at Rostock University, where he received his diploma in 1973 and his PhD in 1977 under Prof. G. Becherer on X‐ray diffraction analysis of glass ceramics. Between 1975 and 1992 he worked at the Institute for Polymer Chemistry in Teltow–Seehof, conducting structural investigations of cellulose which was also the topic of his habilitation (1991, Rostock University). He has been employed at the Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Polymer Research since its foundation in 1992, and he currently heads the Division of Natural Polymers of the Institute. He has been awarded repeatedly for his contributions to the field of cellulose research, most recently in 2002, with the Jisuke Hayashi Award of the Cellulose Society of Japan.

Biographical Information

Brigitte Heublein studied chemistry at the Friedrich Schiller University of Jena and received her master's degree (diploma) in 1969 with her investigations of cationic polymerization of vinyl monomers. She received her PhD in 1974 from research into the control of cationic polymerizations of vinyl monomers with Prof. G. Heublein at the Institute of Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry, and was associated with that research group until 1989. Since 1990 she has been working in organic natural products and polysaccharide chemistry under the direction of Prof. D. Klemm.

Biographical Information

Andreas Bohn studied mineralogy at the universities of Münster and Berlin, where he graduated in 1994 from the Hahn–Meitner Institute with a diploma thesis on X‐ray and neutron scattering investigations of the structure of proton conductors. Since 1995 he has been working in the department of structure characterization at the Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Polymer Research in Teltow and Potsdam (Golm). In 2000 he received his PhD degree with a thesis on X‐ray diffraction investigations of the structure and orientation of bacterial cellulose and regenerated cellulose films. He has since headed the group of X‐ray structure characterization at the Institute.