The invasive New Guinea flatworm Platydemus manokwari in France, the first record for Europe: time for action is now
We recently identified non-indigenous terrestrial flatworms found in a hothouse in Caen (France) as the New Guinea flatworm Platydemus manokwari de Beauchamp, 1963. The identity of these flatworms was subsequently confirmed by molecular analysis of COI sequences. Platydemus manokwari is among the “100 World’s Worst Invader Alien Species” ( Lowe et al., 2000 ). In this paper, we present evidence for the identification of the species in France, the first record in Europe, and provide a brief review of the records of the species in the world, lists of its known prey, and possible control options.

The “new” group of non-indigenous flatworms present in Europe includes mainly species from the southern hemisphere such as the IAS New Zealand flatworm Arthurdendyus triangulatus (United Kingdom, Eire, Faroe Islands), the Australian flatworm Australoplana sanguinea alba (Moseley, 1877) (Eire, United Kingdom), and the Australian Blue Garden flatworm Caenoplana coerulea Moseley, 1877 (United Kingdom, France, and recently Menorca ( Breugelmans et al., 2012 ) and Spain ( Mateos et al., 2013 )). The United Kingdom has some twelve or more non-indigenous species most of which are Australian and New Zealand species ( Jones, 2005 ).

The “old” group includes Bipalium kewense Moseley, 1878 and Dolichoplana striata Moseley, 1877 that were undoubtedly inadvertently introduced to Europe in the 19th Century by horticulturalists. One or both these species are present in ten European countries, and are the only non-indigenous flatworms presently recorded in Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Finland, Germany, Norway, Poland, and Portugal. These two species appear to be largely restricted to hothouses in Europe and do not meet the foregoing criteria for Invasive Alien Species; the species are widespread but exist in localized populations, and may be better regarded as non-invasive species. However such species may move to an invasive stage when optimum environmental and other conditions for the species occur, and the flatworms then have the potential to impact on soil fauna, especially earthworms as has occurred in areas of North America with Dolichoplana striata ( Hyman, 1954 ) and Bipalium species ( Ducey et al., 2005 ; Ducey, McCormick & Davidson, 2007 ).

Historic biological invasions include the passive dispersal of terrestrial flatworms, also known as land planarians. The main driver for this was probably horticulturalists of the 19th Century using the then recently invented Wardian cases to safely transport back to the hothouses and gardens of Europe rare plants, together with soil containing cryptic exotic animal species ( Winsor, Johns & Barker, 2004 ). As a consequence, over 30 species of land planarians have established themselves as non-indigenous species in various countries outside their native range ( Winsor, Johns & Barker, 2004 ).

An undesirable consequence of globalization, a relatively modern phenomenon, has been an increase in the number of biological invasions that challenge the conservation of biodiversity and natural resources ( Secretariat of NOBANIS, 2012 ; Simberloff, 2014 ). Invasive Alien Species (IAS) have been defined as “plants, animals, pathogens and other organisms that are non-native to an ecosystem, and which may cause economic or environmental harm or adversely affect human health. In particular, they impact adversely upon biodiversity, including decline or elimination of native species–through competition, predation, or transmission of pathogens–and the disruption of local ecosystems and ecosystem functions” ( Convention on Biological Diversity, 2009 ).

Genomic DNA was extracted from a small piece of the worm, using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen). A fragment of 424 bp of COI gene was amplified with the primers COI-ASmit1 (forward 5′-TTTTTTGGGCATCCTGAGGTTTAT-3′) and COI-ASmit2 (reverse 5′-TAAAGAAAGAACATAATGAAAATG-3′) ( Littlewood, Rohde & Clough, 1997 ). The PCR reaction was performed in 20 µl, containing 1 ng of DNA, 1× CoralLoad PCR buffer, 3 Mm MgCl2, 66 µM of each dNTP, 0.15 µM of each primer, and 0.5 units of Taq DNA polymerase (Qiagen). The amplification protocol was: 4′ at 94°C, followed by 40 cycles of 94°C for 30″, 48°C for 40″, 72°C for 50″, with a final extension at 72°C for 7′. PCR products were purified and sequenced in both directions on 3730xl DNA Analyzer 96-capillary sequencer (Applied Biosystems). Sequences were edited using CodonCode Aligner software (CodonCode Corporation, Dedham, MA, USA), compared to the GenBank database content using BLAST and deposited in GenBank under accession number KF887958 . Sequences were compared using MEGA5 ( Tamura et al., 2011 ).

Specimens were found in a hothouse in the Jardin des Plantes in Caen (France); according to witnesses, it is likely that similar specimens were present in the hothouse for months. Specimens were collected by hand and sent alive to Paris by postal service. Eight specimens were processed. Five were kept alive and used for prey experiments and detailed photographs; they died after several days and were discarded. Three were killed in hot water and then stored in ethanol (specimens JL81A and JL81B) or formalin (JL81C). A small piece of the body was taken from the two ethanol-fixed individuals for molecular analysis. Photographs were forwarded to one of us (LW) for identification. Histological anatomical investigations were not undertaken at this time. Specimens are deposited in the collections of the Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris, under registration number MNHN JL81A–C.

There is some variation in the literature about the date of description of P. manokwari , 1962 or 1963. We carefully examined the original publication. The paper was presented at a meeting in December 1962 and is included in the volume dated 1962, but the actual date of publication was April 18, 1963. In accord with Article 21.1 ( International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature, 1999 ), the date of the taxon is 1963. The bibliographical date of the publication remains 1962, but the taxon is Platydemus manokwari de Beauchamp, 1963.

The two COI sequences we obtained from two individuals were identical. They were compared to the only available COI sequences of a member of the genus Platydemus in GenBank ( Platydemus manokwari ; Accession number: AF178320.1 ). The p-distance between our new sequence and the GenBank sequence of Platydemus manokwari was 4%. Although this is not mentioned in the GenBank record, we know that this specimen was collected in Australia by one of us (LW). The population from which the GenBank example of Platydemus manokwari ( AF178320.1 ) was taken had previously been confirmed histologically (by LW from lot LW1065) as P. manokwari and voucher specimens lodged in the Queensland Museum (Registration numbers GL4724, whole specimen in alcohol, and GL4725, 126 slides).

Various living snails were introduced in the same container as a single flatworm. Four out of the 5 specimens died before feeding. A single prey event, on the helicid Eobania vermiculata Müller, 1774 was observed. The cylindrical pharynx, protruding from the ventral surface, was visible when the flatworm was preying on a snail ( Fig. 5 ).

The flatworm is preying on a snail: it has been disturbed, thus showing the white cylindrical pharynx on the ventral side, protruding and ingesting soft tissues of the snail. The prey is the helicid Eobania vermiculata , a common snail of the Mediterranean region.

The flatworm was broadest in the middle, tapering evenly anteriorly but more abruptly posteriorly ( Fig. 1 ). Two large prominent eyes were situated back from the tip of the elongate snout-like head ( Fig. 2 ). In cross section the flatworm was convex dorsally and flat ventrally. The figured live mature specimen was 50 mm long and 5 mm wide. The mouth was located just behind the midpoint of the ventrum, with gonopore about half way between the mouth and posterior end. The dorsum was a dark olive brown colour, which under a lens showed a fine pale brownish graininess. A pale cream median dorsal longitudinal stripe, some 0.3 mm wide, began just behind the eyes and continued to the posterior tip ( Figs. 1 and 3 ). The olive brown colour graded to grey at the anterior tip. A thin submarginal cream stripe with fine lower greyish margin ran laterally from the anterior end along the length of the body ( Fig. 3 ). The ventral surface was a pale finely mottled light brown ( Figs. 4 and 5 ), slightly paler mid ventrally. These features are consistent with those of Platydemus manokwari de Beauchamp, 1963 (Platyhelminthes, Continenticola, Geoplanidae, Rhynchodeminae) ( de Beauchamp, 1962 ; Kawakatsu, Ogren & Muniappan, 1992 ; Winsor, 1990 ).

Discussion

Molecular identification The p-distance between our two sequences and the GenBank sequence of Platydemus manokwari was 4%. This genetic distance roughly corresponds to the genetic distances generally found between closely related species or distant populations within a single species. Alvarez-Presas et al. (2012) studied variation of COI in species belonging to the same family as Platydemus manokwari, i.e., the Geoplanidae. In this study of the European species Microplana terrestris (Muller, 1774), specimens were studied from two localities, East and West of Northern Spain. Variation ranged from 0% to 3% within the western localities, and from 0% to 1.6% in the eastern localities; West and East presented a difference of 2.4% to 4%. The between-species difference (M. terrestris vs M. robusta Vila-Farré and Sluys, 2011) was about 19%. Therefore, we consider that the difference of 4% found between our French specimens of P. manokwari and the Australian specimen in GenBank is compatible with intraspecific variation. The molecular data thus confirm the morphological identification.

Reproduction Under experimental conditions the optimum temperature for rearing P. manokwari in terms of pre-oviposition period and cocoon production is 24°C, with a mean post-oviposition developmental period for the young to hatch from the cocoon of 7.8 ±1.2 days (Kaneda et al., 1992). Cocoons contain an average of 5.2 juveniles (3–9) each. The flatworm begins oviposition within 3 weeks of hatching (Kaneda et al., 1992). The temperature threshold for oviposition lies between 15°C and 18°C, and for cocoon and juvenile stages 10°C and 11.7°C respectively (Kaneda et al., 1992). The flatworm normally reproduces sexually, and does not appear to reproduce by fission (Kaneda, Kitagawa & Ichinohe, 1990).

Biology Platydemus manokwari prefers wet humid conditions and is unable to survive in completely dry habitats; high humidity and adequate precipitation are essential for the survival of the flatworm (Kaneda, Kitagawa & Ichinohe, 1990; Sugiura, 2009). The flatworm is diurnal if the moisture conditions are right (Kaneda, Kitagawa & Ichinohe, 1990). Temperature appears to influence predation rate by the flatworm in field and laboratory experiments, and also its survival. Sugiura (2009) considers that 10°C is a possible threshold temperature for the establishment of P. manokwari, and speculates that low winter temperatures may have restricted the invasion and establishment of P. manokwari in temperate countries. Platydemus manokwari, like a number of other rhynchodemines of the Australia-New Guinea region, appears to be an upland species that naturally range from alpine through to sub-alpine, cool temperate and warm temperate zones to tropical climates. At the Pindaunde station on Mt. Wilhelm, New Guinea the mean daily temperature is 11.6°C, mean minimum of 4°C, absolute maximum of 16.7°C, absolute minimum of −0.8°C, and precipitation of some 3450 mm per year (Corlett, 1984), though it is expected that the microclimate on the sub-alpine forest floor would be milder. The climate at Pindaunde has been described as “wintery at night, (and) has days which seem to belong to a chilly spring or autumn” (McVean, 1968). Were P. manokwari introduced to temperate countries and escape hothouse or similar containment, the flatworm may well survive winters and become established. High frequencies of warm winters in temperate zones may also facilitate the establishment of the flatworm in these places (Sugiura, 2009). The flatworm has survived in the hothouse at Caen, and it is expected that it would also survive outdoors in this region, and even more easily in more southern part of Europe. An assessment of the global potential distribution of Platydemus manokwari, based on ecoclimatic data has not yet been undertaken.

Impacts From an agricultural perspective Platydemus manokwari is not a direct plant pest. In fact it has been and probably will continue to be used by local farmers, and plant protection agencies in the Pacific region as a bio-agent in the control of outbreaks of the Giant African snail Achatina fulica (FAO-SAPA, 2002; Winsor, Johns & Barker, 2004), though other factors apart from flatworm predation may contribute to the decline in pest snail populations (Lydeard et al., 2004). Examined from an environmental perspective, P. manokwari has demonstrably had a serious negative impact on the biodiversity of native snail populations in the Pacific region (Cowie, 2010) and wherever it is deliberately or accidentally introduced it will continue to pose a threat not only to native molluscs, but possibly to other slow-moving soil invertebrates (Sugiura, 2010). It may also indirectly have a negative impact on vertebrate species dependent upon these soil invertebrates. An environmental pest risk assessment along the lines of that in the International Standards for Phytosanitary Measures (IPPC, 2004) may need to be undertaken for P. manokwari: an assessment of the probability of direct spread of the flatworm, considered by us to be low; whether the population is actively reproducing and is viable; an assessment of economic consequences, for example, potential threats to commercial snail farming; and environmental consequences, for example, negative impacts on soil invertebrate biodiversity in France and elsewhere. The extent of this incursion, and whether or not it is limited to the hothouse in Caen, the likely primary dispersal source of the current incursion, and possible secondary dispersal through plant exchanges between botanic gardens, and garden centres or plant supermarkets should also be considered.

Possible control options As it is not a plant pest Platydemus manokwari is not listed in the European and Mediterranean Plant Organization A1 or A2 List of pests recommended for regulation as quarantine pests (EPPO, 2013a; EPPO, 2013b), nor listed by the European Alien Species Information Network (EASIN, 2014). In Europe, countries participating in the NOBANIS network have established a simple early warning system (Secretariat of NOBANIS, 2012). When a participating country becomes aware that a new alien species has been found in their country, a warning is sent to the other participating countries and posted on the NOBANIS website. This early warning enables countries to be alerted that a new species has been observed in the region. Depending upon the outcome of an environmental risk assessment and related investigations, threats from Platydemus manokwari may need to be responded to in a similar manner to the invasive New Zealand flatworm Arthurdendyus triangulatus. This species is now subject to an EPPO Standard regarding import requirements (EPPO, 2000a) and nursery inspection, exclusion and treatment (EPPO, 2000b) for the flatworm (Murchie, 2010). The problem with P. manokwari is that even though it is primarily an environmental threat, it does not “indirectly affect plants through the effects on other organisms”. Consequently there is the possibility that responsibility for managing this invasive species may fall between the remits of agricultural and environmental regulatory bodies. This could delay effective management of P. manokwari.

Chemical control Although a range of commercial pesticides were tested against Arthurdendyus triangulatus only gamma-HCH (Lindane), a broad spectrum, organochlorine insecticide gave significant control but was considered unsuitable for the widespread control of the flatworm (Cannon et al., 1999). There may be limited scope for the use of chemicals within an integrated approach to control of invasive alien flatworms combining chemical, physical and cultural methods (Blackshaw, 1996; Cannon et al., 1999).