Homosexual baboon terrorises villagers in South Africa, rapes 5 men
Men at Tshaulu village in South Africa are living in fear over a big male baboon that likes to grope and bonk human males. The baboon is said to have attacked more than six men in the past week and what’s battling the villagers is the fact that the baboon only attacks guys and does not hurt its victims but rather performs sexual acts on the terrified victims and leaves.

One victim, George Chiunc said he was coming from the local shebeen when the baboon attacked him and pinned him down. “I thought it wanted to kill me but realized it was after my bum” George said.

Five men were admitted to hospital after experiencing acute anal pains and fatigue. Doctors confirmed the men have anal cancer. The baboon, which has been nicknamed Somizi travels alone and this, according to animal behaviour specialist is a strange occurrence because baboons are known to ravel in troops. One specialist, Lizzie McKenzie said “the baboon might be an outcast and chased away from its troop. That is why it is travelling alone but as to the reason it’s attacking only males, it beats me. I have never seen that behaviour in my 20 years in this field.”she said.

However, baboons live in a troop wherein a single alpha male mates with multiple females, while other males in the troop do not engage in mating, or leave the troop to mate with random females outside the troop.

Baboons mate according to female estrus cycles, which are around 30 days, following menstruation and ovulation, etc.

There is another phenomenon today, it’s called Anthropocene era. It means, human presence has encroached and adversely altered natural ecosystems to such an extent that certain factors deviate from the norm. This is seen in India where animals that normally avoid human interaction begin randomly attacking human habitats and people without direct provocation. An animal such as a beta baboon male could conceivably become frustrated with constant human interaction while he is sexually frustrated by the alpha male. So the sexual attacks would be a result of human encroachment.

When journalists visited the village, all male school kids were said to be wearing dresses as a preventative measure until the baboon has been dealt with.