Bio

Nicos Anastasiades was born in Pera Pedi, Limassol, in 1946. Both his parents played an important role in his life, especially his father. He has a twin brother and a sister.

In 1971 he married Mrs Antri Moustakoudi and they had two daughters, Elsa and Ino. He has four grandchildren, Andys, Nicholas, Giorgos and Nicos.

He studied Law at the University of Athens and pursued his postgraduate degree in Maritime Law at the University of London. He practices law since 1972.

During his student years he has been an active member of the Youth of Georgios Papandreou’s Centre Union in Athens.

After his studies he served in the National Guard, first at the Recruits’ Training Centre (KEN) in Larnaca and then at the 4th Higher Military Command.

Nicos Anastasiades is a founding member of the Youth of the Democratic Rally (NEDISY), in which he served from the posts of District Secretary, Vice President and President.

After his successful term in NEDISY he takes action next to the historical leader Glafkos Clerides from the positions of First Vice President and later Deputy President until 1997. He is a member of the Cyprus National Council since 1995.

Nicos Anastasiades was triumphantly elected as President of the Democratic Rally in 1997, a position that the members and officials of the party firmly trusted him with by being re-elected in 1999, 2003, 2007 and 2012.

At the same time Nicos Anastasiades was being elected Member of the House of Representatives from 1981 until his election to the Presidency of the Republic. During his lengthy term he has served the Parliament as Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman of the Committee on Educational Affairs, Chairman of the Inter-Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs until 2006 as well as Vice-Chairman and member of many other Committees. He has also been elected Vice President of the House of Representatives for the years 1996-2001 and he has served as Parliamentary Spokesman of the Democratic Rally.

In his political course, Nicos Anastasiades actively participates in the international political scene. From his position as Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, as Head of the Inter-Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs as well as Head of the Cyprus delegation to the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), he represents the Cyprus Parliament since 1991 and takes part in a number of international missions, specialized conferences and visits.

Since his election to the Presidency of the Democratic Rally he participates in all the European People’s Party (EPP) Summits and Conferences, he represents the Democratic Rally in the European Democrat Union (EDU) and actively participates in all the conferences of the International Democrat Union (IDU).

His regular presence and interventions in Summits and Conferences have reinforced the positions of the Democratic Rally in these groups, while through interpersonal relations he has developed, he has contributed so that the political positions of these groups fully identify with the positions of the Greek Cypriot side on our national matter.

Nicos Anastasiades has been elected President of the Republic of Cyprus on 24 February 2013 by winning the run-off presidential election with a majority of 57.4%.