EBC-46 & Animals
EBC-46 is a novel natural product small molecule with anticancer activity being developed as a local treatment for solid tumours in humans and companion animals (dogs, cats and horses). EBC-46 was discovered by applying the EcoLogic™ approach to drug discovery from the tropical rainforests of Far North Queensland. EcoLogic™ was developed by QBiotics parent entity EcoBiotics.

QBiotics plans to develop and register EBC-46 as a veterinary pharmaceutical for the treatment of solid tumours in dogs, cats and horses. To date, EBC-46 has been successful in the treatment of a diverse range of inoperable spontaneous solid tumours in dogs, cats and horses.

Incidence of cancer in animals

EBC-46 has the potential to revolutionise the treatment of many solid tumours in animals.

Accurate data on the rates of cancer (either incidence of new cases or overall prevalence in the population) in companion animals are difficult to obtain due to the lack of formal registries which gather population-based health statistics (e.g. population sizes and breed structure, longevity, neutering patterns, mortality rates and causes, etc.).

Nonetheless, it is possible to make realistic estimates of the occurrence and epidemiology of different cancers in companion animals from survey data collected from university veterinary hospitals and large veterinary practices.

In the table below the estimated annual number of new cases of cancer that are suitable for treatment with EBC-46 in dogs, cats and horses can be found. This data clearly identifies cancer as a major disease afflicting millions of companion animals worldwide.

*Combined Worldwide = USA, Europe, Brazil, Australia, Japan and Canada.

Withrow and MacEwan’s Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 4th Edition, S.J. Withrow and D.M. Vail 2007, Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis;

Animal health industry review and outlook, Wood Mackenzie, 2005, Wood MacKenzie, Edinburgh; Epidemiological studies of risk factors

for cancer in pet dogs, J.L. Kelsey et al, 1998, Epidemiology Review 20: 204-217; Neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours, D.W. Scott and

W.H. Miller, 2003, Equine Dermatology, Saunders, Philadelphia, 719-31; A general survey of tumours in horses, E. Cotchin, 1977, Equine

Veterinary Journal 9:16-21; Epidemiological analysis of the most prevalent sites and types of canine neoplasia observed in a veterinary

hospital. D. Cohen et al 1974, Cancer Research 34:2859-68.

EBC-46 is a new experimental drug for treating cancers in dogs, cats and horses.

In treatment of over 100 dogs, cats and horses, intralesional injection of EBC-46 has successfully ablated or significantly palliated a range of advanced, inoperable tumours (melanomas, sarcomas, carcinomas, mast cell tumours and sarcoids) while causing no significant long-term side effects. A topical formulation of EBC-46 has also been used to successfully treat ulcerative squamous cell carcinomas on cats and horses.

EBC-46 is delivered locally in a single treatment by direct injection into tumours, or by topical application onto the tumour surface.

EBC-46 is active against a wide range of tumour types and is potentially useful in treating any solid tumour that can be accessed for direct injection or topical application of the drug.

EBC-46 only works locally at the site of delivery and there is no current evidence to suggest that EBC-46 has any systemic efficacy against metastatic disease in affecting remote secondary tumours.

Veterinary Trials

QBiotics is currently conducting trials of EBC-46 for treating selected solid tumours in dogs and horses. Trials in cats will follow in the near future. The trials are focusing on treatment of tumours that are accessible for, and amenable to, direct injection of the drug including cutaneous and subcutaneous tumours. EBC-46 will become available through veterinarians following primary registration of the drug.



Please note that we are not in a position to reply to unsolicited emails and phone messages from individuals regarding veterinary trials.