EBC-46 & Humans
An outstanding candidate for a human anti-cancer treatment

EBC-46 is a novel natural product small molecule with anticancer activity being developed as a local treatment for solid tumours in humans and companion animals (dogs, cats and horses). EBC-46 was discovered by applying the EcoLogic™ approach to drug discovery from the tropical rainforests of Far North Queensland. EcoLogic™ was developed by QBiotics’ parent entity EcoBiotics.

QBiotics plans to develop EBC-46 as a human pharmaceutical to Clinical Phase II and then seek a development partner for final development and marketing of the drug. QBiotics has already demonstrated very compelling proof-of-concept of the drug's efficacy and safety by successfully treating advanced, spontaneous tumours in companion animals that were considered untreatable with current standards of care. As the principles behind the development of cancer in animals and humans are analogous, it is likely that EBC-46 will have similar effects in humans as in animals.

Potential indications for the drug include:

Testing EBC-46 in vitro against various cancer cell lines, in mouse models of cancer, and in companion animals with cancer, has demonstrated that the drug has broad activity against many different tumour types including:

Skin cancers, such as squamous cell carcinomas (SCC), basal cell carcinomas (BCC) and melanomas;

Head & neck cancers;

Breast cancers;

Prostate cancers; and

Colorectal cancers.

Clinical trials in humans

EBC-46 is currently being evaluated for safety in a Clinical Phase I trial in patients with cutaneous or subcutaneous solid tumours. Such tumours include melanoma, head and neck cancer, SCC and BCC of the skin and Merckel cell carcinoma. In this trial, EBC-46 is delivered locally in a single treatment by direct injection into tumours. The trial is being conducted in Australia by clinicians in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Adelaide. Details of the trial can be found by accessing the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trial Registry at www.anzctr.org.au and entering “QBiotics” in the search window.

Are you interested in participating in the clinical trials of EBC-46?

If you have any interest in participating in the trial of EBC-46, please speak with your oncologist about the study first. They will be best placed to understand the study requirements and whether this trial might be suitable for you and your situation. If your oncologist agrees that the study is suitable, then the oncologist should contact Rodney Cusack, on +61 7 3870 8933, for details of the closest clinical trial site and Principal Investigator.

Please note that: