N2.2tn debt: FG plans to settle marketers, others with promissory notes
JOHN AMEH, LEKE BAIYEWU and IFEANYI ONUBA

The Federal Government will settle its N2.2tn indebtedness to contractors and oil marketers among other liabilities through the issuance of a 10-year promissory note, SUNDAY PUNCH has learnt.

A promissory note is a debt instrument which one party promises in writing to pay a determinate sum of money to the other, either at a fixed or determinable future time, under specific terms.

The Muhammadu Buhari government inherited the debts which included the N650bn unpaid subsidy payment due to oil marketers from the previous administrations.

Officials at the finance ministry told one of our correspondents that the Federal Government was determined to ensure that its obligations to local contractors were settled.

A source, who pleaded not to be named as he was not officially permitted to speak on the matter, said since the government did not have enough cash in hand to meet the debt obligations, it was agreed that the promissory note would be a solution to a long term problem that had been a drag on economic activities.

The source said already, President Muhammadu Buhari had sent a proposal to the National Assembly on the issue.

He said, “About 10 days ago, the President sent a letter to the leadership of the National Assembly about the $2.5bn Eurobond which would be converted to naira to pay certain debts. The petroleum subsidy is part of it. It is only the National Assembly that can authorise the usage of that money by specifying the allocation to cost areas that the money will be paid.

“The euro bond ($2.5bn) was borrowed because foreign loan is cheaper than Nigeria loan. In Nigeria, the minimum is 18 per cent interest but the foreign loan is seven per cent. So the payment of the debts will be based on that correspondence to the National Assembly. As soon as the National Assembly agrees to the spending plan of the executive regarding that money, then, the debts will be paid including that of Nigeria Airways staff, contractors and even promotion arrears for some civil servants and severance package of some politicians.”

Attempts to get a formal reaction from the House of Representatives on the President’s letter on Saturday failed.

However, investigations showed that the Speaker, Mr. Yakubu Dogara, upon reading the President’s request, immediately referred it to the joint committees on Finance and Aid/Loans and Debt Management for further action.

But, the committees had yet to sit before the House proceeded on Easter break. The break will last till April 10.

Buhari’s letter has also been read in the Senate but has not been considered and referred to any committee for processing.

When contacted on the telephone on Saturday, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Banking, Insurance and Other Financial Institutions, Senator Rafiu Ibrahim, referred one of our correspondents to the Senate Committee on Local and Foreign Debts chaired by Senator Shehu Sani.

Sani, in his response to the enquiry by one of our correspondents, said, “Not yet referred to my committee.”

A source in the Senate however dismissed the claim that the lawmakers were responsible for the delay.

The source said, “Is it at the last minute that they should bring such request? You should ask them if they had lobbied the leadership of the National Assembly. Do they think they can stampede the National Assembly? Is this how democratic governance is carried out? They are running the government like a private business.”

Copyright PUNCH.

All rights reserved. This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH.

Contact: [email protected]

DOWNLOAD THE PUNCH NEWS APP NOW ON