RationalWiki
From RationalWiki

Hail Satan!

Henry Makow, PhD[note 1] (b. 1949) is what you get when you cross a men's rights activist with paranoid conspiracy theorist and an Anti-Semite. Makow believes the world is controlled by nefarious Judeo[note 2]-Masonic/Satanic/Commie forces, spearheaded by the Rockefeller Foundation. He also believes that the aforementioned concocted feminism, so that women wouldn't have children, as part of depopulation efforts. His writings can be found on notorious websites Whale.to, Jesus-is-savior.com, and Alex Jones' PrisonPlanet.

He also designs board games.

In the real world [ edit ]

How everything started... [ edit ]

Henry Makow was born in 1949 in Canada to Polish Jewish parents who "survived the Second World War by passing as Catholics." His parents could be categorized as self-hating Jews as "they wanted nothing to do with the identity that resulted in their parent's deaths and almost cost them their lives." The only thing they were doing as Jews were lighting candles during Sabbath.

Here's how Makow woke up, in his own words:

Until the age of 50, I was a typical brainwashed, dysfunctional, liberal, socialist, zionist, feminist Jew. My return to health began when I started to question these memes and obey my own instincts and perceptions instead. I discovered the Illuminati conspiracy which has become my work.

Fame [ edit ]

Makow's real-world fame is in having invented Scruples , a board game based on ethical dilemmas.[1] At the age of 11, in 1960, he began to write the syndicated advice-to-parents column "Ask Henry".[2][3] At the age of 12, he appeared as a guest on an episode of the TV gameshow What's My Line? aired 14 October 1962.

In 2008, the Canadian Jewish Congress filed a human rights complaint against Makow for a column he authored in what the Southern Poverty Law Center called the "anti-Semitic, conspiracy-mongering Toronto Street News," in which he quoted Mark Glenn as describing Judaism as a "cancer."[4][5]

Articles of Makow are often published on Smoloko News, a website so anti-semitic Jean-François Gariépy looks sane in comparison. Yet, Makow claims to "express the authentic Mosaic Jewish spirit, a commitment to universal truth and morality" in contrast to the SATANIC Cabalist Jews.

Everything = Illuminati [ edit ]

“ ” Rothschild-dominated Freemasonry was probably also a factor. Communism is a Masonic order; both Castro and Guevara were Masons. Other Freemasons include Stalin, Trotsky, Lenin and most Presidents incl. Barrack Obama. Obviously Castro was installed by the Masons.[6] Rothschild-dominated Freemasonry was probably also a factor. Communism is a Masonic order; both Castro and Guevara were Masons. Other Freemasons include Stalin, Trotsky, Lenin and most Presidents incl. Barrack Obama. Obviously Castro was installed by the Masons.

Makow links everything back to some world-controlling organization (which he usually calls the Illuminati), which includes:

Makow believes that the Illuminati was created by Kabbalah Jews acting in concert with the Knights Templar.[7]

Skull and Bones = Illuminati [ edit ]

Makow believes that the world is controlled by the satanic Skull and Bones society, which is apparently an Illuminati front group. He knows this because George W. Bush once made the Satanic horn sign. The following is a side-by-side examination of the introduction to Makow's article:[8]

George W. Bush, President of the "Free World" is a member of "Skull and Bones" a chapter of the Illuminati order. His father, grandfather and uncle are also members. In his autobiography, "A Charge to Keep" Bush writes, "My senior year I joined Skull and Bones, a secret society so secret I can't say anything more." In Aug. 2000 he said his " heritage is part of who I am ." This is a clear quote mine. Here's the interview transcript:[9] TIME: Your family legacy surely also pushed you into politics? BUSH: Yes, my heritage is part of who I am , and that certainly included politics. But my dad didn't take me in the backyard and hit a tackling dummy to make me a great tackler, and he also didn't do things to try to make me a politician. GWB was talking about his "family legacy", not the Skull and Bones. In fact, when GWB was asked about the Skull and Bones, he responded: TIME: But you sure shared a lot of the same upbringing: Andover, Yale, even Skull and Bones. Did you have any qualms, say, about joining an elite secret club like Bones? BUSH: No qualms at all. I was honored. I was fairly nonchalant. I didn't view it as a great heritage thing. I didn't take it all that seriously.

Isn't this a conflict of interest? Hello! Can a man hold any public office, let alone the most important, and belong to a "secret society"? If this society were benign, would it have to be secret? WHAT ARE THEY HIDING? Hitler's old silverware A WORLD-SPANNING PLOT TO WORSHIP SATAN?

What a secret society it is! The Illuminati is the hidden hand behind all modern cataclysms, including the French and Russian Revolutions, Communism, the Depression and Nazism. To affect the course of history only takes money. The people behind the Illuminati have plenty. It's time we faced reality. Murphy's Law applies to humanity. "If it can go wrong, it will." It has. The world is ruled by a satanic cult. Aside from the gross abuse of Murphy's Law, there is only one response: The evidence that Makow presents -- the fact that many influential politicians were Skull and Bones members (which makes sense, given that it's a prestigious Yale University fraternity), and one book by Anthony Sutton -- is certainly not strong enough to overturn historical consensus.

Feminism/Homosexuality/Mass-Media = Illuminati [ edit ]

“ ” Formerly savethemales.ca —Makow's website

“ ” But, why do these dupes include the US State Dept. and media establishment? The US government, media and most corporations are controlled by the central banking cartel, i.e. the Rothschilds, Warburgs, Rockefellers etc. These are the same people who sponsored Communism. [....] This is why the Communist Party term "political correctness" has become part of our lexicon. Why the elite media and foundations promote feminism, homosexuality, pornography and promiscuity to destabilize society. Why they sponsor "diversity" to undermine American identity. Why the education system is devoted to Leftist indoctrination; and conservatives have been driven out. Why the culture industries are dedicated to sex, violence, alienation, deviance and the occult.[6] But, why do these dupes include the US State Dept. and media establishment? The US government, media and most corporations are controlled by the central banking cartel, i.e. the Rothschilds, Warburgs, Rockefellers etc. These are the same people who sponsored Communism. [....] This is why the Communist Party term "political correctness" has become part of our lexicon. Why the elite media and foundations promote feminism, homosexuality, pornography and promiscuity to destabilize society. Why they sponsor "diversity" to undermine American identity. Why the education system is devoted to Leftist indoctrination; and conservatives have been driven out. Why the culture industries are dedicated to sex, violence, alienation, deviance and the occult.

In turn, Feminism was created as a way to get women on the Illuminati's side, and to encourage women to hate men, deign not to have children and take jobs outside of the home to reduce the population (the conspirators furthermore encourage homosexuality for the same reason).

Makow refers to this as "the psychological sterilization of the human female",[10] and naturally believes [A] that the proper place of women is barefoot and pregnant in the kitchen and [B] that all career women are covertly miserable on the inside.[11]

Like some MGTOWers, and all too many mail order bride websites, he advocates that western men try marrying Asian women under the belief that they are more traditionally submissive. In his A Long Way to go for a Date (2000), Makow tells the story of his courtship and marriage to a young Filipina.[12] A followup, Cruel Hoax: Feminism and the New World Order (2007), claims that feminism was invented by Jewish international bankers to promote one world government, and also somehow connects feminism to 9/11 and calls on readers to "take back our heterosexuality". If none of this makes any sense, neither does Makow.

9/11 = Illuminati [ edit ]

Makow is also a 9/11 Truther. He writes:[13]

What we are witnessing is mass self-delusion and hallucination, both criminal and treasonous, by the nation's political and chattering classes. The whole world knows 9-11 was an inside job and are laughing at Americans. How do Americans expect to solve their problems when they won't even face the truth? Their political and cultural leaders are liars, traitors and murderers? Until these gangsters and their minions are brought to justice , Americans will continue to eat dirt. The Illuminati central bankers --Rockefellers, Rothschilds and Goldman Sachs -- were responsible for 9-11. It was designed to advance their police state and justify endless war.

Dead presidents = Illuminati [ edit ]

Makow thinks that JFK, Lincoln, and James Garfield were all killed by the Illuminati/Rothschilds for trying to print money. Richard Nixon, meanwhile, was framed for Watergate because he was planning to purge the Illuminati from the CIA and the US government.[14]

Cold War = Illuminati [ edit ]

Makow writes:[6]

The [Cuban] "revolution" was largely funded and supplied by the Soviet Union. But they couldn't have succeeded without the complicity of the US, proof that the Cold War was an Illuminati charade. [....] Fidel Castro came to power in Cuba because of the covert help of New World orderlies in the US State Dept. and mass media. They cut off arm sales to Batista while at the same time supplying Castro, partly by Russian submarines. This told the Cuban military which way the wind was blowing and they quietly defected.

The Fed = Illuminati [ edit ]

Makow also believes in Federal Reserve crankery, and states that Ezra Pound was jailed for trying to blow the whistle on the Fed.[10]

The Beatles = Illuminati [ edit ]

Makow argues that The Beatles were Illuminati mind controllers who promoted drug use, free sex and the New Age movement. As with Bush, Makow knows this because of a gesture John Lennon made with his hand on the cover of Yellow Submarine.[15]

A440 tuning = Illuminati [ edit ]

An article about the A440 conspiracy theory on Makow's site contains the following passage: "...Rockefeller (Illuminati) financial interests dictated that the standard tuning for the note of 'A' above middle C would henceforth be said to vibrate at precisely 440 cycles per second."[16]

Other crankery [ edit ]

Henry now claims that Marijuana legalization is part of the "Illuminati agenda" and exists to fund "narcoterrorists".

In his site, there is Wendy Thomas, who believes that family courts are controlled by Masonic judges who give away child custody to pedophiles and promote Richard Gardner's supposedly "pro-pedophile" theories.[17] At least, in a stopped clock moment, another writer named Dan Absear (who himself claims to be a victim of parental alienation[18]) is against people assuming that what he calls "doting fathers" are pedophiles just because they are actively involved in their children's lives, although he still makes his defense in a highly homophobic way (probably compounded by his wife, a "radical feminist lesbian, and likey a psychopath", leaving him for a "rather atractive female principal of [the] school").[19]

He believes that "Zionists" killed Jews in the Holocaust, i.e. that the Holocaust was an inside job. While there is one example of a Jewish Nazi, the idea that all the Nazis were Jews is clearly ridiculous.

Relationship with Jeff Rense [ edit ]

Makow had a falling out with fellow crank Jeff Rense over Makow's insistence that the Fukushima accident was intentional. Rense didn't believe him, and refused to continue linking to Makow. Makow then teamed up with Rense's 7th wife to claim Rense has Narcissistic Personality Disorder.[20] Makow maintains a section on his site dedicated to pointing out Rense's character flaws.[21]

On RationalWiki [ edit ]

While Henry Makow himself didn't mention us, his website doesn't seem to mind us, unlike many nutjobs and webshites. If anything, they even quoted us when criticizing William J. Schnoebelen for mostly correct reasons.[22]

Books [ edit ]

Ask Henry , Ace, 1963.

, Ace, 1963. A Long Way to go for a Date , Silas Green, 2000, ISBN 0-9687725-0-1

, Silas Green, 2000, ISBN 0-9687725-0-1 Cruel Hoax: Feminism and the New World Order , Silas Green, 2007, ISBN 0-9687725-1-X

, Silas Green, 2007, ISBN 0-9687725-1-X Illuminati, The Cult That Hijacked the World , Silas Green; 2008, ISBN 1-4392-1148-5

, Silas Green; 2008, ISBN 1-4392-1148-5 Illuminati 2: Deceit and Seduction , Silas Green, 2010, ISBN 1-61577-145-X

, Silas Green, 2010, ISBN 1-61577-145-X Illuminati 3: Satanic Possession, Silas Green, 2014 ISBN 978-0-9918211-2-9

See also [ edit ]

David Icke, a believer in batshit NWO conspiracy theories

Smoloko News, a website which holds similar views and cites Henry Makow in some of their reports. They were even interviewed by Henry Makow on his websites. Makow was also responsible for Smoloko's antisemitism

Notes [ edit ]

↑ every single article and every single time his name is mentioned. Perhaps he is afraid of being a PhD, English Literature. University of Toronto, 1982. He lists this onsingle article andsingle time his name is mentioned. Perhaps he is afraid of being a professor of nothing ↑ Despite being Jewish himself! Seriously!