Easton Officer Pleads Guilty To Involuntary Manslaughter * Scott Cameron Was Charged In Fatal Hackett Park Shooting Christmas Eve.

Police officers filed past her into the chamber to show support for one of their own who was about to plead guilty to the fatal shooting of Achey's fiance on Christmas Eve.

Scott Charles Cameron, a suspended Easton police officer, pleaded guilty to involuntary manslaughter, the lesser of two charges filed against him in May for shooting Easton resident John E. Rapp in the back of the head just outside city-owned Hackett Park in Palmer Township.

Under the plea agreement, prosecutors dropped a charge of voluntary manslaughter. The 30-year-old Kunkletown resident faces a maximum of five years in prison and a $10,000 fine. Sentencing was set for Jan. 5. Cameron is free on $500,000 recognizance bail.

The plea came before a standing-room-only crowd that included about two dozen police officers, most from Easton and some from nearby Wilson and Palmer Township. Officers wore blue ribbons in a show of support.

After Senior Deputy Attorney General Marc Costanzo announced a negotiated plea had been reached, Judge Jack A. Panella said he wanted to hear from Rapp's family before he decided whether to accept it.

However, family members including Rapp's parents, Joanne and David of Bethlehem Township, and his three brothers, Andrew, Steven and David, declined to speak. Achey and Rapp's ex-wife, Laura Lynn Rapp, who at one point stood arm-in-arm before the judge, also remained silent.

Costanzo, who prosecuted the case with Assistant Attorney General Patrick Blessington, said the family has been kept informed of the negotiations.

"(Rapp's family) will get what little measure of justice they'll be able to get," Costanzo told the court. "Obviously, they'll never be able to be made whole in this case."

Costanzo said the prosecution's case for voluntary manslaughter relied on a "small piece" of circumstantial evidence -- a gun was intentionally used to shoot him in the head. But, said Costanzo, a judge or jury would also have to take into consideration other facts.

"All the other evidence supports an act that was not an intent to kill but rather a voluntary act that was unreasonable given the circumstances ... and not justified," said Costanzo.

Panella explained to the Rapp family that voluntary manslaughter required proof of a specific intent to kill, while reckless or grossly negligent conduct must be proven for an involuntary manslaughter conviction.