Toys R Us finally (most likely) going bankrupt next week. Use those gift cards or rewards this weekend, people!
The above is uniformed and misleading. There is NO official announcement that TRU will stop honoring gift cards any time soon. In fact, pursuant to a Court Order, TRU has been continuing to accept gift cards since they filed for Chapter 11 in September 2017. In addition, even the first round of stores to commence "going out of business" sale starting February 2018 are accepting gift cards pursuant to a Court Order. In the bankruptcy cases of Circuit City, RadioShack, etc., gift cards have been accepted during the store closing/liquidation phase. Even if worse comes to worst and TRU converts to Chapter 7 liquidation or commences store closing sales at all remaining stores, it is highly likely that TRU will continue to honor gift cards for at least the next few weeks. Chances are only after all stores have closed/operations ceased will they stop accepting gift cards rendering them worth pennies on the dollar/worthless. What the recent developments mean is there is now an increased urgency (versus last month) to use up your gift cards if you would like to recoup as much value from them as possible or to limit your potential losses.



The news is real, and the situation is getting worse, but it is not as imminent or likely as some headlines are making it out to be.

Does this also affect Babies R Us?Yes. Babies R Us is a division of Toys R Us, which is currently in Chapter 11 bankruptcy. Should this move from Chapter 11 to Chapter 7 Liquidation, this would affect all Toys R Us and Babies R Us stores.When other stores went bankrupt, they still honored the gift cards. Why not here?In either Chapter 11 bankruptcy or Chapter 7 Liquidation, the retailer would have to ask the court for permission to continue to accept their gift cards. They don't have to ask for this permission, and the courts don't have to grant it. Particularly with Chapter 7 liquidation, the gift cards are often frozen and no longer accepted in the stores. Anyone who holds a gift card can only hope to petition the bankruptcy court for reimbursement. Even if successful, after all the other higher priority creditors are paid off, there may only be enough money left over to pay pennies on the dollar for remaining gift card balances - if that. More often, the cards simply become worthless.Is this really going to happen? Will Toys R Us really liquidate? Or is this "fake news"?Liquidation is likely, but not definite yet. Many legitimate business news outlets including Bloomberg are reporting this, based on people familiar with Toys R Us's bankruptcy process. As Bloomberg notes, there is a remote chance that a rescue deal could still be worked out, but that currently seems unlikely.But I talk to (insert store employee/manager here), and they said....All the store employees and management know and are allowed to comment on is what has been officially announced thus far, which is that TRU is in Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization, some stores are going to close as a part of the process, but the rest areopen for business with noannounced plans to close. They have no more insight into the bankruptcy process than you or I. Should the liquidation happen, they'll likely find out at almost the same time that the rest of us find out (possibly a few minutes before).