CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CHAPTER 62. SEX OFFENDER REGISTRATION PROGRAM
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE

TITLE 1. CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE

CHAPTER 62. SEX OFFENDER REGISTRATION PROGRAM

SUBCHAPTER A. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Art. 62.001. DEFINITIONS. In this chapter: (1) "Department" means the Department of Public Safety. (2) "Local law enforcement authority" means, as applicable, the office of the chief of police of a municipality, the office of the sheriff of a county in this state, or a centralized registration authority. (3) "Penal institution" means a confinement facility operated by or under a contract with any division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, a confinement facility operated by or under contract with the Texas Juvenile Justice Department, or a juvenile secure pre-adjudication or post-adjudication facility operated by or under a local juvenile probation department, or a county jail. (4) "Released" means discharged, paroled, placed in a nonsecure community program for juvenile offenders, or placed on juvenile probation, community supervision, or mandatory supervision. (5) "Reportable conviction or adjudication" means a conviction or adjudication, including an adjudication of delinquent conduct or a deferred adjudication, that, regardless of the pendency of an appeal, is a conviction for or an adjudication for or based on: (A) a violation of Section 21.02 (Continuous sexual abuse of young child or children), 21.09 (Bestiality), 21.11 (Indecency with a child), 22.011 (Sexual assault), 22.021 (Aggravated sexual assault), or 25.02 (Prohibited sexual conduct), Penal Code; (B) a violation of Section 43.05 (Compelling prostitution), 43.25 (Sexual performance by a child), or 43.26 (Possession or promotion of child pornography), Penal Code; (B-1) a violation of Section 43.02 (Prostitution), Penal Code, if the offense is punishable under Subsection (c-1)(3) of that section; (C) a violation of Section 20.04(a)(4) (Aggravated kidnapping), Penal Code, if the actor committed the offense or engaged in the conduct with intent to violate or abuse the victim sexually; (D) a violation of Section 30.02 (Burglary), Penal Code, if the offense or conduct is punishable under Subsection (d) of that section and the actor committed the offense or engaged in the conduct with intent to commit a felony listed in Paragraph (A) or (C); (E) a violation of Section 20.02 (Unlawful restraint), 20.03 (Kidnapping), or 20.04 (Aggravated kidnapping), Penal Code, if, as applicable: (i) the judgment in the case contains an affirmative finding under Article 42.015; or (ii) the order in the hearing or the papers in the case contain an affirmative finding that the victim or intended victim was younger than 17 years of age; (F) the second violation of Section 21.08 (Indecent exposure), Penal Code, but not if the second violation results in a deferred adjudication; (G) an attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation, as defined by Chapter 15, Penal Code, to commit an offense or engage in conduct listed in Paragraph (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (K), or (L); (H) a violation of the laws of another state, federal law, the laws of a foreign country, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice for or based on the violation of an offense containing elements that are substantially similar to the elements of an offense listed under Paragraph (A), (B), (B-1), (C), (D), (E), (G), (J), (K), or (L), but not if the violation results in a deferred adjudication; (I) the second violation of the laws of another state, federal law, the laws of a foreign country, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice for or based on the violation of an offense containing elements that are substantially similar to the elements of the offense of indecent exposure, but not if the second violation results in a deferred adjudication; (J) a violation of Section 33.021 (Online solicitation of a minor), Penal Code; (K) a violation of Section 20A.02(a)(3), (4), (7), or (8) (Trafficking of persons), Penal Code; or (L) a violation of Section 20A.03 (Continuous trafficking of persons), Penal Code, if the offense is based partly or wholly on conduct that constitutes an offense under Section 20A.02(a)(3), (4), (7), or (8) of that code. (6) "Sexually violent offense" means any of the following offenses committed by a person 17 years of age or older: (A) an offense under Section 21.02 (Continuous sexual abuse of young child or children), 21.11(a)(1) (Indecency with a child), 22.011 (Sexual assault), or 22.021 (Aggravated sexual assault), Penal Code; (B) an offense under Section 43.25 (Sexual performance by a child), Penal Code; (C) an offense under Section 20.04(a)(4) (Aggravated kidnapping), Penal Code, if the defendant committed the offense with intent to violate or abuse the victim sexually; (D) an offense under Section 30.02 (Burglary), Penal Code, if the offense is punishable under Subsection (d) of that section and the defendant committed the offense with intent to commit a felony listed in Paragraph (A) or (C) of Subdivision (5); or (E) an offense under the laws of another state, federal law, the laws of a foreign country, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice if the offense contains elements that are substantially similar to the elements of an offense listed under Paragraph (A), (B), (C), or (D). (7) "Residence" includes a residence established in this state by a person described by Article 62.152(e). (8) "Public or private institution of higher education" includes a college, university, community college, or technical or trade institute. (9) "Authority for campus security" means the authority with primary law enforcement jurisdiction over property under the control of a public or private institution of higher education, other than a local law enforcement authority. (10) "Extrajurisdictional registrant" means a person who: (A) is required to register as a sex offender under: (i) the laws of another state with which the department has entered into a reciprocal registration agreement; (ii) federal law or the Uniform Code of Military Justice; or (iii) the laws of a foreign country; and (B) is not otherwise required to register under this chapter because: (i) the person does not have a reportable conviction for an offense under the laws of the other state, federal law, the laws of the foreign country, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice containing elements that are substantially similar to the elements of an offense requiring registration under this chapter; or (ii) the person does not have a reportable adjudication of delinquent conduct based on a violation of an offense under the laws of the other state, federal law, or the laws of the foreign country containing elements that are substantially similar to the elements of an offense requiring registration under this chapter. (11) "Centralized registration authority" means a mandatory countywide registration location designated under Article 62.0045. (12) "Online identifier" means electronic mail address information or a name used by a person when sending or receiving an instant message, social networking communication, or similar Internet communication or when participating in an Internet chat. The term includes an assumed name, nickname, pseudonym, moniker, or user name established by a person for use in connection with an electronic mail address, chat or instant chat room platform, commercial social networking site, or online picture-sharing service. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1273 (H.B. 2228), Sec. 2, eff. June 18, 2005. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 593 (H.B. 8), Sec. 3.22(a), eff. September 1, 2007. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 593 (H.B. 8), Sec. 3.22(b), eff. September 1, 2007. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 593 (H.B. 8), Sec. 3.23, eff. September 1, 2007. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 921 (H.B. 3167), Sec. 3.002(a), eff. September 1, 2007. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 921 (H.B. 3167), Sec. 3.002(b), eff. September 1, 2007. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 566 (S.B. 2048), Sec. 1, eff. June 19, 2009. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 755 (S.B. 689), Sec. 2, eff. September 1, 2009. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1 (S.B. 24), Sec. 2.10, eff. September 1, 2011. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 91 (S.B. 1303), Sec. 27.001(4), eff. September 1, 2011. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 233 (H.B. 530), Sec. 1, eff. June 17, 2011. Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 332 (H.B. 10), Sec. 5, eff. September 1, 2015. Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 734 (H.B. 1549), Sec. 13, eff. September 1, 2015. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 685 (H.B. 29), Sec. 15, eff. September 1, 2017. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 739 (S.B. 1232), Sec. 5, eff. September 1, 2017. Art. 62.002. APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER. (a) This chapter applies only to a reportable conviction or adjudication occurring on or after September 1, 1970. (b) Except as provided by Subsection (c), the duties imposed on a person required to register under this chapter on the basis of a reportable conviction or adjudication, and the corresponding duties and powers of other entities in relation to the person required to register on the basis of that conviction or adjudication, are not affected by: (1) an appeal of the conviction or adjudication; or (2) a pardon of the conviction or adjudication. (c) If a conviction or adjudication that is the basis of a duty to register under this chapter is set aside on appeal by a court or if the person required to register under this chapter on the basis of a conviction or adjudication receives a pardon on the basis of subsequent proof of innocence, the duties imposed on the person by this chapter and the corresponding duties and powers of other entities in relation to the person are terminated. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.003. DETERMINATION REGARDING SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR ELEMENTS OF OFFENSE. (a) For the purposes of this chapter, the department is responsible for determining whether an offense under the laws of another state, federal law, the laws of a foreign country, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice contains elements that are substantially similar to the elements of an offense under the laws of this state. (b) The department annually shall provide or make available to each prosecuting attorney's office in this state: (1) the criteria used in making a determination under Subsection (a); and (2) any existing record or compilation of offenses under the laws of another state, federal law, the laws of a foreign country, and the Uniform Code of Military Justice that the department has already determined to contain elements that are substantially similar to the elements of offenses under the laws of this state. (c) An appeal of a determination made under this article shall be brought in a district court in Travis County. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.004. DETERMINATION REGARDING PRIMARY REGISTRATION AUTHORITY. (a) Except as provided by Subsection (a-1), for each person subject to registration under this chapter, the department shall determine which local law enforcement authority serves as the person's primary registration authority based on the municipality or county in which the person resides or, as provided by Article 62.152, the municipality or county in which the person works or attends school. (a-1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if a person resides or, as described by Article 62.152, works or attends school in a county with a centralized registration authority, the centralized registration authority serves as the person's primary registration authority under this chapter, regardless of whether the person resides, works, or attends school, as applicable, in any municipality located in that county. (b) The department shall notify each person subject to registration under this chapter of the person's primary registration authority in a timely manner. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 566 (S.B. 2048), Sec. 2, eff. June 19, 2009. Art. 62.0045. CENTRALIZED REGISTRATION AUTHORITY. (a) The commissioners court of a county may designate the office of the sheriff of the county or may, through interlocal agreement, designate the office of a chief of police of a municipality in that county to serve as a mandatory countywide registration location for persons subject to this chapter. (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a person subject to this chapter is required to perform the registration and verification requirements of Articles 62.051 and 62.058 and the change of address requirements of Article 62.055 only with respect to the centralized registration authority for the county, regardless of whether the person resides in any municipality located in that county. If the person resides in a municipality, and the local law enforcement authority in the municipality does not serve as the person's centralized registration authority, the centralized registration authority, not later than the third day after the date the person registers or verifies registration or changes address with that authority, shall provide to the local law enforcement authority in that municipality notice of the person's registration, verification of registration, or change of address, as applicable, with the centralized registration authority. (c) This section does not affect a person's duty to register with secondary sex offender registries under this chapter, such as those described by Articles 62.059 and 62.153. Added by Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 566 (S.B. 2048), Sec. 3, eff. June 19, 2009. Amended by: Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1036 (H.B. 2825), Sec. 1, eff. June 14, 2013. Art. 62.005. CENTRAL DATABASE; PUBLIC INFORMATION. (a) The department shall maintain a computerized central database containing the information required for registration under this chapter. The department may include in the computerized central database the numeric risk level assigned to a person under this chapter. (b) The information contained in the database, including the numeric risk level assigned to a person under this chapter, is public information, with the exception of any information: (1) regarding the person's social security number or driver's license number, or any home, work, or cellular telephone number of the person; (2) that is described by Article 62.051(c)(7) or required by the department under Article 62.051(c)(9), including any information regarding an employer's name, address, or telephone number; or (3) that would identify the victim of the offense for which the person is subject to registration. (c) Notwithstanding Chapter 730, Transportation Code, the department shall maintain in the database, and shall post on any department website related to the database, any photograph of the person that is available through the process for obtaining or renewing a personal identification certificate or driver's license under Section 521.103 or 521.272, Transportation Code. The department shall update the photograph in the database and on the website annually or as the photograph otherwise becomes available through the renewal process for the certificate or license. (d) A local law enforcement authority shall release public information described under Subsection (b) to any person who requests the information from the authority. The authority may charge the person a fee not to exceed the amount reasonably necessary to cover the administrative costs associated with the authority's release of information to the person under this subsection. (e) The department shall provide a licensing authority with notice of any person required to register under this chapter who holds or seeks a license that is issued by the authority. The department shall provide the notice required by this subsection as the applicable licensing information becomes available through the person's registration or verification of registration. (f) On the written request of a licensing authority that identifies an individual and states that the individual is an applicant for or a holder of a license issued by the authority, the department shall release any information described by Subsection (a) to the licensing authority. (g) For the purposes of Subsections (e) and (f): (1) "License" means a license, certificate, registration, permit, or other authorization that: (A) is issued by a licensing authority; and (B) a person must obtain to practice or engage in a particular business, occupation, or profession. (2) "Licensing authority" means a department, commission, board, office, or other agency of the state or a political subdivision of the state that issues a license. (h) Not later than the third day after the date on which the applicable information becomes available through the person's registration or verification of registration or under Article 62.058, the department shall send notice of any person required to register under this chapter who is or will be employed, carrying on a vocation, or a student at a public or private institution of higher education in this state to: (1) for an institution in this state: (A) the authority for campus security for that institution; or (B) if an authority for campus security for that institution does not exist, the local law enforcement authority of: (i) the municipality in which the institution is located; or (ii) the county in which the institution is located, if the institution is not located in a municipality; or (2) for an institution in another state, any existing authority for campus security at that institution. (i) On the written request of an institution of higher education described by Subsection (h) that identifies an individual and states that the individual has applied to work or study at the institution, the department shall release any information described by Subsection (a) to the institution. (j) The department, for law enforcement purposes, shall release all relevant information described by Subsection (a), including information that is not public information under Subsection (b), to a peace officer, an employee of a local law enforcement authority, or the attorney general on the request of the applicable person or entity. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 755 (S.B. 689), Sec. 3, eff. September 1, 2009. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 521 (S.B. 369), Sec. 1, eff. September 1, 2013. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 685 (H.B. 29), Sec. 16, eff. September 1, 2017. Art. 62.006. INFORMATION PROVIDED TO PEACE OFFICER ON REQUEST. The department shall establish a procedure by which a peace officer or employee of a law enforcement agency who provides the department with a driver's license number, personal identification certificate number, or license plate number is automatically provided information as to whether the person to whom the driver's license or personal identification certificate is issued is required to register under this chapter or whether the license plate number is entered in the computerized central database under Article 62.005 as assigned to a vehicle owned or driven by a person required to register under this chapter. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.0061. REQUEST FOR ONLINE IDENTIFIERS BY SOCIAL NETWORKING SITES. (a) On request by a commercial social networking site, the department may provide to the commercial social networking site: (1) all public information that is contained in the database maintained under Article 62.005; and (2) notwithstanding Article 62.005(b)(2), any online identifier established or used by a person who uses the site, is seeking to use the site, or is precluded from using the site. (b) The department by rule shall establish a procedure through which a commercial social networking site may request information under Subsection (a), including rules regarding the eligibility of commercial social networking sites to request information under Subsection (a). The department shall consult with the attorney general, other appropriate state agencies, and other appropriate entities in adopting rules under this subsection. (c) A commercial social networking site or the site's agent: (1) may use information received under Subsection (a) only to: (A) prescreen persons seeking to use the site; or (B) preclude persons registered under this chapter from using the site; and (2) may not use any information received under Subsection (a) that the networking site obtained solely under Subsection (a) in any manner not described by Subdivision (1). (d) A commercial social networking site that uses information received under Subsection (a) in any manner not described by Subsection (c)(1) or that violates a rule adopted by the department under Subsection (b) is subject to a civil penalty of $1,000 for each misuse of information or rule violation. A commercial social networking site that is assessed a civil penalty under this article shall pay, in addition to the civil penalty, all court costs, investigative costs, and attorney's fees associated with the assessment of the penalty. A civil penalty assessed under this subsection shall be deposited to the compensation to victims of crime fund established under Subchapter B, Chapter 56. (e) This article does not create a private cause of action against a commercial social networking site, including a cause of action that is based on the site: (1) identifying, removing, disabling, blocking, or otherwise affecting the user of a commercial social networking site, based on a good faith belief that the person is required to register as a sex offender under this chapter or federal law; or (2) failing to identify, remove, disable, block, or otherwise affect the user of a commercial social networking site who is required to register as a sex offender under this chapter or federal law. (f) In this article, "commercial social networking site": (1) means an Internet website that: (A) allows users, through the creation of Internet web pages or profiles or other similar means, to provide personal information to the public or other users of the Internet website; (B) offers a mechanism for communication with other users of the Internet website; and (C) has the primary purpose of facilitating online social interactions; and (2) does not include an Internet service provider, unless the Internet service provider separately operates and directly derives revenue from an Internet website described by Subdivision (1). Added by Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 755 (S.B. 689), Sec. 4, eff. September 1, 2009. Art. 62.007. RISK ASSESSMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE; SEX OFFENDER SCREENING TOOL. (a) The Texas Department of Criminal Justice shall establish a risk assessment review committee composed of at least seven members, each of whom serves on the review committee in addition to the member's other employment-related duties. The review committee, to the extent feasible, must include at least: (1) one member having experience in law enforcement; (2) one member having experience working with juvenile sex offenders; (3) one member having experience as a sex offender treatment provider; (4) one member having experience working with victims of sex offenses; (5) the executive director of the Council on Sex Offender Treatment; and (6) one sex offender treatment provider registered under Chapter 110, Occupations Code, and selected by the executive director of the Council on Sex Offender Treatment to serve on the review committee. (b) The risk assessment review committee functions in an oversight capacity. The committee shall: (1) develop or select, from among existing tools or from any tool recommended by the Council on Sex Offender Treatment, a sex offender screening tool to be used in determining the level of risk of a person subject to registration under this chapter; (2) ensure that staff is trained on the use of the screening tool; (3) monitor the use of the screening tool in the state; and (4) analyze other screening tools as they become available and revise or replace the existing screening tool if warranted. (c) The sex offender screening tool must use an objective point system under which a person is assigned a designated number of points for each of various factors. In developing or selecting the sex offender screening tool, the risk assessment review committee shall use or shall select a screening tool that may be adapted to use the following general guidelines: (1) level one (low): a designated range of points on the sex offender screening tool indicating that the person poses a low danger to the community and will not likely engage in criminal sexual conduct; (2) level two (moderate): a designated range of points on the sex offender screening tool indicating that the person poses a moderate danger to the community and might continue to engage in criminal sexual conduct; and (3) level three (high): a designated range of points on the sex offender screening tool indicating that the person poses a serious danger to the community and will continue to engage in criminal sexual conduct. (d) The risk assessment review committee, the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, the Texas Juvenile Justice Department, or a court may override a risk level only if the entity: (1) believes that the risk level assessed is not an accurate prediction of the risk the offender poses to the community; and (2) documents the reason for the override in the offender's case file. (e) Records and files, including records that have been sealed under Chapter 58, Family Code, relating to a person for whom a court, the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, or the Texas Juvenile Justice Department is required under this article to determine a level of risk shall be released to the court, the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, or the Texas Juvenile Justice Department, as appropriate, for the purpose of determining the person's risk level. (f) Chapter 551, Government Code, does not apply to a meeting of the risk assessment review committee. (g) The numeric risk level assigned to a person using the sex offender screening tool described by this article is not confidential and is subject to disclosure under Chapter 552, Government Code. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 734 (H.B. 1549), Sec. 14, eff. September 1, 2015. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 746 (S.B. 1304), Sec. 1, eff. September 1, 2017. Art. 62.008. GENERAL IMMUNITY. The following persons are immune from liability for good faith conduct under this chapter: (1) an employee or officer of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, the Texas Juvenile Justice Department, the Department of Public Safety, the Board of Pardons and Paroles, or a local law enforcement authority; (2) an employee or officer of a community supervision and corrections department or a juvenile probation department; (3) a member of the judiciary; and (4) a member of the risk assessment review committee established under Article 62.007. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 734 (H.B. 1549), Sec. 15, eff. September 1, 2015. Art. 62.009. IMMUNITY FOR RELEASE OF PUBLIC INFORMATION. (a) The department, a penal institution, a local law enforcement authority, or an authority for campus security may release to the public information regarding a person required to register under this chapter only if the information is public information under this chapter. (b) An individual, agency, entity, or authority is not liable under Chapter 101, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, or any other law for damages arising from conduct authorized by Subsection (a). (c) For purposes of determining liability, the release or withholding of information by an appointed or elected officer of an agency, entity, or authority is a discretionary act. (d) A private primary or secondary school, public or private institution of higher education, or administrator of a private primary or secondary school or public or private institution of higher education may release to the public information regarding a person required to register under this chapter only if the information is public information under this chapter and is released to the administrator under Article 62.005, 62.053, 62.054, 62.055, or 62.153. A private primary or secondary school, public or private institution of higher education, or administrator of a private primary or secondary school or public or private institution of higher education is not liable under any law for damages arising from conduct authorized by this subsection. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.010. RULEMAKING AUTHORITY. The Texas Department of Criminal Justice, the Texas Juvenile Justice Department, and the department may adopt any rule necessary to implement this chapter. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 734 (H.B. 1549), Sec. 16, eff. September 1, 2015. SUBCHAPTER B. REGISTRATION AND VERIFICATION

REQUIREMENTS; RELATED NOTICE

Art. 62.051. REGISTRATION: GENERAL. (a) A person who has a reportable conviction or adjudication or who is required to register as a condition of parole, release to mandatory supervision, or community supervision shall register or, if the person is a person for whom registration is completed under this chapter, verify registration as provided by Subsection (f), with the local law enforcement authority in any municipality where the person resides or intends to reside for more than seven days. If the person does not reside or intend to reside in a municipality, the person shall register or verify registration in any county where the person resides or intends to reside for more than seven days. The person shall satisfy the requirements of this subsection not later than the later of: (1) the seventh day after the person's arrival in the municipality or county; or (2) the first date the local law enforcement authority of the municipality or county by policy allows the person to register or verify registration, as applicable. (b) The department shall provide the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, the Texas Juvenile Justice Department, and each local law enforcement authority, authority for campus security, county jail, and court with a form for registering persons required by this chapter to register. (c) The registration form shall require: (1) the person's full name, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, eye color, hair color, social security number, driver's license number, and shoe size; (1-a) the address at which the person resides or intends to reside or, if the person does not reside or intend to reside at a physical address, a detailed description of each geographical location at which the person resides or intends to reside; (1-b) each alias used by the person and any home, work, or cellular telephone number of the person; (2) a recent color photograph or, if possible, an electronic digital image of the person and a complete set of the person's fingerprints; (3) the type of offense the person was convicted of, the age of the victim, the date of conviction, and the punishment received; (4) an indication as to whether the person is discharged, paroled, or released on juvenile probation, community supervision, or mandatory supervision; (5) an indication of each license, as defined by Article 62.005(g), that is held or sought by the person; (6) an indication as to whether the person is or will be employed, carrying on a vocation, or a student at a particular public or private institution of higher education in this state or another state, and the name and address of that institution; (7) the identification of any online identifier established or used by the person; (8) the vehicle registration information, including the make, model, vehicle identification number, color, and license plate number, of any vehicle owned by the person, if the person has a reportable conviction or adjudication for an offense under: (A) Section 20A.02(a)(3), (4), (7), or (8), Penal Code; or (B) Section 20A.03, Penal Code, if based partly or wholly on conduct that constitutes an offense under Section 20A.02(a)(3), (4), (7), or (8) of that code; and (9) any other information required by the department. (d) The registration form must contain a statement and description of any registration duties the person has or may have under this chapter. (e) Not later than the third day after a person's registering, the local law enforcement authority with whom the person registered shall send a copy of the registration form to the department and, if the person resides on the campus of a public or private institution of higher education, to any authority for campus security for that institution. (f) Not later than the seventh day after the date on which the person is released, a person for whom registration is completed under this chapter shall report to the applicable local law enforcement authority to verify the information in the registration form received by the authority under this chapter. The authority shall require the person to produce proof of the person's identity and residence before the authority gives the registration form to the person for verification. If the information in the registration form is complete and accurate, the person shall verify registration by signing the form. If the information is not complete or not accurate, the person shall make any necessary additions or corrections before signing the form. (g) A person who is required to register or verify registration under this chapter shall ensure that the person's registration form is complete and accurate with respect to each item of information required by the form in accordance with Subsection (c). (h) If a person subject to registration under this chapter does not move to an intended residence by the end of the seventh day after the date on which the person is released or the date on which the person leaves a previous residence, the person shall: (1) report to the juvenile probation officer, community supervision and corrections department officer, or parole officer supervising the person by not later than the seventh day after the date on which the person is released or the date on which the person leaves a previous residence, as applicable, and provide the officer with the address of the person's temporary residence; and (2) continue to report to the person's supervising officer not less than weekly during any period of time in which the person has not moved to an intended residence and provide the officer with the address of the person's temporary residence. (i) If the other state has a registration requirement for sex offenders, a person who has a reportable conviction or adjudication, who resides in this state, and who is employed, carries on a vocation, or is a student in another state shall, not later than the 10th day after the date on which the person begins to work or attend school in the other state, register with the law enforcement authority that is identified by the department as the authority designated by that state to receive registration information. If the person is employed, carries on a vocation, or is a student at a public or private institution of higher education in the other state and if an authority for campus security exists at the institution, the person shall also register with that authority not later than the 10th day after the date on which the person begins to work or attend school. (j) If a person subject to registration under this chapter is released from a penal institution without being released to parole or placed on any other form of supervision and the person does not move to the address indicated on the registration form as the person's intended residence or does not indicate an address on the registration form, the person shall, not later than the seventh day after the date on which the person is released: (1) report in person to the local law enforcement authority for the municipality or county, as applicable, in which the person is residing and provide that authority with the address at which the person is residing or, if the person's residence does not have a physical address, a detailed description of the geographical location of the person's residence; and (2) until the person indicates the person's current address as the person's intended residence on the registration form or otherwise complies with the requirements of Article 62.055, as appropriate, continue to report, in the manner required by Subdivision (1), to that authority not less than once in each succeeding 30-day period and provide that authority with the address at which the person is residing or, if applicable, a detailed description of the geographical location of the person's residence. (k) A person required to register under this chapter may not refuse or otherwise fail to provide any information required for the accurate completion of the registration form. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 661 (H.B. 2153), Sec. 2, eff. September 1, 2009. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 755 (S.B. 689), Sec. 5, eff. September 1, 2009. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 91 (S.B. 1303), Sec. 6.005, eff. September 1, 2011. Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 734 (H.B. 1549), Sec. 17, eff. September 1, 2015. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 685 (H.B. 29), Sec. 17, eff. September 1, 2017. Art. 62.052. REGISTRATION: EXTRAJURISDICTIONAL REGISTRANTS. (a) An extrajurisdictional registrant is required to comply with the annual verification requirements of Article 62.058 in the same manner as a person who is required to verify registration on the basis of a reportable conviction or adjudication. (b) The duty to register for an extrajurisdictional registrant expires on the date the person's duty to register would expire under the laws of the other state or foreign country had the person remained in that state or foreign country, under federal law, or under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, as applicable. (c) The department may negotiate and enter into a reciprocal registration agreement with any other state to prevent residents of this state and residents of the other state from frustrating the public purpose of the registration of sex offenders by moving from one state to the other. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.053. PRERELEASE NOTIFICATION. (a) Before a person who will be subject to registration under this chapter is due to be released from a penal institution, the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or the Texas Juvenile Justice Department shall determine the person's level of risk to the community using the sex offender screening tool developed or selected under Article 62.007 and assign to the person a numeric risk level of one, two, or three. Before releasing the person, an official of the penal institution shall: (1) inform the person that: (A) not later than the later of the seventh day after the date on which the person is released or after the date on which the person moves from a previous residence to a new residence in this state or not later than the first date the applicable local law enforcement authority by policy allows the person to register or verify registration, the person must register or verify registration with the local law enforcement authority in the municipality or county in which the person intends to reside; (B) not later than the seventh day after the date on which the person is released or the date on which the person moves from a previous residence to a new residence in this state, the person must, if the person has not moved to an intended residence, report to the applicable entity or entities as required by Article 62.051(h) or (j) or 62.055(e); (C) not later than the seventh day before the date on which the person moves to a new residence in this state or another state, the person must report in person to the local law enforcement authority designated as the person's primary registration authority by the department and to the juvenile probation officer, community supervision and corrections department officer, or parole officer supervising the person; (D) not later than the 10th day after the date on which the person arrives in another state in which the person intends to reside, the person must register with the law enforcement agency that is identified by the department as the agency designated by that state to receive registration information, if the other state has a registration requirement for sex offenders; (E) not later than the 30th day after the date on which the person is released, the person must apply to the department in person for the issuance of an original or renewal driver's license or personal identification certificate and a failure to apply to the department as required by this paragraph results in the automatic revocation of any driver's license or personal identification certificate issued by the department to the person; (F) the person must notify appropriate entities of any change in status as described by Article 62.057; (G) certain types of employment are prohibited under Article 62.063 for a person with a reportable conviction or adjudication for a sexually violent offense involving a victim younger than 14 years of age and occurring on or after September 1, 2013; and Text of paragraph as added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 329 (H.B. 355), Sec. 2

(H) certain locations of residence are prohibited under Article 62.064 for a person with a reportable conviction or adjudication for an offense occurring on or after September 1, 2017, except as otherwise provided by that article; Text of paragraph as added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 924 (S.B. 1553), Sec. 1

(H) if the person enters the premises of a school as described by Article 62.064 and is subject to the requirements of that article, the person must immediately notify the administrative office of the school of the person's presence and the person's registration status under this chapter; (2) require the person to sign a written statement that the person was informed of the person's duties as described by Subdivision (1) or Subsection (g) or, if the person refuses to sign the statement, certify that the person was so informed; (3) obtain the address or, if applicable, a detailed description of each geographical location where the person expects to reside on the person's release and other registration information, including a photograph and complete set of fingerprints; and (4) complete the registration form for the person. (b) On the seventh day before the date on which a person who will be subject to registration under this chapter is due to be released from a penal institution, or on receipt of notice by a penal institution that a person who will be subject to registration under this chapter is due to be released in less than seven days, an official of the penal institution shall send the person's completed registration form and numeric risk level to the department and to: (1) the applicable local law enforcement authority in the municipality or county in which the person expects to reside, if the person expects to reside in this state; or (2) the law enforcement agency that is identified by the department as the agency designated by another state to receive registration information, if the person expects to reside in that other state and that other state has a registration requirement for sex offenders. (c) If a person who is subject to registration under this chapter receives an order deferring adjudication, placing the person on community supervision or juvenile probation, or imposing only a fine, the court pronouncing the order or sentence shall make a determination of the person's numeric risk level using the sex offender screening tool developed or selected under Article 62.007, assign to the person a numeric risk level of one, two, or three, and ensure that the prerelease notification and registration requirements specified in this article are conducted on the day of entering the order or sentencing. If a community supervision and corrections department representative is available in court at the time a court pronounces a sentence of deferred adjudication or community supervision, the representative shall immediately obtain the person's numeric risk level from the court and conduct the prerelease notification and registration requirements specified in this article. In any other case in which the court pronounces a sentence under this subsection, the court shall designate another appropriate individual to obtain the person's numeric risk level from the court and conduct the prerelease notification and registration requirements specified in this article. (d) If a person who has a reportable conviction described by Article 62.001(5)(H) or (I) is placed under the supervision of the parole division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or a community supervision and corrections department under Section 510.017, Government Code, the division or community supervision and corrections department shall conduct the prerelease notification and registration requirements specified in this article on the date the person is placed under the supervision of the division or community supervision and corrections department. If a person who has a reportable adjudication of delinquent conduct described by Article 62.001(5)(H) or (I) is, as permitted by Section 60.002, Family Code, placed under the supervision of the Texas Youth Commission, a public or private vendor operating under contract with the Texas Youth Commission, a local juvenile probation department, or a juvenile secure pre-adjudication or post-adjudication facility, the commission, vendor, probation department, or facility shall conduct the prerelease notification and registration requirements specified in this article on the date the person is placed under the supervision of the commission, vendor, probation department, or facility. (e) Not later than the eighth day after receiving a registration form under Subsection (b), (c), or (d), the local law enforcement authority shall verify the age of the victim, the basis on which the person is subject to registration under this chapter, and the person's numeric risk level. The local law enforcement authority shall immediately provide notice to the superintendent of the public school district and to the administrator of any private primary or secondary school located in the public school district in which the person subject to registration intends to reside by mail to the office of the superintendent or administrator, as appropriate, in accordance with Article 62.054. On receipt of a notice under this subsection, the superintendent shall release the information contained in the notice to appropriate school district personnel, including peace officers and security personnel, principals, nurses, and counselors. (f) The local law enforcement authority shall include in the notice to the superintendent of the public school district and to the administrator of any private primary or secondary school located in the public school district any information the authority determines is necessary to protect the public, except: (1) the person's social security number or driver's license number, or any home, work, or cellular telephone number of the person; and (2) any information that would identify the victim of the offense for which the person is subject to registration. (g) Before a person who will be subject to registration under this chapter is due to be released from a penal institution in this state, an official of the penal institution shall inform the person that: (1) if the person intends to reside in another state and to work or attend school in this state, the person must, not later than the later of the seventh day after the date on which the person begins to work or attend school or the first date the applicable local law enforcement authority by policy allows the person to register or verify registration, register or verify registration with the local law enforcement authority in the municipality or county in which the person intends to work or attend school; (2) if the person intends to reside in this state and to work or attend school in another state and if the other state has a registration requirement for sex offenders, the person must: (A) not later than the 10th day after the date on which the person begins to work or attend school in the other state, register with the law enforcement authority that is identified by the department as the authority designated by that state to receive registration information; and (B) if the person intends to be employed, carry on a vocation, or be a student at a public or private institution of higher education in the other state and if an authority for campus security exists at the institution, register with that authority not later than the 10th day after the date on which the person begins to work or attend school; and (3) regardless of the state in which the person intends to reside, if the person intends to be employed, carry on a vocation, or be a student at a public or private institution of higher education in this state, the person must: (A) not later than the later of the seventh day after the date on which the person begins to work or attend school or the first date the applicable authority by policy allows the person to register, register with: (i) the authority for campus security for that institution; or (ii) except as provided by Article 62.153(e), if an authority for campus security for that institution does not exist, the local law enforcement authority of: (a) the municipality in which the institution is located; or (b) the county in which the institution is located, if the institution is not located in a municipality; and (B) not later than the seventh day after the date the person stops working or attending school, notify the appropriate authority for campus security or local law enforcement authority of the termination of the person's status as a worker or student. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 87 (S.B. 1969), Sec. 25.048, eff. September 1, 2009. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 661 (H.B. 2153), Sec. 3, eff. September 1, 2009. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 755 (S.B. 689), Sec. 6, eff. September 1, 2009. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 663 (H.B. 1302), Sec. 4, eff. September 1, 2013. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 329 (H.B. 355), Sec. 2, eff. September 1, 2017. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 924 (S.B. 1553), Sec. 1, eff. September 1, 2017. Art. 62.054. CIRCUMSTANCES REQUIRING NOTICE TO SUPERINTENDENT OR SCHOOL ADMINISTRATOR. (a) A local law enforcement authority shall provide notice to the superintendent and each administrator under Article 62.053(e) or 62.055(f) only if: (1) the victim was at the time of the offense a child younger than 17 years of age or a student enrolled in a public or private secondary school; (2) the person subject to registration is a student enrolled in a public or private secondary school; or (3) the basis on which the person is subject to registration is a conviction, a deferred adjudication, or an adjudication of delinquent conduct for an offense under Section 43.25 or 43.26, Penal Code, or an offense under the laws of another state, federal law, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice that contains elements substantially similar to the elements of an offense under either of those sections. (b) A local law enforcement authority may not provide notice to the superintendent or any administrator under Article 62.053(e) or 62.055(f) if the basis on which the person is subject to registration is a conviction, a deferred adjudication, or an adjudication of delinquent conduct for an offense under Section 25.02, Penal Code, or an offense under the laws of another state, federal law, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice that contains elements substantially similar to the elements of an offense under that section. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.055. CHANGE OF ADDRESS; LACK OF ADDRESS. (a) If a person required to register under this chapter intends to change address, regardless of whether the person intends to move to another state, the person shall, not later than the seventh day before the intended change, report in person to the local law enforcement authority designated as the person's primary registration authority by the department and to the juvenile probation officer, community supervision and corrections department officer, or parole officer supervising the person and provide the authority and the officer with the person's anticipated move date and new address. If a person required to register changes address, the person shall, not later than the later of the seventh day after changing the address or the first date the applicable local law enforcement authority by policy allows the person to report, report in person to the local law enforcement authority in the municipality or county in which the person's new residence is located and provide the authority with proof of identity and proof of residence. (b) Not later than the third day after receipt of notice under Subsection (a), the person's juvenile probation officer, community supervision and corrections department officer, or parole officer shall forward the information provided under Subsection (a) to the local law enforcement authority designated as the person's primary registration authority by the department and, if the person intends to move to another municipality or county in this state, to the applicable local law enforcement authority in that municipality or county. (c) If the person moves to another state that has a registration requirement for sex offenders, the person shall, not later than the 10th day after the date on which the person arrives in the other state, register with the law enforcement agency that is identified by the department as the agency designated by that state to receive registration information. (d) Not later than the third day after receipt of information under Subsection (a) or (b), whichever is earlier, the local law enforcement authority shall forward this information to the department and, if the person intends to move to another municipality or county in this state, to the applicable local law enforcement authority in that municipality or county. (e) If a person who reports to a local law enforcement authority under Subsection (a) does not move on or before the anticipated move date or does not move to the new address provided to the authority, the person shall: (1) not later than the seventh day after the anticipated move date, and not less than weekly after that seventh day, report to the local law enforcement authority designated as the person's primary registration authority by the department and provide an explanation to the authority regarding any changes in the anticipated move date and intended residence; and (2) report to the juvenile probation officer, community supervision and corrections department officer, or parole officer supervising the person not less than weekly during any period in which the person has not moved to an intended residence. (f) If the person moves to another municipality or county in this state, the department shall inform the applicable local law enforcement authority in the new area of the person's residence not later than the third day after the date on which the department receives information under Subsection (a). Not later than the eighth day after the date on which the local law enforcement authority is informed under Subsection (a) or under this subsection, the authority shall verify the age of the victim, the basis on which the person is subject to registration under this chapter, and the person's numeric risk level. The local law enforcement authority shall immediately provide notice to the superintendent of the public school district and to the administrator of any private primary or secondary school located in the public school district in which the person subject to registration intends to reside by mail to the office of the superintendent or administrator, as appropriate, in accordance with Article 62.054. On receipt of a notice under this subsection, the superintendent shall release the information contained in the notice to appropriate school district personnel, including peace officers and security personnel, principals, nurses, and counselors. (g) The local law enforcement authority shall include in the notice to the superintendent of the public school district and the administrator of any private primary or secondary school located in the public school district any information the authority determines is necessary to protect the public, except: (1) the person's social security number or driver's license number, or any home, work, or cellular telephone number of the person; and (2) any information that would identify the victim of the offense for which the person is subject to registration. (h) If the person moves to another state, the department shall, immediately on receiving information under Subsection (d): (1) inform the agency that is designated by the other state to receive registration information, if that state has a registration requirement for sex offenders; and (2) send to the Federal Bureau of Investigation a copy of the person's registration form, including the record of conviction and a complete set of fingerprints. (i) If a person required to register under this chapter resides for more than seven days at a location or locations to which a physical address has not been assigned by a governmental entity, the person, not less than once in each 30-day period, shall confirm the person's location or locations by: (1) reporting to the local law enforcement authority in the municipality where the person resides or, if the person does not reside in a municipality, the local law enforcement authority in the county in which the person resides; and (2) providing a detailed description of the applicable location or locations. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 661 (H.B. 2153), Sec. 4, eff. September 1, 2009. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 661 (H.B. 2153), Sec. 5, eff. September 1, 2009. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 755 (S.B. 689), Sec. 7, eff. September 1, 2009. Art. 62.0551. CHANGE IN ONLINE IDENTIFIERS. (a) If a person required to register under this chapter changes any online identifier included on the person's registration form or establishes any new online identifier not already included on the person's registration form, the person, not later than the later of the seventh day after the change or establishment or the first date the applicable authority by policy allows the person to report, shall report the change or establishment to the person's primary registration authority in the manner prescribed by the authority. (b) A primary registration authority that receives information under this article shall forward information in the same manner as information received by the authority under Article 62.055. Added by Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 755 (S.B. 689), Sec. 8, eff. September 1, 2009. Art. 62.056. ADDITIONAL PUBLIC NOTICE FOR CERTAIN OFFENDERS. (a) On receipt of notice under this chapter that a person subject to registration is due to be released from a penal institution, has been placed on community supervision or juvenile probation, or intends to move to a new residence in this state, the department shall verify the person's numeric risk level assigned under this chapter. If the person is assigned a numeric risk level of three, the department shall, not later than the seventh day after the date on which the person is released or the 10th day after the date on which the person moves, provide written notice mailed or delivered to at least each address, other than a post office box, within a one-mile radius, in an area that has not been subdivided, or a three-block area, in an area that has been subdivided, of the place where the person intends to reside. In providing written notice under this subsection, the department shall use employees of the department whose duties in providing the notice are in addition to the employees' regular duties. (b) The department shall provide the notice in English and Spanish and shall include in the notice any information that is public information under this chapter. The department may not include any information that is not public information under this chapter. (c) The department shall establish procedures for a person with respect to whom notice is provided under Subsection (a), other than a person subject to registration on the basis of an adjudication of delinquent conduct, to pay to the department all costs incurred by the department in providing the notice. The person shall pay those costs in accordance with the procedures established under this subsection. (d) On receipt of notice under this chapter that a person subject to registration under this chapter is required to register or verify registration with a local law enforcement authority and has been assigned a numeric risk level of three, the local law enforcement authority may provide notice to the public in any manner determined appropriate by the local law enforcement authority, including publishing notice in a newspaper or other periodical or circular in circulation in the area where the person intends to reside, holding a neighborhood meeting, posting notices in the area where the person intends to reside, distributing printed notices to area residents, or establishing a specialized local website. The local law enforcement authority may include in the notice only information that is public information under this chapter. (e) An owner, builder, seller, or lessor of a single-family residential real property or any improvement to residential real property or that person's broker, salesperson, or other agent or representative in a residential real estate transaction does not have a duty to make a disclosure to a prospective buyer or lessee about registrants under this chapter. To the extent of any conflict between this subsection and another law imposing a duty to disclose information about registered sex offenders, this subsection controls. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.057. STATUS REPORT BY SUPERVISING OFFICER OR LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. (a) If the juvenile probation officer, community supervision and corrections department officer, or parole officer supervising a person subject to registration under this chapter receives information to the effect that the person's status has changed in any manner that affects proper supervision of the person, including a change in the person's name, online identifiers, physical health, job or educational status, including higher educational status, incarceration, or terms of release, the supervising officer shall promptly notify the appropriate local law enforcement authority or authorities of that change. If the person required to register intends to change address, the supervising officer shall notify the local law enforcement authorities designated by Article 62.055(b). Not later than the seventh day after the date the supervising officer receives the relevant information, the supervising officer shall notify the local law enforcement authority of any change in the person's job or educational status in which the person: (1) becomes employed, begins to carry on a vocation, or becomes a student at a particular public or private institution of higher education; or (2) terminates the person's status in that capacity. (b) Not later than the later of the seventh day after the date of the change or the first date the applicable authority by policy allows the person to report, a person subject to registration under this chapter shall report to the local law enforcement authority designated as the person's primary registration authority by the department any change in the person's name, online identifiers, physical health, or job or educational status, including higher educational status. (c) For purposes of Subsection (b): (1) a person's job status changes if the person leaves employment for any reason, remains employed by an employer but changes the location at which the person works, or begins employment with a new employer; (2) a person's health status changes if the person is hospitalized as a result of an illness; (3) a change in a person's educational status includes the person's transfer from one educational facility to another; and (4) regarding a change of name, notice of the proposed name provided to a local law enforcement authority as described by Sections 45.004 and 45.103, Family Code, is sufficient, except that the person shall promptly notify the authority of any denial of the person's petition for a change of name. (d) Not later than the seventh day after the date the local law enforcement authority receives the relevant information, the local law enforcement authority shall notify the department of any change in the person's job or educational status in which the person: (1) becomes employed, begins to carry on a vocation, or becomes a student at a particular public or private institution of higher education; or (2) terminates the person's status in that capacity. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 755 (S.B. 689), Sec. 9, eff. September 1, 2009. Art. 62.058. LAW ENFORCEMENT VERIFICATION OF REGISTRATION INFORMATION. (a) A person subject to registration under this chapter who has for a sexually violent offense been convicted two or more times, received an order of deferred adjudication two or more times, or been convicted and received an order of deferred adjudication shall report to the local law enforcement authority designated as the person's primary registration authority by the department not less than once in each 90-day period following the date the person first registered under this chapter to verify the information in the registration form maintained by the authority for that person. A person subject to registration under this chapter who is not subject to the 90-day reporting requirement described by this subsection shall report to the local law enforcement authority designated as the person's primary registration authority by the department once each year not earlier than the 30th day before and not later than the 30th day after the anniversary of the person's date of birth to verify the information in the registration form maintained by the authority for that person. For purposes of this subsection, a person complies with a requirement that the person register within a 90-day period following a date if the person registers at any time on or after the 83rd day following that date but before the 98th day after that date. (b) A local law enforcement authority designated as a person's primary registration authority by the department may direct the person to report to the authority to verify the information in the registration form maintained by the authority for that person. The authority may direct the person to report under this subsection once in each 90-day period following the date the person first registered under this chapter, if the person is required to report not less than once in each 90-day period under Subsection (a) or once in each year not earlier than the 30th day before and not later than the 30th day after the anniversary of the person's date of birth, if the person is required to report once each year under Subsection (a). A local law enforcement authority may not direct a person to report to the authority under this subsection if the person is required to report under Subsection (a) and is in compliance with the reporting requirements of that subsection. (c) A local law enforcement authority with whom a person reports under this article shall require the person to produce proof of the person's identity and residence before the authority gives the registration form to the person for verification. If the information in the registration form is complete and accurate, the person shall verify registration by signing the form. If the information is not complete or not accurate, the person shall make any necessary additions or corrections before signing the form. (d) A local law enforcement authority designated as a person's primary registration authority by the department may at any time mail a nonforwardable verification form to the last reported address of the person. Not later than the 21st day after receipt of a verification form under this subsection, the person shall: (1) indicate on the form whether the person still resides at the last reported address and, if not, provide on the form the person's new address; (2) complete any other information required by the form; (3) sign the form; and (4) return the form to the authority. (e) For purposes of this article, a person receives multiple convictions or orders of deferred adjudication regardless of whether: (1) the judgments or orders are entered on different dates; or (2) the offenses for which the person was convicted or placed on deferred adjudication arose out of different criminal transactions. (f) A local law enforcement authority that provides to a person subject to the prohibitions described by Article 62.063 a registration form for verification as required by this chapter shall include with the form a statement summarizing the types of employment that are prohibited for that person. Text of subsection as added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 329 (H.B. 355), Sec. 3

(g) A local law enforcement authority that provides to a person a registration form for verification as required by this chapter shall include with the form a statement describing the prohibition under Article 62.064. Text of subsection as added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 924 (S.B. 1553), Sec. 2

(g) A local law enforcement authority who provides a person with a registration form for verification as required by this chapter shall include with the form a statement and, if applicable, a description of the person's duty to provide notice under Article 62.064. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 663 (H.B. 1302), Sec. 5, eff. September 1, 2013. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 329 (H.B. 355), Sec. 3, eff. September 1, 2017. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 924 (S.B. 1553), Sec. 2, eff. September 1, 2017. Art. 62.059. REGISTRATION OF PERSONS REGULARLY VISITING LOCATION. (a) A person subject to this chapter who on at least three occasions during any month spends more than 48 consecutive hours in a municipality or county in this state, other than the municipality or county in which the person is registered under this chapter, before the last day of that month shall report that fact to: (1) the local law enforcement authority of the municipality in which the person is a visitor; or (2) if the person is a visitor in a location that is not a municipality, the local law enforcement authority of the county in which the person is a visitor. (b) A person described by Subsection (a) shall provide the local law enforcement authority with: (1) all information the person is required to provide under Article 62.051(c); (2) the address of any location in the municipality or county, as appropriate, at which the person was lodged during the month; and (3) a statement as to whether the person intends to return to the municipality or county during the succeeding month. (c) This article does not impose on a local law enforcement authority requirements of public notification or notification to schools relating to a person about whom the authority is not otherwise required by this chapter to make notifications. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.060. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO DRIVER'S LICENSE OR PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION CERTIFICATE. (a) A person subject to registration under this chapter shall apply to the department in person for the issuance of, as applicable, an original or renewal driver's license under Section 521.272, Transportation Code, an original or renewal personal identification certificate under Section 521.103, Transportation Code, or an original or renewal commercial driver's license or commercial learner's permit under Section 522.033, Transportation Code, not later than the 30th day after the date: (1) the person is released from a penal institution or is released by a court on community supervision or juvenile probation; or (2) the department sends written notice to the person of the requirements of this article. (b) The person shall annually renew in person each driver's license or personal identification certificate issued by the department to the person, including each renewal, duplicate, or corrected license or certificate, until the person's duty to register under this chapter expires. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 752 (H.B. 1888), Sec. 42, eff. January 1, 2016. Art. 62.061. DNA SPECIMEN. A person required to register under this chapter shall comply with a request for a DNA specimen made by a law enforcement agency under Section 411.1473, Government Code. Added by Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 444, Sec. 5(b); Subsec. (a) amended by Acts 2003, 78th Leg., ch. 347, Sec. 10, eff. Sept. 1, 2003. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.062. LIMITATION ON NEWSPAPER PUBLICATION. (a) Except as provided by Subsection (b), a local law enforcement authority may not publish notice in a newspaper or other periodical or circular concerning a person's registration under this chapter if the only basis on which the person is subject to registration is one or more adjudications of delinquent conduct. (b) This article does not apply to a publication of notice under Article 62.056. Added by Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 444, Sec. 8, eff. Sept. 1, 1999; Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 1415, Sec. 16, eff. Sept. 1, 1999. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.063. PROHIBITED EMPLOYMENT. (a) In this article: (1) "Amusement ride" has the meaning assigned by Section 2151.002, Occupations Code. (2) "Bus" has the meaning assigned by Section 541.201, Transportation Code. (b) A person subject to registration under this chapter because of a reportable conviction or adjudication for which an affirmative finding is entered under Article 42.015(b) or 42A.105(a), as appropriate, may not, for compensation: (1) operate or offer to operate a bus; (2) provide or offer to provide a passenger taxicab or limousine transportation service; (3) provide or offer to provide any type of service in the residence of another person unless the provision of service will be supervised; or (4) operate or offer to operate any amusement ride. Added by Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 663 (H.B. 1302), Sec. 6, eff. September 1, 2013. Amended by: Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 770 (H.B. 2299), Sec. 2.26, eff. January 1, 2017. Text of article as added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 329 (H.B. 355), Sec. 1

For text of article as added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 924 (S.B. 1553), Sec. 3, see other Art. 62.064.

Art. 62.064. PROHIBITED LOCATION OF RESIDENCE. A person subject to registration under this chapter may not reside on the campus of a public or private institution of higher education unless: (1) the person is assigned a numeric risk level of one based on an assessment conducted using the sex offender screening tool developed or selected under Article 62.007; and (2) the institution approves the person to reside on the institution's campus. Added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 329 (H.B. 355), Sec. 1, eff. September 1, 2017. Text of article as added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 924 (S.B. 1553), Sec. 3

For text of article as added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 329 (H.B. 355), Sec. 1, see other Art. 62.064.

Art. 62.064. ENTRY ONTO SCHOOL PREMISES; NOTICE REQUIRED. (a) In this article: (1) "Premises" means a building or portion of a building and the grounds on which the building is located, including any public or private driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, or parking garage on the grounds. (2) "School" has the meaning assigned by Section 481.134, Health and Safety Code. (b) A person subject to registration under this chapter who enters the premises of any school in this state during the standard operating hours of the school shall immediately notify the administrative office of the school of the person's presence on the premises of the school and the person's registration status under this chapter. The office may provide a chaperon to accompany the person while the person is on the premises of the school. (c) The requirements of this article: (1) are in addition to any requirement associated with the imposition of a child safety zone on the person under Section 508.187, Government Code, or Article 42A.453 of this code; and (2) do not apply to: (A) a student enrolled at the school; (B) a student from another school participating at an event at the school; or (C) a person who has entered into a written agreement with the school that exempts the person from those requirements. Added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 924 (S.B. 1553), Sec. 3, eff. September 1, 2017. SUBCHAPTER C. EXPIRATION OF DUTY TO REGISTER; GENERAL

PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE

Art. 62.101. EXPIRATION OF DUTY TO REGISTER. (a) Except as provided by Subsection (b) and Subchapter I, the duty to register for a person ends when the person dies if the person has a reportable conviction or adjudication, other than an adjudication of delinquent conduct, for: (1) a sexually violent offense; (2) an offense under Section 20A.02(a)(3), (4), (7), or (8), 25.02, 43.05(a)(2), or 43.26, Penal Code; (3) an offense under Section 20A.03, Penal Code, if based partly or wholly on conduct that constitutes an offense under Section 20A.02(a)(3), (4), (7), or (8) of that code; (4) an offense under Section 21.11(a)(2), Penal Code, if before or after the person is convicted or adjudicated for the offense under Section 21.11(a)(2), Penal Code, the person receives or has received another reportable conviction or adjudication, other than an adjudication of delinquent conduct, for an offense or conduct that requires registration under this chapter; (5) an offense under Section 20.02, 20.03, or 20.04, Penal Code, if: (A) the judgment in the case contains an affirmative finding under Article 42.015 or, for a deferred adjudication, the papers in the case contain an affirmative finding that the victim or intended victim was younger than 17 years of age; and (B) before or after the person is convicted or adjudicated for the offense under Section 20.02, 20.03, or 20.04, Penal Code, the person receives or has received another reportable conviction or adjudication, other than an adjudication of delinquent conduct, for an offense or conduct that requires registration under this chapter; or (6) an offense under Section 43.23, Penal Code, that is punishable under Subsection (h) of that section. (b) Except as provided by Subchapter I, the duty to register for a person otherwise subject to Subsection (a) ends on the 10th anniversary of the date on which the person is released from a penal institution or discharges community supervision or the court dismisses the criminal proceedings against the person and discharges the person, whichever date is later, if the person's duty to register is based on a conviction or an order of deferred adjudication in a cause that was transferred to a district court or criminal district court under Section 54.02, Family Code. (c) Except as provided by Subchapter I, the duty to register for a person with a reportable conviction or adjudication for an offense other than an offense described by Subsection (a) ends: (1) if the person's duty to register is based on an adjudication of delinquent conduct, on the 10th anniversary of the date on which the disposition is made or the person completes the terms of the disposition, whichever date is later; or (2) if the person's duty to register is based on a conviction or on an order of deferred adjudication, on the 10th anniversary of the date on which the court dismisses the criminal proceedings against the person and discharges the person, the person is released from a penal institution, or the person discharges community supervision, whichever date is later. Added by Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 444, Sec. 5(c). Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1 (S.B. 24), Sec. 2.11, eff. September 1, 2011. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 685 (H.B. 29), Sec. 18, eff. September 1, 2017. Art. 62.102. FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS. (a) A person commits an offense if the person is required to register and fails to comply with any requirement of this chapter. (b) An offense under this article is: (1) a state jail felony if the actor is a person whose duty to register expires under Article 62.101(b) or (c); (2) a felony of the third degree if the actor is a person whose duty to register expires under Article 62.101(a) and who is required to verify registration once each year under Article 62.058; and (3) a felony of the second degree if the actor is a person whose duty to register expires under Article 62.101(a) and who is required to verify registration once each 90-day period under Article 62.058. (c) If it is shown at the trial of a person for an offense or an attempt to commit an offense under this article that the person has previously been convicted of an offense or an attempt to commit an offense under this article, the punishment for the offense or the attempt to commit the offense is increased to the punishment for the next highest degree of felony. (d) If it is shown at the trial of a person for an offense under this article or an attempt to commit an offense under this article that the person fraudulently used identifying information in violation of Section 32.51, Penal Code, during the commission or attempted commission of the offense, the punishment for the offense or the attempt to commit the offense is increased to the punishment for the next highest degree of felony. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 362 (H.B. 2637), Sec. 1, eff. September 1, 2013. SUBCHAPTER D. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN

WORKERS AND STUDENTS

Art. 62.151. DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this subchapter, a person: (1) is employed or carries on a vocation if the person works or volunteers on a full-time or part-time basis for a consecutive period exceeding 14 days or for an aggregate period exceeding 30 days in a calendar year; (2) works regardless of whether the person works for compensation or for governmental or educational benefit; and (3) is a student if the person enrolls on a full-time or part-time basis in any educational facility, including: (A) a public or private primary or secondary school, including a high school or alternative learning center; or (B) a public or private institution of higher education. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.152. REGISTRATION OF CERTAIN WORKERS OR STUDENTS. (a) A person is subject to this subchapter and, except as otherwise provided by this article, to the other subchapters of this chapter if the person: (1) has a reportable conviction or adjudication; (2) resides in another state; and (3) is employed, carries on a vocation, or is a student in this state. (b) A person described by Subsection (a) is subject to the registration and verification requirements of Articles 62.051 and 62.058 and to the change of address requirements of Article 62.055, except that the registration and verification and the reporting of a change of address are based on the municipality or county in which the person works or attends school. The person is subject to the school notification requirements of Articles 62.053-62.055, except that notice provided to the superintendent and any administrator is based on the public school district in which the person works or attends school. (c) A person described by Subsection (a) is not subject to Article 62.101. (d) The duty to register for a person described by Subsection (a) ends when the person no longer works or studies in this state, provides notice of that fact to the local law enforcement authority in the municipality or county in which the person works or attends school, and receives notice of verification of that fact from the authority. The authority must verify that the person no longer works or studies in this state and must provide to the person notice of that verification within a reasonable time. (e) Notwithstanding Subsection (a), this article does not apply to a person who has a reportable conviction or adjudication, who resides in another state, and who is employed, carries on a vocation, or is a student in this state if the person establishes another residence in this state to work or attend school in this state. However, that person remains subject to the other articles of this chapter based on that person's residence in this state. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.153. REGISTRATION OF WORKERS OR STUDENTS AT INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION. (a) Not later than the later of the seventh day after the date on which the person begins to work or attend school or the first date the applicable authority by policy allows the person to register, a person required to register under Article 62.152 or any other provision of this chapter who is employed, carries on a vocation, or is a student at a public or private institution of higher education in this state shall report that fact to: (1) the authority for campus security for that institution; or (2) if an authority for campus security for that institution does not exist, the local law enforcement authority of: (A) the municipality in which the institution is located; or (B) the county in which the institution is located, if the institution is not located in a municipality. (b) A person described by Subsection (a) shall provide the authority for campus security or the local law enforcement authority with all information the person is required to provide under Article 62.051(c). (c) A person described by Subsection (a) shall notify the authority for campus security or the local law enforcement authority not later than the seventh day after the date of termination of the person's status as a worker or student at the institution. (d) The authority for campus security or the local law enforcement authority shall promptly forward to the administrative office of the institution any information received from the person under this article and any information received from the department under Article 62.005. (e) Subsection (a)(2) does not require a person to register with a local law enforcement authority if the person is otherwise required by this chapter to register with that authority. (f) This article does not impose the requirements of public notification or notification to public or private primary or secondary schools on: (1) an authority for campus security; or (2) a local law enforcement authority, if those requirements relate to a person about whom the authority is not otherwise required by this chapter to make notifications. (g) Notwithstanding Article 62.059, the requirements of this article supersede those of Article 62.059 for a person required to register under both this article and Article 62.059. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. SUBCHAPTER E. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO PERSONS SUBJECT TO CIVIL COMMITMENT

Art. 62.201. ADDITIONAL PUBLIC NOTICE FOR INDIVIDUALS SUBJECT TO CIVIL COMMITMENT. (a) On receipt of notice under this chapter that a person subject to registration who is civilly committed as a sexually violent predator is due to be released from a penal institution or intends to move to a new residence in this state, the department shall, not later than the seventh day after the date on which the person is released or the seventh day after the date on which the person moves, provide written notice mailed or delivered to at least each address, other than a post office box, within a one-mile radius, in an area that has not been subdivided, or a three-block area, in an area that has been subdivided, of the place where the person intends to reside. (b) The department shall provide the notice in English and Spanish and shall include in the notice any information that is public information under this chapter. The department may not include any information that is not public information under this chapter. (c) The department shall establish procedures for a person with respect to whom notice is provided under this article to pay to the department all costs incurred by the department in providing the notice. The person shall pay those costs in accordance with the procedures established under this subsection. (d) The department's duty to provide notice under this article in regard to a particular person ends on the date on which a court releases the person from all requirements of the civil commitment process. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Art. 62.202. VERIFICATION OF INDIVIDUALS SUBJECT TO COMMITMENT. (a) Notwithstanding Article 62.058, if an individual subject to registration under this chapter is civilly committed as a sexually violent predator, the person shall report to the local law enforcement authority designated as the person's primary registration authority by the department to verify the information in the registration form maintained by the authority for that person as follows: (1) if the person resides at a civil commitment center, not less than once each year; or (2) if the person does not reside at a civil commitment center, not less than once in each 30-day period following: (A) the date the person first registered under this chapter; or (B) if applicable, the date the person moved from the center. (a-1) For purposes of Subsection (a)(2), a person complies with a requirement that the person register within a 30-day period following a date if the person registers at any time on or after the 27th day following that date but before the 33rd day after that date. (b) On the date a court releases a person described by Subsection (a) from all requirements of the civil commitment process: (1) the person's duty to verify registration as a sex offender is no longer imposed by this article; and (2) the person is required to verify registration as provided by Article 62.058. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 34 (S.B. 1576), Sec. 5, eff. September 1, 2017. Art. 62.2021. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO DRIVER'S LICENSE OR PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION CERTIFICATE: INDIVIDUALS RESIDING AT CIVIL COMMITMENT CENTER. (a) Notwithstanding Article 62.060(b), a person subject to registration who is civilly committed as a sexually violent predator and resides at a civil commitment center shall renew the person's department-issued driver's license or personal identification certificate as prescribed by Section 521.103, 521.272, or 522.033, Transportation Code, as applicable. (b) On the date that a person described by Subsection (a) no longer resides at a civil commitment center, the person is required to renew a driver's license or personal identification certificate only as provided by Article 62.060(b). Added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 34 (S.B. 1576), Sec. 6, eff. September 1, 2017. Art. 62.203. FAILURE TO COMPLY: INDIVIDUALS SUBJECT TO COMMITMENT. (a) A person commits an offense if the person, after commitment as a sexually violent predator but before the person is released from all requirements of the civil commitment process, fails to comply with any requirement of this chapter. (b) An offense under this article is a felony of the second degree. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. SUBCHAPTER F. REMOVAL OF REGISTRATION INFORMATION

Art. 62.251. REMOVING REGISTRATION INFORMATION WHEN DUTY TO REGISTER EXPIRES. (a) When a person is no longer required to register as a sex offender under this chapter, the department shall remove all information about the person from the sex offender registry. (b) The duty to remove information under Subsection (a) arises if: (1) the department has received notice from a local law enforcement authority under Subsection (c) or (d) that the person is no longer required to register or will no longer be required to renew registration and the department verifies the correctness of that information; (2) the court having jurisdiction over the case for which registration is required requests removal and the department determines that the duty to register has expired; or (3) the person or the person's representative requests removal and the department determines that the duty to register has expired. (c) When a person required to register under this chapter appears before a local law enforcement authority to renew or modify registration information, the authority shall determine whether the duty to register has expired. If the authority determines that the duty to register has expired, the authority shall remove all information about the person from the sex offender registry and notify the department that the person's duty to register has expired. (d) When a person required to register under this chapter appears before a local law enforcement authority to renew registration information, the authority shall determine whether the renewal is the final annual renewal of registration required by law. If the authority determines that the person's duty to register will expire before the next annual renewal is scheduled, the authority shall automatically remove all information about the person from the sex offender registry on expiration of the duty to register and notify the department that the information about the person has been removed from the registry. (e) When the department has removed information under Subsection (a), the department shall notify all local law enforcement authorities that have provided registration information to the department about the person of the removal. A local law enforcement authority that receives notice from the department under this subsection shall remove all registration information about the person from its registry. (f) When the department has removed information under Subsection (a), the department shall notify all public and private agencies or organizations to which it has provided registration information about the person of the removal. On receiving notice, the public or private agency or organization shall remove all registration information about the person from any registry the agency or organization maintains that is accessible to the public with or without charge. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. September 1, 2005. SUBCHAPTER G. EXEMPTION FROM REGISTRATION FOR

CERTAIN YOUNG ADULT SEX OFFENDERS

Art. 62.301. EXEMPTION FROM REGISTRATION FOR CERTAIN YOUNG ADULT SEX OFFENDERS. (a) If eligible under Subsection (b) or (c), a person required to register under this chapter may petition the court having jurisdiction over the case for an order exempting the person from registration under this chapter at any time on or after the date of the person's sentencing or the date the person is placed on deferred adjudication community supervision, as applicable. (b) A person is eligible to petition the court as described by Subsection (a) if: (1) the person is required to register only as a result of a single reportable conviction or adjudication, other than an adjudication of delinquent conduct; and (2) the court has entered in the appropriate judgment or has filed with the appropriate papers a statement of an affirmative finding described by Article 42.017 or 42A.105(c). (c) A defendant who before September 1, 2011, is convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication community supervision for an offense under Section 21.11 or 22.011, Penal Code, is eligible to petition the court as described by Subsection (a). The court may consider the petition only if the petition states and the court finds that the defendant would have been entitled to the entry of an affirmative finding under Article 42.017 or 42A.105(c), as appropriate, had the conviction or placement on deferred adjudication community supervision occurred after September 1, 2011. (c-1) At a hearing on the petition described by Subsection (a), the court may consider: (1) testimony from the victim or intended victim, or a member of the victim's or intended victim's family, concerning the requested exemption; (2) the relationship between the victim or intended victim and the petitioner at the time of the hearing; and (3) any other evidence that the court determines is relevant and admissible. (d) After a hearing on the petition described by Subsection (a), the court may issue an order exempting the person from registration under this chapter if it appears by a preponderance of the evidence that: (1) the exemption does not threaten public safety; (2) the person's conduct did not occur without the consent of the victim or intended victim as described by Section 22.011(b), Penal Code; (3) the exemption is in the best interest of the victim or intended victim; and (4) the exemption is in the best interest of justice. (e) An order exempting the person from registration under this chapter does not expire, but the court shall withdraw the order if after the order is issued the person receives a reportable conviction or adjudication under this chapter. Reenacted and amended by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 1008 (H.B. 867), Sec. 1.01, eff. S