Court Rejects Chiles' Immigration Suit Against U.s.

Despite The Setback, Chiles Vowed To Keep Seeking Federal Money To Help Pay For Illegal Immigrants.

Davis ruled that the courts do not have the authority to order the federal government to pay Florida for the cost of education, health care and prison beds used by hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants.

So U.S. District Judge Edward B. Davis tossed out the lawsuit.

MIAMI — Gov. Lawton Chiles' $1.5 billion immigration lawsuit against the federal government was more about politics than legal issues, a federal judge ruled Tuesday.

Chiles' lawsuit - filed in March, as his re-election campaign was gearing up - had sought the $1.5 billion from the federal government as reimbursement to the state for those costs.

Despite the setback, Chiles vowed to keep trying to get the federal government to help pay for illegal immigrants.

''The court's dismissal of our lawsuit is only a temporary setback in our efforts to bring immigration justice to Florida's communities,'' Chiles said in a statement.

Tom Herndon, the governor's chief of staff, said Chiles and Attorney General Bob Butterworth intend to appeal the ruling to the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Atlanta.

''We fully expect this will go on up to the United States Supreme Court,'' he said. ''We've done this step and will go on with the next step.''

Florida Senate President Jim Scott, R-Fort Lauderdale, said Chiles' suit was a long shot to begin with.

''This ruling won't affect much of anything,'' Scott said. ''I never saw it as a solution as much as a statement. What we need to do is redouble our efforts through Florida's congressional delegation.''

Republican victories in November's election could help Florida get some relief, Scott said.

''With Republicans in control of the Congress and with key states like California and Texas sharing Florida's problems, it's obvious to them that the solution is in Washington, not in the courts,'' Scott said.

Chiles' lawsuit was the first in a series brought by various states against the federal government.

In dismissing the suit, Davis said:

''The court recognizes that the state of Florida is suffering under a tremendous financial burden due to the methods in which the federal government has chosen to enforce the immigration laws. The state of Florida is in desperate need of relief from this overwhelming burden it is being unfairly forced to bare.''

However, Davis said the matter was out of his domain.

''Recognizing these facts does not create a legal theory under which this court may grant relief. Without such a legal theory this court must dismiss this action,'' he ruled.

South Florida - especially Miami - is one of the leading destinations for immigrants from Cuba, Haiti and other Latin American and Caribbean nations.

A report released by Chiles' office in March concluded that Florida paid about $2.5 billion in 1993 to meet the basic needs of all immigrants. It estimated that the state and local governments paid $884 million for services to 345,000 illegal immigrants.