Cough, Sore throat and White patches on tongue: Common Related Medical Conditions
Viral pharyngitis Viral pharyngitis is a sore throat caused by a virus, and causes throat pain and cold-like symptoms.

Common cold The common cold is a viral respiratory infection causing sore throat, stuffy or runny nose, headache and more.

Bronchitis Bronchitis, an inflammation of the bronchial tubes, causes cough, dark or yellow mucus, chest pain and more.

Laryngitis Laryngitis is an inflammation of the larynx, or voice box, causing hoarseness and loss of voice.

Acute sinusitis Acute sinusitis, an inflammation of the sinuses, causes sinus pain and tenderness, facial redness and more.

Indoor allergens Indoor allergens are the things that cause an allergic reaction: dust, dust mites, mold, pet hair and more.

Dust exposure Dust exposure can cause congestion, runny nose, cough, shortness of breath, tightness in the chest, and more.

Heartburn/GERD Symptoms of heartburn and GERD are a burning feeling in the chest, throat, or mouth, nausea, and more.

Strep throat Strep throat is a throat infection causing symptoms including a red sore throat with white patches.

Tonsillitis Tonsillitis is painful swelling in the tonsils, causing sore throat, red tonsils, pain, fever, and more.

Respiratory syncytial virus Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a virus that causes symptoms similar to the common cold.

Hay fever Hay fever, an allergic reaction to outdoor pollens and molds, causes nasal congestion, itchy eyes, and more.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) COPD is a chronic lung disease that makes breathing difficult.

Pneumonia Pneumonia is a lung infection and causes cough, shortness of breath, wheezing, chest pain, fever, and chills.

Asthma (teen and adult) Asthma is a lung condition that makes it hard to breathe, an asthma attack can be life threatening.

Smoke exposure Exposure to smoke can cause coughing, wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, chest pain, and more.

Thrush (infants and children) Thrush is a fungal infection in the mouth causing whitish patches on the tongue and inside the cheeks.

Allergic reaction Allergic reaction causes sneezing, runny nose and hives and can lead to anaphylaxis, a whole body reaction.

Chronic sinusitis Chronic sinusitis, or sinus infections, cause a stuffy or runny nose, tooth pain, fever, sore throat and more.

Croup Croup is a childhood viral respiratory infection causing swelling that can make breathing difficult and noisy.

Cystic fibrosis Cystic fibrosis is an inherited disease that causes the body to produce abnormally thick and sticky mucus.

Emphysema Emphysema is a chronic lung condition that causes shortness of breath, a chronic cough, wheezing, and more.

Epiglottitis Epiglottitis is a rare, life-threatening illness that keeps air from getting to the lungs.

Esophageal cancer Esophageal cancer starts in the lining of the esophagus and can cause difficulty swallowing.

Pneumonitis Pneumonitis is any inflammation of the lung and causes trouble breathing, cough, and fever.

Pulmonary embolism A pulmonary embolism, a blood clot lodged in the lung, causes shortness of breath, chest pain, and more.

Pulmonary fibrosis Pulmonary fibrosis is a serious chronic lung condition where the lungs become scarred and stiff.

Interstitial lung disease Interstitial lung disease is a group of lung disorders that cause shortness of breath, a dry cough, and more.

Congestive heart failure People with congestive heart failure can have shortness of breath, fatigue, irregular heartbeat and more.

Exercise-induced asthma Exercise-induced asthma causes wheezing, coughing, shortness of breath, and chest tightness.

Tuberculosis Tuberculosis usually infects the lungs, causing a bad cough with blood, chest pain, fever, chills, and fatigue.

Sjogren's syndrome Sjogren's syndrome is an autoimmune disorder that most often causes dry eyes and dry mouth.

Thyroid cancer Thyroid cancer is cancer of the thyroid gland and can cause a cough, hoarseness, a lump in the neck, and more.

Scarlet fever Scarlet fever is a red itchy rash on the body caused by streptococcal bacteria.

Mononucleosis Mononucleosis is a viral infection causing extreme fatigue, sore throat, fever, rash, muscle aches, and more.

Mumps Mumps is a contagious viral disease that causes painful swelling of the glands that produce saliva.

Asbestosis Asbestosis is a serious lung disease, causing shortness of breath, dry cough, chest tightness and more.

Bronchial adenoma Bronchial adenomas are cancers of the respiratory tract causing a cough, fever, or shortness of breath.

Chemical pneumonia Chemical pneumonia is an irritation of the lungs that can cause a dry cough, headache, chest pain and more.

Cryptococcosis Cryptococcosis is a lung disease causing a wide range of digestive, respiratory and cardiovascular symptoms.

Histoplasmosis Histoplasmosis is a fungal infection of the lungs causing muscle aches, fever, chest pain, cough, and more.

Drug allergy A drug allergy is an allergic reaction to a medication and can cause a rapid heartbeat and difficulty breathing.

Radon exposure Breathing in high levels of radon over time can cause lung cancer.

Sarcoidosis Sarcoidosis is a rare disease that can cause swelling and hard lumps in the lymph nodes and organs.

Scleroderma Scleroderma is an uncommon immune disorder that causes collagen to build up in the tissue, making it harden.

Thrush (adults) Thrush is a fungal infection in the mouth causing whitish patches on the tongue and inside the cheeks.

Pleural effusion Pleural effusion is buildup of fluid in the pleura and can cause difficulty breathing or chest pain.

Thermal burn of mouth or tongue A thermal burn of the mouth or tongue can cause pain, blisters, peeling skin, and temporary loss of taste.

Lung cancer (non small cell) Non-small cell lung cancer is the most common type of lung cancer and can cause a cough, chest pain, and more.

Lung cancer (small cell) Small cell lung cancer is the least common type of lung cancer and can cause a cough, chest pain, and more.

Valley fever (coccidioidomycosis) Valley fever is a fungal infection that starts in the lungs and causes mild flu-like symptoms.

Viral pneumonia Viral pneumonia is a lung infection caused by viruses, and causes coughing, wheezing, fever, chills, and more.

Hiatal hernia When hiatal hernia symptoms do occur, they include chest pain and burning, sweating, a bitter taste and more.

Swallowed object Symptoms of swallowing an object include coughing, choking, vomiting, throat pain, breathing trouble, and more.

Sickle cell disease Sickle cell disease symptoms include repeated infections, yellow skin, fatigue, dizziness, pain, and more.

West nile virus West Nile virus is an infection spread by mosquitoes, and can cause diarrhea, fever, abdominal pain, and more.

Whooping cough Whooping cough, a contagious respiratory infection, causes a runny nose, a mild fever, and a severe cough.

Plague Plague is a rare but deadly bacterial infection causing fever, vomiting, seizures, organ failure, and more.

Toxic shock syndrome Toxic shock syndrome is a serious bacterial infection and causes fever, low blood pressure, a rash, and more.

Legionella (Legionnaires disease) Legionnaires' disease is a severe type of pneumonia and causes headache, chills, high fever, a cough, and more.

Ricin poisoning Ricin is a dangerous poison in castor beans, and causes trouble breathing, nausea, fever and sweating.

Radiation sickness Radiation sickness is caused by a high dose of radiation, and causes vomiting, diarrhea, hair loss, and more.

Endocarditis Signs of endocarditis, an infection of the heart, include swelling, rash, sinus congestion, nausea, and more.

Throat cancer Throat cancer can cause symptoms including difficulty swallowing, hoarseness, and chronic cough.

Shingles (herpes zoster) Shingles is a painful, blistering, skin rash typically found on the back and sides of the chest.

Bird (avian) flu Bird flu is spread to people from birds and causes fever, cough, sore throat and muscle aches.