No Ambiguity: Shackle Chain-gang Inmates Together MY WORD

The amendment to bring back chain gangs states, in its entirety: ''The Department of Corrections shall implement a plan by December 1, 1995, to require that selected inmates perform labor wearing leg irons in chain gang work groups.''

Your recent editorial criticized the idea of reintroducing an effective chain-gang program as part of the criminal-justice system in Florida. In May, this measure - which I sponsored with Sen. Robert Wexler, D-Boca Raton - passed overwhelmingly in both the Senate and the House of Representatives.

The language is very clear; there is no ambiguity.

The words of the amendment dictate that inmates not only wear leg irons and work in groups, but wear leg irons and work in chain-gang work groups. There is a distinction. Webster's dictionary defines chain gangs as ''a gang of prisoners chained together.''

After the bill passed, the secretary of the Florida Department of Corrections, Harry Singletary, indicated that he had made a decision to chain inmates individually, not chain them together. However, it is my belief that he does not have the prerogative to make that decision. As I indicated, that decision was already made by the Legislature.

In June, the chain-gang bill went to the governor, at which time he had the option to veto it, sign it into law or allow it to become law without his signature. He chose to allow the bill to become law without his signature.

Although this may not be a tacit endorsement, that was his opportunity to express his disapproval for the bill as written. If he did not want chain gangs - or if he wanted work groups in any form other than chain gangs - he could have acted accordingly at that time. But he didn't act. Instead, he allowed the bill to become law without his signature. The measure is now law, yet the governor's administration is trying to circumvent the law. It appears that this is an attempt to accomplish a veto administratively.

My concern is that the administration's circumvention of the law will not be in the best interest of the safety of the public. I believe that convicted criminals should work and pay their debt to society. They should work on the sides of our highways and byways in visible locations where would-be criminals can see the consequences of committing crime; this would act as a deterrent. And, like the Department of Corrections, I believe that inmates on chain gangs should be as productive as possible.

But I also believe that public safety must come first. Two examples clearly illustrate the need for having inmates chained together:

- An inmate tries to escape on foot. If it is one person chained individually, he would likely have a much better chance of success than if he were running with five other inmates.

- A person drives by the roadside where the chain gang is working and tries to aid an escape by picking up an inmate. It obviously would be much more difficult to pick up five inmates chained together than it would be to pick up one inmate.

Although productivity is an important goal, public safety must be our No. 1 goal.