School Funding Fight May Force Extra Session Legislature '97

The debate over how to solve the crowding problem grew in intensity on Monday as legislative budget negotiators remained unable to reach a $42 billion budget compromise - mostly because of differences over education spending.

TALLAHASSEE — If legislators don't quickly tackle Florida's crowded classroom crisis, a special session could be in their not-too-distant futures.

Gov. Lawton Chiles added fuel to the fire by criticizing House and Senate budget writers for not addressing the crowding issue.

''Ensuring our children a quality learning environment is one of the state's most important responsibilities,'' Chiles said. ''It is clear to me that there's not sufficient funding in the proposed House and Senate budgets to ensure our children aren't packed into crowded classrooms.''

Seeing no major relief coming from the budget, a coalition of school boards, school superintendents and parents is urging the Legislature to let counties raise local property taxes to fund school construction.

''We've turned so many of our school grounds into trailer parks,'' said Linda Sutherland, an Orange County school board member and president of the Florida School Boards Association. ''We must put children first and politics aside.''

The coalition wants the Democratic governor to call the Republican-led Legislature back into a special session if lawmakers don't approve that local option before the scheduled May 2 adjournment.

''School board members came to Tallahassee and asked for the right to increase (taxes). We need help and we need it now. This source of revenue is needed very, very badly,'' said Wayne Blanton, director of the Florida School Boards Association.

The Senate agrees and is prepared this week to vote out a bill separate from the budget that would let school boards - by a majority-plus-one vote - impose an extra half-mill property tax.

If levied by every county, the tax would generate about $260 million statewide. The Governor's Commission on Education has pegged the state's public-school construction needs at a minimum of $3.1 billion.

An average elementary school costs between $6 million and $10 million, while a high school generally costs about $22 million to construct.

''This (local option tax) puts the responsibility of raising the money with those who spend the money,'' said Senate President Toni Jennings, R-Orlando. ''It's a good first step.''