'Becoming: An Intimate Conversation with Michelle Obama,' Coming to Moda Center Saturday, February 9, Presale Registration Open Now
PORTLAND, Ore. (December 11, 2018) – After a highly successful 2018 12-event arena tour across 10 cities, Live Nation and Crown Publishing, a part of Penguin Random House, are pleased to announce that additional dates and cities have been added to Becoming: An Intimate Conversation with Michelle Obama. Don’t miss your chance to see former First Lady, Michelle Obama, at Moda Center Saturday, February 9, register forTicketmaster Verified Fan presale today.

Mrs. Obama is dedicated to ensuring tickets are put into the hands of real fans, and not resold on secondary websites. That is why Live Nation and European ticket agencies are implementing various methods to limit ticket scalpers on the Becoming book tour. The North American events will utilize Ticketmaster’s Verified Fan® platform. Fans can register now through Wednesday, December 12, at 10 p.m. PST HERE for the Verified Fan presale. Registered fans who receive a code will have access to purchase tickets for the North American events before the general public on Friday, December 14, from 10 a.m. local time to 10 p.m. For more information visithttps://verifiedfan.ticketmaster.com/michelleobama2019.

Attendees at Mrs. Obama’s events will hear her honest reflections on the experiences and events, both public and private, that have shaped her, from her childhood on the South Side of Chicago to her years as an executive balancing the demands of motherhood and work, to her years spent at the most famous address in the world. Michelle Obama has emerged as one of the most iconic and compelling women of our era. As First Lady of the United States – the first African-American to serve in that role – she helped create the most welcoming and inclusive White House in history, while also establishing herself as a powerful advocate for women and girls in the U.S. and around the world.

“I couldn’t be more excited to visit even more cities across the country and around the world,” Mrs. Obama said. “I’ve been so humbled by the response to the tour thus far and the overwhelming interest we’ve received from so many communities we weren’t able to visit this year. That’s why I’m thrilled that we’re able to expand our conversations to these new settings and wider audiences. I can’t wait to continue the discussions that have been so meaningful for me and, I hope, for so many others.”

BECOMING was released on November 13 in the U.S. and Canada by Crown Publishing, a part of Penguin Random House, as well as in 33 languages around the world. Since its publication, BECOMING became an instant #1 New York Times bestseller after one week of sales, and has sold more than 3 million units in all formats and editions in the U.S. and Canada. According to NDP BookScan data, the hardcover edition of BECOMING has sold more copies than any other book published in the United States in 2018. After six printings, the hardcover edition of BECOMING will have 3.8 million copies in print in the U.S. and Canada and a total of 6 million copies in print worldwide. The book is also a #1 bestseller in 11 other countries around the world. An audio edition of the book, read by Mrs. Obama, is also available in digital and physical formats by Penguin Random House Audio.