In The Name Of Humanity We Refuse To Accept A Fascist America
Even with a Democratic House… and the 2020 election…

Join with us now to organize for sustained nonviolent protest in the streets TO DEMAND: IN THE NAME OF HUMANITY, THE TRUMP/PENCE REGIME MUST GO!

Every fascist move by the Trump/Pence regime should be met by more struggle and involve more and more people and diverse political forces opposed to the moves of this regime. And this struggle needs to be aiming at and preparing for nothing less than driving out the whole regime.

RefuseFascism.org is a movement of people coming from diverse perspectives, united in our recognition that the Trump/Pence Regime poses a catastrophic danger to humanity and the planet, and that it is our responsibility to drive them from power through non-violent protests that grow every day until our demand is met. From the Refuse Fascism Call to Action: “We are horrified and angered at the shocking damage already done to lives here and around the world by the Trump/Pence regime. We recognize that they are poised to do far worse, including threatening WAR, even nuclear war. Through an unrelenting barrage of daily outrages and twitter outbursts, the Trump/Pence regime is radically remaking society – step by step hammering into place a vicious American fascism. This is not insult or exaggeration, it is what they are doing. Therefore, WE RESOLVE that nothing short of removing this whole illegitimate regime from power will stop this nightmare. There is a way to do this…” – Read and share the entire Refuse Fascism Call to Action

“Order or Justice?” – a clip from the video of a talk by Bob Avakian:

THE TRUMP/PENCE REGIME MUST GO! In The Name of Humanity, We REFUSE To Accept a Fascist America: A Better World IS Possible!

How serious a threat does the Trump/Pence regime pose to humanity? Could fascism really happen here? What is the character of the regime-is it fascist, and if it is, what are the implications? What are the roots of this regime? Is it a terrible aberration, “more of the same”… or something different still? What must be done to stop it? How? Is a better world possible?

These questions, whether spoken or implicit, lie at the bottom of nearly every political debate and discussion today. Bob Avakian, in his filmed talk on the Trump/Pence regime, addresses those questions from a lofty level, with a penetrating scientific approach, and with a depth of compassion and breadth of humanity that is unique.

Watch the entire talk here.

Important voices on the current moment

Fascism: It IS Happening HERE!

The Trump/Pence Regime Is INDICTED For:

Read the full set of Indictments

Individual (sharable) Indictments

> Do It Yourself print-on-any-printer 8 1/2″ x 11″ (two-sides) Indictments