Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren teaming up Sunday to pitch Clinton to progressives
Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont appears with Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton last month at an event in New Hampshire. (Melina Mara/The Washington Post)

Two icons of the progressive community, Sens. Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, are appearing together on Sunday for the first time to jointly pitch the candidacy of Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton.

The event in Denver, Sanders said in an interview, will be an opportunity “to make the case to the progressive community that it is absolutely imperative for [Republican nominee] Donald Trump to be defeated.”

But Sanders, the runner-up in the Democratic primaries, said he will arrive with a secondary goal in mind: to rally like-minded voters around implementing the Democratic platform adopted at the party’s convention in Philadelphia in July.

[Gary Johnson asks Bernie Sanders voters to give him another look]

That, Sanders said, has to become the focus for progressives “the day after the election.”

Party platforms tend to be long forgotten by the time campaigns end and governing begins. But Sanders has been determined to change that this year.

After the final nominating contests ended, he began angling to put his stamp on the Democratic platform, aggressively using the process to push the party leftward on issues such as taxes, the minimum wage, college affordability and climate change.



Hillary Clinton and Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) speak to voters during a rally at the Cincinnati Museum Center on June 27. (Melina Mara/The Washington Post)

The result was “a very progressive document,” Sanders said, and one that mirrored many of the priorities he detailed during his famously long stump speeches as a presidential candidate, in which he railed against the “billionaire class.”

Sanders acknowledged that there will be challenges turning the document into actual policy.

“When you have an agenda that is as progressive as this . . . you obviously engender enormous opposition from the big-money interests,” he said.

Sanders has taken to carrying around a copy of the platform with him, including to an appearance Friday night on HBO’s “Real Time with Bill Maher,” where he displayed it to a live national audience.

Sunday’s joint appearance with Warren is taking place at a student union that serves several college campuses, including the University of Colorado Denver.

During a recent chat, Sanders said, he and Warren decided that they wanted to do an event together geared at the progressive community. Both have been appearing separately on behalf of Clinton. Warren was among those considered a potential Clinton running mate this year.

Sanders acknowledged that there is still work to be done shoring up support for Clinton among the party’s left wing.

He said one challenge is convincing voters that Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson is not the answer.

“In fact, on some issues . . . I think his positions are very good,” Sanders said of the former New Mexico governor. But, the senator added, his record is “disastrous” on other issues, including climate change.