Bush Breaks Record For Vetoes

The Governor Killed 571 Projects To The Tune Of $313 Million, Angering Democrats And His Fellow Republicans Alike.

The first-year governor signed into law a $48.6 billion spending plan crafted by lawmakers. But he wielded his veto pen freely - more than doubling the record $150 million in line-item cuts by Republican Gov. Bob Martinez in 1988.

TALLAHASSEE - Republican Gov. Jeb Bush on Thursday vetoed a record $313 million in projects placed into the state budget by the GOP-led Legislature - including millions for a downtown Orlando performing-arts center.

Bush killed 571 spending measures, angering Republicans and Democrats alike. The programs that were sacrificed ranged from a $17 million increase in university tuition, to scores of individual projects sought by influential lawmakers - items Bush condemned as ``turkeys.''

Bush said most of the vetoed items failed to serve a statewide purpose - a critical element in his budget review.

``Some were pretty blatant, but a lot were more difficult to pursue,'' Bush said of his effort to rid the budget of turkeys.

The $7.6 million for the proposed downtown arts center, tucked into the budget by Republican Senate President Toni Jennings and Senate Democratic Leader Buddy Dyer, both of Orlando, apparently could not dodge the turkey label.

Orange County lawmakers, though, took some solace in Bush's decision to retain $12.5 million toward a major south terminal expansion at Orlando International Airport. As well, he kept scores of Central Florida road projects, along with social-service programs to help the homeless, infants and families.

The area will get more than $15 million to expand State Road 436, along with $7 million for work on the Western Beltway.

The Lake Apopka restoration project also received $11 million.

But the news Thursday centered on those projects Bush killed - including millions of dollars for community parks, festivals, transportation greenways, fairgrounds and local social-service programs throughout the state.

Unusual spending provisions also got whacked - including $10,350 for a Palm Beach County wild-cat spaying program, and $500,000 for a state program to raise sturgeon for caviar production.

Bush said he hoped lawmakers would understand his reasons for lopping many of their pet projects.

``I think when people realize this was based on principles - sound principles, not politics - then there should be no surprise,'' Bush said. ``I know why people are disappointed. But they should not be surprised.''

Fueled by $3 billion in new money, Florida lawmakers this spring spent freely on items they could show off in their home districts. About 1,000 local measures, totaling close to $700 million, eventually were rolled into the budget.