Gabourey Sidibe Dead? Did 32-Year-Old ‘Empire’ Actress Die Of An Asthma Attack? [Breaking]
The news seems shocking when one reads the headline. “Empire Actress Gabourey Sidibe Suddenly Dies,” claims the headline so popular that Trendolizer tracks it as one of the most trending articles at the moment. To think of Gabourey dying at only 32 years of age would be shocking, indeed, with Sidibe winning hearts as the abused young woman in the 2009 movie Precious, starring as Mo’Nique’s much put-upon daughter. Gabourey won an Academy Award for Best Actress nomination for that role.

Thankfully, Gabourey is not dead, and Sidibe took to her Twitter account to announce that fact to the world. The Empire actress joked that maybe she was dead if folks believed articles like the poorly-written article that started the false rumor. It’s a website that features lots of redirects in advertising, so it could be publishing stories for nefarious reasons like malware and the like. Either way Gabby’s fans are relieved to learn that it’s a false rumor about her death.

null

On her official Gabourey Sidibe Twitter account, @GabbySidibe, joked in her description about her love of cats.

“I know that technically children are our future but I bet if we tried really hard, we can make cats our future!…”

However, it’s the fake article’s description about Gabourey’s fake death that played on a topic that often emerges in Sidibe’s life: her weight. In the false article, the claim was made that Sidibe died when she was forced to run and chase a character in a movie scene — and the running caused Gabourey to have an asthma attack. It’s a theory that plays upon Gabourey’s weight once more, with the fake story becoming plausibly believable enough for it to spread across the Internet with great speed — the kind of piece that could get a big reaction.

“Empire actress died suddenly this afternoon from an apparent asthma attack. Gabourey Sidibe was introduced to the world for her role in the movie Precious and was also known for her role as Becky on the hit TV show Empire. Sidibe was on set for another upcoming movie where she plays as a detective [sic] her role required her to run and chase a suspect during the scene Sidibe began to motion with her hands that she couldn’t breath and [then] instantly collapsed. On set paramedics rushed to her aid and attempted to revive her but was unsuccessful and Sidibe expired on the route to the hospital friends and family are devastated by this sudden loss.”

Sidibe was correct in tweeting “poorly-written” in reference to the viral article, with “than” in place of “then” and Sidibe’s name not capitalized in certain parts. The sentence structure doesn’t feature many periods.

Gabourey has undergone controversy before about her weight, with one love scene being criticized between Sidibe and another actor on Empire, strictly due to her weight. However, Gabourey has been known to wear her weight proudly, and not let anyone tell her she’s not beautiful.

null

As seen in the above photo, Gabourey attended the Human Rights Campaign 2016 Los Angeles Gala Dinner on Sunday, March 19. The event was the JW Marriott LA Live in Los Angeles, with Gabourey displaying her usual style and grace.

Reactions to the fake news of Sidibe’s death on Twitter show people either sharing the fake article, or expressing their joy on Gabourey’s Twitter page that they are happy she’s not dead.

Gabby even has such a good sense of humor that she responded on Twitter to folks writing that they were upset Sidibe was dead and that they weren’t invited to her funeral.

“Gabby Sidibe and I was sitting here getting upset that you were dead and that I wasn’t invited to your funeral. “Y’all can come through. There will be a DJ and everyone has to do the whop!”

[Photo by Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP]