Charlie Crist Voters' guide 2000 - Candidate Forum - Education commissioner

Education: B.A., Florida State; J.D., Cumberland School of law

MOST IMPORTANT ISSUE: The most important issue is proper funding, getting the dollars into the classroom. We need to be sure that the hard-earned dollars of the taxpayers are spent on the children and teachers in the classroom. While students are learning in portable classrooms, school officials work in prime office space. It's time to refocus our efforts in the classroom to reduce class size, to provide a safe environment for students and teachers, to increase teacher compensation and to address the teacher shortage.

TESTING: The emphasis should be on providing the tools and resources for teachers to properly teach Florida's children. We don't want to rely solely on standardized testing to replace the teacher's role in teaching and evaluating the student. But testing plays a key role in the learning process. We all had tests in school, you study harder when you're being held accountable, one works harder to learn more, to achieve more. I am an ardent supporter of Gov. Jeb Bush's A+ plan which provides for an even balance of testing and accountability and has proven to improve performance in our public schools.

VOUCHERS: The primary goal is to have the public school performing at levels that causes there to be no need like this. However, should there be a need, I believe the student is the priority and therefore I believe in school choice. I believe that parents have a right to expect the opportunities that their tax dollars are intended to provide for their children.

BRIGHT FUTURES: I supported the bright futures program while I served in the Florida Senate and on the Florida Senate Education Committee. I think we need to do everything possible to ensure that the program is a success. Education is the key to success for our children and there is nothing more important to the future of our state and country than the education of our children. I have proposed the "Teach Florida" scholarship program, which will address the critical teacher shortage in our state. It will provide for 5,000 merit scholarships per year to a Florida public university to students who agree to teach in Florida public schools for at least four years.