Christie defends Melania Trump: 93 percent of speech wasn't plagiarized
CLEVELAND -- New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie was forced to switch roles from prosecutor to defense attorney on Tuesday morning, defending Melania Trump from accusations of plagiarizing a big part of her speech to the Republican National Convention the night before.

Appearing on NBC's "Today" show, the governor was asked if, given the word-for-word lifting of lines from Michelle Obama's 2008 speech to the Democratic National Convention, he could make the case for plagiarism.

"No," Christie, one of the top advisers to presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump, quickly countered. "Not when 93 percent of the speech is completely different from Michelle Obama's speech."

Melania's Trump's speech focused on teaching her children the importance of hard work, but appeared to lift key passages from Obama's work, passing it off as her own.

"They express some common thoughts," said Christie, before being interrupted by "Today" co-host Matt Lauer.

"It's almost word-for-word," Lauer observed.

Did Melania Trump's speech steal parts of Michelle Obama's 2008 convention speech? Word for word, and line for line, Melania Trump's eloquent words at the Republican National Convention turned out to be...Michelle Obama's?

Christie quickly dismissed the charges as unimportant in the larger context of the GOP convention.

"The worst day of the convention is the first day," Christie said. "After tonight, we won't be talking about this."

The governor was then asked if the embarrassing disclosure suggested anything about the staffing of the Trump campaign, which is exceedingly small and tight-knit, and possibly over-matched by its duties.

"I don't know. I think they were trying to do a lot of things at one time," Christie said. "And I know Melania: I think she worked very hard on that speech. A lot of what I heard last night sounded very much like her."

Tuesday night, Christie will speak to the convention crowd in prime time, in a speech he said "makes the case tonight that Donald Trump is ready to be president of the United States."

Monday night's 2016 RNC session 29 Gallery: Monday night's 2016 RNC session

Claude Brodesser-Akner may be reached at cbrodesser@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @ClaudeBrodesser. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.