Obama Endorses Grandson of Terrorist for Congress in California
Former President Barack Obama recently endorsed Ammar Campa Najjar for Congress in California, District 50.

Obama took to twitter to endorse Democratic candidates across the U.S. Obama wrote:

Today I’m proud to endorse such a wide and impressive array of Democratic candidates – leaders as diverse, patriotic, and big-hearted as the America they’re running to represent

Along with the tweet, Obama added a list of candidates, including Ammar Campa Najjar.

In 2012, Ammar served as Deputy Regional Field Director for Obama’s reelection campaign. After the election, Ammar worked in the Obama administration as an official at the Labor Department.

Ammar is anti President Trump. Ammar says that if he wins, he will be President Trump’s worse nightmare. Ammar wrote on Facebook:

…I’ve served in Washington, confronted Trump and lived to tell it. If you send me back, I’ll be Trump’s worst nightmare: the first Latino-Arab American elected to congress in the Trump era.

Ammar is the grandson of a terrorist. Ammar’s grandfather, Muhammad Yusuf al-Najjar also known as Abu Youssef, was a member of the Palestinian terrorist group Black September, which took eleven Israeli Olympic team members hostage and killed them in 1972. Muhammad Yusuf al-Najjar helped mastermind the terror attack, known as the Munich massacre. Al-Najjar was assassinated for his involvement in the massacre.

Ammar will face (R) Duncan Hunter in the General Election in November.

Today I’m proud to endorse such a wide and impressive array of Democratic candidates – leaders as diverse, patriotic, and big-hearted as the America they’re running to represent: pic.twitter.com/gWzalQhFas — Barack Obama (@BarackObama) August 1, 2018

RELATED ARTICLES:

GRANDSON OF MUNICH MASSACRE TERRORIST IS RUNNING FOR CONGRESS IN CALIFORNIA

OBAMA ENDORSES CAIR CIVIL RIGHTS DIRECTOR FOR MINNESOTA HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Deplorable Kel is an independent journalist from California who covers news that the mainstream media refuses to report on. Kel covers anti-American candidates running in the U.S. elections, terrorism, crimes committed by illegal aliens and the indoctrination of children through schools and media. Donate to Deplorablekel.com

Advertisements

Share this: Facebook

Twitter

LinkedIn

Reddit

Tumblr

Pinterest

Pocket

Telegram

WhatsApp

Skype

Email