Schlesinger v. Ticketmaster
[Updated March 5, 2019]

What you need to know about Schlesinger v. Ticketmaster

In 2003, the Schlesinger v. Ticketmaster class action lawsuit alleged that Ticketmaster did not fully disclose all aspects of its UPS and order processing fees to consumers. While vigorously defending the lawsuit, Ticketmaster settled the case in 2013 by agreeing to issue ticket vouchers and discount codes to class members, which allows class members to receive discounts for future ticket purchases and/or receive discounts on future UPS ticket deliveries. In 2018, Ticketmaster fulfilled, per the settlement agreement, all ticket voucher requirements.

The settlement class generally includes all consumers who purchased tickets on Ticketmaster.com between the period of October 21, 1999 and February 27, 2013. To find out if you are a class member and qualify for a discount code, please contact the litigation administrator at http://bit.ly/claims_administrator.

As part of the Schlesinger v. Ticketmaster settlement, Ticketmaster agreed to provide:

One ticket voucher for every purchase made on Ticketmaster.com during the class period, up to 17 vouchers per person. Each ticket voucher may potentially be redeemed for two (2) general admission tickets for eligible events at Live Nation owned or operated venues within the United States. Each ticket voucher is valid for a single, one-time use and tickets are subject to availability to class members on a first-come, first-served basis. The Settlement Agreement limits the value of vouchers that are to be redeemed in a given year and in total. In 2018, Ticketmaster fulfilled the ticket voucher requirements.

One discount code worth $2.25 for every purchase made on Ticketmaster.com during the class period, up to a maximum of 17 credits per person. These codes can be applied toward future primary ticket purchases on Ticketmaster.com for events in the United States. Each discount code is valid for a single, one-time use with unused discount codes remaining active until June of 2020. Redeem Discount Codes on Ticketmaster.com

One $5 UPS delivery credit/discount code per eligible transaction made on Ticketmaster.com during the class period, up to a maximum of 17 credits per person. UPS discount codes may be applied toward a future ticket purchase with UPS delivery on Ticketmaster.com for events in the United States. Redeem Discount Codes on Ticketmaster.com

For more information about Schlesinger v. Ticketmaster, please visit our Frequently Asked Questions available here: http://insider.ticketmaster.com/frequently-asked-questions-schlesinger-v-ticketmaster