Melania Trump Wears Ralph Lauren for Inauguration Ceremonies
It’s Ralph.

For her inauguration look, Melania Trump turned to the most iconic name in American fashion. “With the historic swearing-in of her husband, Donald J. Trump, as the 45th President of the United States, the first lady-elect will become America’s new First Lady wearing an American designer who transformed American fashion, Ralph Lauren,” her spokeswoman said.

The reveal came this morning as the Trumps made their way to St. John’s Church in advance of a tea at the White House and ultimately, the day’s main event at the Capitol. Unlike Thursday’s military-inspired coat, its sobriety appropriate to the solemnity of the wreath-laying ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery, for today’s serious yet celebratory activities, Trump has gone lighter in color, chasing pale blue double-faced cashmere. It features a short, double-faced jacket with bold collar cutaway and three-quarter-length sleeves over a matching lean mock-turtle dress. The silhouette has a vaguely Sixties vibe, triggering comparisons to Jackie Kennedy. Trump punctuated the ultrachic look with a graceful updo, gloves and her signature Manolo Blahnik stilettos.

The Ralph Lauren Corp. issued the following statement Friday: “The Presidential Inauguration is a time for the United States to look our best to the world. It was important to us to uphold and celebrate the tradition of creating iconic American style for this moment.”

Hillary Clinton also turned up Friday wearing a Ralph Lauren Collection pantsuit, as she had done for presidential debates, Election Day and her post-race concession speech. Trump’s former opponent wore a jewel-necked suit and a double-faced cashmere cream-colored coat.

Both Barack and Michelle Obama looked a bit surprised when greeting the new first couple on the steps of the White House. Melania Trump gave Michelle Obama a sizable white-bowed, turquoise blue Tiffany & Co. box. After a quick handoff by President Obama to an aide in the foyer, the incoming and outgoing presidents and their wives took their official photo. Michelle Obama wore a red and black mélange tweed jacquard dress with a matching double-breasted coat by Jason Wu, the designer she wore to the inaugural ball this day eight years ago. She paired it with Harry Kotlar diamond-stud earrings and a Hearts on Fire diamond ring.

As for what was in the box, a Tiffany spokesman would only say Friday, “The White House has been a patron of the House of Tiffany & Co. since Abraham Lincoln.”

Buy-local seems to be a recurring theme of the Trumps’ inaugural week purchases, considering that the Tiffany flagship is just steps away from Trump Tower in midtown. Just as Melania Trump relied on three New York designers — Ralph Lauren, Reem Acra and Norisol Ferrari — for outfits for the first three public appearances in Washington, D.C., Ivanka Trump counted on New York-based Carolina Herrera for a navy wool tweed coat over a navy wool flannel high-necked dress when she first stepped out Friday morning. By the time she arrived on the Capitol steps, the newly-minted First Daughter had changed into a white coat from Oscar de la Renta. She had also worn an Oscar de la Renta gown with a large black bow for Thursday night’s candlelight in Union Station’s grand hall. For Friday’s swearing-in ceremony, Trump’s sister Tiffany also chose a white double-breasted coat from Taoray Wang, a Chinese fashion label who shows at New York Fashion Week.

SEE ALSO: Then & Now: First Lady Fashion On Inauguration Day >>

Trump Inauguration Week Photos: Pictures of the New First Family>>

Then & Now: First Lady Fashion On Inauguration Day>>