Franklin Graham: Attempted rape not a crime. Kavanaugh "respected" his victim by not finishing.
I hate this man.

Franklin Graham began by first saying that Kavanaugh’s attempted rape was “not relevant”:

It's just a shame that a person like Judge Kavanaugh who has a stellar record--that somebody can bring something up that he did as a teenager close to 40 years ago. That's not relevant.

Why he chose to try to justify the crime when Kavanaugh’s entire defense is that he never did it wasn't just unnecessary, it exposed Graham’s truly immoral character.

But then he said something so terrible, I couldn’t believe it.

During the same Christian Broadcast Network’s interview with the evangelical leader, he was asked about the kind of message that might send to sexual abuse victims. His response:

Well, there wasn't a crime committed. These are two teenagers and it's obvious that she said no and he respected it and walked away... He just flat out says that's not true. Regardless if it was true, these are two teenagers and she said no and he respected that so I don't know what the issue is.

I’ll tell you what the issue is, you cretin.

Professor Blasey vividly described an intoxicated Kavanaugh pushing her into a bedroom, locking the door, getting on top of her and trying to tear her clothes off. He put his hand over her mouth to muffle her screams. She said she feared he would inadvertently kill her, and that she barely escaped.

What f---ing sick mind thinks that is, in anyway, “respecting” someone??

And to his phony Christian cult followers, what kind of a depraved person are you to hold this sick f-er as a moral leader? Billy Graham should have given his son therapy, not an audience. My God, the man endorsed a pedophile and attacked his accusers last year-WHY are you STILL giving him money?!

The entire evangelical movement needs to, pardon the pun, have a “Come to Jesus” moment about rape, attempted rape, pedophilia, and other types of sexual assault. You can shut the hell up about homosexuality---we get it. You’ve beaten that dead horse to the ground. Yet some of your members clearly have no moral compass when it comes to rape or attempted rape. It’s the one crime that no evangelical leader ever wants to condemn. No wonder so many think it’s okay.

If you happen to be one of those people reading this, let me clear it up for you:

It’s bad.

It’s wrong.

It’s sinful.

It’s an abomination.

I shouldn’t have to quote the Bible to tell you how wrong it is: but HERE. See? Rapists deserve death. The victim committed “no sin”. Since Jesus never said one word in the Bible about homosexuality or abortion, I would think that you could give this crime at least as much attention.

I’m setting the bar very low. Acknowledge that trying to rape a woman is bad. It’s not horseplay. It’s not teenagers being teenagers. RAPE IS BAD.

When someone is violently raped, you don’t pray for the perpetrators and “those who may have somewhat contributed to it”. You don’t force the 15-year old rape victim to apologize to her congregation for putting herself in a “compromising position”, such as accepting a ride home. When you finally discover that trans and gay people aren’t pedophiles, but certain “Christian” leaders are, you change your damn mind about the trans and gay people, not the pedophile.

And you damn sure as hell don’t give props to an attempted rapist because his victim was able to escape!

Think about that. By supporting people like Franklin Graham, you are supporting this kind of belief. You are perpetuating rape culture. Yet if you are okay with this, and you insist on following him, fine. The good news is that I’m sure you’ll get to join him in the afterlife.

Just dress light.

SemDem Facebook SemDem Twitter