Female Killer In Las Vegas Shouted 'Allahu Akbar' As She Ran Over 40 Innocent People Last Night • Now The End Begins
SHARE THIS IMPORTANT NTEB ARTICLE:

A woman in a car with its windows down screamed “Allahu Akbar” as she ran up onto the sidewalk and ran-over upwards of 40 people in Las Vegas last night

EDITOR’S NOTE: So, if what Obama and the Liberals tell us is true about mass killings and gun ownership, we must now ban cars from public use because they, obviously, are nothing more than “assault weapons”. Am I am the only one that finds it fascinating that she chose to do all this carnage out in front of the PARIS SECTION of the Las Vegas Strip? Paris??? Is ANYONE awake?!? – “She rode the sidewalk, she came to a stop at the Paris intersection, people are punching into the window. … She accelerated again and just kept mowing people down.”

Lakeisha N. Holloway, age 24, of Portland, Oregon, (pictured at top) has been arrested for the incident. She is charged with Murder and leaving the scene of an accident with personal injury, as well as child endangerment.

According to one eye witness “As we were walking across the street, this car comes flying through the red light. She ran up on the sidewalk and smashed into a group of people walking accross the street and into the group of people at the corner. She did not slow down and appeared to accelerate as she hit the sidewalk.”

According to that witness, there was a huge row of plants and bushes separating the sidewalk and the strip, but the woman driver ran through both, at a speed he guessed to be 40-45 miles per hour. “People were flying off the front of her car and people were smashing into other people as she plowed through the crowd.”

Reports of multiple people injured when car rampages thru Paris Blvd…Las Vegas Blvd shutdown pic.twitter.com/xzWaTIcEiv — Kevin Casas (@TheKevinCasas) December 21, 2015

The witness went on to say “As this unfolded, the only thing I recall as this happened is the insane sound of her car accelerating and the voice from the car was screaming “Allah Akbar!” I’ve heard the sound enough times on the news that I was waiting for a bomb to blow up or guns to start firing. ”

According to Police, 37 people were hit and one person was killed. Six of the victims were listed in Critical Condition but they have since been upgraded to stable.

The crash occurred about 6:40 PM local time in front of the Paris Hotel & Casino, and Planet Hollywood. Police are quite explicit in saying the crash was intentional.

This was an act of Islamic Terrorism, perpetrated by an Islamic woman driving a car with a three year old child inside, who INTENTIONALLY rode onto the sidewalk to strike innocent people. Police, however, have been instructed by their superiors to NOT use the word “terrorism” in relation to this incident, because Las Vegas does not want tourists to be frightened away from the city.

But Las Vegas Sheriff Joe Lombardo was forced to admit when he said “We’re not 100% ruling out the possibility of terrorism”, that it is quite possible that indeed it was Islamic terrorism.

Family members recently noticed drastic change in Lakeisha Holloway’s mood and personality

Sheria Agum, Holloway’s cousin, added that she last saw Holloway a month ago and after that she changed her number. Holloway’s mother told her she had not heard from her since and she ‘went off the radar’.

Miss Agum said that Holloway had been staying in Texas until recently but upon her return to the West coast she noticed a change in her character. She said: ‘I have never seen my cousin like that. Her whole attitude changed. She was having problems down there. When she came back she was different’.

It’s quite possible that as this story gets more investigated it will come out that the shift in her personality was due to becoming radicalized in the Muslim religion. Perhaps the biggest clue in all this was that the carnage occurred out in front of the Paris section of the Las Vegas Strip.

Holloway chose to do the bulk of her carnage outside the Paris section of the Las Vegas Strip

“She rode the sidewalk, she came to a stop at the Paris intersection, people are punching into the window. … She accelerated again and just kept mowing people down.”

Paris, as you may recall, was the scene of the largest Islamic terror attack in it’s nation’s history, and the biggest attack since Hitler rode tanks in during WWII. Out of all the places in Las Vegas where she could have done this, doing it out front of the Paris section was perhaps Lakeisha N. Holloway’s way of sending us a message.

Point well taken.