Mcbride's Wife Discloses Her Tax Returns

The Retired Bank President Released The Information To Blunt Criticism By The Gov. Jeb Bush Campaign.

After retiring as Florida president of Bank of America two years ago, the candidate's wife last year collected $2.8 million in stock options and other benefits from the company, her tax returns show. Sink, 54, also collected $3.4 million in stock options and lump-sum pension during her final year at the bank.

TALLAHASSEE -- Adelaide "Alex" Sink, a retired banker and wife of Democratic gubernatorial nominee Bill McBride, divulged her personal tax returns Friday -- blunting potential criticism as McBride's campaign against Gov. Jeb Bush gets under way.

"I think Alex understands that when you are the nominee of a major party in a general election, there is probably a high level of expectations. She was willing to do it," said Alan Stonecipher, spokesman for the McBride campaign. "Basically, what she is learning is there is no right to privacy."

"I can't figure out why she didn't just release them" earlier, Todd Harris, spokesman for the Bush campaign, said Friday. "Any time you refuse to disclose information like that, it can often look like you are hiding something . . . Now they are going to have all the stories written about how wealthy she is."

Sink made more money than McBride for years, but the couple -- married when he was 41 and she was 38 -- have maintained separate assets.

She was Florida president of a national banking conglomerate with 750 branches statewide until retiring in July 2000. He was managing partner of Holland & Knight, Florida's largest law firm, until resigning last year to run for governor.

A portrait of the couple appeared on the cover of Florida Trend magazine in June 1999 with the headline "Not all business."

Sink had worked for Bank of America and the banking firm it acquired, NCNB, and its predecessors, for 26 years. The North Carolina native, raised on a hog farm near the town that was the model for Mayberry in The Andy Griffith Show, joined the bank in 1974.

In 2000, his last full year in law, McBride earned $566,735, according to nearly a decade of returns that he released earlier in the campaign.

In 1999, Sink's last full year at Bank of America, she made $2.6 million, according to those returns.

In 2000, the couple started filing separate returns. Since 2000, she has claimed the tax deductions for their two teenage children. The family lives in a home they built on 31 acres overlooking Lake Thonotosassa east of Tampa.

Until now, Sink maintained she is "not the candidate" and her finances are personal. The Bush campaign has prodded Sink for months to disclose her assets.

The Republican governor has divulged 20 years of personal tax returns in the course of his campaigns for office. Bush and wife, Columba, file joint returns.