FBI agents wounded serving warrant in Park Forest; suspect dead
Convicted of murder as a teenager, Melvin Toran had spent nearly his entire adult life behind bars when federal agents came to his Park Forest home at dawn Tuesday to arrest him on drug trafficking charges

Toran, 50, a reputed high-ranking member of the Black P Stone Nation street gang, didn't go quietly. As an FBI SWAT team descended on the quiet suburban cul-de-sac, a gun battle broke out that left two FBI agents wounded and Toran dead inside the home.

The agents both suffered non-life threatening injuries and were treated and released from local hospitals, said Garrett Croon, a spokesman for the FBI's Chicago office.

Few details were being released Tuesday about how the shooting unfolded, including where or how the agents were wounded or whether Toran was shot by the agents or killed himself. FBI investigators from Washington were still processing the scene Tuesday night, Croon said.

An autopsy on Toran was scheduled to be performed on Wednesday morning, according to the Cook County medical examiner's office.

The dramatic events unfolded as children were getting ready to go to school and prompted a lockdown at nearby Rich East High School as well as a warning that students who walk or ride the bus to school should be kept at home because of "an unsafe situation in the community." The all-clear was given around 9 a.m.

Neighbors, meanwhile, said the wild scene unfolded like a Hollywood movie.

Law enforcement officials gathered outside a home in Park Forest where two FBI officials serving an arrest warrant were shot and a suspect was found dead inside a home May 24, 2016. (WGN-TV/Chicago Tribune) Law enforcement officials gathered outside a home in Park Forest where two FBI officials serving an arrest warrant were shot and a suspect was found dead inside a home May 24, 2016. (WGN-TV/Chicago Tribune) SEE MORE VIDEOS

"I mean I wouldn't even expect to see that type of stuff happening out here. This is like the stuff that happens on television," said Scott Smith, 51, a music promoter who has lived nearby for about two years. "I mean the way that they came. I'm like golly."

The attempted arrest of Toran stemmed from a two-year investigation code-named "Operation Cornerstone" that targeted narcotics trafficking by members of the Black P Stone Nation and others, according the U.S. Attorney's Office.

Authorities seized "distribution quantities" of cocaine and heroin, cash and firearms in raids Tuesday as part of a probe that involved wiretapped cellphones and extensive surveillance, according to federal prosecutors.

Aside from Toran, federal agents and Chicago police arrested at least 10 suspects early Tuesday, including one in Minnesota and another in Indiana, law enforcement officials said. At least five defendants appeared Tuesday afternoon at the Dirksen U.S. Courthouse on a variety of charges, where a U.S. district magistrate judge ordered them held in custody pending detention hearings next week.

Among the criminal activity uncovered in the investigation was a heroin and cocaine operation being run out of a South Side clothing store, according to federal prosecutors. An informant told authorities that drug couriers would purchase an item of clothing "as a pretext," and the store owner or an employee would bag the item and pass over an additional bag containing the narcotics, prosecutors alleged.

Last summer, an informant working at the direction of investigators purchased more than a kilogram of heroin from the store owner for $72,000, federal prosecutors said.

In November, an FBI informant was secretly recording as he negotiated the purchase of $15,000 in heroin at a restaurant in the Back of the Yards neighborhood, according to prosecutors. The transaction, which later took place at a residence in Englewood, was also recorded.

According to prosecutors, the probe also resulted in charges against James Jones, who was arrested in December after Chicago police pulled his car over and found two loaded semi-automatic pistols hidden in a baby bag in the back seat, next to an infant in a car seat. Jones, 41, has pleaded not guilty to a charge of being a felon in possession of a handgun and is being held without bond while awaiting trial.

A criminal complaint charging Toran with distribution of heroin was filed under seal on Monday. It will likely never be made public due to his death, according to law enforcement sources.

Court records show that Toran had a long criminal record that began when he was arrested for murder in Cook County in 1984, when he was just 18. He pleaded guilty two years later and served a little more than half of his 20-year prison sentence before being paroled in the late 1990s, records show.

Details on the murder case were not available Tuesday.

In July 1999, Toran was charged in Wisconsin with manufacturing and delivering heroin with intent to distribute, as well as using a dangerous weapon in furtherance of a crime, records show. He pleaded guilty to both counts and was sentenced to 14 years behind bars in January 2000.

According to online records with the Wisconsin Court of Appeals, Toran was paroled in February 2005. Three years later, he was convicted in Cook County of the aggravated assault of a police officer and weapons offenses and sentenced to another seven years in prison in Illinois, records show.

When he was released in that case, Toran was shipped back to a state prison in Wisconsin for violating the terms of his parole by picking up the Cook County arrest, records show. He filed an appeal of that decision, but in November 2012 the appellate court in Wisconsin upheld the sentence. He was finally released in February 2013.

In a resume posted online as part of the Winnebago Correctional Institute's efforts to help inmates re-enter society, Toran wrote that he had graduated from trucking school and held a commercial driver's license. He also touted his computer skills, saying he could type 45 words per minute.

On Tuesday, neighbors described seeing an estimated 40 law enforcement personnel in military-style gear beginning to mobilize in yards throughout the neighborhood about 6:30 a.m. An FBI armored vehicle was also at the scene, they said.

About half a dozen law enforcement members began to yell at Toran to leave the house, telling him his mother was at the scene and wanted to talk to him, according to Smith. When Toran didn't leave, tear gas canisters were shot into the home, Smith said. Authorities then broke down the door, and gunshots could be heard from inside the home.

Another neighbor, Orpheus Ugbesia, said she saw other people leave the home before the tear gas was fired.

Several neighbors said they had not suspected that anything out of the ordinary had been going on in the house until Tuesday, though Smith said he noticed a van and a police car parked near the home the day before.

Neighbors described Toran as a friendly person who was often seen walking his pit bull.

"He seemed like a pretty nice guy," Smith said. "People said it was a drug bust, but I didn't see nobody ever coming over here. This is a quiet neighborhood."