Gov. Bush Taps New State Supreme Court Justice

Trial Judge Kenneth Bell Was Named To Replace Retiring Justice Leander Shaw.

Bush said Kenneth Bell, 46, a judge in the Pensacola-based First Judicial Circuit, will bring a "model temperament and judicial philosophy" to the seven-member court, which remains dominated by appointees of Democratic Gov. Lawton Chiles.

TALLAHASSEE -- Gov. Jeb Bush named a Panhandle trial judge to the state Supreme Court on Monday to replace retiring Justice Leander Shaw, who was the second black jurist ever to serve on the high court.

The governor clearly viewed the appointment as his latest attempt at recasting Florida's courts, which have sparred with Bush and the Legislature's Republican majority on such issues as school vouchers, budget vetoes and the 2000 presidential-election results.

"Judges have a difficult job," Bush said. "They must balance judicial independence with a respect for the primacy of the Legislature and the executive branch as policymakers.

"They must guard our individual rights, but not at the expense of our collective right to self-government. And perhaps their greatest challenge is to resist the urge to substitute their own values and policy preferences for those embodied in the law."

Bell, a judge since 1991, is a seventh-generation native of Pensacola and becomes the first justice with a hometown west of Tallahassee since Thomas West in 1917. "The people of northwest Florida have gone far too long without representation on the Supreme Court," Bush said.

Bush also cited the fact that Bell will become the only trial judge on the court -- filling an unusual void that occurred when Justice Major Harding retired earlier this year. "This kind of perspective, I think, is important on our state's highest court," Bush said, noting that Bell has presided over more than 27,000 cases in 12 years on the bench.

Bush replaced Harding last July with Miami lawyer Raoul Cantero, the first Hispanic justice named. Bell had been among the four finalists then.

This time, he beat out three others, including Jacksonville Circuit Judge Waddell Wallace. He had been considered the front-runner, in part because he had been a longtime partner in a firm that includes former House Speaker John Thrasher, one of Bush's closest friends.

"I'd made some comments on behalf of Del," Thrasher said of Wallace. "But nothing extraordinary. You know, I'm never disappointed in my governor."

Other finalists were 1st District Court of Appeal Judges Peter Webster and Philip Padovano.

Not surprisingly, Bell's view of the judiciary seemed to mirror that of his new boss.

He quoted former President James Madison -- a favorite of conservatives -- in describing how a balance should be maintained between the separate branches of government.

"The courts exist not to exercise the will of man, but the judgment of law," said Bell, who was joined by his parents, wife Victoria, and their four children.