Trump Cabinet Contender Kris Kobach Brings Hardline Immigration Proposals to Meeting
Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach was photographed Sunday with proposals for the Department of Homeland Security following his meeting with President-elect Donald Trump in New Jersey.

Interested in Donald Trump? Add Donald Trump as an interest to stay up to date on the latest Donald Trump news, video, and analysis from ABC News. Add Interest

Kobach, an immigration hardliner and possible contender for secretary of homeland security under Trump, gave reporters waiting outside Trump's country club a look at his plans for DHS as he posed with Trump.

Carolyn Kaster/AP Photo

Kobach's document, titled "Strategic Plan for the First 365 Days," called for the reintroduction of the National Security Entry-Exit Registration System to track "all aliens from high-risk areas."

Kobach helped create the controversial system to track students, tourists and visitors from 25 countries while working for President George W. Bush's Justice Department after the Sept. 11 attacks.

It also proposed "extreme vetting questions" for "high-risk aliens" on support for Sharia law, jihad, "equality for men and women" and the U.S. Constitution.

The document, which was only partially visible, also called for stopping the admission of Syrian refugees into the United States.

In an interview with Reuters last week, Kobach said he's been in touch with Trump's team on immigration to devise ways to work around Congress on building a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border, and on how to reinstate a registry for immigrants from Muslim countries.

Kobach has not responded to inquiries from ABC News about his meeting with Trump and conversations with his transition staff.

Trump held over 20 meetings throughout the weekend as he continues to solicit advice and vet potential Cabinet members.

On Monday, he held more meetings in New York City, spending time with Rep. Tulsi Gabbard, D-Hawaii, and former Texas Gov. Rick Perry.