What is the Facebook 48-Hour missing game challenge, has it been linked to disappearances and is it in the UK?
A WORRYING Facebook craze is encouraging kids to go missing from home for days at a time to "win points" from their friends online.

Here is the lowdown on the dangerous 48-Hour Challenge.

1 Kids who take part in the challenge get a higher 'score' if their parents take to social media in a desperate bid to find them Credit: Reuters

What is the 48-Hour Challenge?

The 48-Hour Challenge is a sick viral trend circulating on Facebook.

It encourages children to go missing from home for up to two days, sparking police searches and making their parents frantic with worry.

Extra points are awarded for every mention on social media, so desperate appeals to find them from friends and relatives on Facebook and Twitter are welcomed.

The shocking challenge is a copycat of the 72-Hour Game that swept Europe a few years ago.

That game dared youngsters to disappear for 24, 48 or even 72 hours.

Authorities in France issued a warning after a 13-year-old girl vanished for three days in 2015.

Has the 48-Hour Challenge been linked to disappearances in the UK?

The "game" has spread among schoolkids in Northern Ireland and there are fears it is being copied by youngsters in mainland Britain.

One mum from Country Derry told Belfast Live her family was left with "unspeakable" anxiety when her child vanished with pals.

They were found 55 hours later in Ballymena, around 50 miles away.

The mum said: “I was terrified they were dead or would be raped, trafficked or killed. But these kids just think it’s funny.

"There was not even a moment of remorse when my child was taken into police custody and when the police brought my child home, I could see posts of selfies from the police car."

MOST READ IN NEWS 'RIOT' CHAOS Gang of HUNDRED youths pelt cops with bottles outside London shopping centre KILLER IN THE CLASSROOM Horror as primary school hires CHILD KILLER as teaching assistant BLIND RAGE Thug Audi driver chases & slaps pedestrian who helped blind man to cross road Exclusive DAFT AS A BRUSH Furniture maker banned from sweeping factory with 'health hazard' broom 'HOUDINI' HORROR Stuntman, 40, goes missing after being lowered into river in steel cage Exclusive LIVING IN FEAR Travellers 'scratch cars & poo in playground as they hold village to ransom'

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 . We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.