Bristol Palin Blasts Artists for Refusing to Perform at Trump Inauguration
Rude!! 11 A-list artists that refused to perform at Donald Trump’s inauguration - https://t.co/zuQTwJUvay — Bristol Palin (@BristolsBlog) December 28, 2016

Kerry Mentions Israeli 'Occupation' Twice as Much as Terror in 73-Minute Speech

Charlie Sheen Wishes Death Upon Trump After Rash of Celeb Deaths

#ProudAmerican: See Some of the Patriotic Displays That Made Our Year

Bristol Palin has called out a number of musicians as "sissies" for refusing to perform Jan. 20 at the inauguration of President-elect Donald Trump.

In a post to her personal blog Wednesday, Palin lists 11 A-list artists who are skipping the inauguration "for fear of backlash or to stand against him (Trump) politically."

The following is an excerpt from the post:

"If Donald Trump were still just a regular old billionaire and threw a party at Trump Tower in New York City, celebrities would be lined up out the door, and the most famous artists would be pining for a chance to perform. But because he will be inaugurated as the next Republican president in January, these same mega-celebrities, who would normally drool over an invitation to sing for the president, want no part of it."

According to Palin, the following musicians wanted no part of the inauguration: Elton John, Celine Dion, Andrea Bocelli, The Chainsmokers, Garth Brooks, Justin Timberlake, Bruno Mars, Katy Perry, Aretha Franklin, David Foster and KISS.

Palin continued:

"Isn't it amazing how 'not cool' it is to be conservative in the public eye? Either Hollywood is that far off – or we have so many sissies we have [sic] in the spot light too scared to stand for what they believe in!"

Currently scheduled to perform Jan. 20 are Jackie Evancho, the Mormon Tabernacle Choir and the New York City Rockettes, though several members of the dance troupe are not happy about having to perform for Trump.

Tell us what you think of Palin's comments.

Check out the latest updates from Fox News Channel on the Trump transition!

TX Rep Drafting Bill to Defund UN: 'They Don't Need Our Money to Be Anti-Semitic'

Dershowitz Slams WH For 'Enormously' Hindering Israeli Peace Process

Huckabee: Defund UN; Use Money to Help US Veterans