Court Prohibits Guardian For Fetus

Judges' Ruling Defeats Gov. Bush's Appeal, Boosts Abortion Rights

Judges from the 5th District Court of Appeal ruled against the governor Friday in the case of J.D.S., a woman who was impregnated while living in a southwest Orlando group home licensed by the state.

A state appeals court has rejected Florida Gov. Jeb Bush's call to appoint a guardian for the fetus of a disabled rape victim, blocking what abortion-rights activists called a bid to expand the legal rights of the unborn.

The opinion upholds an earlier decision by an Orlando judge and -- at least for now -- blocks the courts from appointing guardians for fetuses of incapacitated women who cannot make decisions about their own pregnancies.

"Had the legislature decided that a fetus was entitled to the protection of the guardianship statutes, it would have so legislated," Judge Emerson Thompson wrote in the opinion.

One of the three judges involved in the case strongly disagreed with the ruling, however, and predicted that the U.S. Supreme Court soon will acknowledge fetal rights.

A Bush aide said Saturday that the governor was reviewing the decision and evaluating the options, which could include an appeal to the Florida Supreme Court.

"We continue to believe that protective guardianship for both mother and unborn child was necessary in this tragic case," spokeswoman Jill Bratina said.

The attorney for the woman who wanted to be the fetal guardian vowed Saturday to try to take the case to the state Supreme Court, saying the issue is too important to drop at the appellate level.

The J.D.S. case sparked a national debate on fetal rights last spring after Bush and Jerry Regier, secretary of the Department of Children & Families, asked for the guardian.

J.D.S., now 23, is severely retarded and suffers from cerebral palsy and autism. Circuit Judge Lawrence Kirkwood appointed a guardian for her in early June to help make decisions about the woman's health, including her pregnancy.

Kirkwood said no, however, when an Orlando-area woman, Jennifer Wixtrom, sought to become a guardian for J.D.S.' unborn child at a time when some abortion opponents feared the pregnancy might be terminated.

Bush joined in Wixtrom's appeal to the court in Daytona Beach.

J.D.S. gave birth to a baby girl in late August soon after the three-judge panel heard arguments in the case, which the court described in its ruling Friday as a matter "of great public importance and capable of recurring."