FSU great Warrick Dunn commends Nike, Colin Kaepernick on ad campaign
CLOSE Colin Kaepernick is featured in a new Nike Ad that will debut on Thursday, Sep. 6, 2018 during the first game of the NFL season Sherlon Christie, @sherlonapp

Nike has made Colin Kaepernick one of the faces of its 30th anniversary "Just Do It" advertising campaign. (Photo: AP)

Some love it.

Some hate it.

Others don’t have strong feelings either way about the new Nike ad that features former NFL quarterback Colin Kaepernick as one of the faces of its “Just Do It” 30th anniversary campaign.

Warrick Dunn, the former Florida State and NFL running back who has a minority stake in the Atlanta Falcons' ownership group, didn't mince words about Nike's new ad during an interview with CNN's Don Lemon that aired Wednesday night.

“I think it’s a brilliant campaign,” Dunn said.

"They just raised his profile because Kaepernick the last couple of years has been the face of this movement of social justice."

Dunn commended Nike’s new ad campaign during the six-minute CNN interview. Nike's two-minute long ad spot is scheduled to make its TV debut Thursday night during the first game of the NFL season between the Philadelphia Eagles and Atlanta Falcons.

Warrick Dunn (Photo: Wire photo)

An image of Kaepernick was used with the phrase, “Believe in something, even if it means sacrificing everything.”

The slogan refers to the fact that Kaepernick has been out of the NFL since becoming a free agent in March 2017. The quarterback in 2016 was the first athlete to kneel during the “Star-Spangled Banner” to protest police brutality against black people.

The ad features Kaepernick narrating over clips of inspirational athletes accomplishing extraordinary feats.

“To be the first guy to come out and really talk about the issues that black kids, black men are being shot and killed, I commend him," Dunn said in the CNN interview.

When asked if he thought Nike's stance to create the campaign was a financial or moral decision, Dunn cited the latter.

"It’s a moral decision. It can’t be about finances," Dunn said.

"I think overall they (Nike) understand the issues. A lot of their star athlete spokesmen are African American. They have a lot of that demographic, so I think it's important they really go after the issues and not necessarily things that are financial."

The ad prompted many people online to threaten to boycott the company. Some went so far as to burn their Nike gear. President Trump responded to the ad via Twitter, saying the company is sending a “terrible message” by featuring the free agent quarterback.

Warrick Dunn played at Florida State for four seasons (1993-96) and set the career rushing mark. (Photo: Getty Images)

Dunn said Trump "is not willing to come to the table" on social justice. He also said NFL players who kneel during the “Star-Spangled Banner” are not disrespecting the flag.

"It’s just a deflection," Dunn said of Trump's stance.

"He’s just trying to change the subject. He's not really focused on the issues. These guys, in my opinion, they are not disrespecting the flag. They are patriots. I looked up the definition of patriotism and it’s about love for or to defend your country. These guys love their country, they love their community.

"They just want to see us be a better America."

Dunn, 43, who donates a significant amount of his time and money to charitable giving, said he understands and defends NFL players' right to protest. However, he added it's important for players to give back and impact their community.

Dunn said he also respects police. His mother, Betty Smothers, was a Baton Rouge, Louisiana, police officer. Working off-duty and escorting a businesswoman to a bank to make a night deposit, Smothers was ambushed and killed by armed robbers in 1993.

"I also understand what police officers go through," Dunn said.

"My mom … to sacrifice and put her life on the line every day for her community. But at the same time my mom got to know the people in her community who she was serving. I would advise other police officers across the country, get to know your constituents, get to know the citizens in your community that you are serving. Because that can help bridge the gap.

"But at the same time as players, they are looking at we have black kids, black men that are being shot and killed and there is no justice at the end. We have issues with that. There are good cops and there are also bad cops. But I do understand the players' issue and I side with them."