GoFundMe campaign for Kavanaugh raises over $500,000
A GoFundMe campaign has raised more than $550,000 to support Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh and his family, in the wake of allegations of sexual assault being leveled against him.

ADVERTISEMENT

John Hawkins, who owns conservative blog, Right Wing News, said he created the GoFundMe eight days ago because he was "disgusted" by Kavanaugh's treatment throughout his nomination.

"We live in a country where innocent until proven guilty is supposed to mean something; yet Brett Kavanaugh's reputation is being dragged through the mud while his family is facing non-stop death threats," Hawkins wrote on the campaign's page.

“This is a horrible way to treat a good man who has dedicated his life to public service,” Hawkins continued. “So many unethical people are giving unprovable 36 year old accusations the same weight as 6 FBI background checks, hundreds of hours of hearings and testimony under oath. It is disgraceful.”

Hawkins went on to say that he that all of the money collected “will go to Brett Kavanaugh's family or alternately, if they refuse to accept it, to a charity of their choice.”

In a recent update to the crowdfunding page, Hawkins wrote that he has been in touch with a staffer for the judge who told him Kavanaugh’s team is aware of the GoFundMe.

“She was extremely appreciative of all the support people have been giving the judge, but did also say, quite understandably, that it may be a little while before we get an answer on this with everything that's going on,” Hawkins said. “I told her that was absolutely fine and that the money would be here when they're ready to decide how to handle it, which I assume will be after the vote.”

The campaign comes as the FBI is reportedly wrapping up its investigation into sexual assault allegations brought against Kavanaugh. Senators were told Wednesday that they will get to review a supplemental FBI background investigation as soon as Thursday.

Senate Democrats have cast doubt on the thoroughness of the scope of the review, citing statements from attorneys for Christine Blasey Ford, the first woman to accuse Kavanaugh of sexual assault, and others who said they had not heard from the FBI.

Last week Kavanaugh and Ford, a college professor who alleges Kavanaugh sexually assaulted her at a high school party in 1982, testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee. Kavanaugh denied Ford's allegations and others brought against him by Deborah Ramirez and Julie Swetnick.

Several GoFundMe campaigns supporting Ford have also raised more than $700,000 on her behalf.