Park and Playground System, Dallas, Texas, 1921-1923 [Annual Report]
The following text was automatically extracted from the image on this page using optical character recognition software:



Turner Plaza is located between Forest and

Cliff Parks. By permission of the Park Board,

the Trustees of the Dallas Public Library built

the Oak Cliff Branch Library here. The grounds have been beautified by shrubbery, flowers, lawns,

trees, walks and other improvements and afford

an ideal rest spot and waiting station for street

car patrons. TRINITY PLAY PARK Located at Corinth and Cockrell Streets. Area 41 2 acres.

Cost of land, $8,500.00. Established years ago in the Cotton Mills

District; this play park was the first park of its

kind for Dallas. It proved popular from the

start, and has been a real service in reducing

crime and improving the moral conditions of its

neighborhood. Owing to the lack of funds, the

first improvements consisted of a temporary bath

house and combination kindergarten and assem-

bly room. Later a Milk Station was estab-

lished here. In cases where mothers are unable

to purchase milk, it is furnished free of cost. This Acquired 1909. institution is under the direction of the Dallas

Infants' Welfare and Milk Association.

In 1915 a new Field House, modern in every

particular and costing in excess of $20,000.00,

was constructed. The Field House contains

shower baths for both sexes, play rooms, reading

rooms and an auditorium fully equipped for pic-

ture shows and amateur theatricals. Free mov-

ing picture shows are given at this park three

times a week throughout the year. Rooms and

housing for the Dallas Free Kindergarten and

Day Nursery are provided at this park. Field Ilouse-Trinity Play Park PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS FOR NEGROES Three combination parks and playgrounds are

maintained by the Park Department for the ex-

clusive use of the colored population of Dallas-

one in North Dallas, one in South Dallas, and

one in Oak Cliff. The total acreage of these

parks is approximately ten acres. Playground

apparatus and a play field is provided on each of

the colored parks. Free moving pictures are given three times

a week at each of these parks during the Summer

season.

At Hall Street Park, in North Dallas, is lo-

cated a Field House, which is provided with

shower bath facilities, reading and club rooms,

assembly hall, and a MIunicipal swimming pool

for colored people. [16J r------- LIBRARY, OR TURNER PLAZA

Located on MAarsalis Avenue and Jefferson Street, Oak Cliff. Area 1 , acres.

Acquired in 1908 and 1914. Cost of land $10,300.00.