Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton Posing With Dogs
As the most insane and distressing presidential election in recent history winds down, lets try to remember that both candidates are, underneath their pantsuits and orange skin, people who occasionally do or pretend to do normal things, like pose with good dogs and cats.

No matter your politics, it’s hard to argue that Hillary Clinton doesn’t have the edge when it comes to public photos with pets, if only because of her eight years in the White House with Socks the cat and Buddy the dog.

Here she is pandering to both dog and cat lovers like the skilled politician she is.

Hillary Clinton: Truly an equal opportunity cat & dog lover pic.twitter.com/rOWhCKHUu6 — Alicia Eler (@aliciaeler) October 15, 2016

A fantastic photo of Clinton relaxing with a clearly terrified Socks.

Not shown: @HillaryClinton sitting in that chair for all eternity because Socks was all snuggled up and comfy #imwithfur #imwithher pic.twitter.com/DpEe6lzgAs — Lindsay (((Goldwert))) (@lindsaygoldwert) November 3, 2016

Is Socks the cat wearing a leash here?

Republicans and democrats both agree that Buddy the dog was a very good dog.

Donald Trump doesn’t appear to be much of a pet person, but he–in keeping with his image as a beauty contest mogul and lover of winners–has still managed to mingle with some of the best dogs on the planet.

Here’s Trump making a presidential face with a very good and sad-looking champion beagle named Tashtins Lookin For Trouble, or Miss P for short, who won Best in Show at the 2015 Westminster Dog Show.

Here’s the GOP leader posing with Palacegarden Malachy, a male Pekingese who was named Best in Show at the Westminster Dog Show in 2012.



And here he is with Foxcliffe Hickory Wind, the Scottish deerhound named Best in Show at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in 2011.

The most essential daily news, entertainment, pop culture, and culture coverage. Want more? Check out “Bill Murray And Eddie Vedder Sing The Band’s ‘The Weight’,” “Please Bow Down To The Greatest iPhone Heist Of The Century,” “Meet Popeye, The Rescue Pup Who Now Eats At Pet Friendly Restaurants Every Day”