The Conversation: In-depth analysis, research, news and ideas from leading academics and researchers.
There's a lack of locally relevant knowledge to prevent and control non-communicable diseases in African countries.

There's a lack of locally relevant knowledge to prevent and control non-communicable diseases in African countries.

Why ‘ pro-poor ’ policies on their own won’t shift inequality in South Africa Inequality persists in post-apartheid South Africa, reflecting the distribution of power. Reversing this will require changing the social processes and relations that underpin it.

A tribute to Raymond Louw: a great South African editor and determined activist Raymond Louw will be remembered as a man of unbending principle.

Words to describe distress differ across the world. What we found in Kenya The aim was to understand intense social problems that accompany people's medical problems.

The three big studies pushing at the frontiers of HIV prevention Researchers around the world are working hard to find a vaccine that is safe and effective.

Boko Haram deploys lots of women suicide bombers. I found out why Boko Haram has the highest number of women fighters in the history of terror

Ramaphosa’s critical choices to get South Africa back on track If the country is to survive its current crisis, government will need to undertake two difficult tasks simultaneously.

Botswana court ruling is a ray of hope for LGBT people across Africa By placing less emphasis on public opinion, and questioning public morality as the basis of its decision, the latest High Court decision shows that times have indeed changed.

Lions sometimes suffer if they attack a porcupine. So why do they do it? The team found evidence of about 50 lions that had been injured or killed by porcupines since the 17th century.

The military’s strategic interests could upend Sudan’s fledgling transition When the establishment retains some leverage over reformers change can be slow, superficial, and short-lived. Sudan appears to be a textbook case of this scenario.

Why Sudan’s deadly crackdown on protesters could escalate in coming weeks History shows that when government elites believe that there is a risk that they may lose control of the capital, they escalate targeted violence against civilians.

Past trends could explain why Senegal scrapped the Prime Minister’s office In the past, the scrapping of the office of Prime Minister was influenced by factors that are unrelated to a specific political regime or president.

Study shows young South Africans have no faith in democracy and politicians After recent elections, South Africa are grappling with what the reasons are for the declining trend in youth participation in the 2019 elections.

Chagos Islands: UK refusal to hand back archipelago disregards international law and echoes era of colonialism The UK must accept that colonialism belongs in the history books, and that it must comply with its obligations under international law.

Action is needed to save West Africa’s critically endangered chimpanzees Studies show that West Africa's critically endangered chimpanzees are finding ways of adapting to their rapidly changing habitat, but they still remain highly at risk.

More countries need to give peaceful protest the chance it deserves In spite of noble promises in their constitutions, many countries have a very restrictive approach to demonstrations.

What the US could learn about vaccination from Nigeria Nigeria’s highly mobilized efforts to eliminate polio, and even tackle measles and other vaccine-preventable diseases along the way, may have lessons for the US.

Attitudes to gender and sexual diversity: changing global trends Global attitudes to gender and sexual diversity are changing. Some embrace the diversity; others push back.

Burkina Faso: a weakened state is paving the way for terrorism A weakened central power makes it easier for violent groups - like highway bandits, local militias and armed bands of jihadists - to emerge and thrive.