Bush tilts toward gay-marriage ban

Crist, Gallagher also attend fundraiser for conservative group

At a fundraiser for the Florida Family Policy Council, a conservative group that backs such a ban, Bush said courts in other states overturning laws banning gay marriages have led him to the conclusion that a change to the Florida Constitution might be necessary.

Gov. Jeb Bush said Friday night he's moving away from a longstanding position that there's no need for a constitutional ban on same-sex marriages.

"We may be at that point in our state," he said.

The statement to reporters at the Rosen Centre Hotel contained a message that could be no more pleasing to the conservative organization.

It came as Florida's Republican elite joined the group in honoring Bush at the dinner for his conservative stances with a new award named after state Sen. Daniel Webster.

The Florida Family Policy Council is the same organization that pressed lawmakers and the courts last year to keep Terri Schiavo on a feeding tube and now is working toward giving voters a chance to decide whether a gay-marriage ban should be written into the Florida Constitution.

The group's efforts to ban gay marriage have irked Equality Florida, a St. Petersburg-based gay-rights group.

"The governor is effectively fundraising for an organization that wants to put discrimination right into our constitution," said Brian Winfield, an Equality Florida spokesman.

"It's an embarrassment to have the Republicans cater to a rabid antigay group," he said. "The governor is supposed to represent all Floridians, and I don't believe that most people in Florida think like this group."

The council's petition to get a gay-marriage ban on the 2006 ballot fell short of the signatures needed, but it is on track for the 2008 ballot and has received $300,000 from the Republican Party.

Meanwhile, Attorney General Charlie Crist and Chief Financial Officer Tom Gallagher, who are vying for the Republican nomination for governor, attended the event to send a message to the conservative group that they ascribe to conservative values.

Each steered clear of hot-button issues as they courted the extreme right wing of the party. Each also could be seen as somewhat left of the group's base, either now or in the past.

"You've got to remember," said Crist, "I'm `Chain Gang Charlie.' " He earned that nickname while in the state Legislature for his successful 1995 measure to restore chain gangs for prisoners.