PIRLS 2006 International Report

IEA's Progress in International Reading Literacy Study in Primary School in 40 Countries

By Ina V.S. Mullis, Michael O. Martin, Ann M. Kennedy, and Pierre Foy (2007), Chestnut Hill, MA: TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center, Boston College.

Download the PIRLS 2006 International Report

Copyright Notice

TIMSS and PIRLS are registered trademarks of IEA. Use of these trademarks without permission of IEA by others may constitute trademark infringement. Furthermore, the website and its contents, together with all online and/or printed publications and released items by TIMSS, PIRLS, and IEA are and will remain the copyright of IEA.

All publications and released items by TIMSS, PIRLS, and IEA, as well as translations thereof, are for non-commercial, educational, and research purposes only. Prior notice is required when using IEA data sources for assessments or learning materials. IEA reserves the right to refuse copy deemed inappropriate or not properly sourced.

Commercial exploitation, distribution, redistribution, reproduction and/or transmitting in any form or by any means, including electronic or mechanical methods such as photocopying, information storage and retrieval system of these publications, released items, translations thereof and/or part thereof are prohibited unless written permission has been provided by IEA.

When quoting and/or citing from one or more publications and/or released items from TIMSS, PIRLS, and IEA for the sake of educational or research purposes, please print an acknowledgment of the source, including the year and name of that publication and/or released item. Please use the following acknowledgment as an example:

SOURCE: PIRLS 2006 Assessment. Copyright © 2007 International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA). Publisher: TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center, Lynch School of Education, Boston College.

Please note that citing without naming the source can or will constitute plagiarism for which you can and will be held accountable. To request permission to reuse, reproduce, or translate IEA material, please fill out the permission request form »

Disclaimer

Please note that the website and its contents, together with all online and/or printed publications and released items (‘works’) by TIMSS, PIRLS, and IEA, were created with the utmost care. However, the correctness of the information cannot be guaranteed at all times and IEA cannot and will not be held responsible or liable for any damages that may arise from the use of these resources, nor will IEA be liable for the wrongful use and/or interpretation of its works.

Please be advised that IEA cannot authorize the use of texts or items that include third- party copyrighted materials (e.g., reading passages, photographs, images). Users of any third-party copyrighted materials must first seek and be granted copyright permission from the owner of the content as indicated in the copyright citation line.

Download by chapter: