'Swimming camels' get national recognition
AHMEDABAD: The 'swimming camels' from Gujarat got national recognition from scientists and experts when two breeders of Kachchhi Kharai were felicitated by LIFE Network and National Biodiversity Authority at a function held in Chennai on January 10.

A booklet on the Kharai camel, the only camels which can swim, was also released on the occasion. The duo got the Breed Saviour Award for breed conservation.

The two breeders, Adam Abdreman Jat from Abdasa and Amand Varindh Jat from Bhachau in Kutch, received a cash prize of Rs 15,000 and a certificate from BK Joshi, director of National Bureau of Animal Genetic Research (NBAGR), Karnal.

Ramesh Bhatti, project coordinator from Sahjeevan, a Bhuj-based NGO involved in camel conservation, told TOI that both the breeders together have more than 100 camels. "LIFE Network rewards pastoralists, traditional livestock keepers/communities, farmers every year, who conserve local livestock breeds or domestic animal species in their region.

These two breeders have been conserving this unique Kharai camel species for the last five to seven generations through traditional breeding practices and not giving up those practices even in adverse conditions," he said.

Kharai is a unique breed of camels in Kutch that can survive in both coastal and dry ecosystems. It grazes on saline trees and shrubs and is tolerant to water with high salinity. Its physical features are different from local camels as it has rounded back, long and thin legs and smaller feet. The most astonishing part, however, is its swimming capability. According to experts, the camel can swim up to three kilometres into the sea in search of mangroves, their primary food.

A booklet prepared by Sahjeevan containing information on the unique breed was released in the event by Dr DK Sadana, principal scientist, NBAGR, and Dr Balakrishna Pisupati, chairman of National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) based in Chennai.

Adam Jat, one of the winners, said, "We have been conserving this breed for generations together and our families are also in this occupation. This is our major source of income. On receiving this award, we feel that the camels have also got recognition on national platform."