Governor candidates take off the gloves ELECTION 2006

Joined for a second day by Orlando's Mel Martinez, the first Cuban-American elected to the U.S. Senate, Crist portrayed Davis as prone to raising taxes and soft on Cuban dictator Fidel Castro.

Democrat Jim Davis kept pressing pocketbook issues, while Republican Charlie Crist courted Hispanic supporters as the rivals in Florida's increasingly combative governor's race kept hammering away at each other Thursday.

"I'm running against someone who wants to raise your taxes for the benefit of government," Crist told 150 people at Orlando's Marks Street Senior Recreation Complex. "He wants to be the government's governor. I want to be the people's governor."

Later in Miami, the Republican attorney general drew cheers as he blistered Davis for visiting Cuba in 2003 and backing congressional efforts to ease restrictions on exile families looking to visit relatives on the island.

"I understand that it's important not to go to Cuba when she's under the dictatorship, but unfortunately the man I'm running against doesn't understand that. But I know that you do," Crist told an audience at a restaurant in Miami's Little Havana neighborhood, a bastion of Republican voters.

Martinez took the same message Thursday to the airwaves in South Florida, with the senator featured in a new Florida Republican Party television ad that blasts Davis for the Cuba visit. Martinez, a former Orange County mayor, also will spend part of today on Cuban-American radio in Miami deriding Davis' record.

Josh Earnest, a Davis spokesman, called claims in the new TV spot "ridiculous," pointing out that the five-term Tampa congressman has voted six times in favor of maintaining the economic embargo on Cuba.

Davis called himself a "strong, outspoken supporter" of the embargo. "Charlie Crist has no record, so he's just trying to make political hay by distorting my record," he said.

Davis, campaigning in Tampa, also pored through Crist's record to condemn him for doing nothing to ease skyrocketing homeowners-insurance costs during his four years as attorney general.

Crist gave Davis fuel for Thursday's attack after admitting he "probably would" have vetoed legislative action last spring that bolstered the state's financially strapped Citizens Property Insurance Corp., which provides coverage for homeowners who can't find private insurance.

The measure handed private insurers the authority to impose some rate increases without any state oversight.

Although the insurance issue consumed lawmakers for most of the two-month session and a consensus wasn't reached until the Legislature's final day, Crist never stepped into the debate.

Davis said Crist deliberately ducked the matter until campaign season, when it is proving politically popular to join the chorus of Floridians angry about rising costs.