Momo challenge: What is the deadly Momo game and what you need to know
Momo Challenge: Warn your kid about this ‘suicide game’ 01:51

Just when the unsettling air around the deadly Blue Whale game was simmering, a game that claimed several teen lives across the globe around an year ago, here comes the Momo Challenge . Similar in nature, it is yet another deadly challenge that targets the mentally vulnerable. The challenge allegedly throws a series of tasks for its chosen player, with the final task asking them to take their lives.Reportedly, two deaths in India have been linked to the challenge. To combat the lingering threat, several state police authorities in India have issued warnings over the disturbing game.It is said that the challenge first started on Facebook where people were asked to communicate with an unknown person via an unknown number. Reportedly, the link of this game is being circulated through Whatsapp.The first Momo challenge death took place in Argentina in early August where a 12-year-old girl filmed her tasks on her phone before committing suicide. The Argentina Police warned parents to monitor their kids. The hunt for the ‘adolescent with whom she exchanged messages’ is underway.According to a popular news portal, Momo is a popular social media account on WhatsApp, Facebook, and YouTube, which uses the image of a doll with scary features and large protruding eyes, and that is how they catch the attention of children.Once the contact with the victim is established, the ‘Momo’ account shares a series of challenges (read activities) that need to be completed to finally meet the ‘Momo’. Most of these tasks, according to reports, involve violent acts that end with suicide. If someone refuses to follow the instructions, the Momo intimidate them with dire consequences.The challenge uses an image of a grotesque woman with big bulging eyes. The Japanese artist who created the image, Midori Hayashi, says she is not associated to the game in any way. The image is called ‘Mother bird by Link Factory’.The perpetrators of this horrific crime monitor the status of people on social networking websites to find out people with suicidal tendency.Cyber experts are warning people to avoid accepting any ‘invitation to play’ from an unknown number and to avoid clicking on any unidentified links. Additionally, it is advised to frequently change your passwords for both email as well as social networking sites.If you happen to get an invite from an unknown number directly on your mobile, block that number straightaway.Teach your child the importance of saying NO with confidence!Learn to listen to your child, instead of talking at them all the time.Don't undermine their concerns. If you dismiss their feelings, they will stop confiding in you.Keep the communication open. They should know they can tell you everything without feeling scared of the consequences.