Financial chief will scrutinize state contracts

It's a daunting task that some say describes the job now facing Alex Sink, the state's newly elected chief financial officer. Sink takes control of the Florida Department of Financial Services next week -- the only Democrat to win one of the three statewide Cabinet posts in the November election.

Imagine you're the kingdom's new accountant, brought in to cast a critical eye on certain programs of a popular former monarch.

The former Florida chief for Bank of America proved a formidable campaigner, defeating veteran Republican state lawmaker Tom Lee. Now, the hard work begins.

Her top priority takes aim at one of Republican Gov. Jeb Bush's favorite initiatives: privatization, or the outsourcing of state government work to private companies. During Bush's two terms in office, state agencies have awarded an unprecedented number of contracts to the private sector, on the premise that doing so would cut costs and reduce the size of government.

The outgoing governor defends the practice, citing numerous instances of savings and service improvements that outweigh acknowledged failures.

"There's been some controversy, but we've saved money for the taxpayers," Bush said. "We have fewer state employees. We're focused more on services."

Still, after a number of highly publicized boondoggles, scandals and critical audits, privatization has come under question from both sides of the political aisle. As the state's new fiscal watchdog, Sink said she plans to examine the practice carefully and determine its real value to taxpayers.

"Of course, Florida has always been involved in contracting out services, just not to the extent of what has been done in the past eight years," she said. "We'll be looking closely at the advisability of doing so much privatizing."

Privatization of state government is a huge phenomenon, she said, involving billions of dollars, thousands of contracts, dozens of agencies, and a large private-sector work force. The state Department of Children & Families alone paid $1.5 billion to 684 private contractors during the past fiscal year for work covered by nearly 1,100 contracts.

In many cases, Sink said, outsourcing has served the state poorly. She cited DCF's foster-care program, which is totally privatized. An audit earlier this year indicated that the program's cost has soared since it went private, even as some services -- such as abuse prevention -- have deteriorated.

Another case in point: the widely criticized deal with Convergys Corp., the Cincinnati-based information-technology contractor. Convergys was hired to manage the state's human-resources, payroll and personnel functions, but it generated foul-ups, delays, cost overruns and major complaints. The deal was eventually investigated by an oversight committee of the Florida Legislature.

Among the lessons learned from the Convergys case, Sink said, was that the state needs to make sure it does things right at the front end when it's outsourcing government services.

"We must have a clearly written contract, so we can go to a company and tell them, `You didn't perform the services, and we are not paying you,' " she said. "We shouldn't have something so convoluted that you can't go back, evaluate the results and hold people accountable. You also can't write a contract so narrowly that only one bidder can bid."