Black Introduces the Defund Planned Parenthood Act of 2015
To watch Congressman Black’s remarks, click HERE or the image above

Washington, DC– This week, Congressman Diane Black (R-TN-06), a nurse for more than 40 years and member of the Congressional Pro-Life Caucus, introduced H.R. 3134, the Defund Planned Parenthood Act of 2015. The legislation has the support of 80 original cosponsors and would place an immediate moratorium on all federal funding of Planned Parenthood for the span of one year while Congress conducts a full investigation into the organization’s activities. Introduction of the bill follows the release of multiple undercover videos showing Planned Parenthood employees discussing the harvesting of aborted babies’ tissue and organs.

Since 2013, Congressman Black has sponsored H.R. 217, the Title X Abortion Provider Prohibition Act, which would combat one of Planned Parenthood’s major government revenue streams by withholding Title X grants from any health care provider that performs abortions or gives funds to organizations that do. However, a nonpartisan Government Accountability Office (GAO) study released earlier this year found that Planned Parenthood also received $1.2 billion from Medicaid over a three year window – making it clear that legislation is needed to combat any possible source of federal funding for the scandal-ridden abortion mill.

Last night, Congressman Black took to the House floor to speak in support of the Defund Planned Parenthood Act. A full transcript of her remarks as prepared for delivery is provided below, or click here for video.

Mister Speaker, Planned Parenthood has blood on its hands. Over the last week, we’ve seen multiple videos showing its employees brazenly discussing the harvesting of aborted babies’ tissue and organs. But the truth is, Planned Parenthood’s culture of depravity runs much deeper than a couple of videos.

In my home state of Tennessee, Planned Parenthood, the supposed champion of safe abortions, sued to overturn our state’s informed consent and mandatory licensing laws – measures put in place to protect women’s health and safety. When I authored an amendment to our state Constitution allowing legislators to reinstate these protections, Planned Parenthood ran an ill-fated smear campaign attempting to confuse the facts and turn Tennesseans against the measure.

You see, Planned Parenthood doesn’t empower women – it deceives them at their most difficult and vulnerable moments. It values convenience over truth and profit over life.

As a nurse, I’ve seen the big-abortion-industry’s shameful tactics with my own eyes. That is why, for two years now, I’ve sponsored the Title X Abortion Provider Prohibition Act to address one of Planned Parenthood’s largest government revenue streams. I continue to urge passage of this legislation, but in light of these latest videos, we must take the fight a step further.

For these reasons, I have just introduced the Defund Planned Parenthood Act of 2015 - legislation that would enact an immediate moratorium on all federal funding for Planned Parenthood while Congress carries out a full investigation.

I eagerly await the findings of this forthcoming investigation, but you know what, Mister Speaker? No matter, what it reveals, here’s the truth – Planned Parenthood has made a business out of destroying that which God has created.

It performs over 327,000 abortions a year, all while receiving roughly $500 million in annual funding from the taxpayer dollar. The one-sided relationship between Planned Parenthood’s ever-growing bank account and American taxpayers must be severed.

I yield back my time.

Background:

Bill Text: Defund Planned Parenthood Act of 2015

Rep. Black’s Op-Ed in TownHall: “More than a Video: Planned Parenthood’s Decades-Long Culture of Deceit”

###

Congressman Diane Black represents Tennessee’s 6th Congressional District. She has been a registered nurse for more than 40 years and serves on the House Ways and Means and Budget Committees