Blackburn presses HHS, DEA on missing report on opioid law
WASHINGTON—Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R-Tenn.) on Tuesday sent a letter to Health and Human Services (HHS) Acting Secretary Eric Hargan and Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) Acting Administrator Robert Patterson requesting swift completion and delivery to Congress of a report detailing the impact of The Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act, which has been highlighted in recent press reports. By law, the report was to have been completed six months ago. “This missed deadline is unacceptable,” Blackburn said. “We would have been much better served if we had this report six months ago. We could have spent those six months working to fix any unintended consequences of this law. Instead, we have been working without a clear picture of how this law is affecting Americans and how effective it has been in stemming the tide of the opioid crisis in our country.” As the letter states, “The Ensuring Patient Access and Effective Drug Enforcement Act (P.L. 114-145) requires the HHS Secretary to coordinate with the DEA Administrator and other officials from related departments and agencies to submit a report to Congress that: details the effects of the law; notes significant barriers to improved enforcement and appropriate and safe clinical care of patients; and identifies ways to improve both Congress’ access to information gleaned from data on opioid prescription and distribution and states’ prescription drug monitoring programs that collect this data.” For the full text of the letter, click here. On Wednesday the House Committee on Energy and Commerce will hold a hearing titled “Federal Efforts to Combat the Opioid Crisis: A Status Update on CARA and Other Initiatives” to examine the implementation of laws like the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act (CARA) and other federal initiatives which provided more than $1 billion to combat the opioid crisis. More information on this hearing and a live stream can be found here. Blackburn and her colleagues on the committee are expected to question officials from the DEA, the Food and Drug Administration, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institute on Drug Abuse, and the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Blackburn serves as chair of the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Communications and Technology. She represents Tennessee’s Seventh Congressional District in the U.S. House of Representatives.