Secretary Kerry Announces U.S. Will Increase Refugee Resettlement Numbers
Secretary of State John Kerry visited London, United Kingdom, September 18-20 to meet with U.K. Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond for discussion of bilateral and global issues, including the ongoing crisis in Syria and refugee situation. While in London, Secretary Kerry also met with United Arab Emirates Foreign Minister Abdullah bin Zayed.

On September 20, Secretary Kerry also traveled to Berlin, Germany, where he and German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier discussed a range of bilateral and global issues, including refugee and migration issues in Europe. Secretary Kerry and Foreign Minister Steinmeier also met with a group of Syrian refugees in Germany. Secretary Kerry described the meeting as "very moving" and said that the groug of refugees "urged us and the rest of the world to move to find the political solution which is the only solution, ultimately, to the challenge of Syria."

Secretary Kerry applauded Germany's response to the refugee crisis. He said, " Germany particularly has set a remarkable example for its willingness to step up and deal with this challenge. The example is an important one, and I will say that America is proud that traditionally we are a nation that has always been a haven for those seeking freedom from persecution, from hunger, from oppression, from war. And it’s a reminder for me personally that, obviously, we all have responsibilities to the millions who are stranded away from home. And that responsibility is not just to safeguard life; it is also to provide hope."

U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry and German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier speaks with a group of Syrian refugees in Berlin, Germany, September 20, 2015. [State Department Photo/Public Domain]

Following their meeting with the refugees, Secretary Kerry and Foreign Minister Steinmeier held a joint press availability, during which the Secretary announced that the United States would increase our refugee resettlement numbers, a step that " is in keeping with the best tradition of America as a land of second chances and a beacon of hope."

Secretary Kerry said, "... I’m pleased to announce today that the United States will significantly increase our numbers for refugee resettlement in the course of this next year and the year after. Last year, I think we were at 70,000. We are now going to go up to 85,000 with at least, and I underscore the 'at least' -- it is not a ceiling, it’s a floor -- of 10,000 over the next year from Syria specifically, even as we also receive more refugees from other areas. And in the next fiscal year, we’ll target 100,000, and if it’s possible to do more, we’ll do."

The U.S. refugee resettlement program reflects the United States’ highest values and aspirations to compassion, generosity, and leadership. Since 1975, Americans have welcomed over three million refugees from all over the world. Refugees have built new lives, homes, and communities in towns and cities in all 50 states.

Secretary Kerry also announced that the increase in refugee resettlement numbers would be accompanied by additional financial contributions to the humanitarian effort, not only from our government but from the American people, and said that the contributions "will become more specific in the next days." The United States remains committed to helping the innocent children, women, and men affected by the ongoing conflict in Syria. Total U.S. humanitarian assistance since the start of the conflict in March 2011 is now more than $4 billion. The United States remains the single-largest donor of humanitarian aid for those affected by Syria crisis, which has become the biggest humanitarian emergency of our era.

For more information: