Passage of Colombia, Panama, and South Korea Trade Agreements
Following congressional approval of the U.S.-Korea, U.S.-Colombia, and U.S.-Panama trade agreements, Secretary Clinton released a statement:

"The Free Trade Agreements passed by Congress tonight will make it easier for American companies to sell their products to South Korea, Colombia and Panama, which will create jobs here at home. The Obama Administration is constantly working to deepen our economic engagement throughout the world and these agreements are an example of that commitment.

"The stakes are not just economic. South Korea, Colombia and Panama are three important partners in strategically vital regions. With the passage of these agreements, America has delivered for our friends and allies. I want to thank Presidents Lee, Santos and Martinelli for their patience and willingness to partner with the Obama Administration as these agreements moved through Congress.

"But our work is not yet done. We will not be content until these agreements are fully implemented so that American exporters can reap the benefits as soon as possible."

Other officials and stakeholders are voicing their support for the congressional approval of trade agreements with Korea, Colombia, and Panama. U.S. Trade Representative Ambassador Ron Kirk said:

"This President has gotten trade policy right. These agreements, made better at the President's insistence, will strengthen and expand ties with strategic partners in Asia and Latin America even as they support tens of thousands of jobs here at home, from shop floors to farms to service firms across our country. TAA reforms will ensure that workers get retraining and assistance for the 21st-century jobs they want and need. And the simultaneous passage of key preference programs upholds our commitment to partner with the world's poorest countries for economic growth.

"Taken together, these initiatives are the leading edge of a job-creating trade agenda that will open markets, level the playing field for our businesses and workers, and champion America's working families in an age of tough global competition. They deserve the historic and widespread support they received in Congress tonight. We will continue our work to rebuild an American consensus on trade."

For more information about the trade agreements, how they will protect workers, and contribute to our economic growth and recovery, please visit the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative's website at www.ustr.gov/FTA.