Florida Gov. Charlie Crist changes tune, backs higher tuition

The premium -- called differential tuition by many -- would cost the average full-time student about $350 more a year if a university imposed the maximum 15 percent increase permitted by the plan.

Reversing his long-held stand against tuition hikes, Gov. Charlie Crist on Thursday proposed that all of Florida's public universities be allowed to charge a premium that could cost students hundreds of dollars a year.

The increase would not be covered by the state's popular Bright Futures merit scholarship program, which pays 75 percent to 100 percent of tuition costs for students who make qualifying grades. Parents who have purchased the state's Prepaid Tuition plan have to buy a supplementary plan to cover differential tuition.

University presidents, who expect to see more state-mandated budget cuts this year and next because of declining state revenues, applauded the proposal, which the Legislature must approve before it could take effect.

"Things evolve," Crist said about his change of heart, which came after consulting with university and business leaders worried that educational quality will suffer without more money.

Earlier this year, the Legislature approved differential tuition at Florida's five largest universities, including the University of Central Florida, with a 15 percent cap. UCF this fall charged 3 percent -- or about $70 -- in addition to the 6 percent hike approved by the Legislature.

The University of Florida, South Florida, Florida International and Florida State all assessed the 9 percent maximum -- on top of the legislatively approved hike -- applying it first to freshmen and sophomores.

Crist's proposal would allow all 11 state universities to charge the premium and also cap total tuition increases at 15 percent a year. It would set aside 30 percent of the money collected for need-based financial aid.

Schools would still need to get the state Board of Governors' approval if they wanted to charge the premium.

Crist also would give universities more autonomy to set budgets and choose presidents.

The plan got an initial endorsement Thursday from House Speaker Ray Sansom, R-Destin. "The concept of local decision-making about tuition is something that the Florida House will receive very well," he said. "We'll work with the governor. We'll make it a priority to get it through our committees and our councils."

Even if the premium is approved, Florida's undergraduate costs would remain among the lowest in the nation. Tuition and fees average $3,808 a year, compared with the national average of $6,585.

"Tuition for a full year of college education in Florida is cheaper than sending a 4-year-old to day care," said University of North Florida President John Delaney. "It's just too cheap."

But Senate Democratic Leader Al Lawson, D-Tallahassee, said the proposal would put higher education even further out of reach for struggling families.