Florida Gov. Charlie Crist enjoyed pricey perks on business trip to Europe thanks to taxpayers COMMENTARY - TAKING NAMES

It's a valid question, since we've learned that Charlie Crist, his fiancM-ie, his fiancM-ie's sister, nine bodyguards and several dozen of Charlie's closest friends and business associates somehow managed to spend that much money this past summer on a European trade mission.

So how does one rack up a $430,000 travel bill?

I'm beginning to think someone should've explained to Gov. Good Times that "free trade" didn't mean all the expenses were on the house.

Sure, Charlie's $30,000-plus bill was picked up by businesses, and others paid their own way. But taxpayers footed the bill for the state employees who went on this 12-day, high-class trip that hopscotched through Europe. And it seems like we deserve to know exactly what we bought and what perks our governor enjoyed in the name of "public service."

Unfortunately, while state officials were good about turning over records, they didn't have detailed receipt breakdowns for the crackerjack reporter at our sister paper, the (Fort Lauderdale) Sun Sentinel, who broke this week's story. So I did a little checking of my own.

*Room service. Let's start with Crist's room-service and minibar bills. They totaled $1,300.

First of all, I'm thinking soon-to-be Mrs. Gov. Good Times was responsible for some of the drink bills. Because "minibar" receipts show someone (or some ones) in Crist's room imbibed 14 times in Crist's suite on the first day in London alone.

Still, you have to figure Charlie downed a couple of Red Bulls a day. They are, after all, Gov. Peppy's caffeine-charged beverage of choice.

So I contacted The Westin Paris, where $1,385 a night not only gets you a lovely suite with a view of the Eiffel Tower but a staff of first-rate professionals willing to cater to your every whim.

And one of those first-rate professionals was kind enough to tell me how much the hotel charges for each bottle of Red Bull: 10 euros.

Oh, mon dieu!

At the current exchange rate, that's more than $12 a pop.

If that was the case, Crist probably could've gotten a better deal by sending a member of his massive traveling entourage out to the French version of 7-Eleven (Sept-Onze?) and paying retail.

Which brings us to the next reason the trip tab was so high . . .

*Entourage envy. I obtained a list of those who traveled with Crist. It was six pages long.

A total of about 90 people traveled with Gov. Globetrotter at different stages of his European vacation. There were top executives from big law firms, big banks, Realtors -- even an engineer from Universal Orlando. And, of course, the official trade-mission photographer.

Looks like someone (who was trying to boost his prospects as John McCain's running mate at the time) wanted to show those fancy foreign dignitaries that his entourage was bigger than their entourage.