Federal stimulus plan gives Florida $12 billion - and a way out of its budget problems

Gov. Charlie Crist risked some political capital last week when the Republican governor backed the $787 billion stimulus package that President Barack Obama will sign into law today.

And now the package is paying off with cold cash.

Crist's office said Monday that Florida could haul in $12.2 billion or more during the next 2 1/2 years because of the bill -- a larger chunk than policymakers expected late last week.

More than $3.2 billion would come in during the next four months -- for road construction, child care, unemployment checks, job training and Medicaid costs. Officials suggested this could eliminate the need for any more state budget cuts this fiscal year, a reported $700 million shortfall.

"This will absolutely shore up Florida's budget in several areas," said Jerry McDaniel, Crist's budget and policy director.

And officials said the whopping $5.17 billion that would be at budget-writers' disposal for the budget year that begins July 1 may plug the projected $5 billion-plus deficit without the need for tax increases or massive spending cuts.

Crist has held off proposing a budget to the Legislature until later this week so he'd know how much cash the stimulus bill would send.

On Monday, Crist suggested the money might buy Florida enough time to get through its economic slump, which isn't forecast to end until well into 2010-11.

"I couldn't be more pleased with how this has turned out," Crist said.

Boost for Medicaid

During the next 16 months, the state could receive more than $3.1 billion just for Medicaid, the state and federally shared health-insurance program for the poor. The stimulus bill raises the federal share of the costs -- currently 55 percent -- which means the state would pay a lower share and could be able to redirect some of its current spending to other programs.

To qualify for the money, the Legislature will have to reverse its plans to cut some 20,000 adults from the Medically Needy program that helps people pay for serious illnesses, and another 7,000 low-income seniors from the Medicaid Aged and Disabled programs. But the additional funds should more than offset these costs.

All told, Crist said Florida could land $5.1 billion in Medicaid funding during the next three years.

Florida also would get about $1.4 billion that it must allocate to road projects and transit during the next four months. The state Department of Transportation estimates the state has nearly $7 billion in road projects that are "shovel ready."

In Central Florida, the MetroPlan Orlando organization estimates it has $3.4 billion worth of projects ready for contract, including adding lanes to Interstate 4 through Orange, Seminole and Osceola counties. MetroPlan estimates about $45 million in federal money could make it to Central Florida.