10 years in, ‘One Florida’ posts mixed results for minorities at universities End of affirmative action

Then-Gov. Jeb Bush pushed plan as 'race-neutral' replacement for affirmative action

In 1999, a bit more than 20 percent of the state's high-school graduates were black, as were 17.5 percent of university freshmen. By 2008, the last year for which a racial breakdown is available, blacks accounted for 19.5 percent of high-school graduates — but only 14.9 percent of university freshmen.

Ten years after Florida banned affirmative-action admissions, minority enrollment in the State University System hasn't kept pace with the number of minorities graduating from high school, an Orlando Sentinel analysis has found.

Similarly, in 1999, Hispanics made up 14.7 percent of high-school graduates and 13.8 percent of university freshmen. By 2008, Hispanics were 21.4 percent of graduates and 19.1 percent of the freshmen class, a wider gap.

By contrast, white and Asian students were overrepresented among college freshmen in 1999 — and still were in 2008, according to the Sentinel's analysis. For example, white students comprised roughly 60 percent of high-school graduates and university freshmen in 1999; by 2008, they were 54 percent of high-school graduates — and 58 percent of university freshmen.

"One Florida hasn't been anything but a smoke screen. It really hasn't produced anything," said state Sen. Tony Hill, D-Jacksonville, who has long railed against the plan pressed by then-Gov. Jeb Bush as a "race-neutral" replacement for affirmative action.

"We had the remedy in place, which was affirmative action," Hill added. "We turned our back on a policy that we know was working. And now we have less diversity."

Bush and other One Florida proponents insist it has worked well. They point out that more students of all races are enrolled in Florida's public universities than in 1999, the last year the university admissions officers could consider race.

Bush, who left office in 2007, said the program achieved its primary goals: admitting minority students without offering explicit racial preferences and while pre-empting a lawsuit or a ballot initiative — as occurred in California — challenging affirmative action.

"I would say the results are pretty good," Bush said. "It doesn't mean it can't be better. It doesn't mean it won't be better; it doesn't mean that there won't be challenges ahead and policies that need adapting."

Frank Brogan, who was Bush's lieutenant governor in 2000 and later president of Florida Atlantic University before becoming chancellor of the State University System last summer, said One Florida has abolished "quotas" and "set-asides" and found race-neutral ways to open doors to more black and Hispanic students.

"There's no question that our numbers are up in terms of minority enrollment in the State University System," Brogan said.

But those increases mask the fact that minority enrollment has failed to keep pace with growth in the state's student population.

From 1999 to last fall, freshman university enrollment increased 25.4 percent, from 28,542 to 35,784.

But the number of high-school graduates increased even faster, by 38.6 percent, from 98,933 to 142,819. As a result, there was more competition for university admissions — and a lower percentage of graduates of every race, except Asian, got in.