Crist calls special session on offshore-drilling ban, rankling Republicans

Florida governor wants constitutional ban on drilling near Florida's coast in wake of Gulf oil spill

The governor, who is making a no-party bid for U.S. Senate, called the session 80 days after the BP deep-water oil well exploded off the Louisiana coast, fouling the Gulf of Mexico and Florida Panhandle beaches with crude oil.

Tallahassee — Gov. Charlie Crist on Thursday called the Florida Legislature into special session July 20 to 23 to consider a constitutional ban on near-shore oil drilling, a move Republican legislative leaders called a political ploy that won't accomplish anything.

State law has prohibited drilling in state waters — within 3 to 10 miles of the coastline — since 1990, although there had been a two-year legislative effort in Tallahassee to lift the ban before the BP oil spill. Crist's proposal would put the ban in the Florida Constitution, which only voters can change.

"I feel a compelling duty to protect Florida," Crist told reporters. "I'm going to be governor for about six more months, and I think I would not be doing my duty as governor if I didn't call this special session."

The big question: whether the Legislature, dominated by Crist's former Republican Party, will go along. The early reaction was hostile. Crist's plan, said Senate President-designate Mike Haridipolos, R-Merritt Island, is a "hurried special session that will achieve nothing for Floridians. Florida already bans offshore drilling."

Senate President Jeff Atwater, R- North Palm Beach, called the proposal a "political contrivance" that doesn't address the immediate needs of Gulf Coast residents. In a memo to senators, he called for expanding the special session to include other spill-related issues, such as helping businesses and residents affected by the spill get financial reimbursements from BP.

Crist, though, said he wants the session to be a "rifle shot" focused solely on banning oil drilling, not other issues. Earlier this summer, Crist had indicated he might seek legislation expanding alternative-energy production in Florida, but he ruled that out Thursday as well.

"I want it to be very direct, very succinct, very clear," he said.

The governor's proposal would give Floridians a vote in November on whether to ban drilling in state waters permanently. To get to the ballot, it needs a three-fifths vote from the Legislature. Then, 60 percent of voters would need to sign off.

Addressing reporters at a quickly arranged news conference, the governor almost dared Republican lawmakers to defy him. He said the ban is needed because lawmakers, just a few months ago, "tried to change [state law] and drill holes three miles off the coast of Florida."

If the Legislature doesn't pass the ban, "it would say a lot," Crist said. "About them."

The governor, though, has a mixed history on the drilling issue. In 2008, Crist supported offshore oil drilling when he was maneuvering for a spot on Republican John McCain's presidential ticket. He also backed legislative efforts in 2009 to open state waters to oil and gas rigs.

Politically, the drilling session is highly unusual. Special sessions usually are agreed to beforehand and offer little political drama. But Crist admitted Thursday that he lacks anyone in the House to sponsor his proposal. House leaders haven't been returning his phone calls, he said.

And major GOP forces are lined up against the proposal. Attorney General Bill McCollum, a Republican gubernatorial candidate, said the ban is unnecessary and doesn't address the immediate needs in responding to the BP spill. The Florida Chamber of Commerce labeled the session a "complete waste of taxpayer dollars."