U.S. Senate candidate Jeff Greene's assets may top $2.8 billion

The documents also show that Greene has liabilities ranging from $216 million to $837 million, including a line of credit extended by JP Morgan in 2004. That alone was worth more than $50 million.

Financial disclosure forms filed Friday show that Democratic U.S. Senate candidate Jeff Greene, a wealthy investor, has assets valued between $827 million and $2.8 billion — mostly in stocks, bonds and real estate.

The dozens of liabilities he listed mostly stem from mortgages in Virginia, Kentucky, California and Texas.

The package of material, 56 pages in all, provides the most complete picture so far of Greene's extensive financial empire. But because he is running for the Senate, he is required to file only a range of values for his assets and liabilities, not a fixed amount for each. Unlike most major candidates, including his Democratic Senate rival Kendrick Meek, Greene has refused to make his tax returns public.

In a statement released by his campaign, Greene said, "The document released contains financial information that expands 35 years of hard work and dedication. My achievement is a testament that the American Dream is alive and well in our great nation."

The disclosure forms show Greene, of Palm Beach, is involved in dozens of partnerships and investments around the globe.

Many of his real-estate ventures are based in Coral Gables, and Greene is listed as the president of both Jet Greene and Think Greene, companies that provide airplane rental and other rental services.

Greene's wealth is the single-biggest — some would say only — reason he is leaving an impression on Florida's political landscape.

It has transformed him from a virtual unknown — at least to people outside real-estate investing — to a contender for the Democratic nomination for U.S. Senate. In one recent poll, he trails Meek — a Miami congressman who is the choice of most party leaders — by just 3 percentage points.

Greene is essentially self-funding his bid for office.

He has spent more than $5 million of his own money — much of that on television ads — while collecting just a little more than $3,000 from contributors.

Without that bank account, it is unlikely Greene would be taken seriously as a statewide candidate. He has never run for office, save for a 1980s congressional bid, in which he ran — and lost — as a Republican in California.

He became wealthy through real estate, but became a billionaire when he correctly predicted the housing bubble would burst. As a result, he became incredibly wealthy as Floridians' home values crashed.

Greene's personal life also makes him an unusual candidate. Before he moved to Florida in 2008, he lived in California and was known for throwing enormous parties that attracted celebrities, models and sports figures. For a time, he allowed Hollywood Madam Heidi Fleiss to live in one of his homes. And when he got married three years ago, his best man was former heavyweight champion and convicted rapist Mike Tyson.