$1.3B from federal stimulus will give Florida a boost

Obama signs law to save school jobs, bolster recovery

This second -- and probably last -- round of federal economic-stimulus spending will deliver an estimated $553 million of education money to Florida to save nearly 9,000 school jobs.

WASHINGTON -- Florida's fragile economic recovery will get a $1.3 billion boost from a state aid bill that cleared Congress on Tuesday.

And it will plug estimated $794 million into state coffers, mostly to cover health care for the poor. The federal infusion will help the Florida Legislature balance its budget and reduce pressure to cut state services, lay off government workers, curb contracts with private companies or raise fees.

The bill, passed by the House on Tuesday and already approved by the Senate, drew praise from Gov. Charlie Crist and local school officials in South and Central Florida.

"We need all the help we can get, especially in this economy," Crist told reporters in Tallahassee. "It's all about jobs, jobs, jobs."

Broward County School Superintendent James Notter said he's "absolutely ecstatic" that the federal government is "doing the right thing. It's sorely needed for education across this nation."

Broward schools expect to get about $54 million, which Notter said will allow him to rehire all of the 555 teachers laid off on July 1. He also expects to rehire more than 500 of the 737 non-instructional employees -- secretaries, bus drivers, custodians and maintenance workers -- who received pink slips.

Palm Beach County school officials expect to get $38 million, and they plan to use it to prevent layoffs during the 2011-2012 school year.

"I can't rule out layoffs for 2012, but $38 million would go a long way to help," said Mike Burke, chief financial officer for Palm Beach County schools.

Central Florida school districts welcomed the federal aid to help plug gaps in their 2011-2012 school year budgets. The districts have 27 months to use the money.

"It still is not going to take care of our needs, but it is helpful," said Margaret Smith, superintendent of Volusia County schools.

According to federal and state figures, the first stimulus bill in 2009 saved 18,042 education jobs in Florida and created 2,934 jobs.