Democrats' best campaign tool is Marco Rubio's record

All they have to do is make sure Republican Marco Rubio doesn't get more than 33 percent of the vote. One of the other two would win automatically.

Here's what Democrats seem to be missing: They don't have to choose .

It's like "Sophie's Choice" … except that Crist can feign earnestness better than Meryl Streep.

Right now, Democrats are wringing their hands over which of their two children they should help in the U.S. Senate race: Kendrick Meek or Charlie Crist.

That way, they get either Meek, a loyal Democrat, or Crist, the independent who's likely to side with the Democrats, since his loyalty rests with whomever is in power.

Getting Rubio below 33 shouldn't be too difficult. His poll numbers, after all, have basically hovered in the 30s. And that's without any hard-hitting attacks coming his way.

Democrats don't even have to be mean to bring Rubio's numbers down.

They simply have to be factual — which would be damning enough.

Rubio, after all, is a hypocrite of the grandest order — a preacher of the live-within-your-means gospel who has lived high on other people's money for much of his own political career.

He talks now of "runaway government," hoping nobody will remember how much he spent on things like a members-only dining room for legislators and his own staff back when he was House speaker in 2006. (Aside from the $119,000 for his press secretary, the hire that really made headlines was the chief of staff Rubio decided to pay $175,000 — more than then-Gov. Jeb Bush.)

Rubio claims to oppose pork spending, hoping no one will remember that Crist vetoed a historic $459 million from Rubio's budget — including $800,000 for artificial-turf football fields for a league in which Rubio played flag football.

And Rubio claims to be ready to fight the special interests, hoping no one will remember the $100,000 worth of charges he racked up on the state GOP's special-interest-funded credit cards. We saw reports about everything from $600-a-week car rentals and $1,800 limousine rides to plane trips for which Rubio double-billed both taxpayers and the Republican Party.

The guy has enough baggage to bring down a 747, much less his own poll numbers. It should be the Democrats' job to remind voters of all these things.

Can you imagine the TV ads?

The images of limos, football fields and pricey restaurant bills juxtaposed against audio of Rubio vowing to bring his new brand of fiscal reform to Washington.

Cue the deep-throated announcer: "Sorry, Marco. America can't afford any more of your reform."

Let Meek and Crist make positive cases for their own candidacies, ideas and plans.

The Democratic Party can just focus on Rubio — and do so simply by simply recalling history. (Right now the GOP strategy is a bit more harsh and personal. One of their slogans: "You can't spell Charlie without "LIE.")

Keep in mind: We're just talking strategy here.

Personally, I think all three of these guys have their warts. I've previously lamented Meek's connections to a shady development deal and Crist's constant waffling.