More need protection under Medicare reform: While I support most of Ryan's plan, there are some provisions I cannot
Mike Haridopolos: More need protection under Medicare reform

That's why I worked with Florida legislators during the 2011 session to pass a resolution rejecting Obamacare, countering the dangerous cuts this new government entitlement made to current programs, including Medicare, in order to fund new ones.

Everyone should start from the position that no one will be helped if America falls into bankruptcy.

What if I told you we could do both?

Liberal politicians and media pundits in Washington have repeatedly sold us a false paradigm that we can either reform government spending, or we can protect the promise we've made to Americans in need, including seniors.

It's not a political ploy. It's a question of government making promises and breaking them at a time when millions of Americans are counting on them most.

Here's what I mean: Obamacare funds welfare for able adults on the backs of seniors that have already paid their dues. Obamacare cuts $500 billion in future Medicare funding in order to fund the new constitutionally questionable government mandate, even going so far as to scuttle Medicare's most popular (and successful) part, Medicare Advantage.

Democrats have told you that it's somehow hypocritical to favor small government and still want to protect seniors — but the fact is, seniors have planned their retirements based on the promises the government has made with Medicare.

The average workers starting the job at age 18 will have paid taxes into Medicare for 47 years when they become eligible for the benefits they've earned. Remember, you pay for Medicare in each paycheck. It's not a government handout.

Cutting this program has imperiled the retirement and health care of millions of seniors who have worked hard and planned their medical futures based on the promised benefits they paid for in taxes.

Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., has been talking about entitlement reform longer and with more seriousness and passion than anyone on Capitol Hill.

Now he has offered a plan aimed at reducing our budget's obscenely high $1.6 trillion in deficit spending for this year and the trillions in projected future deficits. His plan will grow our economy and the jobs we need.

His priorities reflect ours in Florida, as we just recently reduced the cost of Medicaid by reforming and partially privatizing it, allowing it to become more patient-centered (an approach Ryan even uses for Medicare).

We also cut almost $4 billion from the state budget to balance it without raising taxes or fees, even going so far as returning more than $308 million to taxpayers.

We can do more, and while I support most of Ryan's plan, there are some provisions I cannot. But as President Reagan said, the person who agrees with you 80 percent of the time is a friend and an ally — not a 20 percent traitor.