Florida Legislature: How the business lobby fared in the Florida Legislature's 2012 session
Business lobby won many battles during the 2012 session, but it lost a few, too

Businesses weren't quite as lucky during the 2012 session, which gaveled to a close at midnight on March 9. But they still got plenty of presents.

TALLAHASSEE — Following the election of a multimillionaire businessman as governor and stronger-than-ever Republican majorities in the Legislature, last year's law-making session was a bit like Christmas -come-early for Florida's business lobby.

Legislators agreed to push back much of a huge, looming tax increase needed to replenish the state's unemployment-compensation fund, saving businesses across the state a cumulative $830 million over the next three years. They put a constitutional amendment on the ballot to reduce property taxes on business equipment. They cut corporate-income taxes for all businesses (at least the ones that pay the tax at all) and passed additional, narrower tax breaks for manufacturers, video-game designers, property insurers and many others.

Then, on the final day of session — in a plan publicly revealed for the first time at 4:30 in the morning and voted out just before 10 p.m. that same day — the Legislature agreed to impose new restrictions on "personal injury protection," or PIP, car-insurance coverage, in hopes of weeding out fraud and reducing people's premiums.

But the state's big-business groups also suffered some notable defeats.

Legislation to restrict workers-compensation drug benefits died without a vote in the Senate. The House refused to hear bills that would have forced Internet retailers like Amazon.com to collect sales tax. A proposal written by the restaurant industry that would have cut wages for many tipped workers ultimately went nowhere.

Still, business lobbyists say their expectations were more modest than a year ago, given that the Legislature this year faced the twin distractions of another tight budget and the once-a-decade, politically charged process of drawing new House, Senate and congressional districts.

"I think the business community had a terrific session given the constraints that we could not change," said Tom Feeney, the former congressman turned president and chief executive officer of Associated Industries of Florida.

One of the best illustrations of the mixed bag is the Florida Chamber of Commerce's annual post-session "report card." Every year, the business-lobbying group grades individual lawmakers based on their votes on chamber priorities. A handful of those issues are double-weighted because they are particularly important to the chamber or because competing lobbies — typically plaintiff's lawyers, unions or environmentalists — oppose them.

The chamber double-weighted 14 issues this year. Nine of them passed.

Those wins included getting PIP reform passed and successfully blocking a plan to allow huge "destination resort" casinos in South Florida. They also included: Education bills to expand virtual schools and emphasize science, math and engineering degrees in universities; growth-management bills that standardize water-district permit rules, scale back other environmental-permit laws and block the federal government from imposing stringent, new water-quality standards; and a pair of regulatory bills that give Gov. Rick Scott the power to kill agency rules and repeal nearly 300 agency regulations that have been deemed unnecessary.

Of course, that means five priorities failed, including the workers-compensation drug restrictions. The other losses included an education bill known as the "parent trigger," which would have given parents the ability to force a public school to convert into a charter, potentially run by a for-profit company; tort-reform bills making it harder to qualify expert witnesses against businesses and limiting "bad faith" lawsuits against insurance companies; and an anti-gambling bill to outlaw so-called Internet cafes.