Ted Budd's Congressional Update
Dear Friend,



Tuesday night, President Trump went to the American people and rightfully made the case for the border security proposal he has submitted to Congress. I want you to know that I support this proposal. It was developed by law enforcement professionals as well as border agents, and it takes the necessary steps to secure our border, protect our communities, and end the plague of crimes committed by illegal aliens against American citizens. We have a crisis at our border with 2,000 inadmissible migrants arriving every day, many of whom are being exploited by human smugglers. This is a terrible tragedy, but we have a plan to fix it. That is why I will continue to put pressure on those in Congress who are opposing border security to wake up to the seriousness of this issue and help pass a solution.



Budd Joins Special Order Highlighting Border Security Thursday night, I went to the House floor to make the case for strong and necessary border security. Democrats in the past have supported many of these same policies. The only change is they don't like the current occupant of the Oval Office. Now is the time to put country before party and do what's right to protect American citizens.



Click here to view speech Budd Introduces Veterans Entry to Apprenticeship Act We have made a lot of progress over the past few years in reducing the number of unemployed veterans in America. However, 370,000 still remained unemployed in 2017. Currently, veterans are not allowed to use their G.I. Bill benefits to cover the cost of Department of Labor approved pre-apprenticeship programs, such as training in welding or carpentry. My bill, H.R. 433 would change that and make sure veterans have every tools necessary at their disposal.



Budd Joins the Sean Hannity Radio Show I joined the Sean Hannity Radio Show on Wednesday to discuss the crisis at our southern border. My Democrat colleagues need to come to the table and negotiate in good faith. It is time to end the drugs and human trafficking taking place at our border.



Click here to listen Budd Calls on Syrian Government to Release Khalil Maatouk On Wednesday, I spoke on the House floor to highlight the plight of Khalil Maatouk. Khalil has dedicated his life to the defense of human rights, and it’s past time that he be releases by the Syrian government and get to return to his family. You can watch my full speech by clicking below.



Click to watch



Photo from Human Rights Commission



I always appreciate hearing your feedback. I would also like to encourage you to follow me on Facebook and Twitter @RepTedBudd so you can stay up to date on what I am doing in Congress.



Sincerely,







Ted Budd

Member of Congress