Students arrested Florida: Student arrests in Florida alarm justice and school officials
Thousands of student arrests alarm Florida justice leaders Sentinel Watchdog: From School to Jail: Part 1

Though the number of school arrests has dropped significantly since the state eased its "zero tolerance" policies a few years ago, there are still far too many kids handcuffed and hauled away in front of their classmates, said Wansley Walters, secretary of the Florida Department of Juvenile Justice.

Thousands of Florida students are arrested in school each year and taken to jail for behavior that once warranted a trip to the principal's office — a trend that troubles juvenile-justice and civil-rights leaders who say children are being traumatized for noncriminal acts.

"The vast majority of children being arrested in schools are not committing criminal acts," Walters told the Orlando Sentinel.

Sixty-seven percent of the arrests last year were for misdemeanors such as disorderly conduct — a catchall, attorneys say, that has been used when children refused to take a cellphone out of a pocket or yelled in class. Fewer than 5 percent faced weapons charges.

Most arrests, Walters says, stem from "bad behavior, not criminal behavior."

Nalani Bolden's experience is an example of an arrest that Walters and others question. The 12-year-old had been suspended but never had received the notification. So she showed up to her Orange County middle school last spring and was arrested for trespassing after refusing orders to go to the office.

She was one of more than 12,000 Florida students arrested nearly 14,000 times last year, records from the Department of Juvenile Justice showed.

A review of arrest records and interviews conducted by the Orlando Sentinel also shows:

Disabled students and black children, such as Nalani, are arrested disproportionately. Black students also are more likely than white children to see their cases dismissed.

Central Florida school districts and police departments have not made curbing arrests a priority, as some communities have done. Orange County schools, for, example, last year had 1,048 arrests, nearly double the number in Miami-Dade County schools — though the South Florida district enrolls nearly twice as many students.

•An arrest record stays with students for life, even when charges are dropped. That means their response must be "yes" to questions on college and employment applications that ask: "Have you ever been arrested?"

Taking youngsters to detention centers for misbehaving needlessly pushes them into the criminal-justice system and out of school, Walters said. The arrests likely make their behavior worse, she said, and fail to provide them the counseling or social services they need.

That's why Walters' agency is determined to see a decline in arrests by 10 percent by the end of this school year, even though they have dropped from more than 28,000 since 2005.

A school arrest can be a "very traumatizing experience" — for both the student taken into custody and others who witness it, said Scott Roberts, a campaign coordinator with the Advancement Project, a national civil-rights group working to stem school arrests.