The Californial School Climate, Health, and Learning Survey (CalSCHLS) System
Reports and Data

Available Reports

One of the benefits to California schools participating in CalSCHLS is that a district/school can compare local results with those from other districts/schools and to county and state norms. Such comparisons can help in interpreting trends and guiding program decisions by placing the results in a larger context of what is happening elsewhere. By participating you also contribute to a statewide dataset that can be analyzed to provide insight into broad factors affecting student success that benefit all schools.

Standard district student and staff reports are produced in less than three weeks for 90% of districts when the survey is administered online. When the survey is administered in paper-and-pencil format, reports are produced in less than seven weeks after print answer forms are received at WestEd. Reports based on custom survey configurations can take longer. District reports are publicly posted to this website by the end of November of the year following administration. Parent survey results are not posted on the website.

School-level CalSCHLS reports and user-friendly School Climate Report Cards (SCRCs) may be requested by a district (or an individual school) if its survey includes a sufficient number of students. These reports are not publicly posted. District-level (aggregated) SCRCs also are available, as well as a description of how the SCRC school climate index is created. Requests for these reports can be made by contacting your Regional Technical Advisor (888-841-7536 or CalSCHLS@wested.org).

Countywide CHKS reports are generated when funding is available. These are two-year aggregated and weighted reports that encompass all schools that administered the CHKS within the two-year cycle within a county.

State-level reports

Biennial Statewide Student Reports

Statewide norms in California are provided by the Biennial Statewide CHKS Report, funded by Department of Health Care Services and based on a randomly-selected representative sample of secondary schools surveyed over a two-year period. The Biennial CHKS instrument consists of the CHKS Core Module and the supplemental module on Alcohol and Other Drugs.

Aggregated CalSCHLS Reports

Aggregated state-level reports are created by combining all the data from all districts that administered the CHKS over a two-year period, because most districts administer the survey every other year. Aggregated state-level reports are provided for the Elementary CHKS and the California Staff School Survey. The Biennial State CHKS Report (described above) is used to provide results for secondary students, as the results are derived from a sample designed to be representative of the state.

CalSCHLS Topical Reports

California Student Mental Health Report Card. Summarizes levels and general trends between 2013-15 and 2015-17 in students' social-emotional well-being, school safety and victimization, substance use, student behavioral problems, learning engagement, and student supports based on data collected from the Biennial Statewide California Healthy Kids Survey and the California School Staff Survey.

School Facilities Report. Describes how students rate the quality of their school's physical environment, how student socioeconomic and demographic characteristics are related to their school's physical environment, and how perceptions of the school's physical environment are related to academic performance and school climate.

Search LEA Reports

Access the search engine to obtain student and staff reports at the district- and county-level for every administration of the CHKS and CSSS since Fall 2007.

Data Dashboards

Access the CalSCHLS data dashboards to examine and graphically display the most recent state and district CHKS results, trends over time, and disparities in survey outcomes across subgroups. Elementary school results can be displayed for 21 indicators for all 5th grade students, males and females, and by participation in afterschool programs. Secondary school results can be displayed for 23 indicators from the Core Survey Module and 12 indicators from the School Climate Module across 11 subgroups.

Query CalSCHLS

Obtain recent key CHKS and CSSS results at the district-, county-, and state-levels from Kidsdata.org.

Request Raw Data

Raw student, staff, and parent survey datasets are available for analysis by researchers and educators in any data format. Requestors must sign a Memorandum of Understanding that includes assurances of data confidentiality. There are two different versions of the MOU: one for districts and schools, and the other for all others, including County Offices of Education.

Requests for raw data can be made by contacting your Regional Technical Advisor (888-841-7536 or CalSCHLS@wested.org).

TOP