Interview with Agriculture Commissioner Adam Putnam
Front & Center: Putnam: Water is state's top issue

Republican Adam Putnam was already a political veteran when he was elected Florida's agriculture commissioner in 2010. He had represented a U.S. House district that included his hometown of Bartow in Polk County for a decade, and had served four years in the Florida Legislature. In a recent interview with the Sentinel Editorial Board, he tamped down speculation that he might mount a primary challenge next year to Gov. Rick Scott, though he refused to rule out the possibility. He also talked about other hot topics he deals with in his current Cabinet spot, including water policy and immigration reform. Here are excerpts.

Q: You've called water policy Florida's top issue. Why?

A: Long term, whether you build a subdivision, plant an orange grove or save the Everglades, it's going to come down to water policy. That's water quality and water quantity. …

Q: Plenty of environmentalists don't think the state's doing enough on water quality.

A: … Florida already has among the most robust state-based water-quality monitoring system … The state passed its own [nutrient pollution] law, which the EPA has chosen to recognize. It did not go as far as some elements of the environmental community would have liked for it to go, but it is a leader in the nation, and it will not result in nearly every wastewater-treatment utility in the state being out of compliance and having to spend billions of dollars to meet a standard that may or may not be attainable at any cost.

Q: Yet there's been a significant decline in waterways like the Wekiva River.

A: There is a noticeable decline in some rivers and springs, and a noticeable improvement in others. … We have very aggressively focused our resources and attention of our water-quality shop on the Suwannee Valley … the lower St. Johns, as well as the northern Everglades … to enroll landowners in best-management practices, to reduce levels of nitrogen and phosphorous leaving the farm, and we've had tremendous success with that. … We think that there's continued room for improvement in other areas of the state …

Q: Lawmakers have spent only a fraction on springs that experts have called for.

A: The Legislature prioritized the Everglades as the beneficiary of limited environmental-restoration funds. … As budgets rebound, I think that you will see that commitment spread to other environmental priorities that should not be neglected in Florida, and I think spring restoration and spring shed protection should be an environmental priority in Florida. … There's more to Florida than the Everglades.

Q: What do you think of the current immigration reform effort in Congress?

A: The broad outlines of what the Senate … and what the House ... are now considering are positive steps in the right direction for the country and for Florida. … Florida stands to gain the most from a modern, well-functioning immigration system, and we stand to lose the most if Congress fails yet again to have a single, smart federal immigration policy. We're a state that has an international reputation as a welcoming place to live, to work, to play, to put your money. We just crossed the 90 million visitor threshold, a substantial number of which are international. … This is important to all of Florida. To tourism, to construction, to agriculture, to banking. …