CARLY For America
The Truth About Donald Trump

During last night’s debate, Carly was asked a question about Donald Trump and in her answer she brought up his flip-flops on many important issues, including abortion. While Mr. Trump now claims he is pro-life, the evidence shows that that was not always the case.

Carly During The Debate: “I would also just say this. Since he has changed his mind on amnesty, on health care and on abortion, I would just ask what are the principles by which he will govern.” (Carly Fiorina, 2015 GOP Debate, Cleveland, OH, 8/6/15)

Donald Trump’s Flip-Flops On Abortion

“On ‘Meet The Press’ In 1999, Trump Said He Was ‘Very Pro-Choice.’ ‘I Hate The Concept Of Abortion,’ He Said. ‘I Hate It. I Hate Everything It Stands For. ... But I Just Believe In Choice.’” (The Washington Post’s “The Fix” Blog, “The Many Ways In Which Donald Trump Was Once A Liberal’s Liberal,” Posted By Hunter Schwarz, 7/9/15)

“Trump Also Told Fox News Sunday: ‘I'm Totally Pro-Choice. I Hate It And I Hate Saying It. And I'm Almost Ashamed To Say That I'm Pro-Choice, But I Am Pro-Choice Because I Think We Have No Choice.’” (Beth Reinhard, “Trump's Flip-Flop On Abortion,” National Journal, 2/15/11)

1999: “Trump Said … That He Would Not Favor A Ban On So-Called Partial-Birth Abortion.” (Beth Reinhard, “Trump's Flip-Flop On Abortion,” National Journal, 2/15/11)

Trump: “‘I want to see the abortion issue removed from politics,’ he told reporters in December 1999. ‘I believe it is a personal decision that should be left to the women and their doctors.’” (Beth Reinhard, “Trump's Flip-Flop On Abortion,” National Journal, 2/15/11)

Now Trump Claims He’s Pro-Life And Has Been Pro-Life. “Now: In an interview with Bloomberg Politics in January, Trump said, ‘I'm pro-life and I have been pro-life.’ He said he believed there should be exceptions in cases of rape, incest or the life of the mother.” (The Washington Post’s “The Fix” Blog, “The Many Ways In Which Donald Trump Was Once A Liberal’s Liberal,” Posted By Hunter Schwarz, 7/9/15)

For more research please go here.

Categories: