Jason Carter for Governor
En Español

Education For All | An Economy That Works for the Middle Class | Honest Government



“The single biggest failure of Georgia’s current leadership — and the biggest drain on our economy is the dismantling of our education system.”

K-12 Funding

Governor Deal’s administration has slashed billions of dollars from public education, resulting in teachers being furloughed, larger class sizes, and less individual attention for struggling students. While Georgia schoolchildren are getting shortchanged in the classroom, many Georgia families are paying more in property taxes. In fact, dozens of districts raised local property taxes to make up for the Governor’s cuts to education.

Setting out clear priorities for how our tax dollars are spent — and living by those priorities — is what it means to be fiscally conservative.

That’s why Jason proposed a separate Education Budget – essentially a trust fund for education that will prevent politicians in Atlanta from mortgaging our future to pay for other things. Today education funding in Georgia is a shell game. A separate Education Budget will ensure that investing in education is Georgia’s top priority.

HOPE Scholarship

HOPE is vanishing. Under Governor Deal’s failed reforms, HOPE continues to cover less and less of the costs of attending college. Every year more high-achieving students will be left behind, unable to go to college. It’s already happening: for the first time in decades, enrollments at two-year, four-year, and technical colleges across Georgia declined in 2012.

A HOPE plan that reduces the number of students who get degrees can only be called one thing: a failure, both for our students and for our economy.

Jason has sponsored numerous proposals that would reform the Zell Miller Scholarship and preserve HOPE for future generations.

Early Childhood Education

Investment in early learning does more than any other investment to close achievement gaps and to help ensure that all children get the education they deserve.

Georgia has long been a leader in early childhood education because of the investment of Lottery for Education dollars in universal Pre-K. Governor Deal, however, has slashed that investment by $56 million, which has meant fewer Pre-K slots, longer wait lists, larger classroom sizes, and a shorter school year. These cuts make it harder to retain qualified Pre-K teachers and to meet the needs of our communities.

Jason understands the value of Pre-K, and as a first step toward fixing these problems, he proposed fully funding incentives for new and existing highly qualified and experienced Pre-K teachers.

Supporting Our Teacher Workforce

Since 2009, Georgia’s public schools have lost more than 9,000 classroom teachers while the number of students has gone up. Class sizes are up in 95 percent of school districts across the state. Nearly three-quarters of Georgia school districts fail to teach students the full 180 days per year.

The most important thing we can do to improve educational outcomes is to support our teacher workforce. That means not only recruiting and retaining quality teachers, but supporting them throughout their careers. In Georgia, a lack of leadership on the issues that matter to teachers is holding back our entire educational system.

Jason has proposed measures – including reinstating National Board Certification bonus pay and restoring HOPE Scholarship Programs designed to train and recruit our teacher workforce – as critical first steps for rebuilding trust and recruiting new teachers.



“Here’s the simple truth: it is getting harder and harder for middle-class people in Georgia to make it.”

Right now, there are 363,000 Georgians still looking for work. Our state ranks 50th in the nation in unemployment. One out of every four children in Georgia lives in poverty, the sixth worst poverty rate in the country.

Adjusted for inflation, the average Georgia family takes home $6,000 less than they did a decade ago. Georgia’s median income has slipped from 18th in 2002 to 33rd today. Middle-class incomes have dropped twice as fast in Georgia as it has in the rest of the country. That’s a real pay cut.

We need a strong climate for business. And you can’t have a strong economy if the middle class and small business owners are being left behind.

Promoting Small Business

We all have a stake in ensuring that communities statewide are good places to do business. Smarter tax policies and other incentives will attract businesses searching for a new home and will reassure workers and employers that we are committed to creating new jobs.

Unfortunately, under Governor Deal’s leadership, Georgia is failing to recognize the contribution of small businesses to job creation in our state.

Jason has proposed initiatives to expand benefits for small businesses, and for his work in the Senate has earned the endorsement of the National Federation for Independent Business as well as an “A” grade from the Georgia Chamber of Commerce.

Preparing the Workforce of Tomorrow

We must do better at educating and training Georgians for jobs that pay well and help families get ahead.

Governor Deal’s policies have resulted in 45,000 fewer Georgians attending technical colleges, with enrollment slipping from 195,000 to 150,000 in just two years. Not only is that a crisis for those students and their families, it’s an economic disaster for Georgia.

Jason has proposed measures to fix these failed reforms – for the sake of both our students and for our economy.



“Our state is at its best when it has an honest government that works for everyone, not just campaign donors or well placed friends.”

Georgia’s inadequate ethics laws and lax enforcement remain major problems.

Jason has championed a number of proposals that would bring transparency, accountability, and integrity to state government, including caps on gifts from lobbyists, the establishment of an independent (and fully funded) ethics commission, and redistricting reform.

Jason has been awarded Common Cause’s prestigious Democracy Award for promoting ethics reform, and he will continue to fight for increased enforcement of the ethics laws that are on the books to increase transparency and restore public faith.