NY’s Economic Development Programs Costliest in the Nation
A new report finds New York’s economic development tax incentive programs are the most expensive in the country. The report adds to a growing body of evidence that there is little relationship between business tax incentives and economic growth. These findings underscore Citizens Budget Commission's (CBC’s) call for a moratorium on new economic development spending until the State increases transparency, establishes performance criteria to measure impacts, and enforces agreements to hold beneficiaries accountable.

In February Timothy Bartik, a senior economist at the independent, nonpartisan W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, released a report, “A New Panel Database on Business Incentives for Economic Development Offered by State and Local Governments in the United States,” in which he analyzes the growth of economic development tax incentives over the past 25 years. To study how the use of incentives has changed over time, Bartik compiled a database of tax expenditures in 32 states (including 47 cities within those states) and the District of Columbia. The data is drawn from tax expenditure reports published by state and local officials and was cross-checked with previous studies on the use of economic development incentives. Extrapolating his analysis to the entire country, Bartik estimates that state and local economic development tax incentives cost taxpayers $45 billion in 2015 – triple the amount foregone in 1990.

According to Bartik’s analysis, New York’s economic development programs are the most expensive in the country.1 He found New York awarded $8.25 billion in incentives in 2015; when compared to the 10 largest states by population, economic development incentives cost New York as much as the next 3 states combined.

Bartik develops two metrics that allow him to compare the use of incentives across states and over time: the value of incentives as a percentage of the estimated gross taxes paid by businesses and as a percentage of industry-level value-added.2 New York’s incentives rank as the costliest as a percentage of gross taxes and second, behind only New Mexico, as a percentage of value-added. By both measures, the state’s incentive use is 2.5 times higher than the national average and is the highest among the 10 largest states by population, plus neighboring New Jersey and Connecticut.