SeaWorld, activists make questionable claims about killer whale survival
SeaWorld, activists make questionable claims on killer-whale life spans

The claim, which goes unchallenged in the film, is a powerful contrast, meant to suggest that the giant marine mammals suffer when forced to live in man-made pools.

In the middle of "Blackfish," the scathing documentary about SeaWorld's killer-whale program, an activist says the whales in SeaWorld parks die early while their counterparts in the wild live as long as humans.

Trainers work with Orcas during a show at the Shamu up close attraction… (Joshua C. Cruey, Orlando…)

Yet SeaWorld Entertainment Inc. says its killer whales have life spans equivalent to those of wild orcas, an assertion the company makes to show that it provides a healthful, stimulating environment for the 29 orcas it owns at four marine parks — the largest captive collection on the planet.

The truth is not nearly as simple as either side claims. The fact is that scientists don't know for sure how long killer whales live.

Some experts accuse both sides — the marine-park industry, which is led by SeaWorld, and the anti-captivity movement, which "Blackfish" has come to symbolize — of cherry-picking research and manipulating statistics to support their arguments. That, they say, has muddied what should be an honest debate about whether the U.S. should continue to allow killer whales to be exhibited in captivity.

"Both sides skew the numbers," said John Hargrove, a former SeaWorld killer-whale trainer who said he wants to see an end to captivity but who is also critical of what he calls the vocal "fringe" of animal-rights groups.

"This is a debate, but you have to debate with facts," added Hargrove, who appears on screen in "Blackfish."

One of the biggest obstacles to understanding the whales' life spans is that researchers have studied only a small percentage of the world's wild killer whales — a handful of populations off the coasts of Washington state, British Columbia and Alaska — long enough to reach trustworthy conclusions.

Killer whales are found around the globe, from Iceland to Sri Lanka to Antarctica. There are at least nine genetically distinct "ecotypes," Brad Hanson, a Seattle scientist with the National Marine Fisheries Service, wrote in an e-mail.

It may be, for instance, that salmon-eating orcas in the Pacific Northwest have different life expectancies than mammal-eating orcas in the Southern Ocean.

Several peer-reviewed studies conducted by U.S. and Canadian government researchers have calculated average life expectancies for killer whales in the Pacific Northwest. The results range from 30 to 50 years for females — depending on which specific population was studied and during what period — and from 19 to 31 years for males.

Individual whales can live much longer. Maximum longevity has been estimated at up to 90 years for females and 70 years for males, depending on the study.

Most of SeaWorld's whales are far younger; only one has so far lived into her 40s.

But with the limited data available, scientists say it can be misleading to compare life expectancies between whales in the wild and those in captivity. Instead, they say, the more accurate comparison to use is the "annual survival rate" — essentially, an estimate of the percentage of whales in a population expected to survive each year.