Deal Protects Trump Plaza From Bankruptcy
Fidelity's Capital & Income Fund and its Belmont Fund limited partnership will give the Trump Organization $25 million in face-value Trump Plaza bonds in exchange for a mortgage on the Trump Plaza's 2,700-car garage, Trump announced.

Nick Ribis, president of Trump's Atlantic City holdings, said Wednesday he was confident Trump Plaza would be able to pay the interest on the bonds.

Trump Plaza has been the healthiest of the developer's three casinos, but the Plaza's cash flow last year declined by 80 percent from 1989 to $29.1 million.

So far this year, winnings from gamblers - the main source of revenue for Trump Plaza - are down sharply. In March, the win from gamblers was $21.3 million, down 22.2 percent from March 1990.

The commitment letter announced yesterday also gives Fidelity an option to sell back another $25 million face value of Trump Plaza bonds next year in exchange for an unspecified "new obligation of Trump Plaza."

"This looks like a very good deal for all parties," said H. Michael Miller, an analyst for the investment-rating firm Fitch Investors Services.

Fidelity in recent weeks has paid an average of about 55 cents per $1 face value for $30 million to $50 million face value of Trump Plaza bonds, the Wall Street Journal reported yesterday. The garage on which Fidelity received a mortgage loan has been appraised at about $25 million.

The New Jersey Casino Control Commission must approve the deal, but that seems almost assured since it will allow Trump Plaza to pass the Casino Control Act's financial stability test. In May, at license renewal hearings, the casino must prove financial stability for the next two years.

The Trump Organization also is in discussions with lawyers representing Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. over mortgage payments on the Trump Regency Hotel. The Inquirer erred on Thursday in reporting that the bank had hired the lawyers to initiate foreclosure proceedings on the Trump Regency. As noted in an article in yesterday's Inquirer, executives of the bank and Trump's organization said the negotiations were aimed at averting a foreclosure.

Trump has yet to strike a deal to cover $34 million of principal and interest payments due June 15 on Trump Castle Casino Resort, his weakest gambling hall.

On April 15, hearings are scheduled to open on whether to renew the Taj Mahal Casino Resort's operating license and on the Trump Organization's

financial stability. The commission has defined financial stability as the ability to pay bills or to be operating under the protection of Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. The Taj is expected to enter bankruptcy in May to work out a deal to satisfy its creditors.

Trump also is trying to negotiate a new deal with banks to replace agreements signed last June. Those agreements provided $65 million in new credit lines and relaxed payment terms on $800 million of Trump's $1.9 billion of bank debt.