Site Of Complex Compromise Shipping And Retailing Interests Cut A Deal Involving Riverfront Land.
The vacant, rock-strewn strip resting behind a chain-link fence has become the focus of a red-hot debate between port interests trying to preserve the riverfront for shipping, and those proponents, including Mayor Rendell, of new commercial development on the river.

The two sides crafted a complex compromise: The developer, Richard I. Rubin & Co., agreed to sell the Shapiro site to the Delaware River Port Authority, which wants it to expand a neighboring pier.

The price of that property, though, would have to make up for additional costs Rubin would incur in buying new land to shift his development slightly north, under an agreement brokered in part by Mayor Rendell.

In turn, Rubin will pay a lesser amount to Barry Shapiro and two other investors who now own the land; Kenneth Shapiro died seven months ago.

This was not the Shapiros' first real estate deal.

Kenneth Shapiro was a major land speculator in Atlantic City in the early 1980s, and he and his brother Barry were identified in 1986 by New Jersey state authorities as longtime associates of Nicodemo Scarfo's organized-crime family.

Ronald Rubin, chairman of Richard I. Rubin & Co., said he had no knowledge of the Shapiros' background. When he agreed to buy their waterfront site, he said, he negotiated primarily with the Kerr McGee chemical company, which owns the bulk of the overall development tract.

His company, he said, agreed to move his development proposal north to Tasker Street at substantial additional cost to help out the port.

*

In the early 1980s, Kenneth Shapiro and a group of associates were involved in several multimillion-dollar Atlantic City real estate transactions. Their holdings included a crucial portion of the site where the Trump Plaza Casino- Hotel now stands.

Kenneth Shapiro was an unindicted co-conspirator in the extortion case against Atlantic City Mayor Michael Matthews. Shapiro, prosecutors said, was the go-between for Matthews and the Scarfo organized-crime family.

Barry Shapiro, according to a 1986 report by the New Jersey Commission of Investigations, was linked to organized crime through boxing events he ran in Atlantic City that investigators said were financed by his brother.

Shapiro says he is now out of the boxing business and is running his family's scrap-metal firm and other investments.

Last week, Barry Shapiro said he and his brother had many investments in real estate, including the small piece along the Delaware River.

Shapiro said his brother bought the waterfront land because it had some large metal tanks on it. The Shapiro family, which also runs a salvage business, tore them down for scrap, he said.

But Kenneth Shapiro, he said, also was betting the city would someday change the land's zoning.

"My brother's plan was to bring in condos," said Barry Shapiro.

Neither Rubin, nor Shapiro, would disclose how much the Richard I. Rubin Co. has agreed to pay for the land, but Shapiro acknowledged he would make a decent profit on the deal.

The sale is scheduled to be completed March 31 and is contingent on the zoning changes allowing commercial development on the site, Shapiro said. A City Council committee is scheduled to hold a hearing on the zoning case Tuesday.

Shapiro acknowledged the proposed rezoning had increased the value of his land. But, he said, it had been rising anyway, as more speculators became convinced the city would someday change its zoning policy.

"Everybody realizes that the city needs employment, and this land is just sitting here vacant," Shapiro said.

Rendell used the same argument when he supported the rezoning, reversing the city's long-standing policy of keeping that part of the riverfront reserved for port and industrial use. Commercial development such as bars, restaurants, hotels and housing was steered closer to Center City.

Earlier this year, Councilman Joseph C. Vignola, who represents the South Philadelphia riverfront, introduced legislation to rezone the waterfront south of Reed Street.

The new zoning would accommodate Rubin's plans and plans by another developer, Tower Investments Inc., to build another shopping center just north of Rubin's site.

Initially, Rubin had agreed to buy three parcels: the Shapiro site; an additional seven acres that Shapiro said he used to own but has since sold to Anthony Marques, a contractor who owns Lisbon Contractors Inc.; a third, and largest, piece, about 18 acres, owned by Kerr McGee.

But when Rubin's plans became known late last year, port officials complained they needed the land for expansion of an adjacent paper and forest- products business.

Rubin agreed to move his site north, but that will require buying additional land from another group of investors for about $7.5 million. The owners of this property are represented by Albert J. Momjian, a Center City lawyer, and include members of the Maloumian family, which owns a Philadelphia Oriental rug business.

Initially, Mayor Rendell said Rubin could expect up to $5 million for the Shapiro site. That led to an uproar by unions opposed to the new development - and some port officials - who complained that the Delaware River Port Authority, which earns its revenue from bridge tolls, was paying much more than the land was worth.

If the port wanted the land, they argued, why hadn't it bought the site earlier, before its value shot up as a result of the proposed zoning change? And why would it need to be rezoned for the port's expansion plans?

Wallace Nunn, chairman of the board of the Philadelphia Regional Port Authority - which will lease the Shapiro land from the DRPA once the Port Authority buys it - said the port had had no funds to buy the land earlier. It was only after the river's port agencies were restructured last year that it was able to fund development projects through new powers of the bi-state DRPA.

Opponents of the development plan also complained the initial $5 million sale price was too high.

The DRPA then ordered a formal appraisal. Last week, the appraisal concluded that the 7.5-acre parcel was worth $3.5 million. The DRPA is set to vote on the sale this week.

Rendell said Friday that the appraiser has been asked to revise his appraisal to consider the value of a couple of acres of land under the Delaware River and a planned riverfront road.

Rendell said he expected that the appraiser would, upon considering these factors, increase the $3.5 million figure.

Through it all, Ronald Rubin is continuing with his plans to develop the shopping center, which city officials say will bring hundreds of dollars and new tax revenues to the city.

Rendell said that if Rubin's plans fell through, the development agreement was off.

"The city is going through with this only on the assumption that Ron Rubin is going to exercise his option," Rendell said. "Ron Rubin is one of the most reputable real estate developers in the city of Philadelphia and that's who we're dealing with. We obviously wouldn't enter into a deal with people who had any ties to the Mafia."

Nunn also said he had no qualms about buying Shapiro's tract.

"It's an interesting twist, but it does not seem as though anybody was trying get any special deal for them," he said.

Shapiro said the tract would hold its value no matter what happened.

"If this deal falls through," Shapiro said. "I have people calling every day."