Casino Panel Blocks The Ventnor Merlinos But The Agency Granted A License To A Man A Senate Report Called An Associate Of An Asian Crime Group.
Leung, 47, of Toronto, who has been organizing trips to Atlantic City from Canada since 1986 - now predominantly for the Trump Taj Mahal - denies any affiliation to organized crime. Just as the Ventnor Merlinos do.

Both decisions by the commission were intended to uphold the public's confidence in the casino industry in Atlantic City, commissioners said.

To Edwin J. Jacobs Jr., the Merlinos' attorney, the rulings were ``baffling.'' He plans to appeal.

Leung left the meeting all smiles.

``It's hard to reconcile,'' Jacobs said. ``A Senate committee identifies a person as an organized-crime member or associate, [and] the commission disregards that. On the other hand, in my case the FBI, the state police and every other law enforcement agency clears my clients [and], the commission disregards that.''

The commission voted 4-0 to reject a request for casino qualifications for Bayshore Rebar Inc. and its owners, Phyllis Merlino and her son, Joseph N. Merlino, and for ReSteel Service Inc. and its owner, Marco Merlino, Joseph's brother. The vote was an affirmation of a 36-page ruling Casino Control Commission Chairman Bradford S. Smith issued in December, after five days of hearings over the summer.

The commission's decision to renew Leung's casino license and the junket enterprise license of his company, Danny Leung Enterprises Inc., was 3-1. Commissioner Leanna Brown cast the dissenting vote, saying, ``I think there's a lot here that we still don't know.''

The Merlinos' downfall, several commissioners said, was offering Skinny Joey a job when he was about to be paroled from prison in 1994, allowing him to spend the night at the family's Ventnor home in 1995 and attending his sister's high school graduation party that same year. Skinny Joey never accepted the job offer.

``The bottom line is it's fine to do things with your family and for your family,'' Commissioner James R. Hurley told the Merlinos. ``But in the context of this industry, it is not fine to be associated with a career offender.''

At the close of an impassioned argument, Frederick J. McDonough, a deputy attorney general, gave the Merlinos this advice:

``When a family member is in the mafia, you have to avoid him if you want to be licensed by this commission.''

In an emotional speech that lasted nearly an hour, Jacobs described the Merlinos' predicament as ``a battle of perception over reality.''

``We are not the mob; we have never been the mob; we don't aspire to be the mob,'' Jacobs told the commission.

The commission is not suggesting that they are, Smith countered. But the family's association with Skinny Joey - no matter how benign - is enough to disqualify them from casino-related work, Smith wrote in his December report.

McDonough contended that Marco Merlino's company, ReSteel, was created in 1990 as a front for Bayshore, a way for Phyllis and son Joseph to get around a 1989 ruling by the Casino Control Commission that first denied them the right to do casino-related work. At that time, Bayshore was deemed disqualified mostly because of its association with Lawrence ``Yogi'' Merlino, Phyllis' former husband, the father of her children and now a top underworld informant.

To help prove his assertion that ReSteel is really Bayshore in disguise, something the Merlinos deny, McDonough noted that the companies - which install the steel reinforcement rods needed before concrete can be poured at construction sites - have never bid against each other for projects, share a foreman and use the same law firm and accountant.

The commission has ordered ReSteel to cease all casino work effective March 20. ReSteel is currently working on a project at Caesars Atlantic City.

Jacobs said he intends to file a request for an emergency stay on that ruling.

In urging the commissioners to block Leung from doing any further business with casinos, Deputy Attorney General R. Lane Stebbins told them they should ``feel comfortable relying'' on the 1992 U.S. Senate subcommittee report that listed Leung among ``identified Asian organized-crime figures.'' The report described Leung as an associate of the 14K Triad, a group mainly found in Hong Kong that appeared in Canada in the mid-1970s.

Stebbins also referred to prior testimony before Smith of two detectives from the Metropolitan Toronto Police Department who said they had unsubstantiated information from confidential informants that Leung has been a member of the 14K Triad. Two other Canadian police officials have testified that they do not believe Leung has had any organized-crime affiliations.

In a report issued in December, Smith said he had determined that Leung was mentioned in the Senate subcommittee report because of a past business association with a reputed Asian underworld figure, Eddie Louie. That business association ended in 1985. Leung has had two encounters with Louie since, both by chance and both of which he promptly reported to police, Smith said. The Merlino family from Ventnor should follow Leung's lead if it ever wants to be qualified for casino work in Atlantic City, Smith said yesterday.

``Mr. Leung, in my view, did what I think people in his position need to do and should do when they come into contact with members of organized crime,'' Smith said. ``He went to police [and] and told them what had occurred.''