Bank to refund fees in 'predatory-lending' cases Bank of America's EquiCredit plans to return $2.5 million to 12,000 Pa. homeowners and help 800 families in foreclosure.
An attorney for EquiCredit, Leonard Bernstein of the Philadelphia office of Reed Smith L.L.P., said it would be "inappropriate" to discuss details before the agreement is formally presented to federal Judge Eduardo C. Robreno at a scheduled meeting this afternoon.

Bernstein also said that, as part of the settlement agreement, the bank and its affiliates do not acknowledge "that anyone did anything wrong."

At EquiCredit's peak in the late 1990s, "we would get at least a case a week involving an elderly homeowner, usually female and African American, who had gotten a loan with EquiCredit, but did not know the terms of the loan or how much it was costing them," said Alan White, an attorney with Community Legal Services of Philadelphia, which also represented borrowers in the case.

When borrowers could not pay, Bank of America tried to take over their homes. In Philadelphia alone, Bank of America has filed foreclosure papers on more than 500 homes since 1998, according to court records.

City foreclosures rose rapidly in the 1990s, a problem that housing activists, City Council and some bankers blamed on the proliferation of aggressive, high-cost lenders, such as EquiCredit, that specialize in "subprime" loans to risky borrowers. But subprime lenders argue they provide a useful service by lending to people traditional banks refuse to serve.

The lead plaintiff in the case, Mildred Samuel of North Philadelphia, borrowed $18,000 for home repairs two years ago through a broker who charged $1,700 for setting up an EquiCredit loan, according to court papers.

Without telling Samuel, the broker enlarged the loan to pay her outstanding utility bills and additional fees so the home-repair loan could be approved, according to Searles.

EquiCredit charged 13 percent interest and set payments at $357 a month over 15 years - about 40 percent of Samuel's income. Samuel was unable to pay, and EquiCredit tried to take her home. Last year, Bank of America announced plans to shut down EquiCredit and to stop making subprime mortgage loans.

*

For information about the settlement, call Community Legal Services at 215-227-2400.

Contact Joseph N. DiStefano at 215-854-5957 or jdistefano@phillynews.com.