A troubled empire Trump gambled on junk bonds, and lost.
His downfall, in 1991 and now: the staggering debt that followed construction of the billion-dollar Trump Taj Mahal, his third Atlantic City casino.

"The Taj Mahal was his undoing," said Roger Gros, publisher of Global Gaming Business, which tracks the industry. "It was his first visit with bankruptcy because of the financing, and it's the basis of his current problems."

Trump financed the Taj Mahal primarily with junk bonds, with onerous interest rates that he has been unable to refinance - until now.

Under the plan to restructure his $1.8 billion debt, Credit Suisse First Boston would inject $400 million into his company. Trump would contribute nearly $71 million as a coinvestor with Credit Suisse. He would remain chairman, with a $2 million salary, but would step down as chief executive officer.

Even though his title would change and his ownership stake would be reduced from 56 percent to 25 percent, Trump said yesterday that his presence in Atlantic City was not diminishing.

"No, I think just the opposite," Trump said from New York City. "We've reduced our debt by $544 million and our interest rate, and we have a cash flow that's going to be tremendous.

"Look, I'm investing $71 million in the deal," he said. "I'm a buyer, I'm an investor, and I'm a chairman. That does not sound like I'm leaving Atlantic City. I love Atlantic City and what it holds for the future."

Still, news of the bankruptcy filing caused the New York Stock Exchange to delist the company's stock yesterday. When it resumed trading, shares plunged 81 percent to 36 cents, down $1.49.

Trump's troubles come as his real estate empire is booming, and the man himself is the star of a top-rated television show, The Apprentice.

For a decade, Trump was the biggest thing in Atlantic City - a marquee showman and master promoter who was bigger than life. Like Madonna, he needed only one name, and his mere appearance at a casino caused a stir. Never known to be modest, Trump loved to boast he was "No. 1 in Atlantic City" and had "the No. 1 property" there - the gleaming Trump Taj Mahal.

When Trump unveiled the Taj Mahal in 1990, it was more majestic, more grand and more expensive than anything ever seen in Atlantic City, and further elevated Trump's status.

Trump brought glitz and star power to a once-downtrodden resort and took a chance on Atlantic City when few other investors would. Atlantic City embraced him for it. From the late 1980s to the late 1990s, Gros said, "Trump was the most recognizable figure in Atlantic City."

But a billion dollars in debt caught up even with the man who prides himself on his deal-making talents. With this restructuring, Trump will lose his controlling stake. He must even give up rights to his own name and likeness - at least when it is used for gambling and casinos.

Ironically, it comes when the Trump brand may be more popular than ever. Trump is pitchman for Visa and Verizon. His latest book, Trump: How to Get Rich, is a best-seller in the business category. He stars in the hit TV reality show The Apprentice, where contestants jockey for an executive-level job in his empire.

So what went wrong?

The gambling world has changed dramatically since the Taj Mahal opened, and these days $1 billion is the minimum to build a world-class facility. Colossal casinos in Las Vegas, such as the $1.8 billion Bellagio and Steve Wynn's $2.3 billion Win Las Vegas, set to open next year, raised the bar.

And Atlantic City, once with a virtual monopoly on gambling on the East Coast, is now surrounded by states that offer some form of gaming. Pennsylvania will soon be in the mix with as many as 61,000 slot machines in 14 locations, including Center City - an hour's drive from Atlantic City.

There is also a newer, flashier competitor in town. The year-old Borgata Hotel Casino & Spa has taken some of Trump's high rollers and altered the Atlantic City gambling landscape. Next to the $1.1 billion vertical, golden-hued Borgata, the other properties in town seem outdated.

"There's always a newer, shinier penny in town," said Wallace Barr, president and chief executive officer of Caesars Entertainment Inc., which owns three casinos on the Atlantic City Boardwalk. "That's why we're always having to upgrade."

But Trump has not upgraded, because he has not had the cash, and the delay has cost him dearly. Yesterday's revenue figures released by the New Jersey Casino Control Commission showed that Trump's three properties have recorded year-over-year declines in revenue for the first seven months of the year, compared with the same period last year. The three casinos combined have not turned a profit in nearly a decade.

Some see Trump as simply moving on to bigger and better things. He has multimillion-dollar condos under development on the Las Vegas Strip and in the Caribbean, a new riverboat casino in Indiana, and opportunities to explore in Pennsylvania.

"I have great interest in Pennsylvania," Trump said. "Now if this deal goes through, the company will be so strong that we'll be able to do Pennsylvania."

But to shareholders, such as Joseph and Shirley Rudnick of Wilmington, who are awaiting the summation of Trump Hotels' bankruptcy filing next month, Trump and his casinos have seen better days.

"It's not run as efficiently and kept as well as it used to be," Joseph Rudnick, 79, said of what used to be his favorite casino, the Trump Taj Mahal. "The Borgata is getting a lot of business. It's a nicer place. It's newer."

Contact staff writer Suzette Parmley at 856-779-3818 or sparmley@phillynews.com.

Who Owns Atlantic City's Casinos

Donald J. Trump controls three of the 12 casinos in Atlantic City: the Trump Taj Mahal, Trump Plaza, and Trump Marina. The following are the other owners:

Aztar Corp: Tropicana.

Boyd Gaming Inc./MGM Mirage: Borgata.

Caesars Entertainment Inc.*: Bally's, Caesars, and the Atlantic City Hilton.

Colony Capital L.L.C.: Resorts International Casino Hotel.

GB Holdings Inc.: Sands Hotel & Casino.

Harrah's Entertainment Inc.*: Harrah's and Showboat.

*Harrah's said last month that it would buy Caesars, making it the world's biggest gambling company and Atlantic City's dominant casino owner.