How to keep your personal information safe on social media
Social media runs a significant portion of people’s social lives. We use it to connect with far-flung friends and family, send quick messages to co-workers, and announce major (and minor) events in our lives. Many businesses use social media sites to collaborate or share information—for instance, you might discuss a project with co-workers via a Facebook messaging session or plan a conference on a LinkedIn forum. Employers and schools are increasingly using social media to reach out to potential employees and students as well.

Free security software just doesn’t have the resources to keep up with new threats as they emerge. That’s why you need a multi-layered defense to security. Meet Norton Security Premium — protection for up to 10 of your devices.

According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, over 16 million US residents became victims of identity theft in 2012 alone. With more and more of our identities taking shape on social media, protecting our personal information on these sites has become more important than ever. Here are several ways to keep your personal information safe while still enjoying the benefits of making social media connections:

1. Treat the “about me” fields as optional.

Facebook gives you the option to fill in a great deal of information about yourself, from your date of birth to where you went to high school. Just because these fields are offered, however, doesn’t mean you must fill them out. Consider offering a general version of the information requested or simply leaving the field blank. For instance, listing only your state of residence, instead of both city and state, can make it harder for others to figure out exactly where you live.

2. Become a master of privacy settings.

All social media sites give you the option to limit post viewing to specific audiences. Take the time to explore these settings, try different options, and become a master of their use. For instance, both Facebook and Twitter let you create custom lists of people who are allowed to view specific posts.As you get better at using the privacy settings, bear in mind that not all privacy settings “translate” between websites. For instance, some Facebook users have reported that photographs they set to “private” on Facebook were still indexed publicly in Google Image Search—and could be found by searching for their names. If you don’t want it found publicly, don’t post it!