Universal Basic Education
The Universal Basic Education (UBE) Programme is a nine (9) year basic educational programme, which was launched and executed by the government and people of the Federal Republic of Nigeria to eradicate illiteracy, ignorance and poverty as well as stimulate and accelerate national development, political consciousness and national integration. Former President Olusegun Obasanjo flagged off UBE on 30 th September 1999 in Sokoto , Sokoto State. The UBE Programme is Nigeria's strategy for the achievement of Education for All (EFA) and the education-related Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The implementation process of the programme has been on since 1999 , but progress was hampered by lack of an enabling law to execute certain aspects of the programme. What a big relief it was when the President signed the UBE Bill into law on 26 th May 2004 following its passage by the National Assembly . The UBE Act 2004 makes provision for basic education comprising of ECCE, Primary and Junior Secondary Education. The financing of basic education is the responsibility of States and Local Governments. However, the Federal Government has decided to intervene in the provision of basic education with 2% of its Consolidated Revenue Fund. For states to fully benefit from this Fund, criteria were established which states are to comply. The Act also provides for the establishment of the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) to co-ordinate the implementation of the programme at the states and local government through the State Universal Basic Education Board (SUBEB) of each state and the Local Government Education Authorities (LGEAs) . The Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) was formally established on 7 th October 2004 . Vision Statement To be a world class education intervention and regulatory agency for the promotion of uniform,qualitative and functional basic education in Nigeria Mission Statement To operate as an intervention, coordinating and monitoring Agency to progressively improved the capacity of states, local Government Agencies and communities in the provision of unfettered access to high qualitative basic education in Nigeria Scope of UBE Programmes and initiatives for early childhood care and education, Six-year Primary Education, and three (3) years of Junior Secondary Education. Objectives Of UBE Ensure unfettered access to nine (9) years of formal basic education.

The provision of free, Universal Basic Education for every Nigerian child of school­ going age.



Reducing drastically the incidence of drop-out from the formal school system, through improved relevance, quality and efficiency

Ensuring the acquisition of appropriate levels of literacy, numeracy, manipulative, communicative and life skills as well as the ethical, moral and civic values needed for laying a solid foundation for life-long learning. Core Values of the UBE Commission

Honesty and Accountability Integrity and Transparency Team Work and Commitment