Man who preyed on lone female joggers is banned from approaching women - for LIFE
A man who preyed on lone female runners has been banned from approaching women for life.

A man who preyed on lone female runners has been banned from approaching women for life.

Clifford Morgan was also handed a suspended prison term after targeting three lone female joggers, barging into one and following the other two – while making lewd comments.

The 29-year-old, from Penzance, Cornwall, had pleaded guilty to two counts of causing harassment, alarm and distress, and one count of assault at Truro Magistrates Court, relating to the incidents, which happened in September and October.

He was handed a 16-week prison term, suspended for 18 months but police also argued that a lifetime criminal behaviour order should be put in place to stop him approaching any women in future.

Banned – Clifford Morgan faces jail or a fine if he approaches woman (Picture: SWNS) More

Devon and Cornwall Police, the Crown Prosecution Service and Cornwall Council’s Anti-Social Behaviour (ASB) Team said that as a result of Morgan’s dangerous behaviour and his lack of engaging with support services, a criminal behaviour order should be made to restrict him from being able to approach females in the future and protect the wider community.

Sergeant Gemma Freestone said such extreme action was necessary as he had failed to change his behaviour, despite previous warnings, and the criminal behaviour order would give them extra powers if necessary.

MORE: Facebook lurking ‘makes you miserable and will ruin your Christmas’

MORE: This deer takes working out to an extreme by crashing through a window and leaping around a gym

Truro magistrates put a lifetime criminal behaviour order on Morgan saying he “must not approach, contact or follow any female in a manner that causes or is likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress”.

Tom Styles, from Cornwall Council’s anti social behaviour team, said: “This shows the power and flexibility of the anti social behaviour tools and powers.

“Orders like this are not made without serious consideration to the perpetrator, the victim(s) and the wider community.

“If this individual chooses to continue to target people and cause them fear and distress, he can now be arrested and imprisoned for up to five years, given up to a £5,000 fine, or both.”

(Top picture: Getty)