Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995
Editor note: This version of the Constitution does not incorporate amendments contained in The Constitution (Amendment) Act 2005 and The Constitution (Amendment) (No. 2) Act 2005

Commencement: 8 October, 1995. The Preamble. We The People of Uganda: Recalling our history which has been characterised by political and constitutional instability; Recognising our struggles against the forces of tyranny, oppression and exploitation; Committed to building a better future by establishing a socio-economic and political order through a popular and durable national Constitution based on the principles of unity, peace, equality, democracy, freedom, social justice and progress; Exercising our sovereign and inalienable right to determine the form of governance for our country, and having fully participated in the Constitution-making process; Noting that a Constituent Assembly was established to represent us and to debate the Draft Constitution prepared by the Uganda Constitutional Commission and to adopt and enact a Constitution for Uganda: Do hereby, in and through this Constituent Assembly solemnly adopt, enact and give to ourselves and our posterity, this Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, this 22nd day of September, in the year 1995. For God and my country.

National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. General. I. Implementation of objectives. (i) The following objectives and principles shall guide all organs and agencies of the State, all citizens, organisations and other bodies and persons in applying or interpreting the Constitution or any other law and in taking and implementing any policy decisions for the establishment and promotion of a just, free and democratic society. (ii) The President shall report to Parliament and the nation at least once a year, all steps taken to ensure the realisation of these policy objectives and principles. Political objectives. II. Democratic principles. (i) The State shall be based on democratic principles which empower and encourage the active participation of all citizens at all levels in their own governance. (ii) All the people of Uganda shall have access to leadership positions at all levels, subject to the Constitution. (iii) The State shall be guided by the principle of decentralisation and devolution of governmental functions and powers to the people at appropriate levels where they can best manage and direct their own affairs. (iv) The composition of Government shall be broadly representative of the national character and social diversity of the country. (v) All political and civic associations aspiring to manage and direct public affairs shall conform to democratic principles in their internal organisations and practice. (vi) Civic organisations shall retain their autonomy in pursuit of their declared objectives.

III. National unity and stability. (i) All organs of State and people of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability. (ii) Every effort shall be made to integrate all the peoples of Uganda while at the same time recognising the existence of their ethnic, religious, ideological, political and cultural diversity. (iii) Everything shall be done to promote a culture of cooperation, understanding, appreciation, tolerance and respect for each other's customs, traditions and beliefs. (iv) There shall be established and nurtured institutions and procedures for the resolution of conflicts fairly and peacefully. (v) The State shall provide a peaceful, secure and stable political environment which is necessary for economic development. IV. National sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. (i) The State and citizens of Uganda shall at all times defend the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda. (ii) The State and citizens of Uganda shall endeavour to build national strength in political, economic and social spheres to avoid undue dependence on other countries and institutions. (iii) The State shall endeavour to mobilise, organise and empower the Ugandan people to build independent and sustainable foundations for the development of Uganda. Protection and promotion of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms. V. Fundamental and other human rights and freedoms. (i) The State shall guarantee and respect institutions which are charged by the State with responsibility for protecting and promoting human rights by providing them with adequate resources to function effectively.

(ii) The State shall guarantee and respect the independence of nongovernmental organisations which protect and promote human rights. VI. Gender balance and fair representation of marginalised groups. The State shall ensure gender balance and fair representation of marginalised groups on all constitutional and other bodies. VII. Protection of the aged. The State shall make reasonable provision for the welfare and maintenance of the aged. VIII. Provision of adequate resources for organs of government. The distribution of powers and functions as well as checks and balances provided for in the Constitution among various organs and institutions of government shall be supported through the provision of adequate resources for their effective functioning at all levels. IX. The right to development. In order to facilitate rapid and equitable development, the State shall encourage private initiative and self-reliance. X. Role of the people in development. The State shall take all necessary steps to involve the people in the formulation and implementation of development plans and programmes which affect them. XI. Role of the State in development. (i) The State shall give the highest priority to the enactment of legislation establishing measures that protect and enhance the right of the people to equal opportunities in development. (ii) The State shall stimulate agricultural, industrial, technological and scientific development by adopting appropriate policies and the enactment of enabling legislation.

(iii) In furtherance of social justice, the State may regulate the acquisition, ownership, use and disposition of land and other property, in accordance with the Constitution. XII. Balanced and equitable development. (i) The State shall adopt an integrated and coordinated planning approach. (ii) The State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas. (iii) The State shall take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas. XIII. Protection of natural resources. The State shall protect important natural resources, including land, water, wetlands, minerals, oil, fauna and flora on behalf of the people of Uganda. Social and economic objectives. XIV. General social and economic objectives. The State shall endeavour to fulfill the fundamental rights of all Ugandans to social justice and economic development and shall, in particular, ensure that— (a) all developmental efforts are directed at ensuring the maximum social and cultural well-being of the people; and (b) all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and access to education, health services, clean and safe water, work, decent shelter, adequate clothing, food security and pension and retirement benefits. XV. Recognition of the role of women in society. The State shall recognise the significant role that women play in society.

XVI. Recognition of the dignity of persons with disabilities. Society and the State shall recognise the right of persons with disabilities to respect and human dignity. XVII. Recreation and sports. The State shall promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda. XVIII. Educational objectives. (i) The State shall promote free and compulsory basic education. (ii) The State shall take appropriate measures to afford every citizen equal opportunity to attain the highest educational standard possible. (iii) Individuals, religious bodies and other nongovernmental organisations shall be free to found and operate educational institutions if they comply with the general educational policy of the country and maintain national standards. XIX. Protection of the family. The family is the natural and basic unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State. XX. Medical services. The State shall take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population. XXI. Clean and safe water. The State shall take all practical measures to promote a good water management system at all levels. XXII. Food security and nutrition. The State shall— (a) take appropriate steps to encourage people to grow and store adequate food;

(b) establish national food reserves; and (c) encourage and promote proper nutrition through mass education and other appropriate means in order to build a healthy State. XXIII. Natural disasters. The State shall institute an effective machinery for dealing with any hazard or disaster arising out of natural calamities or any situation resulting in general displacement of people or serious disruption of their normal life. Cultural objectives. XXIV. Cultural objectives. Cultural and customary values which are consistent with fundamental rights and freedoms, human dignity, democracy and with the Constitution may be developed and incorporated in aspects of Ugandan life. The State shall— (a) promote and preserve those cultural values and practices which enhance the dignity and well-being of Ugandans; (b) encourage the development, preservation and enrichment of all Ugandan languages; (c) promote the development of a sign language for the deaf; and (d) encourage the development of a national language or languages. XXV. Preservation of public property and heritage. The State and citizens shall endeavour to preserve and protect and generally promote the culture of preservation of public property and Uganda’s heritage. Accountability. XXVI. Accountability. (i) All public offices shall be held in trust for the people. (ii) All persons placed in positions of leadership and responsibility shall, in their work, be answerable to the people. (iii) All lawful measures shall be taken to expose, combat and

eradicate corruption and abuse or misuse of power by those holding political and other public offices. The environment. XXVII. The environment. (i) The State shall promote sustainable development and public awareness of the need to manage land, air and water resources in a balanced and sustainable manner for the present and future generations. (ii) The utilisation of the natural resources of Uganda shall be managed in such a way as to meet the development and environmental needs of present and future generations of Ugandans; and, in particular, the State shall take all possible measures to prevent or minimise damage and destruction to land, air and water resources resulting from pollution or other causes. (iii) The State shall promote and implement energy policies that will ensure that people’s basic needs and those of environmental preservation are met. (iv) The State, including local governments, shall— (a) create and develop parks, reserves and recreation areas and ensure the conservation of natural resources; (b) promote the rational use of natural resources so as to safeguard and protect the biodiversity of Uganda. Foreign policy objectives. XXVIII. Foreign policy objectives. (i) The foreign policy of Uganda shall be based on the principles

of— (a) promotion of the national interest of Uganda; (b) respect for international law and treaty obligations; (c) peaceful coexistence and nonalignment; (d) settlement of international disputes by peaceful means; (e) opposition to all forms of domination, racism and other forms of oppression and exploitation.

(ii) Uganda shall actively participate in international and regional organisations that stand for peace and for the well-being and progress of humanity. (iii) The State shall promote regional and pan-African cultural, economic and political cooperation and integration. Duties of a citizen. XXIX. Duties of a citizen.

(a) (b) The exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms is inseparable from the performance of duties and obligations; and, accordingly, it shall be the duty of every citizen— to be patriotic and loyal to Uganda and to promote its well-being; to engage in gainful work for the good of that citizen, the family and the common good and to contribute to national development; (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) to contribute to the well-being of the community where that citizen lives; to promote responsible parenthood; to foster national unity and live in harmony with others; to promote democracy and the rule of law; and to acquaint himself or herself with the provisions of the Constitution and to uphold and defend the Constitution and the law.

Chapter One The Constitution. 1. Sovereignty of the people. (1) All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution. (2) Without limiting the effect of clause (1) of this article, all authority in the State emanates from the people of Uganda; and the people shall be governed through their will and consent. (3) All power and authority of Government and its organs derive from this Constitution, which in turn derives its authority from the people who consent to be governed in accordance with this Constitution. (4) The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda. 2. Supremacy of the Constitution. (1) This Constitution is the supreme law of Uganda and shall have binding force on all authorities and persons throughout Uganda. (2) If any other law or any custom is inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Constitution, the Constitution shall prevail, and that other law or custom shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void. 3. Defence of the Constitution. (1) It is prohibited for any person or group of persons to take or retain control of the Government of Uganda, except in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. (2) Any person who, singly or in concert with others, by any violent or other unlawful means, suspends, overthrows, abrogates or amends this Constitution or any part of it or attempts to do any such act, commits the offence of treason and shall be punished according to law. (3) This Constitution shall not lose its force and effect even where its

observance is interrupted by a government established by the force of arms; and in any case, as soon as the people recover their liberty, its observance shall be reestablished and all persons who have taken part in any rebellion or other activity which resulted in the interruption of the observance shall be tried in accordance with this Constitution and other laws consistent with it. (4) All citizens of Uganda shall have the right and duty at all times— (a) to defend this Constitution and, in particular, to resist any person or group of persons seeking to overthrow the established constitutional order; and (b) to do all in their power to restore this Constitution after it has been suspended, overthrown, abrogated or amended contrary to its provisions. (5) Any person or group of persons who, as required by clause (4) of this article, resists the suspension, overthrow, abrogation or amendment of this Constitution commits no offence. (6) Where a person referred to in clause (5) of this article is punished for any act done under that clause, the punishment shall, on the restoration of this Constitution, be considered void from the time it was imposed, and that person shall be taken to be absolved from all liabilities arising out of the punishment. 4. Promotion of public awareness of the Constitution. The State shall promote public awareness of this Constitution by— (a) translating it into Ugandan languages and disseminating it as widely as possible; and (b) providing for the teaching of the Constitution in all educational institutions and armed forces training institutions and regularly transmitting and publishing programmes through the media generally.

Chapter Two The Republic. 5. The Republic of Uganda. (1) Uganda is one sovereign State and a Republic. (2) Uganda shall consist of the districts specified in the First Schedule to this Constitution and such other districts as may be established in accordance with this Constitution or any other law consistent with it. (3) The territorial boundary of Uganda shall be as delineated in the Second Schedule to this Constitution. (4) The capital of Uganda is Kampala. 6. Official language. (1) The official language of Uganda is English. (2) Subject to clause (1) of this article, any other language may be used as a medium of instruction in schools or other educational institutions or for legislative, administrative or judicial purposes as may be prescribed by law. 7. Nonadoption of a State religion. Uganda shall not adopt a State religion. 8. National symbols and seals. The national flag, the national coat of arms, the public seal, the national anthem and the seals of the courts of judicature in use immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall continue to be in use.

Chapter Three Citizenship. 9. Citizens of Uganda. Every person who, on the commencement of this Constitution, is a citizen of Uganda shall continue to be such a citizen. 10. Citizenship by birth. The following persons shall be citizens of Uganda by birth— (a) every person born in Uganda one of whose parents or grandparents is or was a member of any of the indigenous communities existing and residing within the borders of Uganda as at the first day of February, 1926, and set out in the Third Schedule to this Constitution; and (b) every person born in or outside Uganda one of whose parents or grandparents was at the time of birth of that person a citizen of Uganda by birth. 11. Foundlings and adopted children. (1) A child of not more than five years of age found in Uganda, whose parents are not known, shall be presumed to be a citizen of Uganda by birth. (2) A child under the age of eighteen years neither of whose parents is a citizen of Uganda, who is adopted by a citizen of Uganda shall, on application, be registered as a citizen of Uganda. 12. Citizenship by registration. (1) Every person born in Uganda— (a) at the time of whose birth—

(i) neither of his or her parents and none of his or her grandparents had diplomatic status in Uganda; and (ii) neither of his or her parents and none of his or her grandparents was a refugee in Uganda; and (b) who has lived continuously in Uganda since the ninth day of

October, 1962, shall, on application, be entitled to be registered as a citizen of Uganda.

(2) The following persons shall, upon application, be registered as

citizens of Uganda— (a) every person married to a Uganda citizen upon proof of a legal and subsisting marriage of three years or such other period prescribed by Parliament; (b) every person who has legally and voluntarily migrated to and has been living in Uganda for at least ten years or such other period prescribed by Parliament; (c) every person who, on the commencement of this Constitution, has lived in Uganda for at least twenty years. (3) Clause (2)(a) of this article applies also to a person who was married to a citizen of Uganda who, but for his or her death, would have continued to be a citizen of Uganda under this Constitution. (4) Where a person has been registered as a citizen of Uganda under clause (2)(a) of this article and the marriage by virtue of which that person was registered is— (a) annulled or otherwise declared void by a court or tribunal of

competent jurisdiction; or (b) dissolved,

that person shall, unless he or she renounces that citizenship, continue to be

a citizen of Uganda. 13. Citizenship by naturalisation. Parliament shall by law provide for the acquisition and loss of citizenship by naturalisation. 14. Loss of citizenship by registration. A person may be deprived of his or her citizenship if acquired by registration, on any of the following grounds— (a) voluntary acquisition of the citizenship of another country; (b) voluntary service in the armed forces or security forces of a country hostile to or at war with Uganda; (c) acquisition of Uganda citizenship by fraud, deceit, bribery, or having made intentional and deliberate false statements in his or her application for citizenship; and (d) espionage against Uganda.

15. Prohibition of dual citizenship. (1) Subject to this article, a Uganda citizen shall not hold the citizenship of another country concurrently with his or her Uganda citizenship. (2) A citizen of Uganda shall cease forthwith to be a citizen of Uganda if, on attaining the age of eighteen years he or she, by voluntary act other than marriage, acquires or retains the citizenship of a country other than Uganda. (3) A person who— (a) becomes a citizen of Uganda by registration; and (b) upon becoming a citizen of Uganda, is also a citizen of another country, shall cease to be a citizen of Uganda unless he or she has— (c) renounced his or her citizenship of that other country; (d) taken the oath of allegiance specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Constitution; (e) made and registered such declaration of his or her intentions concerning residence as may be prescribed by law; or (f) obtained an extension of time for taking those steps and the extended period has not expired. (4) A Uganda citizen who loses his or her Uganda citizenship as a result of the acquisition or possession of the citizenship of another country shall, on the renunciation of his or her citizenship of that other country, become a citizen of Uganda. (5) Where the law of a country, other than Uganda, requires a person who marries a citizen of that country to renounce the citizenship of his or her own country by virtue of that marriage, a citizen of Uganda who is deprived of his or her citizenship by virtue of that marriage shall, on the dissolution of that marriage, if he or she thereby loses his or her citizenship acquired by that marriage, become a citizen of Uganda. 16. National Citizenship and Immigration Board. (1) There shall be a National Citizenship and Immigration Board.

(2) The board shall consist of a chairperson and not less than four other persons, each of whom shall be of high moral character and proven integrity, appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. (3) The functions of the board shall be prescribed by Parliament and shall include— (a) registering and issuing national identity cards to citizens; (b) issuing Uganda passports and other travel documents; (c) granting and cancelling citizenship by registration and naturalisation; (d) granting and cancelling immigration permits; and (e) registering and issuing identity cards to aliens. (4) The functions of the board set out in clause (3)(a), (b) and (d) of

this article may be decentralised to the district level. 17. Duties of a citizen. (1) It is the duty of every citizen of Uganda— (a) to respect the national anthem, flag, coat of arms and currency; (b) to respect the rights and freedoms of others; (c) to protect children and vulnerable persons against any form of abuse, harassment or ill-treatment; (d) to protect and preserve public property; (e) to defend Uganda and to render national service when necessary; (f) to cooperate with lawful agencies in the maintenance of law and order; (g) to pay taxes; (h) to register for electoral and other lawful purposes; (i) to combat corruption and misuse or wastage of public property; and (j) to create and protect a clean and healthy environment. (2) It is the duty of all able-bodied citizens to undergo military

training for the defence of this Constitution and the protection of the

territorial integrity of Uganda whenever called upon to do so; and the State

shall ensure that facilities are available for such training. 18. Registration of births, marriages and deaths. The State shall register every birth, marriage and death occurring in Uganda.

19. Citizenship of a parent dying before the birth of a person. (1) A reference in this Chapter to the citizenship of the parent of a person at the time of the birth of that person shall, in relation to a person born after the death of the parent, be construed as a reference to the citizenship of the parent at the time of the parent’s death. (2) For the purposes of clause (1) of this article, where the death occurred before the coming into force of this Constitution, the citizenship that the parent would have had if he or she had died on the coming into force of this Constitution shall be taken to be his or her citizenship at the time of his or her death.

Chapter Four Protection and promotion of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms. General. 20. Fundamental and other human rights and freedoms. (1) Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual are inherent and not granted by the State. (2) The rights and freedoms of the individual and groups enshrined in this Chapter shall be respected, upheld and promoted by all organs and agencies of Government and by all persons. 21. Equality and freedom from discrimination. (1) All persons are equal before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life and in every other respect and shall enjoy equal protection of the law. (2) Without prejudice to clause (1) of this article, a person shall not be discriminated against on the ground of sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability. (3) For the purposes of this article, “discriminate” means to give different treatment to different persons attributable only or mainly to their respective descriptions by sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability. (4) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from enacting laws that are necessary for— (a) implementing policies and programmes aimed at redressing social, economic, educational or other imbalance in society; or (b) making such provision as is required or authorised to be made under this Constitution; or (c) providing for any matter acceptable and demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society. (5) Nothing shall be taken to be inconsistent with this article which

is allowed to be done under any provision of this Constitution. 22. Protection of right to life. (1) No person shall be deprived of life intentionally except in execution of a sentence passed in a fair trial by a court of competent jurisdiction in respect of a criminal offence under the laws of Uganda and the conviction and sentence have been confirmed by the highest appellate court. (2) No person has the right to terminate the life of an unborn child except as may be authorised by law. 23. Protection of personal liberty. (1) No person shall be deprived of personal liberty except in any of the following cases— (a) in execution of the sentence or order of a court, whether established for Uganda or another country or of an international court or tribunal in respect of a criminal offence of which that person has been convicted, or of an order of a court punishing the person for contempt of court; (b) in execution of the order of a court made to secure the fulfillment of any obligation imposed on that person by law; (c) for the purpose of bringing that person before a court in execution of the order of a court or upon reasonable suspicion that that person has committed or is about to commit a criminal offence under the laws of Uganda; (d) for the purpose of preventing the spread of an infectious or contagious disease; (e) in the case of a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years, for the purpose of the education or welfare of that person; (f) in the case of a person who is, or is reasonably suspected to be, of unsound mind or addicted to drugs or alcohol, for the purpose of the care or treatment of that person or the protection of the community; (g) for the purpose of preventing the unlawful entry of that person into Uganda, or for the purpose of effecting the expulsion, extradition or other lawful removal of that person from Uganda or for the purpose of restricting that person while being conveyed through Uganda in the course of the extradition or removal of that person as a convicted prisoner from one country to another; or

(h) as may be authorised by law, in any other circumstances similar to any of the cases specified in paragraphs (a) to (g) of this clause. (2) A person arrested, restricted or detained shall be kept in a place authorised by law. (3) A person arrested, restricted or detained shall be informed immediately, in a language that the person understands, of the reasons for the arrest, restriction or detention and of his or her right to a lawyer of his or her choice. (4) A person arrested or detained— (a) for the purpose of bringing him or her before a court in execution of an order of a court; or (b) upon reasonable suspicion of his or her having committed or being about to commit a criminal offence under the laws of Uganda, shall, if not earlier released, be brought to court as soon as possible but in any case not later than forty-eight hours from the time of his or her arrest. (5) Where a person is restricted or detained— (a) the next-of-kin of that person shall, at the request of that person, be informed as soon as practicable of the restriction or detention; (b) the next-of-kin, lawyer and personal doctor of that person shall be allowed reasonable access to that person; and (c) that person shall be allowed access to medical treatment including, at the request and at the cost of that person, access to private medical treatment. (6) Where a person is arrested in respect of a criminal offence— (a) the person is entitled to apply to the court to be released on bail, and the court may grant that person bail on such conditions as the court considers reasonable; (b) in the case of an offence which is triable by the High Court as well as by a subordinate court, the person shall be released on bail on such conditions as the court considers reasonable, if that person has been remanded in custody in respect of the offence before trial for one hundred and twenty days; (c) in the case of an offence triable only by the High Court, the person shall be released on bail on such conditions as the court considers reasonable, if the person has been remanded in custody

for three hundred and sixty days before the case is committed to the High Court. (7) A person unlawfully arrested, restricted or detained by any other person or authority shall be entitled to compensation from that other person or authority whether it is the State or an agency of the State or other person or authority. (8) Where a person is convicted and sentenced to a term of imprisonment for an offence, any period he or she spends in lawful custody in respect of the offence before the completion of his or her trial shall be taken into account in imposing the term of imprisonment. (9) The right to an order of habeas corpus shall be inviolable and shall not be suspended. 24. Respect for human dignity and protection from inhuman

treatment. No person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. 25. Protection from slavery, servitude and forced labour. (1) No person shall be held in slavery or servitude. (2) No person shall be required to perform forced labour. (3) For the purposes of this article, “forced labour” does not include— (a) any labour required in consequence of the sentence or order of a court; (b) any labour required of any person while that person is lawfully detained which, though not required in consequence of the sentence or order of a court, is reasonably necessary in the interests of hygiene or for the maintenance of the place at which the person is detained; (c) any labour required of a member of a disciplined force as part of that member’s duties as such or, in the case of a person who has conscientious objections to service as a member of a naval, military or air force, any labour which that person is required by

law to perform in place of that service; (d) any labour required during any period when Uganda is at war or in case of any emergency or calamity which threatens the life and well-being of the community, to the extent that the requiring of the labour is reasonably justifiable in the circumstances of any situation arising or existing during the period or as a result of the emergency or calamity, for the purpose of dealing with that situation; or (e) any labour reasonably required as part of reasonable and normal communal or other civic obligations. 26. Protection from deprivation of property. (1) Every person has a right to own property either individually or in association with others. (2) No person shall be compulsorily deprived of property or any interest in or right over property of any description except where the following conditions are satisfied— (a) the taking of possession or acquisition is necessary for public use or in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; and (b) the compulsory taking of possession or acquisition of property is made under a law which makes provision for— (i) prompt payment of fair and adequate compensation, prior to the taking of possession or acquisition of the property; and (ii) a right of access to a court of law by any person who has an interest or right over the property. 27. Right to privacy of person, home and other property. (1) No person shall be subjected to— (a) unlawful search of the person, home or other property of that person; or (b) unlawful entry by others of the premises of that person. (2) No person shall be subjected to interference with the privacy of

that person’s home, correspondence, communication or other property. 28. Right to a fair hearing.

(1) In the determination of civil rights and obligations or any criminal charge, a person shall be entitled to a fair, speedy and public hearing before an independent and impartial court or tribunal established by law. (2) Nothing in clause (1) of this article shall prevent the court or tribunal from excluding the press or the public from all or any proceedings before it for reasons of morality, public order or national security, as may be necessary in a free and democratic society. (3) Every person who is charged with a criminal offence shall— (a) be presumed to be innocent until proved guilty or until that person has pleaded guilty; (b) be informed immediately, in a language that the person understands, of the nature of the offence; (c) be given adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his or her defence; (d) be permitted to appear before the court in person or, at that person’s own expense, by a lawyer of his or her choice; (e) in the case of any offence which carries a sentence of death or imprisonment for life, be entitled to legal representation at the expense of the State; (f) be afforded, without payment by that person, the assistance of an interpreter if that person cannot understand the language used at the trial; (g) be afforded facilities to examine witnesses and to obtain the attendance of other witnesses before the court. (4) Nothing done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with— (a) clause (3)(a) of this article, to the extent that the law in question imposes upon any person charged with a criminal offence, the burden of proving particular facts; (b) clause (3)(g) of this article, to the extent that the law imposes conditions that must be satisfied if witnesses called to testify on behalf of an accused are to be paid their expenses out of public funds. (5) Except with his or her consent, the trial of any person shall not take place in the absence of that person unless the person so conducts himself or herself as to render the continuance of the proceedings in the presence of

that person impracticable and the court makes an order for the person to be removed and the trial to proceed in the absence of that person. (6) A person tried for any criminal offence, or any person authorised by him or her, shall, after the judgment in respect of that offence, be entitled to a copy of the proceedings upon payment of a fee prescribed by law. (7) No person shall be charged with or convicted of a criminal offence which is founded on an act or omission that did not at the time it took place constitute a criminal offence. (8) No penalty shall be imposed for a criminal offence that is severer in degree or description than the maximum penalty that could have been imposed for that offence at the time when it was committed. (9) A person who shows that he or she has been tried by a competent court for a criminal offence and convicted or acquitted of that offence shall not again be tried for the offence or for any other criminal offence of which he or she could have been convicted at the trial for that offence, except upon the order of a superior court in the course of appeal or review proceedings relating to the conviction or acquittal. (10) No person shall be tried for a criminal offence if the person shows that he or she has been pardoned in respect of that offence. (11) Where a person is being tried for a criminal offence, neither that person nor the spouse of that person shall be compelled to give evidence against that person. (12) Except for contempt of court, no person shall be convicted of a criminal offence unless the offence is defined and the penalty for it prescribed by law. 29. Protection of freedom of conscience, expression, movement, religion, assembly and association. (1) Every person shall have the right to— (a) freedom of speech and expression which shall include freedom of the press and other media; (b) freedom of thought, conscience and belief which shall include academic freedom in institutions of learning;

(c) freedom to practise any religion and manifest such practice which shall include the right to belong to and participate in the practices of any religious body or organisation in a manner consistent with this Constitution; (d) freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition; and (e) freedom of association which shall include the freedom to form and join associations or unions, including trade unions and political and other civic organisations. (2) Every Ugandan shall have the right— (a) to move freely throughout Uganda and to reside and settle in any part of Uganda; (b) to enter, leave and return to, Uganda; and (c) to a passport or other travel document. 30. Right to education. All persons have a right to education. 31. Rights of the family. (1) Men and women of the age of eighteen years and above have the right to marry and to found a family and are entitled to equal rights in marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. (2) Parliament shall make appropriate laws for the protection of the rights of widows and widowers to inherit the property of their deceased spouses and to enjoy parental rights over their children. (3) Marriage shall be entered into with the free consent of the man and woman intending to marry. (4) It is the right and duty of parents to care for and bring up their children. (5) Children may not be separated from their families or the persons entitled to bring them up against the will of their families or of those persons, except in accordance with the law. 32. Affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups.

(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them. (2) Parliament shall make relevant laws, including laws for the establishment of an equal opportunities commission, for the purpose of giving full effect to clause (1) of this article. 33. Rights of women. (1) Women shall be accorded full and equal dignity of the person with men. (2) The State shall provide the facilities and opportunities necessary to enhance the welfare of women to enable them to realise their full potential and advancement. (3) The State shall protect women and their rights, taking into account their unique status and natural maternal functions in society. (4) Women shall have the right to equal treatment with men and that right shall include equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities. (5) Without prejudice to article 32 of this Constitution, women shall have the right to affirmative action for the purpose of redressing the imbalances created by history, tradition or custom. (6) Laws, cultures, customs or traditions which are against the dignity, welfare or interest of women or which undermine their status, are prohibited by this Constitution. 34. Rights of children. (1) Subject to laws enacted in their best interests, children shall have the right to know and be cared for by their parents or those entitled by law to bring them up. (2) A child is entitled to basic education which shall be the

responsibility of the State and the parents of the child. (3) No child shall be deprived by any person of medical treatment, education or any other social or economic benefit by reason of religious or other beliefs. (4) Children are entitled to be protected from social or economic exploitation and shall not be employed in or required to perform work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with their education or to be harmful to their health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development. (5) For the purposes of clause (4) of this article, children shall be persons under the age of sixteen years. (6) A child offender who is kept in lawful custody or detention shall be kept separately from adult offenders. (7) The law shall accord special protection to orphans and other vulnerable children. 35. Rights of persons with disabilities. (1) Persons with disabilities have a right to respect and human dignity, and the State and society shall take appropriate measures to ensure that they realise their full mental and physical potential. (2) Parliament shall enact laws appropriate for the protection of persons with disabilities. 36. Protection of rights of minorities. Minorities have a right to participate in decision-making processes, and their views and interests shall be taken into account in the making of national plans and programmes. 37. Right to culture and similar rights. Every person has a right as applicable to belong to, enjoy, practise, profess, maintain and promote any culture, cultural institution, language, tradition, creed or religion in community with others.

38. Civic rights and activities. (1) Every Uganda citizen has the right to participate in the affairs of government, individually or through his or her representatives in accordance with law. (2) Every Ugandan has a right to participate in peaceful activities to influence the policies of government through civic organisations. 39. Right to a clean and healthy environment. Every Ugandan has a right to a clean and healthy environment. 40. Economic rights. (1) Parliament shall enact laws— (a) to provide for the right of persons to work under satisfactory, safe and healthy conditions; (b) to ensure equal payment for equal work without discrimination; and (c) to ensure that every worker is accorded rest and reasonable working hours and periods of holidays with pay, as well as remuneration for public holidays. (2) Every person in Uganda has the right to practise his or her profession and to carry on any lawful occupation, trade or business. (3) Every worker has a right— (a) to form or join a trade union of his or her choice for the promotion and protection of his or her economic and social interests; (b) to collective bargaining and representation; and (c) to withdraw his or her labour according to law. (4) The employer of every woman worker shall accord her protection

during pregnancy and after birth, in accordance with the law. 41. Right of access to information.

(1) Every citizen has a right of access to information in the possession of the State or any other organ or agency of the State except where the release of the information is likely to prejudice the security or sovereignty of the State or interfere with the right to the privacy of any other person. (2) Parliament shall make laws prescribing the classes of information referred to in clause (1) of this article and the procedure for obtaining access to that information. 42. Right to just and fair treatment in administrative decisions. Any person appearing before any administrative official or body has a right to be treated justly and fairly and shall have a right to apply to a court of law in respect of any administrative decision taken against him or her. 43. General limitation on fundamental and other human rights and

freedoms. (1) In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest. (2) Public interest under this article shall not permit— (a) political persecution; (b) detention without trial; (c) any limitation of the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed by this Chapter beyond what is acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society, or what is provided in this Constitution. 44. Prohibition of derogation from particular human rights and

freedoms. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, there shall be no derogation from the enjoyment of the following rights and freedoms— (a) freedom from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; (b) freedom from slavery or servitude; (c) the right to fair hearing; (d) the right to an order of habeas corpus.

45. Human rights and freedoms additional to other rights. The rights, duties, declarations and guarantees relating to the fundamental and other human rights and freedoms specifically mentioned in this Chapter shall not be regarded as excluding others not specifically mentioned. Human rights and freedoms during a state of emergency. 46. Effect of laws enacted for a state of emergency. (1) An Act of Parliament shall not be taken to contravene the rights and freedoms guaranteed in this Chapter, if that Act authorises the taking of measures that are reasonably justifiable for dealing with a state of emergency. (2) The provisions of any enactment other than an Act of Parliament dealing with a state of emergency declared under this Constitution shall apply only to that part of Uganda where the emergency exists. (3) Without prejudice to clause (1) of this article, an Act enacted in accordance with that clause may make provision for the detention of persons where necessary for the purposes of dealing with the emergency. 47. Detention under emergency laws. Where a person is restricted or detained under a law made for the purpose of a state of emergency, the following provisions shall apply— (a) he or she shall, within twenty-four hours after the commencement of the restriction or detention, be furnished with a statement in writing specifying the grounds upon which he or she is restricted or detained; (b) the spouse or next-of-kin of or other person named by the person restricted or detained shall be informed of the restriction or detention and allowed access to the person within seventy-two hours after the commencement of the restriction or detention; (c) not more than thirty days after the commencement of his or her restriction or detention, a notification shall be published in the Gazette and in the media stating that he or she has been restricted or detained and giving particulars of the provisions of the law under which his or her restriction or detention is authorised and the grounds of his or her restriction or detention.

48. Review by the Uganda Human Rights Commission. (1) The Uganda Human Rights Commission shall review the case of a person who is restricted or detained and to whom article 47 of this Constitution applies, not later than twenty-one days after the commencement of the restriction or detention, and after that, at intervals of not more than thirty days. (2) A person who is restricted or detained shall be permitted and afforded every possible facility— (a) to consult a lawyer of his or her choice or any group of persons who shall be permitted to make representations to the Uganda Human Rights Commission for the review of his or her case; (b) to appear in person or by a lawyer of his or her choice at the hearing or review of his or her case. (3) On a review of the case, the Uganda Human Rights Commission

may order the release of that person, or uphold the grounds of the restriction

or detention. 49. Report to Parliament. (1) In every month in which there is a sitting of Parliament, the

Minister responsible shall make a report to Parliament in respect of— (a) the number of persons restricted or detained under the state of emergency; and (b) the action taken in compliance with the findings of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. (2) The Minister responsible shall publish every month in the Gazette

and in the media— (a) the number and names and addresses of the persons restricted or detained; (b) the number of cases reviewed by the Uganda Human Rights Commission; and (c) the action taken in compliance with the findings of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. (3) For the avoidance of doubt, it is declared that at the end of the

emergency declared under this Constitution, any person in or under

restriction, detention or custody as a result of the declaration of emergency

shall be released immediately, unless charged with a criminal offence in a court of law. Enforcement of rights and freedoms by courts. 50. Enforcement of rights and freedoms by courts. (1) Any person who claims that a fundamental or other right or freedom guaranteed under this Constitution has been infringed or threatened, is entitled to apply to a competent court for redress which may include compensation. (2) Any person or organisation may bring an action against the violation of another person’s or group’s human rights. (3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the court may appeal to the appropriate court. (4) Parliament shall make laws for the enforcement of the rights and freedoms under this Chapter. Uganda Human Rights Commission. 51. Uganda Human Rights Commission. (1) There shall be a commission called the Uganda Human Rights Commission. (2) The commission shall be composed of a chairperson and not less than three other persons appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. (3) The chairperson of the commission shall be a judge of the High Court or a person qualified to hold that office. (4) The chairperson and members of the commission shall be persons of high moral character and proven integrity and shall serve for a period of six years and be eligible for reappointment. 52. Functions of the Human Rights Commission.

(1) The commission shall have the following functions— (a) to investigate, at its own initiative or on a complaint made by any person or group of persons against the violation of any human right; (b) to visit jails, prisons, and places of detention or related facilities with a view to assessing and inspecting conditions of the inmates and make recommendations; (c) to establish a continuing programme of research, education and information to enhance respect of human rights; (d) to recommend to Parliament effective measures to promote human rights, including provision of compensation to victims of violations of human rights or their families; (e) to create and sustain within society the awareness of the provisions of this Constitution as the fundamental law of the people of Uganda; (f) to educate and encourage the public to defend this Constitution at all times against all forms of abuse and violation; (g) to formulate, implement and oversee programmes intended to inculcate in the citizens of Uganda awareness of their civic responsibilities and an appreciation of their rights and obligations as free people; (h) to monitor the Government’s compliance with international treaty and convention obligations on human rights; and (i) to perform such other functions as may be provided by law. (2) The Uganda Human Rights Commission shall publish periodic reports on its findings and submit annual reports to Parliament on the state of human rights and freedoms in the country. (3) In the performance of its functions, the Uganda Human Rights Commission shall— (a) establish its operational guidelines and rules of procedure; (b) request the assistance of any department, bureau, office, agency or person in the performance of its functions; and (c) observe the rules of natural justice. 53. Powers of the commission. (1) In the performance of its functions, the commission shall have the powers of a court—

(a) to issue summons or other orders requiring the attendance of any person before the commission and the production of any document or record relevant to any investigation by the commission; (b) to question any person in respect of any subject matter under investigation before the commission; (c) to require any person to disclose any information within his or her knowledge relevant to any investigation by the commission; and (d) to commit persons for contempt of its orders. (2) The commission may, if satisfied that there has been an

infringement of a human right or freedom, order— (a) the release of a detained or restricted person; (b) payment of compensation; or (c) any other legal remedy or redress. (3) A person or authority dissatisfied with an order made by the commission under clause (2) of this article has a right to appeal to the High Court. (4) The commission shall not investigate— (a) any matter which is pending before a court or judicial tribunal; (b) a matter involving the relations or dealings between the Government and the Government of any foreign State or international organisation; or (c) a matter relating to the exercise of the prerogative of mercy. 54. Independence of the commission. Subject to this Constitution, the commission shall be independent and shall not, in the performance of its duties, be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority. 55. Expenses of the commission. (1) The commission shall be self-accounting and all the administrative expenses of the commission, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to persons serving with the commission, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund. (2) The chairperson and other members of the commission shall be

paid such salaries and allowances as Parliament may prescribe. 56. Removal of commissioners. The provisions of this Constitution relating to the removal of a judge of the High Court from office shall, with the necessary modifications, apply to the removal from office of a member of the commission. 57. Staff of the commission. The appointment of the officers and other employees of the commission shall be made by the commission in consultation with the Public Service Commission. 58. Parliament to make laws regarding functions of the commission. Parliament may make laws to regulate and facilitate the performance of the functions of the Uganda Human Rights Commission.

Chapter Five Representation of The People. Right to vote. 59. Right to vote. (1) Every citizen of Uganda of eighteen years of age or above has a right to vote. (2) It is the duty of every citizen of Uganda of eighteen years of age or above to register as a voter for public elections and referenda. (3) The State shall take all necessary steps to ensure that all citizens qualified to vote register and exercise their right to vote. (4) Parliament shall make laws to provide for the facilitation of citizens with disabilities to register and vote. Electoral Commission. 60. Electoral Commission. (1) There shall be an Electoral Commission which shall consist of a chairperson, a deputy chairperson and five other members appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. (2) Members of the commission shall be persons of high moral character, proven integrity and who possess considerable experience and demonstrated competence in the conduct of public affairs. (3) The members of the commission shall hold office for seven years, and their appointment may be renewed for one more term only. (4) If the appointment of a member of the commission is being renewed, the renewal shall be done at least three months before the expiry of the first term. (5) A person holding any of the following offices shall relinquish his or her position in that office on appointment as a member of the commission—

(a) a member of Parliament; (b) a member of a local government council; (c) a member of the executive of a political party or political organisation; or (d) a public officer. (6) Members of the commission shall be paid such emoluments as Parliament may determine. (7) If a member of the commission is absent or dies, the President shall, with the approval of Parliament, appoint a person qualified in terms of this article to act in his or her place until that person is able again to resume his or her duties or, as the case may be, until a new person is appointed to fill the vacancy. (8) A member of the commission may be removed from office by the President only for— (a) inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising out of physical or mental incapacity; (b) misbehaviour or misconduct; or (c) incompetence. 61. Functions of the Electoral Commission. The Electoral Commission shall have the following functions— (a) to ensure that regular, free and fair elections are held; (b) to organise, conduct and supervise elections and referenda in accordance with this Constitution; (c) to demarcate constituencies in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution; (d) to ascertain, publish and declare in writing under its seal the results of the elections and referenda; (e) to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters register; (f) to hear and determine election complaints arising before and during polling; (g) to formulate and implement civic educational programmes relating to elections; and (h) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by Parliament by law.

62. Independence of the commission. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the commission shall be independent and shall, in the performance of its functions, not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority. 63. Constituencies. (1) Subject to clauses (2) and (3) of this article, Uganda shall be divided into as many constituencies for the purpose of election of members of Parliament as Parliament may prescribe; and each constituency shall be represented by one member of Parliament. (2) When demarcating constituencies for the purposes of clause (1) of this article, the Electoral Commission shall ensure that each county, as approved by Parliament, has at least one member of Parliament; except that no constituency shall fall within more than one county. (3) Subject to clause (2) of this article, the boundary of a constituency shall be such that the number of inhabitants in the constituency is, as nearly as possible, equal to the population quota. (4) For the purposes of clause (3) of this article, the number of inhabitants of a constituency may be greater or less than the population quota in order to take account of means of communication, geographical features, density of population, area and boundaries of districts. (5) Subject to clause (1) of this article, the commission shall review the division of Uganda into constituencies within twelve months after the publication of results of a census of the population of Uganda and may as a result redemarcate the constituencies. (6) Where the boundary of a constituency established under this article is altered as a result of a review, the alteration shall come into effect upon the next dissolution of Parliament. (7) For the purposes of this article, “population quota” means the number obtained by dividing the number of inhabitants of Uganda by the number of constituencies into which Uganda is to be divided under this article.

64. Appeals from decisions of the commission. (1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Electoral Commission in respect of any of the complaints referred to in article 61(f) of this Constitution may appeal to the High Court. (2) A person aggrieved by a decision of the commission in respect of a demarcation of a boundary may appeal to a tribunal consisting of three persons appointed by the Chief Justice; and the commission shall give effect to the decision of the tribunal. (3) A person aggrieved by a decision of the tribunal made under clause (2) of this article may appeal to the High Court. (4) A decision of the High Court on an appeal under clause (1) or (3) of this article shall be final. (5) Parliament shall make laws providing for procedure for the expeditious disposal of appeals referred to in this article. 65. Staff of the commission. The appointment of officers and employees of the Electoral Commission shall be made by the commission acting in consultation with the Public Service Commission. 66. Expenses of the commission. (1) Parliament shall ensure that adequate resources and facilities are provided to the commission to enable it to perform its functions effectively. (2) The commission shall be a self-accounting institution and shall deal directly with the Ministry responsible for finance on matters relating to its finances. (3) The administrative expenses of the commission, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of persons serving with the commission, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.

67. Organisation of elections. (1) The Electoral Commission shall ensure that elections are held at times fixed and notified in advance to the public. (2) No candidate in an election shall be denied reasonable access and use of State-owned communication media. (3) All presidential candidates shall be given equal time and space on the State-owned media to present their programmes to the people. (4) Parliament shall make laws regulating the use of public resources and institutions during election campaigns. 68. Voting at elections and referenda. (1) At a public election or referendum, voting shall, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, be by secret ballot using one ballot box at each polling station for all candidates in an election and for all sides in a referendum. (2) Immediately after the close of the poll, the presiding officer shall proceed to count at the polling station, the ballot papers of that station and record the votes cast in favour of each candidate or question. (3) A candidate is entitled to be present in person or through his or her representatives or polling agents at the polling station throughout the period of voting, counting of the votes and ascertaining of the results of the poll. (4) The presiding officer, the candidates or their representatives and in the case of a referendum, the sides contesting or their agents, if any, shall sign and retain a copy of a declaration stating— (a) the polling station; (b) the number of votes cast in favour of each candidate or question, and the presiding officer shall there and then, announce the results of the voting at that polling station before communicating them to the returning officer. (5) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, an issue for

determination by a referendum shall be taken to be determined by a majority

of the votes cast at the referendum. Political systems. 69. Political systems. (1) The people of Uganda shall have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice through free and fair elections or referenda. (2) The political systems referred to in clause (1) of this article shall include— (a) the movement political system; (b) the multiparty political system; and (c) any other democratic and representative political system. 70. Movement political system. (1) The movement political system is broad-based, inclusive and

nonpartisan and shall conform to the following principles— (a) participatory democracy; (b) democracy, accountability and transparency; (c) accessibility to all positions of leadership by all citizens; (d) individual merit as a basis for election to political offices. (2) Parliament may— (a) create organs under the movement political system and define their roles; and (b) prescribe from time to time any other democratic principle of the movement political system, as it may consider necessary. 71. Multiparty political system. A political party in the multiparty political system shall conform to the following principles— (a) every political party shall have a national character; (b) membership of a political party shall not be based on sex, ethnicity, religion or other sectional division; (c) the internal organisation of a political party shall conform to the democratic principles enshrined in this Constitution; (d) members of the national organs of a political party shall be regularly elected from citizens of Uganda in conformity with the

provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this article and with due consideration for gender; (e) political parties shall be required by law to account for the sources and use of their funds and assets; (f) no person shall be compelled to join a particular party by virtue of belonging to an organisation or interest group. 72. Right to form political organisations. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the right to form political parties and any other political organisations is guaranteed. (2) An organisation shall not operate as a political party or organisation unless it conforms to the principles laid down in this Constitution and it is registered. (3) Parliament shall by law regulate the financing and functioning of political organisations. 73. Regulations of political organisations. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, but notwithstanding

the provisions of articles 29(1)(e) and 43 of this Constitution, during the

period when any of the political systems provided for in this Constitution has

been adopted, organisations subscribing to other political systems may exist

subject to such regulations as Parliament shall by law prescribe. (2) Regulations prescribed under this article shall not exceed what

is necessary for enabling the political system adopted to operate. 74. Change of political systems by referenda or elections. (1) A referendum shall be held for the purpose of changing the political system— (a) if requested by a resolution supported by more than half of all members of Parliament; (b) if requested by a resolution supported by the majority of the total membership of each of at least one half of all district councils; or (c) if requested through a petition to the Electoral Commission by at least one-tenth of the registered voters from each of at least two-thirds of the constituencies for which representatives are

required to be directly elected under article 78(1)(a) of this Constitution. (2) The political system may also be changed by the elected representatives of the people in Parliament and district councils by resolution of Parliament supported by not less than two-thirds of all members of Parliament upon a petition to it supported by not less than two-thirds majority of the total membership of each of at least half of all district councils. (3) The resolutions or petitions for the purposes of changing the political system shall be taken only in the fourth year of the term of any Parliament. 75. Prohibition of one-party State. Parliament shall have no power to enact a law establishing a one-party state. General. 76. Parliament to enact laws on elections. Parliament may, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, enact such laws as may be necessary for the purposes of this Chapter, including laws for the registration of voters, the conduct of public elections and referenda and, where necessary, making provision for voting by proxy.

Chapter Six The Legislature. Establishment, composition and functions of Parliament. 77. Parliament of Uganda. (1) There shall be a Parliament of Uganda. (2) The composition and functions of Parliament shall be as prescribed by this Constitution. (3) The term of Parliament shall be five years from the date of its first sitting after a general election. (4) Where there exists a state of war or a state of emergency which would prevent a normal general election from being held, Parliament may, by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of all members of Parliament, extend the life of Parliament for a period not exceeding six months at a time. 78. Composition of Parliament. (1) Parliament shall consist of— (a) members directly elected to represent constituencies; (b) one woman representative for every district; (c) such numbers of representatives of the army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine; and (d) the Vice President and Ministers, who, if not already elected members of Parliament, shall be ex officio members of Parliament without the right to vote on any issue requiring a vote in Parliament. (2) Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under clause (1)(b) and (c) of this article for the purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it. (3) The representatives referred to in clause (1)(a) of this article shall be elected on the basis of universal adult suffrage and by secret ballot.

(4) Parliament shall, by law, prescribe the procedure for elections of representatives referred to in clause (1)(b) and (c) of this article. 79. Functions of Parliament. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. (2) Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or body other than Parliament shall have power to make provisions having the force of law in Uganda except under authority conferred by an Act of Parliament. (3) Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda. 80. Qualifications and disqualifications of members of Parliament. (1) A person is qualified to be a member of Parliament if that

person— (a) is a citizen of Uganda; (b) is a registered voter; and (c) has completed a minimum formal education of Advanced Level standard or its equivalent. (2) A person is not qualified for election as a member of Parliament

if that person— (a) is of unsound mind; (b) is holding or acting in an office the functions of which involve a responsibility for or in connection with the conduct of an election; (c) is a traditional or cultural leader as defined in article 246(6) of this Constitution; (d) has been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in Uganda and has not been discharged; or (e) is under a sentence of death or a sentence of imprisonment exceeding nine months imposed by any competent court without the option of a fine. (3) A person elected to Parliament when he or she is a member of a

local government council or holds a public office shall resign the office before assuming the office of member of Parliament. 81. Election of members of Parliament. (1) A general election of members of Parliament shall be held within thirty days before the expiration of the term of Parliament. (2) Whenever a vacancy exists in Parliament, the Clerk to Parliament shall notify the Electoral Commission in writing within ten days after the vacancy has occurred; and a by-election shall be held within sixty days after the vacancy has occurred. (3) Notwithstanding clause (2) of this article, a by-election shall not be held within six months before the holding of a general election of Parliament. (4) Every person elected to Parliament shall take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and the oath of member of Parliament specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Constitution. (5) Except for the purpose of taking the oaths referred to in clause (4) of this article, no person shall sit or vote in Parliament before taking and subscribing the oaths. 82. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament. (1) There shall be a Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament. (2) The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall be elected by members of Parliament from among their number. (3) A person shall not be qualified to be elected a Speaker or Deputy Speaker if he or she is a Vice President or a Minister. (4) Subject to article 81(4) of this Constitution, no business shall be transacted in Parliament other than an election to the office of Speaker at any time that office is vacant. (5) The Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice shall preside at an election of a Speaker, and the Speaker shall preside at an

election of the Deputy Speaker. (6) An election to the office of Deputy Speaker shall be held at the first sitting of Parliament after that office becomes vacant. (7) The Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall vacate his or her office— (a) if he or she is appointed to any public office; (b) if he or she becomes a Minister; (c) if he or she resigns his or her office by writing signed by him or her addressed to the Clerk to Parliament; (d) if he or she ceases to be a member of Parliament; or (e) if he or she is removed by resolution of Parliament supported by not less than two-thirds of all members of Parliament. (8) The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall receive such salaries, allowances and gratuities as may be prescribed by Parliament. (9) The salaries, allowances and gratuities of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund. (10) The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall each, before assuming the duties of office, take and subscribe the oath of Speaker or Deputy Speaker specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Constitution. 83. Tenure of office of members of Parliament. (1) A member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament— (a) if he or she resigns his or her office in writing signed by him or her and addressed to the Speaker; (b) if such circumstances arise that if that person were not a member of Parliament would cause that person to be disqualified for election as a member of Parliament under article 80 of this Constitution; (c) subject to the provisions of this Constitution, upon dissolution of Parliament; (d) if that person is absent from fifteen sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker during any period when Parliament is continuously meeting and is unable to offer satisfactory explanation to the relevant parliamentary committee for his or her absence;

(e) if that person is found guilty by the appropriate tribunal of violation of the Leadership Code of Conduct and the punishment imposed is or includes the vacation of the office of a member of Parliament; (f) if recalled by the electorate in his or her constituency in accordance with this Constitution; (g) if that person leaves the political party for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament to join another party or to remain in Parliament as an independent member; (h) if, having been elected to Parliament as an independent candidate, that person joins a political party; (i) if that person is appointed a public officer. (2) Notwithstanding clause (1)(g) and (h) of this article, membership of a coalition government of which his or her original political party forms part shall not affect the status of any member of Parliament. (3) The provisions of clauses (1)(g) and (h) and (2) of this article shall only apply during any period when the multiparty system of government is in operation. 84. Right of recall. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the electorate of any constituency and of any interest group referred to in article 78 of this Constitution have the right to recall their member of Parliament before the expiry of the term of Parliament. (2) A member of Parliament may be recalled from that office on any of the following grounds— (a) physical or mental incapacity rendering that member incapable of performing the functions of the office; (b) misconduct or misbehaviour likely to bring hatred, ridicule, contempt or disrepute to the office; or (c) persistent deserting of the electorate without reasonable cause. (3) The recall of a member of Parliament shall be initiated by a petition in writing setting out the grounds relied on and signed by at least two-thirds of the registered voters of the constituency or of the interest group referred to in clause (l) of this article, and shall be delivered to the Speaker.

(4) On receipt of the petition referred to in clause (3) of this article, the Speaker shall, within seven days require the Electoral Commission to conduct a public inquiry into the matters alleged in the petition and the Electoral Commission shall expeditiously conduct the necessary inquiry and report its findings to the Speaker. (5) The Speaker shall— (a) declare the seat vacant, if the Electoral Commission reports that it is satisfied from the inquiry, with the genuineness of the petition; or (b) declare immediately that the petition was unjustified, if the commission reports that it is not satisfied with the genuineness of the petition. (6) Subject to the provisions of clauses (2), (3), (4) and (5) of this

article, Parliament shall, by law prescribe the procedure to be followed for the

recall of a member of Parliament. 85. Emoluments of members of Parliament. (1) A member of Parliament shall be paid such emoluments and such gratuity and shall be provided with such facilities as may be determined by Parliament. (2) A member of Parliament shall not hold any office of profit or emolument likely to compromise his or her office. 86. Determination of questions of membership. (1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any

question whether— (a) a person has been validly elected a member of Parliament or the seat of a member of Parliament has become vacant; or (b) a person has been validly elected as Speaker or Deputy Speaker or having been so elected, has vacated that office. (2) A person aggrieved by the determination of the High Court under

this article may appeal to the Court of Appeal. (3) Parliament shall, by law make provision with respect to—

(a) the persons eligible to apply to the High Court for determination

of any question under this article; and (b) the circumstances and manner in which and the conditions upon which any such application may be made. 87. Clerk to Parliament and other staff. There shall be a public officer designated Clerk to Parliament appointed by the President in consultation with the Public Service Commission and such other members of staff as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of the functions of Parliament. Procedure of Parliament. 88. Quorum of Parliament. (1) The quorum of Parliament shall be one-third of all members of Parliament entitled to vote. (2) The quorum prescribed by clause (1) of this article shall only be required at a time when Parliament is voting on any question. (3) Rules of procedure of Parliament shall prescribe the quorum of Parliament for the conduct of business of Parliament other than for voting. 89. Voting in Parliament. (1) Except as otherwise prescribed by this Constitution or any law consistent with this Constitution, any question proposed for decision of Parliament shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting in a manner prescribed by rules of procedure made by Parliament under article 94 of this Constitution. (2) The person presiding in Parliament shall have neither an original nor a casting vote and if on any question before Parliament the votes are equally divided, the motion shall be lost. 90. Committees of Parliament. (1) Parliament shall appoint standing committees and other committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions.

(2) The committees of Parliament shall include sessional committees and a committee of the whole house. (3) Rules of procedure of Parliament shall prescribe the composition and functions of committees of Parliament. (4) In the exercise of their functions under this article, committees of Parliament— (a) may call any Minister or any person holding public office and private individuals to submit memoranda or appear before them to give evidence; (b) may co-opt any member of Parliament or employ qualified persons to assist them in the discharge of their functions; (c) shall have the powers of the High Court for— (i) enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath, affirmation or otherwise; (ii) compelling the production of documents; and (iii) issuing a commission or request to examine witnesses abroad. 91. Exercise of legislative powers. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised through bills passed by Parliament and assented to by the President. (2) A bill passed by Parliament shall, as soon as possible, be presented to the President for assent. (3) The President shall, within thirty days after a bill is presented to him or her— (a) assent to the bill; (b) return the bill to Parliament with a request that the bill or a particular provision of it be reconsidered by Parliament; or (c) notify the Speaker in writing that he or she refuses to assent to the bill. (4) Where a bill has been returned to Parliament under clause (3)(b) of this article, Parliament shall reconsider it and if passed again, it shall be presented for a second time to the President for assent.

(5) Where the President returns the same bill twice under clause (3)(b) of this article and the bill is passed for the third time, with the support of at least two-thirds of all members of Parliament, the Speaker shall cause a copy of the bill to be laid before Parliament, and the bill shall become law without the assent of the President. (6) Where the President— (a) refuses to assent to a bill under clause (3)(c) of this article, Parliament may reconsider the bill and if passed, the bill shall be presented to the President for assent; (b) refuses to assent to a bill which has been reconsidered and passed under paragraph (a) or clause (4) of this article, the Speaker shall, upon the refusal, if the bill was so passed with the support of at least two-thirds of all members of Parliament, cause a copy of the bill to be laid before Parliament, and the bill shall become law without the assent of the President. (7) Where the President fails to do any of the acts specified in clause (3) of this article within the period prescribed in that clause, the President shall be taken to have assented to the bill and at the expiration of that period, the Speaker shall cause a copy of the bill to be laid before Parliament and the bill shall become law without the assent of the President. (8) A bill passed by Parliament and assented to by the President or which has otherwise become law under this article shall be an Act of Parliament and shall be published in the Gazette. 92. Restriction on retrospective legislation. Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgment of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgment. 93. Restriction on financial matters. Parliament shall not, unless the bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government— (a) proceed upon a bill, including an amendment bill, that makes provision for any of the following— (i) the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction; (ii) the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or

other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction; (iii) the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda of any monies not charged on that fund or any increase in the amount of that payment, issue or withdrawal; or (iv) the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government of Uganda; or (b) proceed upon a motion, including an amendment to a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this article. 94. Rules of procedure in Parliament. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedure, including the procedure of its committees. (2) Parliament may act notwithstanding a vacancy in its membership. (3) The presence or the participation of a person not entitled to be present or to participate in the proceedings of Parliament shall not, by itself, invalidate those proceedings. (4) The rules of procedure of Parliament shall include the following provisions— (a) the Speaker shall determine the order of business in Parliament and shall give priority to Government business; (b) a member of Parliament has the right to move a private member’s bill; (c) the member moving the private member’s bill shall be afforded reasonable assistance by the department of Government whose area of operation is affected by the bill; and (d) the office of the Attorney General shall afford the member moving the private member’s bill professional assistance in the drafting of the bill. 95. Sessions of Parliament. (1) Where a new Parliament is elected, the President shall, by proclamation, appoint the place and a date not beyond seven days after the

expiry of the term of Parliament or of the extended period, as the case may be, for the first sitting of the new Parliament. (2) A session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may, by proclamation, appoint. (3) The Speaker may, after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation. (4) A session of Parliament shall be held at least once a year but the period between one session and the next following session shall be less than twelve months. (5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, at least one-third of all members of Parliament may, in writing signed by them, request a meeting of Parliament; and the Speaker shall summon Parliament to meet within twenty-one days after receipt of the request. 96. Dissolution of Parliament. Parliament shall stand dissolved upon the expiration of its term as prescribed by article 77 of this Constitution. General. 97. Parliamentary immunities and privileges. (1) The Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, members of Parliament and any other person participating or assisting in or acting in connection with or reporting the proceedings of Parliament or any of its committees shall be entitled to such immunities and privileges as Parliament shall by law prescribe. (2) Notwithstanding article 41 of this Constitution, no member or officer of Parliament and no person employed to take minutes of evidence before Parliament or any committee of Parliament shall give evidence elsewhere in respect of the contents of such minutes of evidence or the contents of any document laid before Parliament or any such committee, as the case may be, or in respect of any proceedings or examination held before Parliament or such committee, without the special leave of Parliament first

obtained. (3) The special leave referred to in clause (2) of this article may, during a recess or adjournment of Parliament, be given by the Speaker or in the absence or incapacity of the Speaker or during a dissolution of Parliament, by the Clerk to Parliament.

Chapter Seven The Executive. The President. 98. President of Uganda. (1) There shall be a President of Uganda who shall be the Head of State, Head of Government and Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and the Fountain of Honour. (2) The President shall take precedence over all persons in Uganda, and in descending order, the Vice President, the Speaker and the Chief Justice shall take precedence over all other persons in Uganda. (3) Before assuming the duties of the office of President, a person elected President shall take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and the presidential oath specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Constitution. (4) While holding office, the President shall not be liable to proceedings in any court. (5) Civil or criminal proceedings may be instituted against a person after ceasing to be President, in respect of anything done or omitted to be done in his or her personal capacity before or during the term of office of that person; and any period of limitation in respect of any such proceedings shall not be taken to run during the period while that person was President. 99. Executive authority of Uganda. (1) The executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution and the laws of Uganda. (2) The President shall execute and maintain this Constitution and all laws made under or continued in force by this Constitution. (3) It shall be the duty of the President to abide by, uphold and safeguard this Constitution and the laws of Uganda and to promote the welfare of the citizens and protect the territorial integrity of Uganda.

(4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the functions conferred on the President by clause (1) of this article may be exercised by the President either directly or through officers subordinate to the President. (5) A statutory instrument or other instrument issued by the President or any person authorised by the President may be authenticated by the signature of a Minister; and the validity of any instrument so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not made, issued or executed by the President. 100. Notification of the absence of the President from Uganda. The President shall, whenever leaving Uganda, notify in writing the Vice President, the Speaker and the Chief Justice. 101. Presidential addresses. (1) The President shall, at the beginning of each session of Parliament, deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation. (2) The President may, also, in consultation with the Speaker, address Parliament from time to time, on any matter of national importance. 102. Qualifications of the President. A person is not qualified for election as President unless that person is— (a) a citizen of Uganda by birth; (b) not less than thirty-five years and not more than seventy-five years of age; and (c) a person qualified to be a member of Parliament. 103. Election of the President. (1) The election of the President shall be by universal adult suffrage through a secret ballot. (2) A person shall not be a candidate in a presidential election unless— (a) that person submits to the Electoral Commission on or before the day appointed as nomination day in relation to the election, a document which is signed by that person nominating him or her

as a candidate; and (b) the nomination is supported by one hundred voters in each of at least two-thirds of all the districts in Uganda. (3) The election of the President shall be held during the first thirty

days of the last ninety days before the expiration of the term of the President,

except in the case of— (a) the first election under this Constitution; (b) an election held under article 104(6) of this Constitution; (c) an election held under article 109(2) of this Constitution; and (d) an election necessitated by the fact that a normal presidential election could not be held as a result of the existence of a state of war or a state of emergency, in which case, the election shall be held within such period as Parliament may, by law, prescribe. (4) A candidate shall not be declared elected as President unless the number of votes cast in favour of that candidate at the presidential election is more than 50 percent of valid votes cast at the election. (5) Where at a presidential election no candidate obtains the percentage of votes specified in clause (4) of this article, a second election shall be held within thirty days after the declaration of the results in which election the two candidates who obtained the highest number of votes shall be the only candidates. (6) The candidate who obtains the highest number of votes in an election under clause (5) of this article shall be declared elected President. (7) The Electoral Commission shall ascertain, publish and declare in writing under its seal, the results of the presidential election within forty-eight hours from the close of polling. (8) A person elected President during the term of a President shall assume office within twenty-four hours after the expiration of the term of the predecessor and in any other case, within twenty-four hours after being declared elected as President. (9) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall by law, prescribe the procedure for the election and assumption of office by a President.

104. Challenging a presidential election. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, any aggrieved candidate may petition the Supreme Court for an order that a candidate declared by the Electoral Commission elected as President was not validly elected. (2) A petition under clause (1) of this article shall be lodged in the Supreme Court registry within ten days after the declaration of the election results. (3) The Supreme Court shall inquire into and determine the petition expeditiously and shall declare its findings not later than thirty days from the date the petition is filed. (4) Where no petition is filed within the time prescribed under clause (2) of this article, or where a petition having been filed, is dismissed by the Supreme Court, the candidate declared elected shall conclusively be taken to have been duly elected as President. (5) After due inquiry under clause (3) of this article, the Supreme Court may— (a) dismiss the petition; (b) declare which candidate was validly elected; or (c) annul the election. (6) Where an election is annulled, a fresh election shall be held within twenty days from the date of the annulment. (7) If after a fresh election held under clause (6) of this article there is another petition which succeeds, then the presidential election shall be postponed; and upon the expiry of the term of the incumbent President, the Speaker shall perform the functions of the office of President until a new President is elected and assumes office. (8) For the purposes of this article, article 98(4) of this Constitution shall not apply. (9) Parliament shall make such laws as may be necessary for the purposes of this article, including laws for grounds of annulment and rules of procedure.

105. Tenure of office of a President. (1) A person elected President under this Constitution shall, subject to clause (3) of this article, hold office for a term of five years. (2) A person shall not be elected under this Constitution to hold office as President for more than two terms as prescribed by this article. (3) The office of President shall become vacant— (a) on the expiration of the period specified in this article; or (b) if the incumbent dies or resigns or ceases to hold office under article 107 of this Constitution. (4) The President may, by writing signed by him or her, and addressed to the Chief Justice, resign from office as President. (5) The resignation of the President shall take effect when it is received by the Chief Justice. (6) The Chief Justice shall, immediately upon receiving the resignation of the President under this article, notify the Vice President, the Speaker and the Electoral Commission of the resignation. 106. Terms and conditions of service of the President. (1) The President shall be paid a salary and allowances and afforded such other benefits as Parliament shall by law provide. (2) Parliament shall, by law, make provision for the grant of benefits for a President who ceases to hold office otherwise than by being removed under article 107(1)(a) or (b) of this Constitution. (3) The salary, allowances and other benefits granted to a President under this article shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund. (4) The President is exempted from direct personal taxation on allowances and other benefits except on the official salary. (5) The President shall not hold any other public office other than those conferred by this Constitution or any office of profit or emolument likely to compromise the office of President.

(6) The salary, allowances and other benefits granted to the President under this article shall not be varied to the disadvantage of the President while he or she holds office. (7) The retirement benefits granted to a President under this article shall not be varied to the disadvantage of the President. 107. Removal of the President. (1) The President may be removed from office in accordance with

this article on any of the following grounds— (a) abuse of office or wilful violation of the oath of allegiance and the presidential oath or any provision of this Constitution; (b) misconduct or misbehaviour— (i) that he or she has conducted himself or herself in a manner which brings or is likely to bring the office of President into hatred, ridicule, contempt or disrepute; or (ii) that he or she has dishonestly done any act or omission which is prejudicial or inimical to the economy or security of Uganda; or (c) physical or mental incapacity, namely that he or she is incapable

of performing the functions of his or her office by reason of

physical or mental incapacity. (2) For the purpose of removal of the President under clause (1)(a) or

(b) of this article, a notice in writing signed by not less than one-third of all

the members of Parliament shall be submitted to the Speaker— (a) stating that they intend to move a motion for a resolution in

Parliament for the removal of the President on the charge that the

President has—

(i) wilfully abused his or her office or wilfully violated the oath of allegiance and the presidential oath or any other provision of this Constitution in terms of clause (1)(a) of this article; or (ii) misconducted himself or herself or misbehaved in terms of clause (1)(b) of this article; and (b) setting out the particulars of the charge supported by the

necessary documents on which it is claimed that the conduct of

the President be investigated for the purposes of his or her

removal.

(3) The Speaker shall, within twenty-four hours after receipt of the notice referred to in clause (2) of this article, cause a copy to be transmitted to the President and the Chief Justice. (4) The Chief Justice shall, within seven days after receipt of the notice transmitted under clause (3) of this article, constitute a tribunal comprising three justices of the Supreme Court to investigate the allegation in the notice and to report its findings to Parliament stating whether or not there is a prima facie case for the removal of the President. (5) The President is entitled to appear at the proceedings of the tribunal and to be represented there by a lawyer or other expert or person of his or her choice. (6) If the tribunal determines that there is a prima fac