UT Austin Job Posting - Health Education Coordinator II
Essential Functions

This position will provide strategic guidance for MasculinUT, a comprehensive initiative that aims to promote healthy masculinities on the UT Austin campus through public events, educational workshops, and other forms of student involvement. MasculinUT works to increase acceptance of gender diversity, promote healthy relationships with an emphasis on consent, and prevent interpersonal violence. Though the Healthy Masculinities Coordinator is housed at the UT Austin campus, this position will have responsibility for working with campus liaisons at all UT System academic institutions to provide best practices for engaging men in ending interpersonal violence. This may include traveling to UT System schools, organizing conference calls, and/or providing in-person or web-based training opportunities. Working under the direction of the Associate Director, Prevention and Outreach, at the Counseling and Mental Health Center and with the Voices Against Violence (VAV) team, this position serves as a catalyst and resource for advancing violence prevention efforts on UT System campuses that will include a focus on gender equity and social justice. With support from the VAV team and an assessment coordinator, the Healthy Masculinities Coordinator will provide programmatic guidance for the planning, execution, and development of strategic plans, goals and measurable objectives for advocacy, violence prevention and healthy masculinities programs and services. The coordinator works to forge cross-campus partnerships, facilitate difficult dialogues and will model respectful discourse. The coordinator continues to grow the programs of MasculinUT at the UT Austin campus including facilitating a steering committee of faculty, staff and students. This position may also have the opportunity to create programming and/or content around men's experiences of interpersonal violence. The coordinator role will include a focus on programs that support healthy masculinities to encourage all students to think critically about the impact gender role socialization has on their personal and academic relationships. The coordinator will support student success by promoting campus leadership and involvement, effective bystander behaviors, and the emotional and physical well-being of all students. The coordinator is also responsible for administrative tasks including budgeting and other administrative duties. In partnership with VAV staff, the Healthy Masculinities Coordinator works with the media on requests related to these issues.