Homes for the Holidays Turns 20:

Celebrates 2017 NFL Draft Pick Deshaun Watson!



Twenty years ago this November 25, former NFL Player and Philanthropist, Warrick Dunn welcomed the very first Homes for the Holidays (HFTH) family home in Tampa, Florida. This milestone year is also a special year for a Homes for the Holidays recipient family from Gainesville, Georgia. Former HFTH recipient of the 61st family served by the Charity, Deshaun Watson on January 9, 2017 earned college football’s national title as quarterback of the Clemson Tigers and on Thursday, April 27,2017, he was selected to the National Football League’s Houston Texans.

Just ten years ago Watson, along with his mother and three siblings, joined the Homes for the Holidays family. Since then, WDC has reached more than 150 families in 15 markets. We are so grateful for each donor and friend who has helped us achieve this milestone. We congratulate Deshaun on his monumental accomplishment!

Incredible moment.@DeshaunWatson4 is brought to tears as he reads a letter from his mom. #NFLDraft pic.twitter.com/8Z0QMTfuxT — NFL (@NFL) April 28, 2017

Homes for the Holidays (HFTH) has made homeownership more affordable since 1997. Since its inception, HFTH has provided economically-disadvantaged single parents and their children with comprehensive programming for first-time homeownership. All families are selected through a Habitat for Humanity affiliate and/or homeownership program.

Your contributions open doors to a field of dreams!



In addition to education, nutrition and financial literacy programming, participating families who must demonstrate a commitment to achieving financial independence and stability through homeownership will receive full home furnishings, food and down-payment assistance for their new home.

HFTH was founded under the umbrella of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers community relations department during Warrick Dunn’s first year in the NFL. It extends his late mother’s dream to other single parents working towards first-time homeownership.

15 markets have been served to date:

Atlanta, GA • Tampa/St.Petersburg, FL • Baton Rouge/Lafayette, LA • Tallahassee, FL • Lafayette, LA • Jacksonville, FL • Baltimore, MD • Dallas, TX • Topeka, KS • Newark, NJ • Port Monmouth, NJ • Detroit, MI • Coolidge, AZ • New Orleans, LA • Houston, TX

To help program recipients achieve sustainable futures, support services for families include Count On Your Future, a financial literacy program, SCULPT (nutrition & wellness) and Hearts for Community Service Scholarship Program.