USGS: Volcano Hazards Program YVO Yellowstone
We can't help but notice the comments in social media, and even the ticklers and headlines in the newspapers and blogs. Sometimes, people spread misinformation even when they think they know the facts. With that in mind, here are a few of the common misconceptions regarding the Yellowstone volcanic system:

Misconception #1: When Yellowstone erupts…. it'll be Armageddon. The most likely explosive event to occur at Yellowstone is actually a hydrothermal eruption—a rock-hurling geyser eruption—or a lava flow. Though the worst-case scenario for a giant Yellowstone eruption is indeed bad, and could have global implications, most past eruptions at Yellowstone were not highly explosive. Of the past 50 or so eruptions, almost all were simple lava flows. If they occurred tomorrow, or next year, they would have minimal direct effect outside Yellowstone National Park. This is the most likely volcanic scenario at Yellowstone. You can read our published report discussing the relative likelihood of eruptions at Yellowstone. As for the worst-case scenario, even previous Yellowstone supereruptions did not cause extinctions, and ash fallout on the other side of the continent was minimal.

Misconception #2: The Yellowstone magma chamber is growing. There's no evidence for that one. Though we get better and better at understanding the extent of magma beneath Yellowstone, that doesn't mean the magma storage region is growing. A study, done by scientists at the University of Utah (and colleagues at Caltech and the University of New Mexico), reveals a lot of partly molten rock, but nearly all of it appears too "frozen" to erupt. And no one has found evidence for an increase in the size of the near-surface magma reservoir (the one that feeds the eruptions) within the timeframe that we have been monitoring Yellowstone. Eruptions at Yellowstone are possible, but we have no evidence that enough melt has accumulated in one place to feed a supereruption (1000 cubic kilometers of volcanic debris). Again, if it were to erupt, the most likely type of eruption would be a comparatively non-explosive lava flow.

Misconception #3: Yellowstone is overdue for a supereruption. See #1. If it does erupt, it need not be a large eruption. Moreover, there's no necessity that there will be another supereruption. Most volcanic systems do not have multiple such events. When they do, the supereruptions are not evenly spaced in time. Finally, it is not valid to calculate a recurrence period solely on two values (the two intervals between supereruptions). Therefore, the calculations you may hear stating that Yellowstone is some number of years overdue for a supereruption is mathematically inaccurate.