Man Casually Mows His Lawn as Tornado Swirls Behind Him in Viral Photo
Story Highlights A man mowing his lawn has gone viral after a photo captured him cutting grass during a tornado. He says the storm was farther away than it appears, and he was keeping an eye on it.

A Canadian man’s household chore has gone viral after his wife shared a photo of him mowing the lawn as a massive tornado swirls behind him.

The storm was passing through Three Hills when Cecilia Wessels took the picture. It occurred in Alberta, a province in prairie lands east of the Canadian Rockies. It's a similar environment to what occurs in the Plains of the United States.

"I literally took the picture to show my mum and dad in South Africa, 'Look there's a tornado,' and now everyone is like, 'Why is your husband mowing the lawn?’” Wessels told the Times Colonist.

While her husband was cutting the grass, Cecilia’s daughter woke her up from a nap, upset that something resembling a tornado was outside and her father wouldn’t come back into the house, the Times Colonist reports.

(MORE: Thousands of Caterpillars Cover a Highway as They Swarm Manitoba, Canada)

“We were all worried but at the moment I took the picture the tornado warning had not been issued yet,” Cecilia told weather.com. “The warning only came out about 10 minutes later.”

Her husband, Theunis, said the storm was actually farther away than it appears in the photo and that it had been moving away from them, according to the Times Colonist.

“I was keeping an eye on it,” he said.

Tornadoes are uncommon in South Africa, where the couple hails from. Theunis became familiar with the storms after attending a seminar hosted in Saskatchewan by a storm chaser, Cecilia told weather.com.

There have been no reports of injuries from the tornado, but there were reports of damage to a barn and downed trees, according to the Times Colonist.

Canada averages about 100 tornadoes annually, the second most of any country in the world behind the United States, according to NOAA.

MORE ON WEATHER.COM: May 2017 Canada Flooding