Warrick Dunn Charities
A Better Future

Warrick Dunn Charities was created from the belief that a better future starts with hope. We are dedicated to strengthening and transforming communities by combating poverty, hunger and improving the quality of life for families and children. We help families thrive academically, socially, and economically.

Mission

To provide hope and healing to communities through innovative programming inspired by our Founder’s life journey.

Warrick Dunn Charities, a 501(c)(3) recognized nonprofit, has helped single parents and children thrive academically, socially and economically.

Honoring a Dream

Warrick Dunn started Homes for the Holidays in 1997 during his rookie year with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. The program is a tribute to his mother, Betty Smothers, a Baton Rouge police officer, who as a single-mother of six, worked tirelessly to achieve the American dream of owning her own home.

While working a second job as a security guard, she was ambushed and killed. Ms. Betty was never able to realize her dream.

Warrick Dunn, former all-pro running back and philanthropist, began Homes for the Holidays during his rookie season in the NFL to honor his late mother, Betty Smothers.

Since 1997, thousands of children and families have benefited from programs activated by NFL great Warrick Dunn.

Warrick Dunn Charities’ services provide support in key areas:

Financial Financial literacy and new homeowner support

Educational Post-Secondary Education Scholarships

Social Wellness and other resources for parents and children

Initiatives include efforts to address financial literacy, education, food-insecurity and nutrition & wellness amongst low to moderate-income families.

Warrick Dunn Charities has awarded millions in home furnishings, food and other donations to single-parent families and children across the nation to combat poverty, hunger and ensure families have comfortable surroundings and basic necessities to improve their quality of life.

Board of Directors Leadership Advisory Council