Texas Constitution 2000 Article 2. Limits of Government
Texas Constitution 2000

(in English)

Article 2. Limits of Government

Section 1. Government has no inherent rights or powers, neither implicit nor explicit. This constitution assigns certain functions to the artificial entities called governments created by this constitution and authorizes those artificial entities to take certain actions necessary to accomplish the assigned functions. No national or county government entity or official shall assume any function or authorization not specifically assigned or authorized by this constitution.

Section 2. Government shall never infringe the rights of individuals nor modify any governmental processes, duties, responsibilities, or form of government as specified in this constitution.

Section 3. Government shall never operate outside the limits of a budget which shall never exceed ninety percent of the revenue collected the previous year.

Section 4. Government shall never grant monopolies or perpetuities nor in any way restrict or control the free flow of trade within or across the geographical boundaries of Texas.

Section 5. Government shall never restrict individuals from assembling to train with arms for the individual or collective defense of life, liberty, or property.

Section 6. Government shall never restrict nor control the manufacture, sale, purchase, ownership, use, storage, transportation, or carrying of any arms, parts, accessories, or ammunition.

Section 7. Government shall never issue charters, licenses, certificates of competency, nor any form of recognition or registration for any organization or individual.

Section 8. Government shall never promote, control, nor interfere with any religious or philosophical organization or activity.

Section 9. Government shall never restrict nor control the free flow of ideas using any present or future form or medium of expression.

Section 10. Government shall never invade the privacy of any individual without due process of law.

Section 11. Government shall never operate, own, control, nor fund any means of education not specifically related to performing the functions of government authorized by this constitution.

Section 12. Government shall never infringe the right of the free movement of individuals within or across the geographical boundaries of Texas.

Section 13. Government shall never borrow money nor pledge the assets of individuals or non-governmental organizations.

Section 14. Government shall never offer nor provide gifts, subsidies, or assistance of any kind to any individual, group of individuals, organization, or nation.

Section 15. Government shall never accept gifts, subsidies, or assistance of any kind from any foreign government, organization, or nation.

Section 16. Government shall never issue currency nor cause currency to be issued.

Section 17. No organization established, controlled, employed, or enabled by government shall violate any part of this constitution.

Section 18. Government shall never own title to any real property which is not specifically authorized by this constitution.

Section 19. Government shall never restrict individuals from freely associating or assembling.

Section 20. Government shall never extend payment, credit, gifts, subsidies, endowments, retirement benefits, nor anything else of value or worth to any individual beyond the time of actual service to the government in whatever capacity.

Section 21. Government shall never impose taxation of any kind.

Section 22. Government shall never own subsurface water nor unprocessed minerals of any sort.

Section 23. Government shall never own methods of extracting any mineral, including water, from it's source.

Section 24. Government shall never regulate the use of publicly owned rights of way.

Section 25. Government shall never impose emergency powers nor suspend any part of this constitution, neither in time of war nor for any other reason.

To return to where you were before you started reading the constitution,

just close this window.