OSLO PEACE PROCESS







Secret negotiations held in Oslo between members of the PLO and of the Israeli government which led to a mutual recognition in September 1993. The PLO and Israel then resumed a process of bilateral negotiations supposed to bring a definitive solution in the long-term to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The Declaration of Principles (DOP) - Oslo Agreement - was signed in Washington on 13 September 1993. It gives the general guidelines for the negotiations to come and lays the foundations for a regime of Palestinian autonomy in the West Bank and Gaza for a transitional period of five years. After this period, a permanent settlement based on Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 should enter into force. This settlement shall deal not only with the permanent juridical form of the Palestinian entity but also with Jerusalem, refugees, Israeli settlements, global security arrangements, borders and other matters of common interests.

The Gaza-Jericho Autonomy Agreement - Cairo Agreement or Oslo I Agreement - was signed on 4 May 1994. Gaza-Jericho option is the first stage of Palestinian autonomy. The Israeli military redeployment preceded the setting up of an Authority (the Palestinian National Authority) invested with limited civil and security powers. As agreed in the DOP the transitional period starts with the Israeli military redeployment from Gaza and Jericho (Israel remains in control of the settlements and military locations). This interim period is supposed to last until May 1999.

The Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip - Taba Agreement or Oslo II Agreement - was concluded in Taba on 26 September 1995 and signed in Washington on the 28th. It is the second stage of Palestinian autonomy. This document deals with the complete geographical and material form of Palestinian autonomy:

a/ The West Bank (East-Jerusalem excluded) and the Gaza Strip are divided in three zones :

Area A comprises territories already taken over in May 1994 (Gaza-Jericho) and the six major towns of the West Bank (Jenin, Qalqilya, Tulkaram, Nablus, Ramallah, Bethlehem). Hebron has a special status and is subject to a separate agreement. There is full Palestinian civil jurisdiction and internal security also is in Palestinian hands.

Area B comprises other Arab populated areas of the West Bank (towns, villages and refugees camps). There is a full Palestinian civil jurisdiction, but internal security is under a shared Israeli-Palestinian regime.

Area C comprises Israeli settlements, military locations, state lands and roads. It remains under Israeli civil and overall security control. However, there is a partial Palestinian civil jurisdiction (on Palestinian civil matters not related to territory).

Area A and B respectively represent 7.6% and 21.4% of the West Bank and Gaza and cover more than 90% of the local Palestinian population. Israeli Civil Administration has been dissolved and Israeli military forces redeployed. Israel however keeps overall control over external security.

Area C comprises 71% of the Palestinian territories. Israeli military redeployments from some parts of Area C are expected at six-monthly intervals (during 18 months) after the inauguration of the Autonomy Council.

b/ The election of a Palestinian Autonomy Council is foreseen and its competences determined

Elections were held on 20 January 1996. The Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) and its executive appointed committee, the Palestinian National Authority (PNA), exercise civil powers. All legislation and acts of these Palestinian institutions are automatically transmitted to the Israeli authorities for control.

In accordance with the Taba Agreements, the Israeli army started its phased redeployment from area A in October 1995. It was, except Hebron, completed by the end of 1995 despite the murder of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin by a Jewish extremist on 4 November 1995. Israel's new Prime Minister Shimon Peres halted the negotiations on Hebron until the elections of 29 May 1996. These elections were won by the right-wing Likud leader Benjamin Netanyahu. Likud is basically opposed to the Oslo process but, nevertheless, an agreement on Hebron was reached on 15 January 1997.

Hebron Agreement. Under the terms of this agreement Israel agreed to withdraw from 80% of the city, but retained control over an enclave with 400 settlers and 20,000 Palestinians.

The Hebron agreement was followed in February 1997 by the decision of the Ministerial Committee for Jerusalem To build a new settlement, Har Homa, on the hilltop of Jabal Abu Ghneim in East Jerusalem. This led to a crisis and deadlock in the negotiations on further Israeli withdrawals.

Wye River Memorandum (23 October 1998). After months of stalemate, the American president Bill Clinton decided to force the issue and organised a meeting between Prime Minister Netanyahu and PLO-leader Yasser Arafat at Wye Plantation (Maryland). This resulted in an agreement on Israeli redeployment from 13% of the West Bank. But after a 2% withdrawal near the northern town of Jenin, Netanyahu stopped the process as a result of pressure in Likud and from right-wing and religious parties opposed to any withdrawal. On 21 December 1998 the Knesseth voted for early elections that will be held in May 1999. Until then, the implementation of the Wye River Agreement is suspended.

PERSPECTIVES

This agreement also stipulated the immediate resumption of the final status talks. But they were not resumed. The talks over the final status of the Palestinian territories started formally on 5 May 1996 - the limit set in the Declaration of Principles - but where quickly adjourned despite the fact that they, under the Declaration, should be concluded by 4 May 1999. Palestinian President Arafat threatened several times to declare unilaterally an independent Palestinian state on 4 May if their is no agreement by that time. Israel insists that a Palestinian state can only be the result of negotiations and threatened to annex all territories if Arafat acts unilaterally.

See also:

Madrid peace process

Palestinians

Occupied territories

DOCUMENTS

(January 1999)