Example Fraud E-mails
Following are examples of unauthorized e-mails fraudulently representing themselves as FedEx or as representatives of FedEx. It is important to note that FedEx does not request via unsolicited mail or e-mail payment or personal information in return for goods in transit or in FedEx custody. If you believe that you have received suspicious e-mail, or have any questions or concerns, please contact us immediately at 1.800.GoFedEx 1.800.463.3339 or via e-mail at abuse@fedex.com.





Sent: 3/10/2008 2:29:02 A.M. Pacific Daylight Time

Subj: PAYMENT DETAILS









FEDEX COURIER SERVICE, WEST AFRICA

EDO STATE,NIGERIA

Dear Customer: ,



I have been awaiting for you to contact me for the delivery of your check of $900,000,00. You can as well come down to this branch to pick up your package or even send someone to pick it up on your behalf. More so, the phone number works perfectly and I will advise you cross the number again as it is below this mail.



There is this who came to our company last week to place your check on out going delivery, he already paid for the insurance fee and the delivery charges. But he did not pay for the security keeping fee due to the fact that we did not know when you will be contacting us via mail to inform us that we have your check, so we advised him not to pay for the security keeping fee of the courier company so far but we informed him to contact you on time so you will not have to pay more than $245 USD on demurrage and we do not operate COD on a charge like this.



All you need to do right now to get your check delivered to your door step is to go ahead and pay the security keeping fee of the courier company so far.The fee is $245.00 USD = 130 Pounds only, you are to come up with this fee as to process the delivery of your package.



Payment should be made via western union money transfer only for security purpose, payment details are listed below.



Name:

Address: Benin City, Edo State Nigeria.

Text Question to be used: Relationship?

Text Answer: Friend



You have to send down the MTCN (Money Transfer Control Number) and your complete postal address. Reconfirm your full name, address, country and most important your phone number.



Get back to me with your payment details, I will have to send a mail that you have contacted me regarding the check he left for you. Note that your tracking number would be provided to you as soon as the payment has been made and confirmed by us.



Have a wonderful time. Please call me anytime you need any assistance.



Dispatch Director.



P.S:

Below is the display image of your package on my desk ready for instant dispatchment.











Sent: Tuesday, March 04, 2008 1:18 AM

Subject: CONTACT FEDEX NOW!!!



Good day!



It is my pleasure to inform you that your Confirmable Bank Draft of $1,500,000.00 United States Dollars which my boss kept for you before he left, but i did not heard from you since that time. Then I went to the bank to confirm if the draft has expired or getting near to expire and the Director of the Bank where the check was issued told me that before the draft will get to your hand that it will expire. So I told him to cash the $1,500,000.00 to cash payment to avoid losing this funds under expiration as I will be out of the country for 3 Months Course and I will not come back until end of Oct 2008.



What you have to do now is to contact the FEDEX COURIER COMPANY as soon as possible to know when they will deliver your package to you without delaying. And for your information, I have paid for the delivering Charges.



The only money you will send to the FEDEX Courier Company to deliver your Consignment direct to your postal Address in your country is ($150.00 US) One Hundred & Fifty Dollars only being Security Keeping Fee of the Courier Company so far. Again, don't be deceived by anybody to pay any other money except $150.00 US Dollars. I would have paid that but they said no because they don't know when you will contact them and in case of demurrage.



Now contact the FEDEX COURIER COMPANY immediately for the delivery of your package with this information bellow:



Contact Person:

Email Address:



Finally, make sure that you reconfirm your Postal address and Direct telephone number to them again to avoid any mistake on the Delivery and ask them to give you the tracking number to enable you track your package over there and know when it will get to your address.



Let me repeat again, try to contact them as soon as you receive this mail to avoid any further delay and remember to pay them their Security Keeping fee of ($150.00 US) Dollars for their immediate action.



Note this. The FEDEX COURIER COMPANY don't know the contents of the Box. I registered it as a BOX of African cloths. Don't let them know that the contents of box is money ok this is to avoid them delaying with the BOX.



Yours Faithfully,