Atlas Shrugs: HOW COULD STANLEY ANN DUNHAM HAVE DELIVERED BARACK HUSSEIN OBAMA JR. IN AUGUST OF 1961 IN HONOLULU, WHEN OFFICIAL UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON RECORDS SHOW HER 2680 MILES AWAY IN SEATTLE ATT
A SIMPLE QUESTION: Rudy Schultz – St. Louis MO

HOW COULD STANLEY ANN DUNHAM HAVE DELIVERED BARACK HUSSEIN OBAMA JR. IN AUGUST OF 1961 IN HONOLULU, WHEN OFFICIAL UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON RECORDS SHOW HER 2680 MILES AWAY IN SEATTLE ATTENDING CLASSES THAT SAME MONTH?

As graduation neared for the class of 1960, Stanley “Ann” Dunham (Barack’s mother) had hoped to join many of her classmates at the University of Washington. She was also accepted to the University of Chicago, according to Obama's memoir, the best-selling "Dreams from My Father.", but she popped up instead at the University of Hawaii nearly 6 weeks after the start of the 1960 Fall semester. (See email from U of Hawaii at Manoa below)

In a highly unlikely scenario, she then conceived Barack Hussein Obama Jr. only one month after she started classes Sept 26th 1960. Then, while only two months pregnant in early January 1961, Stanley “Ann” Dunham drops out of college. She then supposedly married Briarack Obama Sr. three months after conception and only four months after arriving in Hawaii. And only 10 months after first arriving in Hawaii, she is back at the University of Washington, 2680 miles away. (See email from U of Washington below). Contrary to a massive disinformation scheme by the Obama campaign and the news media, Stanley Ann Dunham did not return to the U of Hawaii until Barack Obama Sr. left the island.

Madelyn Dunham, Barack’s maternal grandmother, abruptly left a lucrative career in Seattle WA as VP Bank Officer in the late summer of 1960 to work in Hawaii as an hourly wage bank teller. This afforded her time to raise Barack Hussein Obama Jr. from birth. Madelyn reportedly did not return to her previous salaried banker management level until years later when Ann snatched Barack Jr. to go to Indonesia.

Barack Hussein Obama Jr’s mother, Stanley “Ann” Dunham, gave a telling admission while still in Washington State as a recent high school graduate in the summer of 1960 when she told her friends: "I don’t need to date or marry to have children”. Oddly, although Barack Hussein Obama Sr. was already married with children in Kenya, Ann supposedly married him in order to legitimize her child’s birth.

HERE IS A MORE PLAUSIBLE THEORY:

Drunk on radical ideology, Stanley “Ann” Dunham became pregnant in the summer of 1960 in Seattle WA with the baby of a prominent black liberal activist. But in 1960, unmarried parents and children suffered penalties ranging from confinement in isolated maternity homes to parental rejection and community disapproval. To be “illegitimate” was to be shamed and shunned and labeled as immoral. The belief that children born out of wedlock posed significant social and public health problems was widespread. In the case of mixed race children, perceptions of illegitimacy were compounded by legal segregation in education, housing, employment, and voting. Recall that it wasn’t until 1965 that The National Voting Rights Act was passed to outlaw discriminatory voting practices that had been responsible for the widespread disenfranchisement of African Americans. Laws against interracial marriage and interracial sex existed in several US states and US territories until a Supreme Court decision in 1967.

With racial unrest at its peak, the Dunham’s wanted to move as far away as possible from their predominantly white conservative community to allow Ann to have her illegitimate child in relative obscurity. So the Dunham’s abruptly moved to the new state of Hawaii (Aug of 1959) where whites were the minority and a mixed race child would be more accepted. In a 1959 interview with the Honolulu Star-Bulletin, Obama Sr. described the absence of racial prejudice in Hawaii as "unique." No one, he marveled, "seems to be conscious of color." Obama Sr’s perceptions of race relations in Hawaii were that he thought it "rather strange ... even rather amusing, to see Caucasians discriminated against here."

In the early 1960’s there were noticeable very few African Americans on the streets of Honolulu, and Obama Sr. was the only Black man from Africa on the island. Ann Dunham, in an effort to legitimize her mixed race baby, would have sought out one of the only black men on the island to convince him to use his name. And so Barack Hussein Obama Sr. was likely pressed into service as father and husband in name only. Barack Sr. had no moral objections because to gain recognition in the Kenyan community, one needed to be polygamous. Polygamy enhanced your status, and symbolized that you were a wealthy man. Obama Sr’s name on the certificate of birth would legitimize the birth, and conceal the identity of the true father…a win-win for all parties.

Barack Sr. was being paid by a key member of the Laubach Literacy Institute (LLI). The LLI had links to the Nation of Islam and embraced a Pan-African styled philosophy. Pan-Africanism is a sociopolitical world view, and philosophy, as well as a movement, which seeks to unify both native Africans and those of the African descent, as part of a "global African community”. This separatist style philosophy was embraced by Malcolm X and the NOI and is still being preached at Trinity Church in Chicago famously by former leader Rev. Wright (Obama Jr’s pastor for 20 years). LLI’s even more ambitious goal was to make the concept of sovereign nations with borders obsolete. This would be done through “peaceful social change” as stated on their website.

Ann Dunham’s mortified family was determined to give their wayward daughter a second chance to find a normal life by raising Barack Hussein Obama Jr. for her, and allowing her to return to her collegiate life. Immediately upon her child’s birth supposedly in August of 1961, Ann left her supposed new husband and only days old Barack Hussein Obama Jr. behind in Hawaii to be raised by his grandmother. Ann flew back to Washington State to help stir the anti-establishment cauldron of socialists, communists, civil rights and self defense organizations including the Nation of Islam, and the Black Panther Party, which were boiling over in Seattle…and possibly visit the baby’s real father. She started classes at the U of Washington in Aug 1961, the same month she supposedly had Barack Hussein Obama Jr. in Honolulu. This explains why none of Barrack Hussein Obama Sr.’s friends from Hawaii remember Ann or Barrack Obama Jr. When Obama Sr. left Hawaii in 1962, he never mentioned Ann Dunham or Barack Hussein Obama Jr. to even his closest friends. Obama Jr. has never produced records of his supposed parent’s marriage or divorce most likely because they don’t exist.

STARTING AT THE BEGINNING

Barack Hussein Obama Sr Barack Hussein Obama Jr. Malcolm X

Ht: Approx. 5’-10” Ht: Approx. 6’-2” Ht: Approx. 6’-3”

New York / Chicago

1925: Malcolm X was born Malcolm Little on May 19, 1925 in Omaha, Nebraska. By the time he was 13, his father had died and his mother had been committed to a mental hospital. After living in a series of foster homes, Malcolm X became involved in the criminal underworld in Boston and New York. In 1945, Malcolm X was sentenced to eight to ten years in prison. After his release from prison in 1952, Little visited Elijah Muhammad, the leader of the Nation of Islam, in Chicago, Illinois. Kenya

1930: Tom Mboya was born about Aug. 15, 1930, at Kilima Mbogu, near Nairobi Kenya, where his father, a Luo tribesman from Rusinga Island in Lake Victoria, was employed on a European sisal estate.

Barack Hussein Obama Sr.

1936: Barack Hussein Obama (Sr.) was born in 1936 on the shores of Lake Victoria in Nyang’oma Kogelo, Siaya District, Kenya.

Kansas

1942: Stanley Ann Dunham (Barack Obama’s mother) was born in Fort Leavenworth KS New York

1935: Dr. Frank Laubach, an American missionary saw poverty, injustice and illiteracy as impediments to world peace. He developed the "Each One Teach One" literacy program. Dr. Laubach also demonstrated that literacy is an effective means for positive community mobilization and change.

1951: LAUBACH, FRANK C. “Wake Up Or Blow Up: America: Lift the World Or Lose It!” New York, Fleming H. Revell,.

1955: Frank Charles Laubach founded “Laubach Literacy International” (LLI) which was headquartered in New York State and serving Africa, the Middle East, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean The objectives of LLI were to form partnerships for literacy, community development and peaceful social change. Dr. Laubach felt that World peace is a future ideal of freedom, peace and happiness among and within all nations. “The realization of world peace may also make the idea of individual nations obsolete.” LLI’s stated goal is identical to Marxism, which states that communism is the final stage in human society and is both classless and stateless.

The LLI was formed during an era when states required voters to meet minimum qualifications, such as passing literacy tests, in order to register to vote: a principal means by which southern states had prevented African-Americans from voting (to disenfranchise voters). Frank Laubach and Elijah Mohammed of the Nation of Islam both felt that minorities must learn to read to realize their goal of Pan-African social change. It is widely known that Malcolm Little (later Malcolm X), introduced to Nation of Islam (NOI) philosophy while in prison, spent his days memorizing the dictionary. In the context of illiterate blacks not being allowed to vote, LLI, NOI and Kenya became linked by their common goal to empower blacks to enact social change through literacy and advanced education.

Laubach Literacy International (LLI) and Literacy Volunteers of America, Inc. (LVA) merged to form ProLiteracy Worldwide in August 2002 and counts Bill Gates (Obama supporter) as a principal financial backer.

Washington

1955: Madelyn and Stanley Dunham (Barack’s maternal grandparents) moved to Seattle, Washington where Stanley Dunham worked at the downtown Standard-Grunbaum Furniture store.

Right-to-left: Madelyn Payne Dunham and Stanley Armour Dunham with their daughter Ann Dunham

1956: They moved to Mercer Island so that 13-year old Ann could attend the high school that had just opened, Mercer Island was then "a rural, idyllic place," quiet, and politically conservative. As a suburb, Mercer Island was still in its infancy. The 1950 census counted about 5,000 people, almost all white, but Mercer Island High School was a hotbed of radical indoctrination with ties to the Communist Party. Some parents protested the school’s politics, but not the Dunhams. They had abandoned their conservative religious ties and began attending a Unitarian church which the locals called ‘the little Red church on the hill.’

Mercer Island High School was a hotbed of pro-Marxist radical teachers. John Stenhouse, board member, told the House Un-American Activities Subcommittee that he had been a member of the Communist Party USA and this school has a number of Marxists on its staff. Two teachers at this school, Val Foubert and Jim Wichterman, both Frankfurt School style Marxists, taught a critical theory curriculum to students which included; rejection of societal norms and questioning authority, attacks on Christianity, the traditional family, and assigned readings by Karl Marx. The hallway between Foubert’s and Wichterman classrooms were called ‘anarchy ally.’

Barack Obama Jr’s mom, Stanley “Ann” Dunham took the lessons to heart. Dunham has been described by her friends as ‘a fellow traveler’ meaning ‘a communist sympathizer.’ Stanley “Ann” Dunham thrived in the environment, Wichterman said. "As much as a high-school student can, she'd question anything: What's so good about democracy? What's so good about capitalism? What's wrong with communism? What's good about communism?" Wichterman said. "She had what I call an inquiring mind."

Stanley “Ann” Dunham’s High School Sophomore Photo 1958

1959/1960: Malcolm X’s candid and often irreverent political views made him the most interviewed African-American leader by the press and the second-most sought-after college speaker. Malcolm X made many trips to the West Coast to speak at colleges like UC Berkeley and U Washington.

As graduation neared for the class of 1960, Dunham had hoped to join many of her classmates at the University of Washington, and she was also accepted to the University of Chicago, according to Obama's memoir, the best-selling "Dreams from My Father."

Kenya to Hawaii

1959 Malcolm X travels to Middle East and Africa including Kenya. Malcolm X meets with Jomo Kenyatta (recently released from prison following his conviction on leading the Mau Mau Rebellion), Tom Mboya, and may have met Barack Hussein Obama Sr, who was Mboya’s close confident and fellow Luo tribesman both from Lake Victoria.

Due to a program offering Western educational opportunities to outstanding Kenyan students that was organized by nationalist leader Tom Mboya, Obama Sr. was awarded a scholarship in economics, and at the age of 23 (1959) he enrolled at the University of Hawaii. Initial financial supporters of the program included Harry Belafonte, Sidney Poitier, Jackie Robinson, and Elizabeth Mooney Kirk, a literacy advocate who provided most of the financial support for Obama Senior's early years in the United States. Elizabeth Mooney Kirk worked in Kenya and in concert with Jomo Kenyatta and Tom Mboya. Kirk and Malcolm X, both New Yorkers, would have certainly met in Kenya. Kirk co-authored many books with Frank Charles Laubach, founder of LLI.

Aside: Contrary to Obama's claims in speeches in January at American University and in Selma last year, the Kennedy family did not provide the funding for a September 1959 airlift of 81 Kenyan students to the United States that included Obama's father

Hawaii

1960: Purportedly, Ann Dunham became pregnant approx. Nov 1st, 1960 while still 17 years old. While only 3 months pregnant, on February 2, 1961, Obama purportedly married a fellow student in , Hawaii. Their son, Barack Obama II, was purportedly born on August 4, 1961. Records from the U of Hawaii and U of Washington make these dates very unlikely.

“The University of Hawaii at Manoa is only able to provide the following information for Stanley Ann Dunham:

Dates of attendance:

Fall 1960 (First day of instruction 9/26/1960)

Spring 1963 - Summer 1966

Fall 1972 - Fall 1974



Spring 1978

Fall 1984 - Summer 1992



Degrees awarded:

BA - Mathematics, Summer 1967 (August 6, 1967)

MA - Anthropology, Fall 1983 (December 18, 1983)

PhD - Anthropology, Summer 1992 (August 9, 1992)



Sincerely,

Stuart Lau”

****************************************

Stuart Lau

University Registrar

Office of Admissions and Records

University of Hawaii at Manoa

Ph: (808) 956-8010

****************************************

Members of the snack bar crowd at University of Hawaii don’t remember the Obama-Dunham relationship. Hal Abercrombie said he never saw them together. Pake Zane could not recall Ann from those days but had precise memories of Obama.

August of 1961: The same month that Obama Jr’s birth certificate says he was born in Hawaii, the University of Washington shows his mom Stanley “Ann” Dunham attending classes in Seattle nearly 2680 miles away from Honolulu. She was enrolled in the UW and lived in an apartment on Capitol Hill. This explains why Obama Sr’s friends in Hawaii don’t remember her.

Ms. Stanley Ann Dunham was enrolled at the University of Washington for:

Autumn 1961

Winter 1962

Spring 1962



The records responsive to your request from the University of Washington are above as provided by the Public Disclosure Laws of Washington State. This concludes the University’s response to your Public Records request. Please feel free to contact our office if you have any questions or concerns.

Madolyne Lawson

Office of Public Records

206-543-9180



LLI’s Elizabeth Mooney Kirk wrote to Tom Mboya in May 1962 to request additional funds to "sponsor Barack Obama for graduate study, preferably at Harvard." She said she would "like to do more" to assist the young man but had two stepchildren ready for college. Kirk’s letter worked and Obama Sr. was offered a scholarship (from Tom Mboya in Kenya) to pursue a doctorate at Harvard. Obama Sr. graduated from the University of Hawaii with honors in June 1962. A story in the Star-Bulletin on the day he left, June 22 1962, said Obama planned a several-weeks grand tour of mainland universities before he arrived at Harvard to study economics on a graduate faculty fellowship. The story did not mention that he had a wife and an infant son. Obama arrived in Cambridge on a brisk fall day in 1962, not returning to Hawaii until Dec 1971.

Stanley “Ann” Dunham and Barack Hussein Obama Jr.

Stanley “Ann” Dunham returned to Hawaii after Barack Hussein Obama Sr. left the island, and resumed her study of Mathematics in the Spring of 1963 at the University of Hawaii at Manoa.

1965: On his return to Kenya, Obama Sr. was hired by an US oil company and then served as an economist in the Ministry of Transportation, and later became senior economist in the Kenyan Ministry of Finance. The mass airlifts of Kenyan students to the United States had a "huge" impact on the young African nation, which gained its independence from Britain in 1963. A University of Nairobi study showed that 70 percent of top Kenyan officials after independence, including Obama Sr., were products of the American program. LLI was proud of their part in this social change.

Barack Hussein Obama Sr’s trip to Honolulu in Dec 1971 was bracketed by two trips that Obama's old snack bar friends from the University of Hawaii made to see him in Kenya. Late in 1968, Neil Abercrombie and Pake Zane traveled through Nairobi on a year-long backpacking trip around the world and stayed with Obama for several days before they made their way on to the port city of Mombasa and to India. No mention was made of Stanley “Ann” Dunham or Barack Hussein Obama Jr. Neil Abercrombie is now Hawaii State’s 1st district Representative in the US Congress. He is a member of the Congressional Progressive Caucus who until 1999, worked in open partnership with Democratic Socialists of America. Pake Zane runs a store called Antique Alley in Hawaii. Although in the 1960’s Hawaii offered a diverse cultural mix, native Hawaiian Pake Zane recalls that “He (Obama Sr.) was the first real black man I ever met”.

Neil Abercrombie Pake Zane

The sad truth for Barack Hussein Obama Jr, is that Obama Sr didn’t return to Hawaii in December 1971 to see his son, but rather to go party with his friends Neil and Pake. That is why there aren’t any pictures of Obama Jr. with his dad as an infant, nor are there any pictures of the Dunham grandparents and Obama Sr. Sadly the only picture from when Obama Jr’s dad returned to Hawaii is at the airport while Obama Sr. waited for his luggage.

Stanley “Ann” Dunham was absolutely determined to continue the charade. Ann and Barack Jr. took turns taking pictures of themselves with Obama Sr.

Kenya

1964 Oct 18th Malcolm X Flies from Dar es Salaam to Kenya with Kenyan President Jomo Kenyatta and Ugandan Milton Obote. Barack Hussein Obama Sr. left Harvard and the USA to work for Tom Mboya in the Ministry of Economic Planning under Jomo Kenyatta’s presidency in Kenya.

Tom Mboya



1966: Oginga Odinga was a Luo Chief, who became a prominent figure in Kenya's struggle for independence. He later served as Kenya's first Vice-President, and thereafter as opposition leader. The ‘radical’ wing, represented by Oginga Odinga (?1911–94), demanded a more equitable wealth distribution and a policy of nationalization as the best means of achieving this end; but the ‘conservative’ viewpoint, as expressed by Tom Mboya, was that Kenya would be jeopardizing its export capacity and potential by such severe measures. The ideological debate became first a political rift and then an open clash ending in Mboya’s assassination in 1969. Obama Sr. was near the assassination and testified at the assassin’s trial. Obama Sr’s testimony essentially ended his political career, and caused a hit and run assassination attempt on his life.

Tragically, Barack Hussein Obama Sr risked his life and sacrificed his career to support the memory of his friend Tom Mboya, and then 40 years later Barack Hussein Obama Jr. stomped on his father’s valor by campaigned for Raila Odinga: Oginga Odingo’s son. Raila Odinga wanted to bring the country under Sharia law, kick out the Western investors in the nation that had made it one of the most stable nations in Africa, and supplant those Western investors with wealthy Arab oil money. More on this later.

Philip Ochieng — is a Kenyan Luo, and an Editor with the Nation Media Group. Like Obama Senior, he too went to the US on the famous Tom Mboya Airlift of 1959 [when hundreds of Kenyan students were given scholarships to American universities]. He first met Obama Senior in 1958 in Tom Mboya’s Nairobi office [Mboya was then the secretary general of the Kenya Federation of Labour]. Obama and Ochieng met up again in 1965 on returning to Nairobi and remained drinking buddies for many years.

Ochieng states: “By seeking to enter white America's centre of power, Barack Obama Jr., who is almost certain to become a US Senator in this week’s elections, may himself be accused of surrender to a "democracy" that is in essence an "elective tyranny," the white liberal's political prescription for perpetuating an economic-intellectual system that dehumanises the black person. “

The physical mannerisms and speech cadence and tonal quality of Malcolm X have an uncanny resemblance to Barack Hussein Obama Jr. Check it out.

You Tube: MALCOLM X: I Have No Fear of Anybody or Anything

SO WHAT WAS HAPPENING IN SEATTLE THE SUMMER ANN DUNHAM GRADUATED HIGH SCHOOL? 1960: Though Seattle’s black population had been historically small, the city had been no stranger to racial problems. Many of Seattle’s blacks fought back in one form or another, some by participating in civil rights and self defense organizations including the NAACP, the National Urban League, the Universal Negro Improvement Association, the Congress of Racial Equality, and the National Negro Congress, the Nation of Islam, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, and the Black Panther Party.

Malcolm X utilized newspaper columns, as well as radio and television to communicate the NOI's message across the United States including Seattle. He proved to be a brilliant, powerful orator who attracted huge crowds on the university lecture circuit. His charisma, drive and conviction attracted an astounding number of new members. Malcolm was largely credited with increasing membership in the NOI from 500 in 1952 to 30,000 in 1963.

1960: Stanley Ann Dunham graduates high school and Malcolm X forms the Nation of Islam Temple No.67 - Seattle, Wash. - 5943 Empire Way

1961: Martin Luther King held a march during his visit to Seattle. This is the same year, that immediately upon the birth of her child in Hawaii, Stanley Ann Dunham returned to Seattle. Stokely Carmichael, of the Black Panther Party, also spoke in Seattle. Black college students, learning to be middle class Negro capitalists, heard the vision of Black Power and were transformed into Black Revolutionary Socialists. 1962: The doctrine taught by Fard Muhammad, founder of the Nation of Islam, and his successor Elijah Mohammed, was widely viewed as a black separatist doctrine. The NOI taught that blacks were the original people on the Earth and had been tricked out of their power, conquered and oppressed by the Caucasian people via a global system of white supremacy. He further taught that the white race was produced through a series of genetic breeding experiments conducted by a Mr. Yakub.

1963 Nation of Islam orders Malcolm X to be silent, allegedly because of remarks concerning President Kennedy's assassination. On December 1, 1963, when he was asked for a comment about the assassination of President Kennedy, Malcolm X said that it was a case of "chickens coming home to roost".

March, 1964 Certain contradictions gnawed at Malcolm X: the incredible teachings about the Mother Plane (The Wheel), Martians and "Mr. Yakub" (founder of the white race), the doctrine that white people are irredeemably evil and there is nothing they can do to change. Malcolm X leaves the Nation of Islam and starts his new organization, Muslim Mosque, Inc.

April, 1964 Malcolm X Travels to Middle East and Africa. To undergird his religious beliefs in opening his own mosque, Malcolm took a pilgrimage to the Islamic holy land of Mecca, Saudi Arabia. In Kenya, He meets with Jomo Kenyatta, and Tom Mboya (Obama Sr’s sponsor). The LLI’s Elizabeth Mooney Kirk (Barack Hussein Obama’s benefactor) was also active in Kenya this year.

During his travels, he encountered worshipers of Islam of all colors who embraced him in the brotherhood of the Muslim orthodox faith. This pilgrimage awakened a new world, one of political unity and economic development between Blacks around the globe (Pan-Africanism), as well as social peace with whites. He turned away from the divisive canons on Black-white human genesis and racial stereotypes underpinning the theology of the Nation. Malcolm X returned to the United States with a new outlook on integration and a new hope for the future. This time when Malcolm spoke, instead of just preaching to African-Americans, he had a message for all races.

Enflamed by the hate speech of Louis Farrakhan, members of the Nation of Islam gunned down Malcolm X in his new mosque. Fifteen hundred people attended Malcolm's funeral in Harlem on February 27, 1965 at the Faith Temple Church of God in Christ.

Barack Hussein Obama Jr Malcolm X Barack Hussein Obama Sr. Barack Hussein Obama Sr., Tom Mboya, and Philip Ochieng, all share common physical features of the Kenyan Luo tribe: Modest stature under six feet, round faces, small chins, wide set eyes, slanted back foreheads, and retracted hairlines…none of these features are shared by Malcolm X and Barack Hussein Obama Jr.

BY NOW YOU ARE ASKING “WHAT DIFFERENCE DOES IT MAKE WHO FATHERED BARACK OBAMA JR?” THE ANSWER IS BECAUSE BARACK OBAMA JR WENT TO CHICAGO TO FIND HIS IDENTITY … AND HERE IS WHAT HE FOUND:

BARACK HUSSEIN OBAMA JR. GOES TO CHICAGO

Barack Obama Jr. melds into the radical remnants of the social fabric left by Malcolm X. The crosscurrents appealed to Obama. Obama was drawn to the writings of the influential American Muslim who served as the spokesman for the militant Nation of Islam. Obama wrote in Dreams of My Father, “Malcolm X’s autobiography seemed to offer something different.” Continuing the beliefs of his mother, he begins his career with community organizing with communistic intent. Obama Jr. came to believe that the church could not only compensate for the limitations of Alinsky-style organizing but could help answer the nagging identity problem he had come to Chicago to solve.

Saul Alinsky wrote Rules for Radicals (his final work, published in 1971 one year before his death), he addressed the 1960s generation of radicals, outlining his views on organizing for mass power. In the first chapter, opening paragraph of the book Alinsky writes, "What follows is for those who want to change the world from what it is to what they believe it should be. The Prince was written by Machiavelli for the Haves on how to hold power. Rules for Radicals is written for the Have-Nots on how to take it away".[ At the heart of the Alinsky method is the concept of "agitation"--making someone angry enough about the rotten state of his life (eg. The Economy) that he agrees to take action to “change” it; or, as Alinsky himself described the job, to "rub raw the sores of discontent."

When Alinsky would ask new students why they wanted to organize, they would invariably respond with selfless bromides about wanting to help others. Alinsky would then scream back at them that there was a one-word answer: "You want to organize for power!"

BARACK SETTLED INTO HYDE PARK CHICAGO IL, THE WORLD HEADQUARTERS FOR THE NATION OF ISLAM, WHOSE OTHER NOTABLE RESIDENTS INCLUDE:

1 - Elijah Muhammad (leader of the Nation of Islam until his death in 1975)

Elijah Muhammad, says blacks were "born righteous and turned to unrighteousness," while the white race was "made unrighteous by the god who made them.

Dr. Abdul Alim Muhammad, who is head of the Nation of Islam mosque in Washington, D.C., and also the NOI Minister of Health and Human Services, told a black audience in 1992 that they could find "healing" in killing white people: "When you let [your anger and anxiety] out, there's healing in that. And if in the process, some of your oppressors and slavemasters die, so what? Everybody has to die some time, don't they? So why shouldn't your slavemaster die now? They got to die anyhow!"

At this point, the congregation responded with their agreement. "If you're white today, it ain't worth living anyhow," Alim said. "Would you shoot a dog and put it out of its misery? Or a horse? Well, certainly white people is equal to dogs and horses."

Barack hires numerous Nation of Islam members as part of his campaign staff. Sen. Barack Obama employed and continues to employ senior staffers who belong to the Nation of Islam, and the presidential candidate has some "worrying" ties to the controversial group headed by Louis Farrakhan.

Of particular concern is that Obama employed at least two Nation of Islam activists in his early days as a state senator, when his office was staffed by only three or four staffers"

2 - William Ayers (Founder of the Weather Underground who set bombs off at the Pentagon)

Barack Obama ran the Annenberg Challenge at 115 Sangamon in Chicago for several years: The Chicago Annenberg Challenge (CAC), was a “$100,000,000.00 failure” in improving the failing Chicago schools. Bill Ayers (Weatherman Underground terrorist) was the founder of the CAC. The Challenge Board was chaired by Obama, and he also served as President of the Challenge. Obama also served with Ayers on the Woods Fund. Aside from the fact there are matters still to be explored as to where the CAC’s money and the Woods Fund money was filtered, it appears that Rev. Meeks, Fr. Pfleger, Rev. Wright and Trinity United Church of Christ may all have been recipients of Obama/Ayers fund money.

Ayers, who still serves on the Woods Fund board, contributed to Obama's senatorial campaign fund and has served on panels with Obama at numerous public speaking engagements. Ayers admitted to involvement in the bombings of U.S. governmental buildings in the 1970s. He is a professor at the University of Illinois at Chicago.

Ayers boasted of his involvement with the Weathermen terror group's bombings of the New York City Police headquarters in 1970, the Capitol in 1971 and the Pentagon in 1972. "I don't regret setting bombs. I feel we didn't do enough," Ayers told the New York Times in an interview released Sept. 11, 2001 When asked, ‘So would you do it all again?’ he answered “I don’t want to discount the possibility.” Ayers was a close associate of Obama, they served together on the Woods Fund and the Chicago Anneberg Challenge that dealt with millions of dollars, and Obama began his political career in his living room.

Terrorist Bill Ayers ran the Small Schools Workshop, the one Obama directed over hundreds of thousands of dollars to which is located at 115 S. Sangamon Street in Chicago on the University of Illinois Chicago Campus:

Barack Obama told George Stephanopoulos during the ABC democratic primary debate in April that "Bill Ayers" was just "a guy who lives in my neighborhood." But Barack Obama and terrorist Bill Ayers and Maoist hardliner Mike Klonsky actually shared the same office building- on the same floor- for several years!

3 - Michael Klonsky

Michael Klonsky (born 1943) is an American educator and political activist, a leader of the New Communist Movement. In the 1970s he headed the Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist) in which role he was one of the first westerners allowed to visit the People's Republic of China. Between 1979 and 1981, Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist) (CPML) chairman and Obama supporter Mike Klonsky was repeatedly feted with state-dinner-level visits to Beijing.

Klonsky belonged to the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) and was best friends with William Ayers and Bernadine Dohrn who later became famous for their acts of terrorism when the SDS broke up and the Weathermen terror group was formed. More recently Klonsky has been a professor of education at the University of Illinois, Chicago; his academic work focused on small school size as a solution to the problems of inner city schools. He is now the director of the Small Schools Workshop, a school outreach program associated with UIC.

Mike Klonsky, the communist Maoist Hardliner, Obama supporter and former best friend of the Weatherman terrorist group founders William Ayers and Bernadine Dohrn, received a $175,000 grant from the William Ayers/Barack Obama-led Annenberg Challenge to run the Small Schools Workshop. Barack Hussein Obama Jr. shared offices on the same floor of the building with these radicals.

115 South Sangamon in Chicago

4 - Bernardine Dohrn (Leader of the Weather Underground) During the Vietnam War she traveled to Cuba and met with representatives of the North Vietnamese and Cuban governments)

During the Vietnam War she traveled to Cuba and met with representatives of the North Vietnamese and Cuban governments) She was criticized for a comment she made about the Charles Manson led Tate-LaBianca murders in a speech during the December 1969 "War Council" meeting organized by the Weathermen and attended by about 400 people in Flint, Michigan: "Dig it! First they killed those pigs and then they put a fork in their bellies. Wild!" the group organized the October 1969 Days of Rage riot in Chicago, which Dohrn led. During the 1970s, the Weathermen bombed federal buildings and police stations. Prior to the March 6, 1970 Greenwich Village townhouse explosion, in which three members of the group were killed as a bomb was being constructed, all members of Weatherman went underground. The group then changed its name to Weather Underground. Dohrn went underground in early 1970, engaging in bombing activities

Dohrn clearly stated support for Communist ideology:

We are building a communist organization

“We are building a communist organization to be part of the forces which build a revolutionary communist party to lead the working class to seize power and build socialism. [...] We must further the study of Marxism-Leninism within the WUO [Weather Underground Organization]. The struggle for Marxism-Leninism is the most significant development in our recent history. [...] We discovered thru [sic] our own experiences what revolutionaries all over the world have found — that Marxism-Leninism is the science of revolution, the revolutionary ideology of the working class, our guide to the struggle [...]"

Dohrn refused to testify against Susan Lisa Rosenberg , an American radical who drove the getaway car in the Brinks robbery (1981) in which two police officers and an armored-car guard were killed. Dohrn ended up spending only one year in jail while Rosenberg was pardoned and set free by Bill Clinton in his last day in office.

Dohrn was once on the FBI's Top 10 Most Wanted List and was described by J. Edgar Hoover as the "most dangerous woman in America." Ayers and Dohrn raised the son of Weathermen terrorist Kathy Boudin, who was serving a sentence for participating in a 1981 murder and robbery that left four people dead.

Dohrn purportedly babysat Barack Obama’s children.

5 - Louis Farrakhan

A key constituency for Obama was Hyde Park, where Farrakhan lives. To be successful politically in that area, you need to be involved with Farrakhan, since he's a strong power in the district. In January 1995, Qubilah Shabazz was arrested and charged with the attempted murder of Louis Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam, in retaliation for the assassination of her father, Malcolm X in 1965. In a 60 Minutes interview that aired during May 2000, Farrakhan stated that some of the things he said may have led to the assassination of Malcolm X.

CHICAGO (AP) - In his first major public address since a cancer crisis, Nation of Islam Minister Louis Farrakhan said Sunday that presidential candidate Barack Obama is the “hope of the entire world” that the U.S. will change for the better. “This young man is the hope of the entire world that America will change and be made better,” he said. “This young man is capturing audiences of black and brown and red and yellow. If you look at Barack Obama’s audiences and look at the effect of his words, those people are being transformed.”

Farrakhan :”I want to be one of the flame-throwers of God, break white folks’ backs. I want to give you hell all the way to your graves. I ain’t scared to die and I’m ready to kill.”

Farrakhan :”You’re lucky you just got words out of me and I didn’t give you the bum’s rush and black-boot stomp the hell out of you.”

Farrakhan :”I love Colin Ferguson, who killed all those white folks on the Long Island train. God spoke to Colin Ferguson and said, ‘catch the train, Colin, catch the train.’”

Farrakhan : said this in South Africa: “I say give ‘em [whites] 24 hours to get out of town. If they don’t, kill everyone white in sight. Kill the men, kill the women, kill the children, kill the blind, kill the crippled. God damn it, kill them all.”

Farrakhan :”The Nation of Islam is consistently anti-American. This is why Mahmoud Abdul-Rouf would not stand during the National Anthem at Denver Nuggets’ basketball games. According to him, the United States’ flag symbolized only “oppression and tyranny.”

Obama won’t put his hand on his heart during the National Anthem.

Quotes from Farrakhan :

”Everybody talks about what Hitler did to you. What did you do to Hitler?

”You wonder why I call it Jew-nited Nations…Jew York City…Jew-niversity. Because you control it.” “Black Muslims consider themselves in a perpetual “jihad” or holy war against the Satanic whiterace.” Obama hired Nation of Islam activists to work for his campaigns. Former Obama worker Shakir Muhammad is a Nation of Islam activist. Muhammad was paid by Obama's office as a photographer in the late 1990s. Muhammad reportedly worked as a bodyguard for the Nation of Islam chief, Louis Farrakhan, Early employees of Obama were Nation of Islam members, including Jennifer Mason, who still works in Obama's Chicago Senate office as director of constituency services – a key community liaison position. Also, Cynthia K. Miller, whom the former insider identified as a Nation of Islam activist, served Obama in his early state Senate days and later as treasurer for his U.S. senatorial campaign.

This forty minute video begins your education on the Nation of Islam, Black Nationalism, The New Black Panthers, The Millions More Movement, The State of the Black Union, The extermination of the European Species and many other topics. Watch the prospect of the extermination of Western Cultural Values and members of Western Culture. Part Two (Conclusion) of this two-video is here, including discussions on White Racism and the murder of Malcolm X by his mentor, Elijah Muhammad. (hat tip Laura)

6 - Carol Moseley Braun

She worked for Judson Miner’s law firm, as did Barack Obama, Michelle Obama and former Weather Underground terrorist Bernardine Dohrn, wife of fellow Weatherman Bill Ayers. In November 1979 she was a co-sponsor of the founding conference of the US Peace Council, a CPUSA (Communist Party USA) front and an affiliate of the Soviet controlled World Peace Council. Moseley Braun’s Peace Council co-sponsors included US Congressmen John Conyers and Ron Dellums, both lifelong CPUSA front operatives and later DSA members. In May 1987 Moseley Braun helped sponsor, with CPUSA leaders Angela Davis and Herbert Aptheker, a benefit for Chicago Communist Party veterans Claude Lightfoot and Jack Kling.

While serving as recorder of deeds Moseley-Braun decided to run for US Senate in the 1992 election-with CPUSA backing.

In 1991, angered by incumbent Democratic senator Alan Dixon's vote to confirm Clarence Thomas, Moseley Braun challenged him in the primary election. Moseley Braun was the subject of a 1993 Federal Elections Commission investigation over $249,000 in unaccounted campaign funds. The agency found several violations, but took no action against Moseley Braun, citing a lack of resources. Moseley Braun only admitted to bookkeeping errors.

In 1996, Moseley Braun made a private trip to Nigeria, where she met with dictator Sani Abacha. She subsequently defended Abacha's human rights records in Congress.

Dictator Sani Abacha

Abacha's government was accused of human rights abuses, especially after the hanging of Ogoni activist Ken Saro-Wiwa by the Auta tribunal. On 10 November 1995, Saro-Wiwa was hanged by Abacha, resulting in the immediate suspension of Nigeria from the Commonwealth of Nations. His regime suffered stiff opposition internally and externally by pro-democracy activists who made the regime unpopular, and responded by banning political activity in general and by controlling the press in particular; a significant fraction of the military was fired, and Abacha surrounded himself with approximately 3,000 armed men loyal to himself

According to post-Abacha governmental sources, some $3 or $4 billion USD in foreign assets were stolen from the government by Abacha, his family and their representatives, $2.1 billion of which the Nigerian government tentatively came to an agreement with the Abacha family to return, with the quid pro quo being that the Abachas would be allowed to keep the rest of the money. Although this proposal caused a massive outcry at the time for seeming to reward the theft of public funds, it was subsequently rejected by the late dictator's son, Mohammed Abacha, who continues to maintain that all the assets in question were legitimately acquired. Although in 2002, Abacha's family accepted to return $1.2 billion that was taken from the central bank. Abacha was listed as the world's fourth most corrupt leader in recent history by Transparency International in 2004. Abacha had also literally laughed in the face of any possible sanctions by the United States against his government, arguing that the Americans would not do that on account that the oil companies are taking care of the Republicans and the Congressional Black Caucus ( of which Carol Moseley Braun was one) takes care of the Democrats, and that all American blacks have a dual loyalty to African leaders.

In 1998, after George Will wrote a column reviewing the allegations of corruption against Mosely Braun. She responded to Will's comments, saying that "I think because he couldn't say nigger, he said corrupt." She also compared Will to a Ku Klux Klansman, saying "I mean this very sincerely from the bottom of my heart: He can take his hood and put it back on again, as far as I'm concerned."

7 - Rev. Jeremiah Wright: Obama’s pastor for 20 years, has given sermons that are racist, Jew-hating, white-hating, Farrakhan-praising, and Hammas-praising he calls Black Liberation Theology. Barack Hussein Obama Jr. was a member of Jeremiah Wright’s church for 20 years and presided over Michelle and Barack’s wedding. Wright was a former Muslim and black nationalist who had studied at Howard and Chicago. Trinity’s guiding principles–what the church calls the “Black Value System” included a "Disavowal of the Pursuit of Middleclassness.' Obama now claims to be fighting for the middle class.

Wright is one of the first people Obama thanked after his Senate victory in 2004

2001: Quoting Malcolm X’s response to the assassination of JFK, Obama’s pastor Jeremiah Wright told his congregation after Sept 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, “America’s chickens are coming home to roost.”

The Rev. Jeremiah A. Wright presented the Lifetime Achievement Trumpeteer" Award at the 2007 Trumpet Gala at the United Church of Christ to Nation of Islam Minister Louis Farrakhan.

Louis Farrakhan is the acting head of the Nation of Islam. Farrakhan made several controversial statements about race, including "White people are potential humans - they haven't evolved yet" and "Murder and lying comes easy for white people".

8- Tony Rezko: Antoin 'Tony' Rezko - Syrian-American mobster

Ties to quite a few people in local business, real estate and politics. The local 'fixer' sort of deal maker associated with the mob in Chicago.

Rezko was convicted of launching a $7 million scheme to use his clout with Blagojevich’s administration to pressure a contractor and firms wanting to do business with the state for kickbacks. Tony Rezko had eleven foreclosed properties in Obama’s former State Senate district. One of the Rezko properties that were luckily never foreclosed, was a beautiful mansion neighboring Louis Farrakhan’s and Bill Ayers’ residences, that now belongs to Barack Obama.

Obama took a job with Davis, Miner, Barnhill & Galland who represented 'Rezar' which was Rezko's firm. Rezko was one of Obama's first major financial contributors when he ran for office in Chicago. In 2003, Rezko threw an early fundraiser for Obama which Chicago Tribune reporter David Mendelland claims was instrumental in providing Obama with 'seed money' for his U.S. Senate race.

In 2005, Obama purchased a new home in Kenwoood District of Chicago for $1.65 million. On the same day Rezko's wife, Rita, purchased the adjoining empty lot for full price. The London Times reported that Nadhmi Auchi, an Iraqi-born Billionaire loaned Rezko $3.5 million three weeks before Obama's new home was purchased. Obama met Nadhmi Auchi many times with Rezko. Now, we have Obama running for President. Valerie Jarrett, was Michele Obama's boss. She is now Obama's chief advisor and he does not make any major decisions without talking to her first. Where was Jarrett born? Shiraz, Iran! Do we see a pattern here? On May 10, 2008 The Times reported, Robert Malley advisor to Obama was 'sacked' after the press found out he was having regular contacts with 'Hamas', which controls Gaza and is connected with Iran . What's even more interesting is that the Syrian Tony Resko is business partners with Elijah Mohammad's (Nation of Islam) son Imam Warith Deen Mohammed (Leader of The Mosque Cares) Obama is connected to the Nation of Islam in several ways.

9 - Imam Warith Deen Mohammed

The third son of Nation of Islam leader Elijah Muhammad died Monday Sept 9, 2008 after heart surgery at the University of Illinois Hospital in Chicago He was 79 and a near lifelong resident of Chicago's South Side near Barack Hussein Obama Jr. in Hyde Park.

The Islamic Society of North America (ISNA) joins all Muslim Americans in condoling the demise of Imam Warith Deen Mohammed today. Warith's father, Hon. Elijah Muhammad, was the leader of the Nation of Islam from 1934 to 1975, an organization that preaches a form of Black nationalism. Elijah Muhammad died on February 26, 1975. After his father's death in 1975, Warith Deen Mohammed was accepted by followers of the Nation of Islam as their leader. With his new understanding, based on his lifelong study of the Qur’an and the life of Prophet Muhammad, he brought about many reforms, which brought the followers of the Nation of Islam closer to mainstream Islam and away from Black nationalism. During this journey, he renamed his organization a number of times; and finally The Mosque Cares.

Muhammad had a successful business career in areas including real estate, food service and Chicago park concessions. For many years, his close associate was Tony Rezko, the politically connected fixer and early political patron of Barack Obama who was convicted in June of mail and wire fraud, aiding and abetting bribery, and money laundering.

10 - Khalid Al-Mansour:

Percy Sutton, NYC political icon in the African American community, tells a news reporter that Dr. Khalid al Mansour solicited favor and recommendation on behalf of Barack Hussein Obama in order to secure Barack's entry into Harvard.

During the 1950's and 1960's, Percy Sutton became one of American's best known lawyers. He represented many controversial figures such as Malcolm X and argued many cases

(photo: Malcolm X and Percy Sutton at a Harlem rally on Seventh Avenue between 125th and 126th streets, 1963)

"I was introduced to [Obama] by a friend," Sutton told the interviewer. The friend's name was Dr. Khalid al-Mansour, and the introduction took place about 20 years ago. Sutton described al-Mansour as "the principle adviser to one of the world's richest men." He also implied that al-Mansour was currently raising money for Obama. Knowing that Sutton had friends at Harvard, al-Mansour asked Sutton to "please write a letter in support of [Obama] ... a young man that has applied to Harvard." Sutton gladly did so. Although Sutton does not specify a date, this would likely have been in 1988 when the 27-year-old Obama was applying to Harvard Law.

The man who pulled strings, provided financing and wrote the letter to have Obama admitted into Harvard. has spewed hatred of white and Jewish Americans. He has called for a National “bloodbath” of White Americans, and has even declared that “killing and mutilating” of whites and jews by blacks is part of God’s plan.

Dr. Khalid Abdullah Tariq Al-Mansour

Dr. Al-Mansour is an International Attorney and Businessman. His college education was obtained at Howard University, where he majored in Philosophy and Logic, and at the University of California School of Law at Berkeley where he received his Doctor of Jurisprudence degree.

Dr. Al-Mansour has spent most of his adult life as a businessman/lawyer, intellectual, religious activist, author and teacher. His business and professional interests include co-founding the International Law Firm of Al-Waleed, Al-Talal & Al-Mansour, representing the O.P.E.C. interest of the famous Los Angeles trial, I.M.A.W.C. vs. O.P.E.C.; and serving as a co-founder and director of the Saudi African Bank (SAB), the United Bank for Africa (UBA) and the World United Bank for Africa (WUBA).

11 - Rashid Khalidi:

Close associate of Obama, Khalidi and Obama lived in nearby faculty residential zones and that the two families dined together a number of times. The sources said the Obama’s [sic] even babysat the Khalidi children. Khalidi in 2000 held what was described as a successful fundraiser for Obama’s failed bid for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives.

Rashid Khalidi had ties to the radical phase of the PLO and Yasser Arafat. Khalidi got $75,000 through Obama and Ayers from the Woods Fund, and later Khalidi returned the favor by hosting a fundraiser for Obama. Obama praised Khalidi in 2003 when the former PLO functionary took a job at Columbia University, according to the LA Times. Khalidi is also the man who has hosted Ahmadinejad’s countless visits to the United States.

One figure ties together both Rashid Khalidi and Barack Obama: Ali Abunimah. Abunimah is a graduate of Princeton University and the University of Chicago and is a frequent speaker and commentator on the Middle East, contributing regularly to the Chicago Tribune and the Los Angeles Times among other publications. He lives in Chicago, Illinois. He has also served as the Vice-President on the Board of Directors of the Arab American Action Network.

Here is part of the work done by Obama on behalf of Palestinians:

Abunimah previously described meeting with Obama at a fundraiser at the home of Columbia University professor Rashid Khalidi, reportedly a former PLO activist.

"[Obama] came with his wife. That's where I had a chance to really talk to him," Abunimah recalled. "It was an intimate setting. He convinced me he was very aware of the issues [and] critical of U.S. bias toward Israel and lack of sensitivity to Arabs. ... He was very supportive of U.S. pressure on Israel.

Abunimah serves on the board of the Arab American Action Network, or AAAN, a controversial Arab group that mourns the establishment of Israel as a "catastrophe" and supports intense immigration reform, including providing driver's licenses and education to illegal aliens.

a href="http://www.wnd.com/index.php?fa=PAGE.view&pageId=57231" title="http://www.wnd.com/index.php?fa=PAGE.view&pageId=57231">WND reported yesterday the Woods Fund, a Chicago-based nonprofit on which Obama served as a paid director alongside a confessed domestic terrorist, provided $75,000 in grants to the AAAN.

12 - Jesse Jackson

Operation Push HQ, 930 E 50th St, ☎ +1 773 373-3366 (fax: +1 773 373-3571), The enormous classical revival building at 50th & Drexel near Obama’s home in Hyde Park, is the national headquarters of Jesse Jackson's RainbowPUSH organization.

The Rainbow Coalition goals were to demand programs, voting rights, and affirmative action for all groups that had been neglected by Reaganomics. Jackson's campaign blamed President Ronald Reagan's policies for reduction of government domestic spending, causing new unemployment and encouraging economic investment outside of the inner cities, while they discouraged the rebuilding of urban industry. In 1998 the organization admonished Freddie Mac for its lending and employment practices, which led to its pledge to earmark $1 billion in mortgage loans specifically for minorities, to donate more than $1 million directly to Rainbow/PUSH and to became a sponsor of Jackson's annual Wall Street Project.

Raila Odinga:

2006: Barack Hussein Obama Jr. SUPPORTED Raila Odinga in Kenya’s presidential election. Odinga, of Luo tribe like Obama Sr. and his Luo supporters (a core of whom call themselves The Taliban ”(“Ethnic Gangs Rile Kenyan Slums” Newsweek 1/10/08), ran for president against President Mibaki of the Kikuyu tribe and tried to get Sharia Muslim law in place there.

Odinga had threatened genocide if he did not win. He also campaigned to “end cooperation” with the US in the war against terror and to establish Islamic Law if he had won the election. Obama, who is Odinga’s tribal cousin, still campaigned for him as a US Senator, using public funds to visit Kenya and campaign for him. What we do know about Odinga is not good. A former Minister of Energy, Odinga is reported to have been set up in the oil business by the al Bakri Group and Muammar Quaddafi (“How How Rich is Raila-The ODM Kenya Presidential Aspirant?¡± African Press 4/26/2007) Abdel Qader Bakri (or- Abdulkader al Bakri) was listed on the infamous ¡°Golden Chain¡±–an internal Al-Queda list of wealthy Saudi financial sponsors Raila Odinga¡¯s father Oginga Odinga was leader of the ¡°Kenya People¡¯s Union¡± and perceived as a ¡°committed socialist¡± (¡°Oginga Odinga: Kenya¡¯s Most Persecuted Politician¡± ” Kenya: Key Issues 8/21.2002).

The idea was simply to have the Luo tribe, mostly Muslims, to take over Kenya from the inheritors of colonial power, the Kikuyu, and bring the country under Sharia law, kick out the Western investors in the nation that had made it one of the most stable nations in Africa, and supplant those Western investors with wealthy Arab oil money. Even with Barack Hussein Obama’s help, it all failed. Then Odinga yelled election fraud, and put his Luo Islamofascists into the streets of Nairobi to “protest” by murdering, raping and maiming Kikuyu people.

In December of 2007 President Mwai of Kenya was re-elected. Opposition candidate Ralia Odinga refused to accept his loss, and riots broke out leaving over 500 dead. Odinga’s supporters went on a rampage—burning Kikuyu homes and businesses, (“Ethnic Cleansing in Luoland¡± The Economist 2/7/2008) raping Kikuyu women, and murdering everyone in their path—including at least 50 Christian Kikuyu woman & children who had sought refuge in a church. They burned them alive. (¡°Mob Burns Kenyans Seeking Refuge In Church” CNN 1/10/2008)

Obama campaigned for someone who is corrupt, ruthless and has financial ties to terrorists. More importantly, Obama campaigned for Raila Odinga who had the stated objective of dismantling US & Kenyan government efforts to root out Al Queda and other terrorist organizations. Organizations that had already caused the deaths of hundreds of Americans and Africans in embassy bombings. Senator Obama’s actions—intentional or not—were in direct conflict with the efforts and interests of US national security. This raises serious questions about the judgment, maturity and readiness of Senator Obama.

BARACK HUSSEIN OBAMA OFFICIAL CAMPAIGN WEBSITE LINKS TO SITES OF ISLAMIC FASCIST RADICALS

This page on Obama's website seems quite tranquil on its face, but hidden within the page is a "upcoming event calendar" that lists events hosted by Islamic organizations that have insidious ties to terror groups. Two of those groups are the Muslim American Society, and ICNA (Islamic Circle of North America Also listed is the 44th Annual ISNA National Convention, held in Rosemont, Illinois.

ISNA or the Islamic Society of North America (ISNA) was recently named an “Unindicted Co-conspirator” for a Dallas trial that dealt with the funding of millions of dollars to Hamas. Beginning in December 2003, ISNA was the subject of a Senate investigation into the financing of terror groups overseas. The group currently uses its website to propagate violent hatred against Jews and Christians.

Another of the events listed is the 32nd ICNA-MAS Convention, held in Hartford, Connecticut. ICNA or the Islamic Circle of North America, in August 2006, was the top donor to a Pakistani charity that, at the time, had given $99,000 to the head of Hamas, Khaled Mashaal. Four people associated with the ICNA-related ‘Houston Taliban’ were arrested and charged with jihad training with firearms, for the purpose of joining the Taliban to attack Americans overseas.

MAS or the Muslim American Society, like ISNA, uses the web to spread violent hatred against non-Muslims. In April 2004, MAS’s Communications Director, Randall Todd “Ismail” Royer, was sentenced to 20 years in prison for his activities within the ‘Virginia Jihad Network,’ a group that was conspiring with Laskar-e-Taiba (LeT) to attack Americans and Indians abroad.

Yet another event listing is the 2007 MANA National Convention, held in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. MANA or the Muslim Alliance in North America was founded in May of 2000, in response to the arrest of cop killer H. Rap Brown, a.k.a. Jamil Al-Amin. The President (Amir) of the organization is Siraj Wahhaj, an individual that was named by the U.S. government an “Unindicted Co-conspirator” in the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.

The FEC breakdown of the Obama campaign has identified a staggering $222.7 million as coming from contributions of $200 or less. “Contributions that come under $200 aggregated per person are not listed,” said Bob Biersack, a spokesman for the FEC. “They don’t appear anywhere, so there’s no way of knowing who they are.”

IN ADDITION TO RADICAL MUSLIM GROUPS, BARACK HUSSEIN OBAMA IS LINKED TO SOCIALIST AND COMMUNIST GROUPS

Democratic Socialists of America (DSA), the Communist Party USA (CPUSA) and more latterly the CPUSA offshoot Committees of Correspondence, have worked together on several occasions to elect “progressive” Democrats. This alliance started in 1983 with the election of Chicago’s first black mayor Harold Washington. It has worked since to elect Barack Obama to the Illinois State Senate, the US Senate and now the US presidency.

http://www.dsausa.org/about/index.html

The Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) is the largest socialist organization in the United States, and the principal U.S. affiliate of the Socialist International. DSA's members are building progressive movements for social change while establishing an openly socialist presence in American communities and politics

“We are socialists because we reject an international economic order sustained by private profit, alienated labor, race and gender discrimination, environmental destruction, and brutality and violence in defense of the status quo.”

“We are socialists because we share a vision of a humane international social order based both on democratic planning and market mechanisms to achieve equitable distribution of resources, meaningful work, a healthy environment, sustainable growth, gender and racial equality, and non-oppressive relationships”

According to one DSA position paper, its collectivist agenda includes “massive redistribution of income from corporations and the wealthy to wage earners and the poor and the public sector”; “a massive shift of public resources from the military … to civilian uses”; and “expanding [Medicare] eligibility to people of all ages and income regardless of health or employment status” so that “the federal government can serve as the single payer” for the nation’s health care. After all, the DSA contends, “Free markets or private charity cannot provide adequate public goods and services. [...]

http://theactivist.org/blog/287

Read the article on how the Young Democratic Socialists plan to reconnect Karl Marx with the Democratic Party where they report that Capitalism wastes human creativity and continues to spout the absolutely false statement that 1 out of every 100 people in the USA are homeless. Another link on the YDS site defends Obama’s time as a “Community Organizer”, a term now being commonly understood to be a radical socialist activist.

Until 1999, DSA hosted the website of the Progressive Caucus. Following a subsequent expose of the link between the two entities, the Progressive Caucus established its own website under the auspices of Congress. But DSA and the Progressive Caucus remain intimately linked. All 58 Progressive Caucus members also belong to DSA.

RESIST - Movement for a Democratic Society - November 9, 2007.

Banks and mortgage companies were “redlining” her neighborhood; the school board was sending its resources into wealthiest areas, and federal laws worked against local progress. The two leaders have different strategies, Chincotta storms bureaucrats’ offices, and later at the follow-up meetings methodically uses the legislative process to control America’s lifeblood: money. She helped write and pass the federal Community Reinvestment Act of 1976, which requires financial institutions that are being bought or sold to prove that they lend money in the communities they serve.

Mortgage Crisis

And now we have the mortgage crisis, which has sent a shock wave through Wall Street and panicked world financial markets like no other since the stock market crash of 1929. But this is a problem created in Washington long ago. It originated with the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), signed into law in 1977 by President Jimmy Carter. The CRA was Carter's answer to a grassroots activist movement started in Chicago, and forced banks to make loans to low income, high risk customers. PhD economist and former Texas Senator Phil Gramm called it "a vast extortion scheme against the nation's banks."

ACORN showed its colors again in 1991, by taking over the House Banking Committee room for two days to protest efforts to scale back the CRA. Obama represented ACORN in the Buycks-Roberson v. Citibank Fed. Sav. Bank, 1994 suit against redlining. Most significant of all, ACORN was the driving force behind a 1995 regulatory revision pushed through by the Clinton Administration that greatly expanded the Community Reinvestment Act and laid the groundwork for thebbbbbbb Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac borne financial crisiswe now confront.Barack Obama was the attorney representing ACORN in this effort. With this new authority, ACORN used its subsidiary, ACORN Housing, to promote subprime loans more aggressively

Ironically, an enthusiastic Fannie Mae Foundation report singled out one paragon of nondiscriminatory lending, which worked with community activists and followed "the most flexible underwriting criteria permitted." That lender's $1 billion commitment to low-income loans in 1992 had grown to $80 billion by 1999 and $600 billion by early 2003.

Remember it was Barack Obama’s neighbor, the Rainbow Coalition in Chicago, run by Jesse Jackson that forced private lenders to make risky loans. The lender they were speaking of was Countrywide, which specialized in subprime lending and had a working relationship with ACORN who was represented by Barack Hussein Obama.

http://www.americanthinker.com/2008/09/barack_obama_and_the_strategy.html

Socialism refers to a broad set of economic theories of social organization advocating state or collective ownership and administration of the means of production and distribution of goods, and the creation of an egalitarian society. Modern socialism originated in the late nineteenth-century working class political movement. Karl Marx posited that socialism would be achieved via class struggle and a proletarian revolution which represents the transitional stage between capitalism and communism.

Communism is a socioeconomic structure that promotes the establishment of an egalitarian, classless society based on common ownership of the means of production and property in general. According to Marxism, communism is the final stage in human society and is both classless and stateless. Leninists have attempted to produce communist societies by setting up political parties, which in some cases have become governments. These attempts have never produced the "pure" communist societies envisoned by Marx, and have led to totalitarian states.

HOW TO TEAR DOWN A CAPITALIST REPUBLIC AND REPLACE WITH A SOCIALIST DEMOCRACY

Cloward Piven Crisis Strategy - Strategy for forcing political change through orchestrated crisis. First proposed in 1966 and named after Columbia University (Obama’s college) sociologists Richard Andrew Cloward and Frances Fox Piven, the "Cloward-Piven Strategy" seeks to hasten the fall of capitalism by overloading the government bureaucracy with a flood of impossible demands, thus pushing society into crisis and economic collapse. Their strategy is to create political, financial, and social chaos that would result in revolution and a change in U.S. government. To achieve their revolutionary change, Cloward and Piven blended Alinsky community organizing concepts with more aggressive organizer tactics and assisted by friendly news media to force a re-distribution of the nation's wealth.

Rather than placating the poor with government hand-outs, wrote Cloward and Piven, activists should work to sabotage and destroy the welfare system; the collapse of the welfare state would ignite a political and financial crisis that would rock the nation; poor people would rise in revolt; only then would "the rest of society" accept their demands.

Cloward-Piven's early promoters cited radical organizer Saul Alinsky as their inspiration. "Make the enemy live up to their (sic) own book of rules," Alinsky wrote in his 1989 book Rules for Radicals. When pressed to honor every word of every law and statute, every Judaeo-Christian moral tenet, and every implicit promise of the liberal social contract, human agencies inevitably fall short. The system's failure to "live up" to its rule book can then be used to discredit it altogether, and to replace the capitalist "rule book" with a socialist one. Cloward and Piven calculated that persuading even a fraction of potential welfare recipients to demand their entitlements would bankrupt the system. The result, they predicted, would be "a profound financial and political crisis" that would unleash "powerful forces … for major economic reform at the national level." Their article called for "cadres of aggressive organizers" to use "demonstrations to create a climate of militancy." Intimidated by threats of black violence, politicians would appeal to the federal government for help. Carefully orchestrated media campaigns, carried out by friendly, leftwing journalists, would float the idea of "a federal program of income redistribution," in the form of a guaranteed living income for all -- working and non-working people alike. Throw in Universal Healthcare and local officials would clutch at this idea like drowning men to a lifeline. They would apply pressure on Washington to implement it.

With every major city erupting into chaos, Washington would have to act. This was an example of what are commonly called Trojan Horse movements -- mass movements whose outward purpose seems to be providing material help to the downtrodden, but whose real objective is to draft poor people into service as revolutionary foot soldiers; to mobilize poor people en masse to overwhelm government agencies with a flood of demands beyond the capacity of those agencies to meet. (ACORN) The flood of demands was calculated to break the budget, jam the bureaucratic gears into gridlock, and bring the system crashing down. Fear, turmoil, violence and economic collapse would accompany such a breakdown -- providing perfect conditions for fostering radical change. That was the theory.

http://www.discoverthenetworks.org/groupProfile.asp?grpid=6967

All three of these organizations -- ACORN, Project Vote and Human SERVE -- set to work lobbying

energetically for the so-called Motor-Voter law, which Bill Clinton ultimately signed in 1993. The Motor-Voter bill is largely responsible for swamping the voter rolls with "dead wood" -- invalid registrations signed in the name of deceased, ineligible or non-existent people -- thus opening the door to the unprecedented levels of voter fraud and "voter disenfranchisement" claims that followed in subsequent elections. Motor Voter Act of 1993, a law allowing people to register at motor vehicle departments, schools, libraries and other public places.

The new "voting rights" coalition combines mass voter registration drives -- typically featuring high levels of fraud -- with systematic intimidation of election officials in the form of frivolous lawsuits, unfounded charges of "racism" and "disenfranchisement," and "direct action" (street protests, violent or otherwise). The burden of illegal immigration on our already overstressed welfare system has been widely documented. Some towns in California have even been taken over by illegal immigrant drug cartels. The disease, crime and overcrowding brought by illegal immigrants places a heavy burden on every segment of society and every level of government, threatening to split this country apart at the seams. In the meantime, radical leftist efforts to grant illegal immigrants citizenship guarantee a huge pool of new democrat voters. With little border control, terrorists can also filter in.

Obama aided ACORN as their lead attorney in a successful suit he brought against the Illinois state government to implement the Motor Voter law there.

The law had been resisted by Republican Governor Jim Edgars, who feared the law was an opening to widespread vote fraud. His fears were warranted as the Motor Voter law has since been cited as a major opportunity for vote fraud, especially for illegal immigrants, even terrorists. According to the Wall Street Journal: "After 9/11, the Justice Department found that eight of the 19 hijackers were registered to vote..."

CONCLUSION:

Barack Obama's Radical Left connections and his relation to the Cloward Piven strategy are inexorably linked Obama is related to too many radical individuals and organizations to include them all here, but this paper lists perhaps the most significant.

Barack Obama at the epicenter of an incestuous stew of American radical leftism. Not only are his connections significant, they practically define who he is. Taken together, they constitute a who's who of the American radical left, and guiding all is the Cloward-Piven strategy. Obama’s associates are all radicals, firmly bedded in the anti-American, communist, socialist, radical leftist mesh. Obama is associated with black separatist liberation ideologues, domestic terrorists, Palestinian radicals, Kenyan mass murderers of Christians, and both Moist and Marxist communist radicals. Although Obama now tries to distance himself from them, now that he is running for president, they were all his mentors, allies, friends, contributors, associates and supporters. They befriended him… and he befriended and socialized with them back.

The public knows next to nothing about them, and this is quite alarming considering that the Media is not doing the necessary work to expose them. To examine these relationships is not smearing, it speaks to his true intentions and ideological perspectives. Barack Obama, the Cloward-Piven candidate, no matter how he describes himself, has been a radical activist for most of his political career. That activism has been in support of organizations and initiatives that at their heart seek to tear the pillars of this nation asunder in order to replace them with their demented socialist vision. Their influence has spread so far and so wide that despite their blatant culpability in the current financial crisis, Capital Hill politicians now claim to be able to fix the problem with HOPE AND CHANGE.

HIS FATHER WOULD BE PROUD

God grant those few responsible yet remaining in Washington, DC the strength to prevent this massive fraud from occurring. God grant them the courage to stand up in the face of this Marxist tidal wave.