Society, fashion, arts, business from Shiny Sheet
Home > PBDNotebook > Archives > 2009 > July > 30 > Entry

Palm Beacher Nancy Goodman Brinker, founder of the world’s leading breast cancer grass roots organization, will receive the 2009 Presidential Medal of Freedom, America’s highest civilian honor.

President Barack Obama will present Brinker and 15 other recipients with the award August 12, during a ceremony at the White House.

Brinker is being recognized for her contributions as founder of Susan G. Komen for the Cure, which began in 1982 as the Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation.

She founded the organization in memory of her sister, Susan G. Komen, who died from the disease in 1980 at age 36.

This is a huge, wonderful surprise and honor and I am truly very grateful for it,” Brinker said. “It is a great honor to receive it and it certainly is one of the most important awards I’ve ever been fortunate to receive. Of course it’s not just for me it’s for the work of Susan G. Komen and the wonderful colleagues who join me every day. I look forward to attending the ceremony and am deeply moved by it. This is the 30th year of my sister’s passing and so it is very meaningful to me.”

In starting the group, Brinker fulfilled a promise to her sister that she would do everything she could to help eradicate the disease - a disease that Brinker also was diagnosed with and successfully fought.

“At that time, there was a stigma and shame around breast cancer,” Brinker said. “You didn’t talk about it. There were no 800-numbers, no Internet. Our government didn’t spend much on breast cancer research. There were few major cancer centers with expertise about breast cancer. That’s the world we faced when Suzy was diagnosed. It’s a world I watched her suffer in, and it’s a world she wanted us to change.”

The Dallas-based group has grown from a group of friends in a living room to an organization with more than 120 domestic and global Affiliates, more than 1.5 million advocates and a presence in more than 50 countries.

Alexine Clement Jackson, chair of the Susan G. Komen for the Cure board of directors, said in a statement, “Nancy Brinker embodies an American story - a story of the tremendous good that can be achieved when people put their minds to it. Today, millions of women and men owe their recoveries, their treatments, their positive prognosis, their social and psychological support to the work that Nancy has achieved in her sister’s memory. We are very proud of her - this is well-deserved.”

Through events like Race for the Cure, the organization has given and invested over $1.3 billion for research, health services and education services. It has developed a worldwide grassroots network of breast cancer survivors and activists.

In 1983, the first Susan G. Komen Race for the Cure® was run around a Dallas shopping mall with about 800 people. Today, more than 1.5 million people run annually in Komen Race for the Cure events in more than 120 U.S. and 14 international cities. This October, Komen will hold its first Race for the Cure around the Giza Pyramids in Cairo.

Brinker has received several awards for her work, and has also served in government as U.S. Ambassador to Hungary (2001 - 2003), Chief of Protocol of the U.S. (2007 - 2009), and Chair of the President’s Cancer Panel (1990). In May, Nancy Goodman Brinker was named the first-ever World Health Organization’s Goodwill Ambassador for Cancer Control.

The Medal of Freedom is awarded to individuals who make an especially meritorious contribution to the security or national interests of the United States, world peace, cultural or other significant public or private endeavors.

Among the other recipients: Stephen Hawking, Jack Kemp. Sen. Edward Kennedy, Billie Jean King, Sandra Day O’Connor, Sidney Poitier, Chita Rivera, Harvey Milk and Desmond Tutu.

“We are, clearly, facing a global cancer crisis,” Brinker said. “Cancer is already killing more people than AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis combined. It is the second leading cause of death in the world; cases are expected to triple in 30 years, and too little attention is being paid to the human suffering and the social and economic impacts of this disease.”





Permalink | Comments (0) | Post your comment | Categories: honors