Warriors Alien Resistance
Out Of Place Artifacts According To The Theory Of Evolution -Forbidden Archeology

(Caveat- The information about Zecharia Sitchin and his theory that aliens came to earth and modified humans is false. It was fallen angels who came to earth. Sol-war)

VU: I have found it. And it's not under the water. And the central place of this civilization, the mountain called 'Meru,' [has] the biggest pyramid. Probably you have heard about it, Meru.

VU: I was lucky to find Hyperborea. The Hyperborean people -- in all ancient texts, they are called... and 'Hyperborea,' at the place where gods were living. And the place from which they came to Atlantis. They came to Europe. They came to Siberia. And they brought a knowledge to India. They brought a knowledge to Eastern countries. So, they were the first, the first, the key spiritual stimulators of our planet. And everybody said that this place now is under the water of the Northern sea.

According to Valery Uvarov author of the book "Pyramids" Mt. Meru is in Greenland and was Hyperborea where the alleged gods (fallen angels in my opinion) first came down and made contact with man. The Hyperborean people later migrated to Atlantis. This was all before Sumeria. At lantean high priests went to Egypt wiith their secrets..

Perhaps the Yeti were made from DNA experiments with humans and animals and taught blood sacrifices by fallen angels.

Acclaimed oceanographer Robert Ballard says he has found evidence Claims massive flood happened in Black Sea region around 5600BC Waters cascaded down Turkey's Straits of Bospurus and into sea It is believed to have started story of Noah, which was then passed on

Forks used to eat slain enemies sold for nearly £30,000 at auction Cannibalism was practised in Fiji for centuries - but faded away in the late 19th century after Christianity was introduced and British colonial rule imposed. To eat an enemy was to inflict the ultimate humiliation on the island, known as the Cannibal Isles. Some victims were kept alive while their body parts were sliced off and cooked in front of them. Skulls were used as drinking bowls, and sexual organs were hung from trees as trophies of victory in battle. Rev Thomas Baker was murdered, cooked and consumed while trying to spread Christianity in Fiji's rugged highlands in July 1867. Legend has it that Mr Baker, a Methodist minister born in Playden, Sussex, was murdered after breaking a taboo by taking a comb from a chief's hair. But historians say the real reason was resistance to the spread of Christianity and complex tribal politics

So, a group of Russians went to Egypt and climbed the Great Pyramide. According to their story, they arrived there early while the complex was open, then waited in shadows till the visitor hours are over and the night came down, so later they climbed on the top and made photos. “There are lots of signs on the top of the pyramide on different languages, including Russian, and they say somewhere among them there is a signature of last Russian Tsar who climbed it too sometime long ago”. The security didn’t notice them, they got back down uncaught, keeping in mind that according to Egypt’s laws there is a possible couple of years sentence for such kind of things. Also, all photos are clickable.

Mohenjo Daro – Civil Engineering Since indoor plumbing did not arrive in modern societies to any extent until the 20th century, and urban planning has still not been adopted much to this date in history, what we find in the ancient city of Mohenjo Daro is anomalous indeed. This city in the Indus Valley was built on a grid system about 4,500 years ago, obviously planned out and drawn up before the first brick was laid. It had houses, some with indoor plumbing, a granary, baths, an assembly hall and towers all made out of standard size bricks. The streets were about eight to ten feet wide on average, and were built with well-engineered drainage channels. Mohenjo Daro was divided into two parts; the Citadel was on the upper level and included an elaborate tank called the Great Bath that was made of fine quality brickwork and drains. The Great Bath was 40 feet long and 8 feet deep, a huge public facility by any standards. A giant granary, a large residential building, and several assembly halls were also on this upper level. The Great Bath was made watertight by the use of two layers of brick, lime-cement and then finally sealed with bitumen (tar). The bath included a shallow section for children. We should wonder how an ancient culture of which nothing is known, not even their language, created this sophisticated city at a point in time many thousands of years ahead of the curve? Civil engineers do not crawl out of thatched-roof huts able to draw up plans for a complex urban environment. We need to address the following question to archaeologists and historians: 1. Where are the cities that demonstrate the path of urban development, social and technical organisation, leading to Mohenjo Daro? 2. How do you explain the sudden emergence of a complex society when 99.99% of the rest of humanity were living primitively? These issues cannot be brushed aside with some arrogant pretence that the questions have already been addressed and answered by digging up and labelling pottery shards and other artefacts. We have been and are being overly indulgent with our “soft sciences” regarding their cavalier assertions about having all the answers. In fact, they have very few, so why are they throwing stones at independent researchers from behind glass towers? Extraordinarily little is known about the Indus Valley civilisation that once spanned nearly a thousand miles with other cities matching the description of Mohenjo Daro.

A “gate to hell” has emerged from ruins in southwestern Turkey, Italian archaeologists have announced. Known as Pluto's Gate -- Ploutonion in Greek, Plutonium in Latin -- the cave was celebrated as the portal to the underworld in Greco-Roman mythology and tradition. Historic sources located the site in the ancient Phrygian city of Hierapolis, now called Pamukkale, and described the opening as filled with lethal mephitic vapors.

It's a beautiful day... The sun is brighter than you've ever seen it. Towering clouds hide distant mountain tops across the southern horizon. A cool breeze rushes past as you boat out onto Lake Titicaca. In the distance a small group of reed islands float as they have for hundreds, perhaps thousands of years. The Aymara call these islands home, deriving everything necessary for life from the lake and wildlife who inhabit this extraordinary place. This is an adventure of a different kind. Lighthearted fun with an incredible backdrop, where people live on a fantasy-like island floating upon a lake thrust two and a half miles into the vivid blue sky. Everything here is different...

Fallen angel technology and one of their landing sites. Two UFOS filmed on this expedition. Hours by narrow dirt road deep into the Andes atop a 13,000 foot plateau sits a memorial created in the long forgotten past. This stone museum, Markawasi, is littered with hundreds of figures chiseled from volcanic stone. Recent examination suggests this incredible place had been completed long before the pyramids of Egypt. Join Jerry and Kathy Wills as they take you on a journey across the mysterious plateau of Markawasi, the mist shrouded mystery.

ARCHAEOLOGY NEWSFLASH 350 You'll be astonished at this news which Lisa has revealed. A young New Zealander on a visit to the USA, Lisa worked for a while with the New Mexico Parks Department. During her term of employment there was a big "washout" in one of the Park regions and I'm assuming it was up in Pueblo country around Taos. The flash flood scoured out embankments and in doing so a large number of anomalous skeletons were exposed. Lisa and her colleagues were assigned the task of gathering up the remains and placing them into crates. Also in attendance at the site were Smithsonian Institute officials and FBI agents.

The faded images in Tennessee's Cumberland Plateau are believed to be the most widespread collection of such art ever found in the U.S. Art works feature mythical creatures, heroic ceremonial actions, religious motifs and a selection of birds and reptiles

Rob Skiba discusses more of his theory concerning the "suspicious women" who got on board Noah's Ark. Taking it a step further, he shows how Nephilim Punnett Squares reveal it was much better for God to allow that than to allow for multiple incursions. This video also shows some of the post-Flood animal-human hybrids and reveals just how true Yeshua's prophecy in Matthew 24:37 really is

(Caveat- The information about Zecharia Sitchin and his theory that aliens came to earth and modified humans is false. It was fallen angels who came to earth. Sol-war)

"This web site is under continuous construction."

"People who have forgotten their past have no future"

“Facts do not cease to exist becaus﻿e they are ignored,” Aldous Huxley

“There is a principle which is a bar against all information, which is proof against all argument, and which cannot fail to keep man in everlasting ignorance. That principle is condemnation before investigation.” ~ Edmund Spencer.

The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the sun. Is there anything whereof it may be said, See, this is new? It hath been already of old time, which was before us” (Eccl. 1:9-10)

Ecclesiastes 1:9

King James Version (KJV)

9 The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the sun.





Nephilim: TRUE STORY of Satan, Fallen Angels, Giants, Aliens-video

*( Disclaimer- Although David Icke is only one of the persons interviewed he is a New Age disinformation agent who once stated on television that he is the son of God. Sol-war)

Published on Aug 21, 2013

Nephilim: Origin of Genetic Evil, the Nephilim. NEPHILIM (FULL) DOCUMENTARY - Journey into the world of Fallen Angels, Satan, Shadow People, Aliens, Demons, Anunnaki, Archons, Ancient Giants, "Ancient Aliens" & Genetic Hybrids.

Nephilim: Origin of Genetic Evil takes a deep look at human genetics, elongated skulls, "Nephilim Skulls" ancient giants, "Nephilim giants" giant skulls (fragments) and Neanderthal skulls (genetically) -- all this in an EASY walk through of precise Hebrew, Babylonian - Sumerian, Egyptian & Book of Enoch accounts of Nephilim / Annunaki, Ancient Alien / Demons, Fallen Angels, and even the father of all lies --- Satan... From the depths of the underworld & Lucifer (Luciferian) occult of Hell's gates.... to the ancient pages of Biblical revelation and prophecy... to the very words of prophecy from the lips of Jesus Christ Himself....

Nephilim: A journey from heaven to hell... and the genetic hybrids & entities between.

-- Nephilim by Trey Smith / God in a Nutshell project

Nephilim: the Nephilim documentary is a FULL in-depth EXAMINATION of Ancient Giants, Ancient Aliens, Fallen Angels, Anunnaki / Nephilim, Ancient Elongated Skulls... and FULL details of Egyptian & Babylonian occult - sometimes called "Luciferian"

Nephilim (DEFINITION): The Nephilim (nɛfɨˌlɪm) were the offspring of the "sons of God" and the "daughters of men" in Genesis 6:4. The pre-flood / post flood, genetic hybrids of the ancient world. Ezekiel32:27 "the fallen mighty (גִּבֹּורִים נֹפְלִים) of the uncircumcised (Nephilim), which are gone down ( יָרְדֽוּ) to the grave (hell) with their weapons of war. These are but a few of the writings from the Bible, the Book of Enoch and cultures around the globe.... demons to some, genetic hybrids to more, fallen angels to others, and "underworld gods" to still more.

Some commentators on the Nephilim topic have included: Ancient Aliens Debunked, L A Marzulli, Steve Quayle, David Icke, Chris White (Ancient Aliens Debunked) & others

Nephilim: Other videos by Trey Smith

Evolution: Tale of Modern Myth

Theory of Everything by Trey Smith

Enoch: Book of Enoch

Benny Hinn: TRUE STORY of Greed vs. God

Thieves: One dirty TV pastor and the man who robbed

Choice by Trey Smith

Nephilim: You are about the enter the world of Nephilim, Ancient "Nephilim" Giants & Nephilim Hybrids. ------------- Nephilim Video Details & Contributors ------------

Nephilim: Origin of Genetic Evil by Trey Smith

Nephilim - produced by Trey Smith (author of Thieves & producer of Theory of Everything)

Nephilim - Hebrew Translations (& Nephilim text translations) by Rabbi Brian Hall (in Hebrew, Rabbi Abir Baruch Hallel), Senior Rabbi of Beth Yeshua Synagogue Newton/Boston, Ma

Nephilim - Video Footage of Elongated Skulls (and Skull comparisons between Human Skulls & Elongated Skulls - Genetic Bone Structures) by Brien Foerster, Inca Tours, as well as the Dr.'s and research professionals on his team

Nephilim - Special Consultant Advisory thanks on Mathematics & the Universe to Dr. Carl Smith, former research developer for Los Alamos US Government Labs, retired Research Developer for Royal Dutch - Shell Oil Company (special projects & development) & retired professor of upper-level mathematics at University of Houston.

Nephilim - Special Consultant Advisory thanks on Neanderthal Skulls, Facial Growth, Brows & Wisdom Teeth (Neanderthal's are Humans with long life-spans) to Dr. Jack Cuozzo, 33 yrs career in Oral Biology, Paleontology, Study of EXTREMELY slow genetic growth / maturity rates in "Neanderthal" (ancient human) children -and - credited with taking the first cephalometric (orthodontic) radiographs in the history of Neanderthal fossils (1979-1991)

Nephilim - Voice Overs by former FOX NEWS VO artist & owner of MarrsHarris Creative, Rick

Nephilim - music by German composer Michael

-and also-

Nephilim - music by US composer Trevor DeMaere

Nephilim video is dedicated to Jesus Christ. "So as in the days of Noah, so also shall it be in the days of the return of the Son of man...." ---------------- End of Nephilim Video Details ------------------

Thieves: One dirty TV pastor and the man who robbed him (OFFICIAL WEBSITE)

Nephilim video will be available as FULL LENGTH DVD with additional 45+ minutes of commentary by Trey Smith. To find out details of the Nephilim video & DVD, go to the God in a Nutshell project at: http://godinanutshell.com/





Nephilim giants skeletons

http://www.greatdreams.com/reptlan/nephilim.htm

compiled by Dee Finney

GENESIS 6:4 The Nephilim were on the earth in those days, and also afterward, when the sons of God came into the daughters of men, and they bore children to them. these were the mighty men that were of old, the men of renown.

Num 13:33

And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight.

INCREDIBLE FIND IN GREECE

11-6-10

These astounding photos are from a recent archaeological discovery in Greece . This totally unexpected find furnishes proof of the existence of "Nephilim".

Nephilim is the word used to describe the giants spoken of in biblical times by Enoch as well as the giant David fought against (Goliath). It is generally believed that most of these Giants came about when the fallen angels had union with earthly woman. Note the incredible size of the skull.

A monograph entitled, Reality of the Serpent Race, by Branton, reveals, "In Genesis 3 we read about the 'Nachash'; Hebrew word for 'Serpent'. The original Nachash was not actually a snake as most people believe, but an extremely intelligent, cunning creature, possessed with the ability to speak and reason." Another significant parallel from the Holy Bible is shown in Jeremia

INCREDIBLE FIND IN GREECE

These astounding photos are from a recent archaeological discovery in Greece . This totally unexpected find furnishes proof of the existence of "Nephilim".

Nephilim is the word used to describe the giants spoken of in biblical times by Enoch as well as the giant David fought against (Goliath). It is generally believed that most of these Giants came about when the fallen angels had union with earthly woman. Note the incredible size of the skull.

h 8:17, "Behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices among you, which will bite you, saith the Lord." The definition of a cockatrice is a reptilian bird-like creature or winged-serpent. This could very well represent the Phoenix, described in Egyptian mythology.

A theory proposed by Bible scholar I.D.E. Thomas asserts that the race of the "Nephilim" (meaning Giants and/or fallen ones), mentioned in Genesis 6:4 and Numbers 13:33, closely resemble the alien race of the blond Pleiadian Nordics, reported to be eight to nine feet tall. The Nazis attempted to revive this mystical Aryan race in the 1930's and 1940's. Mr. Thomas believes that a hybrid offspring culminated from relations between the Nephilim and the "daughters of man" resulting in increased wickedness upon the earth; and thus evoking God's wrath in the form of the "Great Flood".

100 Million Years Old Giant Skull And Teeth Found Embedded In Coal

This is the very first specimen that Ed Conrad discovered in the Carboniferous-dated anthracite region of Pennsylvania but the Smithsonian’s experts dismissed it as a concretion, a rock. However, petrified teeth were found inside the jaw-like area and an infrared scan revealed the material is “compatible with either tooth or bone in origin.”

As time passed, Ed continued to search the same locality and kept finding numerous unusual objects that bore the contour of bone, although rock-like in their brownish coloration and weight.

Approximately a year later and in the same general area _ only a short distance from where he had found the specimen resembling an anthropoid skull — Ed discovered the large boulder in which was embedded the object that bore a distinct resemblance to a human cranium.

Actually, Ed had passed the specimen hundreds of times but only after doing a bit of study about human skulls was he able to recognize it, since the jaw like area was facing downward

http://www.pakalertpress.com/2013/02/25/100-million-years-old-giant-skull-and-teeth-found-embedded-in-coal/?utm_source=feedburner&utm;_medium=email&utm;_campaign=Feed%3A+pakalert+%28Pak+Alert+Press%29&utm;_content=Yahoo!+Mail

Ice Age art & the Lion-man statue 32,000 years old. (Museum disinformation Lion-men were real)-video

This is disinformation from the British Museum. Ancient texts have been written about LION-MEN which were the creations by Fallen angels (watchers) who came down and mated with earth women. The watchers also used DNA to combine human and animals. Some theorize that because these fallen angels could assume physical from of any type that they also had sex with animals creating hybrids.

The British Museum (high officials) do not want to let you know the truth about angels good and bad or about God.

Published on Feb 11, 2013

A new exhibition at the British Museum features sculptures made up to 40,000 years ago. Dr. Alice Roberts meets curator Jill Cook to discuss three artefacts in the collection; the Lion Man, a group of female figurines from Siberia, and the oldest known flute. Despite being made thousands of years ago, the objects show that the minds of their creators - our ancestors - were incredibly similar to our own.

When the flute was first discovered the finding was published in Nature. Read the full article here: http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v460/n7256/full/nature08169.html

The book of Jasher, which is mentioned in the Bible in Joshua 10:13 and 2 Samuel 1:18 says, "After the fallen angels went into the daughters of men, [then] the sons of men taught the mixture of animals of one species with the other, in order to provoke the Lord" (4:18). The Book of Enoch says that fallen angels not only merged their DNA with women, but that "they began to sin against birds, and beasts, and reptiles, and fish" (7:5; 6) quoted from

http://www.bibleprobe.com/nephilim.htm

http://www.ortzion.org/whatitallboilsdownto_4.html

Noah Primeval - Godawa

http://www.godawa.com/chronicles_of_the_nephilim/files/NoahPrimevalSample.pdf

historical research about Noah's flood and the ancient Near Eastern context of the book of ..... The most significant is the book of 1 Enoch, a document famous for it's ..... This bull-man and lion-man were the living breathing monsters depicted in ...

http://www.godawa.com/chronicles_of_the_nephilim/files/NoahPrimevalSample.pdf

2 Samuel 23:20--"Where do you think the Lion like Men of Moab came from"? Hint---Genesis 6

http://www.genesis6giants.com/index.php?s=592

32,000 yr old idol of 'lion man'

http://krishnaparis.com/en/?q=32000-yr-old-idol-lion-man

Published on Feb 11, 2013

A new exhibition at the British Museum features sculptures made up to 40,000 years ago. Dr. Alice Roberts meets curator Jill Cook to discuss three artefacts in the collection; the Lion Man, a group of female figurines from Siberia, and the oldest known flute. Despite being made thousands of years ago, the objects show that the minds of their creators - our ancestors - were incredibly similar to our own.

When the flute was first discovered the finding was published in Nature. Read the full article here: http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v460/n7256/full/nature08169.html

Ice Age art

PLANTING THE HALL OF RECORDS

The Egyptians had the natural inclination of rejecting any investigations by the Cayce people, but as it turned out, two women got a foothold at Giza in the 1950s and reportedly did some drilling at the sphinx before reporting back to the Cayce Foundation that things looked "promising" for discovering the Hall of Records (this information from Robert Bauval).

In order for my suspicion to be true, that plotters did get into the Hall to first plant and then exchange the Records, there must at least be a way into the Hall that they knew of, but that was kept concealed from the Egyptian Antiquities authorities, as well as other Giza-project teams not privy to the hoax. Such a secret entry was discovered recently, but before getting to that, I will concentrate on the person(s) possibly responsible for the re-planting. Finding this person is important because it will identify the organization involved, which then becomes suspect as a leading player in the upcoming New-Age manipulations expected to drastically alter our world system so as to produce Armageddon. As Dolphin and the Stanford Institute were planning their Giza project in that year, Hugh Cayce sends Mark Lehner to Cairo University, with money from the Association for Research and Enlightenment (ARE), an organization that obviously can't help but advertise its Illumination pride. There are other reasons to suspect its involvement with Rosicrucianism: its dedication to Cayce lore, for one, and its being run by the Cayce family itself.

Some information on this topic comes from a book authored by two Freemasons, Graham Hancock and Robert Bauval, both convinced of the Mars-Egypt connection. In the fifth chapter of the book, "The Message of the Sphinx," we have the following phrase: "Dr. Mark Lehner of the Edgar Cayce Foundation". In that year, NASA received images from Mars. Take a look at the face on Mars (1976) and tell if it doesn't appear to you as a fabrication created by an artist here on earth. I'm not suggesting that the mound does not exist, but that someone added some black markings to create a perfect nose line upon a brow line, and symmetrical eye and mouth (later pictures of the mound do not reveal a face at all). The face is said by some to have been a sphinx. Therefore, knowing now that James Hurtak predicted just this sort of picture the year before images were to arrive from Mars, doesn't this suggest that, not only Hurtak, but NASA itself is taking us for fools?

How could NASA, in 1976, perpetuate such a hoax without the employees discovering it? It couldn't. Some employees had discovered it, but without evidence to prove it. I'm no high-tech wizard, but I do understand that all space images funneled to the computer screens of all employees can first be screened, and therefore altered, without their knowing about it...especially in 1976. If anyone so much as voiced one suspicion of foul play, they would be scorned by the officials who perpetuated the hoax, and moreover reprimanded by those employees who couldn't believe that NASA officials would do such a thing. How many officials were in on the hoax? Perhaps it only took one or two. Only one picture was needed to reach the public; after that, NASA could feign opposition to the artificiality of the face, but allow wild imaginations to take over and fuel the hoax. NASA would count on such men, and Hoagland seems to have been one of them. Obtained from France by Lehner's team were field notes and 200 photographs from the 1925-36 excavation project, which was essentially the removal of wind-blown sand covering much of the sphinx. It was in relation to the excavation that, I believe, Rosicrucians planted the Records. In one of the photographs, dated 1926, there is "a man standing at the entrance to this passage. The passage was sealed with new blocks but restorers at the time never recorded what, if anything, had been found. Priority for examining this tunnel [now] appears to be low."

http://sphinxtemple.virtualave.net/articles/saga_sphinx.html

The tunnel, located in the mid-section or rib area, leads into the heart/basement of the sphinx. Who ordered the blocking during the excavation project, and why??? Could the Hall of Records have been somewhere down this tunnel by the time of that 1926 photograph? Remember, Hugh Cayce had said that Edgar had prophesied in 1923 concerning a secret sphinx chamber, and Hawass would soon confess on American television that the above-mentioned tunnel entrance was blocked up in 1922!! n 1987, Dolphin was no longer employed at Stanford. He was to join Chuck Missler in a Jerusalem-Temple scheme assisting British-Illuminati agents and Israeli Kabalists.

http://www.tribwatch.com/records.htm

Old stone at NTT Pictorial Symbols Mysterious UFO Found In Kupang, NTT, Indonesia

Type Thing: Stone ; One of rock but as there were two stones tied.

Artifact: Pictures stars, sun, arrows & the directive on a star. Owners First: Spanish Geologist, Mr. CA Castillo (ALM 1994) Owners Update: Alfred (son of CA Castillo)





Found: 1992, disebuah cave at Devil Hill (formerly: Hill Nitnai) Location: Oesu'u, regency of Kupang, East Nusa Tenggara, Indonesia Photo: Willi Soeharly. Coordinate:-10.153375 S, 123.800158333 E



Mysterious Stone Found In Kupang, NTT, Indonesia



In 1992, a strange artifact was discovered in a cave on the Devil Hills (or Mount of Satan) in Kupang, East Nus Tenggara, Indonesia.



The artifact was a stone, which possesses strange carvings on its surface.



The photographs of the artifact belonged to a geologist who had lived in Kupang and died of illness in 1994. He’d been exploring a cave at the Devil Hills at night, and came upon a strange pile of rocks, where he found the stone.



It appeared like two pieces of rock bound together, but its most curious characteristic were the drawings upon its surface: stars, the Sun, and arrows pointing in every direction.



You can also see humanoid figures, highlighted in the image below, which compares the carvings on the rock to the Pioneer plaques. These were plaques sent into space aboard Pioneer 10 and Pioneer 11 in 1972 and 1973, respectively, meant to give any intelligent life in the universe information on the crafts’ origins.



On the strange stone, the images (if they are similar) appear reversed.



The artifact also had other qualities (translated from original):



“According to Willy [Soeharly] who is now a field investigation team coordinator BETA-UFO Kupang and surrounding areas, the rock contains a magnet and is thought to contain radioactive elements.”



The stone is now kept by the geologist’s family.



In the area of the Devil Hills, there have also been reports of UFOs, including “three black dots” that had formed a triangle, which some claimed had been the markings of a UFO landing. These markings eventually vanished due to erosion. Neons lights had also been reported descending toward the hills.



Is this a legitimate artifact? It’s possible this could actually be a septarian concretion, a kind of rock formation where cracks or separations occur and fill in with minerals. The carvings could very well be man-made. But let your mind wander…



What could these carvings mean? Why are they there? - Indo Crop Circles

http://indocropcircles.wordpress.com/2011/01/31/batu-misterius-tentang-ufo/

Geological Wonders You Didn't Know About If you are adventurous and love to travel, especially to explore under-explored regions, then you already traveled a lot and seen a lot certainly. But I believe that you just haven't seen the wonders of the world, that we have now prepared. Our planet is truly a wonderful place to live. We should be maintained with, as possible as we can. Look at the next 15 Geological Wonders and love your planet! 1.Danxia Landform (China) This unique geological phenomenon, known as a ‘Danxia Landform‘, can be seen in several places inChina. This example is located in Zhangye, Gansu Province. Danxia, which means "rosy cloud", is a special landform formed from reddish sandstone that has been eroded over time into a series of mountains surrounded by curvaceous cliffs and many unusual rock formations.











2.Great Blue Hole (Belize) Part of the Lighthouse Reef System, The Great Blue Hole lies approximately 60 miles off the mainland out of Belize City. A large, almost perfectly circular hole approximately one quarter of a mile (0.4 km) across, it's one of the most astounding dive sites to be found anywhere on earth. Inside this hole, the water is 480 feet (145 m) deep and it is the depth of water which gives the deep bluecolor that causes such structures throughout the world to be known as "blue holes."











3.Fly Geyser (Nevada, US) These look as if they were taken on another planet, or at least on the set of a new and very expensive science fiction movie. Yet these pictures are of the Fly Geyser which is very much of planet earth (Nevada, US to be exact). The geyser can be found in Hualapai Valley near Gerlach. It is a little seen phenomenon as the land upon which it sits is private. It can be seen from State Road 34 but unless you have permission the view from a distance is all you should attempt. Back in 1916 the owners of the place were looking for water in the hope of creating rich farmland in this desert area of the state. They came across water, yes, and the well worked for decades. However, the drill that was driven down a shaft hit a geothermal pocket of water and the result was a geyser.







4.Pamukkale (Turkey) In Turkish the name literally means Cotton Castle and it is easy to see why it was given that name. Yet this geological wonder is also the site of the ancient city of Hierapolis and over the centuries the two have seemed to come together, almost merged into one. In fact some of the old tombs in the city's necropolis have become part of landscape. The site itself is a series of travertines and hot springs. The travertines here have a concentric appearance and are almost sheer white giving the area an ethereal appearance. The hot springs precipitate calcium carbonate at their mouths and produce the strange almost organic looking structures.











5.Enchanted Well - Chapada Diamantina National Park (Brazil) Poço Encantado, or Enchanted Well, is located in the Chapada Diamantina National Park in Bahia state, approximately 400 kilometres inland from Salvador, the capital city of Bahia. This giant sunken pool is 120 feet deep and the water is so transparent the rocks and ancient tree trunks are visible on the bottom. When the sun is just right, light comes through a crevice and creates a blue reflection on the water. Access to this pond is highly controlled for environmental protection of its rare and delicate ecosystem.











6.The Wave (between Arizona and Utah - USA) A red-rock stunner on the border of Arizona and Utah, The Wave is made of 190-million-year-oldsand dunes that have turned to rock. This little-known formation is accessible only on foot via a three-mile hike and highly regulated.











7. Antelope Canyon (Arizona - USA) The most visited and photographed slot canyon in the American Southwest, the Antelope Canyonis located on Navajo land near Page, Arizona. It includes two separate, photogenic slot canyon sections, referred to individually as Upper Antelope Canyon -or "The Crack"- and Lower Antelope Canyon -or "The Corkscrew." The Navajo name for Upper Antelope Canyon is Tse' bighanilini, which means "the place where water runs through rocks." Lower Antelope Canyon is Hasdestwazi, or "spiral rock arches." Both are located within the LeChee Chapter of the Navajo Nation. 8.Wulingyan, Hunan (China) The Hunan region is full of dramatic landscapes and the magnificent Wulingyan is one of their biggest attractions. This geological wonder is made up of over 3000 limestone karsts. There are scenic waterfalls and some of Asia's biggest limestone caves.









9.The Valley of the Moon (Argentina) Ischigualasto, meaning "the place where you put the moon" is a remote valley in Argentina. It is studded with geological formations left by wind erosion, amazing standing stones and boulders that are so rounded they look like enormous marbles. The valley's once-fertile ground is now arid and contains so many plant and animal fossils that paleontologists come from all over the world to study them. Erosion over the millennia unearths the fossils as well as other geological formations such as a host of almost spherical concretions. The wind, inexorable and patient, has pounded the local bedrock for an age. Revealed, the boulders that mudstone - in its original wet form, helped to form look as if giants have been playing marbles.







10.Blue Lake Cave (Brazil) Mato Grosso do Sul region in Brazil (and especially the quiet town of Bonito) boasts many marvelous underground lakes: Gruta do Lago Azul, Gruta do Mimoso, Aquário Natural. The world famous "Gruta do Lago Azul" (Blue Lake Cave) is a natural monument whose interior is formed by stalactites, stalagmites and a huge and wonderful blue lake. The beauty of the lake is something impressive. The Blue Lake Cave has a big variety of geological formation but impresses mainly for the deep blue colored water of its inside lake.









11.Eye of the Sahara (Mauritania) This spectacular landform in Mauritania in the southwestern part of the Sahara desert is so huge with a diameter of 30 miles that it is visible from space. Called Richat Structure -or the Eye of the Sahara- the The formation was originally thought to be caused by a meteorite impact but now geologists believe it is a product of uplift and erosion. The cause of its circular shape is still a mystery.









12.Hell Gate (Turkmenistan) Called by locals The Door to Hell, this place in Turkmenistan is situated near the small town of Darvaz. When geologists were drilling for gas, 35 years ago, they suddenly found an underground cavern that was so big, all the drilling site with all the equipment and camps got deep deep under the ground. None dared to go down there because the cavern was filled with gas, so they ignited it so that no poisonous gas could come out of the hole, and since then, it has been burning. Nobody knows how many tons of excellent gas has been burned for all those years but it just seems to be infinite.













13.Wave Rock (Australia) The Wave Rock is a natural rock formation located in western Australia. It derives its name from the fact that it is shaped like a tall breaking ocean wave. The total outcrop covers several hectares; the "wave" part of the rock is about 15 meters high and approximately 110 meters long. One aspect of Wave Rock rarely shown on photographs is the retaining wall about halfway up the rock. This follows the contours and allows rainwater to be collected in a dam. It was constructed in 1951 by the Public Works Department, and such walls are common on many similar rocks in the wheatbelt.









14.Kasha Katuwe Tent Rocks (New Mexico, US) New Mexico's Kasha-Katuwe Tent Rocks National Monument, where erosion chisels rock formations formed by explosive volcanic eruptions between six and seven million years ago. While the formations are uniform in shape, they vary in height from a few feet to 90 feet throughout the 4,000 acre monument.













15.The Stone Forest (China) The Shilin (Chinese for stone forest) is an impressive example of karst topography. Its rocks are made of limestone and are formed by water percolating the ground's surface and eroding away everything but the pillars. It's known since the Ming Dynasty as the ‘First Wonder of the World.'









16. Jeita Grotto (Lebanon) Jeita Grotto is located 20 km north of Beirut in the Valley of Nahr al-Kalb. In this cave and galleries, the action of water in the limestone has created cathedral-like vaults full of various sizes, colors and shapes of stalactites and stalagmites, majestic curtains and fantastic rock formations. The total length of the cave is more than 9000 m and it is among the biggest stalactites in the world hanging 8,20 m. The grotto accommodates a huge hall with a distance of 108 m from the ceiling till the water level.









Cacahuamilpa Grotto (Mexico) This is a protected Natural Area located two and a half hours from Mexico City. Its name, of Nahuatl origin, can be interpreted as "peanut land". This grotto is considered to be among the most impressive in the world and open to the public. The Cacahuamilpa Grotto was discovered in 1835 and was opened to the public in 1920 and elevated to the rank of National Park in 1936.









Caves of Mira D'aire (Portugal) This is Portugal's largest caves system. The underground tour leads down through a series of colourfully lit caverns with some impressive speleothems. The last cavern, 110m below the surface contains a huge lake with artificial waterfalls and dramatic artificial fountains. Exit is via a fast elevator to the surface.











Demons Reveal themselves in Ukraine Museum Exhibit. Photo Exhibit-Cyprus-Ukraine Archeology, History and Recreating the Trip of Jason and the Argonauts My hypothesis : First, Jason was raised by a demonic being who was half horse and half man. Many if not all of the so called heroes who went on the voyage with Jason were the offspring of fallen angels and human women. When Tim Severin planned his 1984 re-tracing of jason's voyage http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_Severin#The_Jason_Voyage_.281984.29 The epic poem Argonautica, first written down by Apollonius of Rhodes in Alexandria in the late 3rd century BC, became the basis for Severin's next expedition. He began his research into ancient Greek ships and the details of the text in 1981. Master shipwright Vasilis Delimitros of Spetses hand built a 54-foot (16.5 m) replica of a Bronze Age galley based on a detailed scale model of the Argo. In 1984, with twenty volunteer oarsmen, Severin rowed and sailed from northern Greece through the Dardanelles, crossed the Marmara Sea, and passed through the Straits of Bosphorus to the Black Sea—a voyage of 1,500 miles (2,400 km). Along the way they identified many of the landmarks visited by Jason and his Argonauts, and found a likely explanation for the legend of the Golden Fleece. Severin recounted the expedition in The Jason Voyage Those demonic spirits from thousands of years ago went with him. That's why there are demonic skull faces and other faces in the water near the ship. And of course Zmeinyi island, also known as Serpent or Snake island right offshore of Ukraine and the spirits of Achilles and Apollo who were also offspring of the fallen angels and human women are still roaming the island and the Black Sea. http://factsanddetails.com/world.php?itemid=2028&catid;=56 Jason and the Argonauts and the Golden Fleece Jason and the Argonauts was the first nautical saga in Western Literature. Many of the events in the 3000-year-old story also took place in present-day Turkey and Georgia. The plot of the saga was this: Jason left Greece with a boat load of heroes—including Hercules, the twins Castor and Polux, and Orpheus—on a journey to Colchis (present-day Georgia) on the Black Sea to claim the Golden Fleece that came from a golden ram that long time ago carried a young Greek prince across the Black Sea to safety. Jason’s ship, the 50-oar Argo , contained a beam cut from the divine Dodona tree that could tell the future. Teeth of the sleepless serpent when sowed grew into armed soldiers. ["Jason's Voyage" by Tim Severin, September 1975 (⊛)] There are at least 12 demons in this photo exhibit, most are skulls but one appears to be an old man of flesh and blood. The demons are ethereal- lacking material substance : immaterial, intangible. Route of Jason and the Argonauts Claiming the Golden Fleece was regarded as an impossible task. It hung in a sacred grove guarded by an enormous serpent. If Jason managed to bring it home he could reclaim his rightful place on his father’s throne taken from him by his uncle Pelias. For thousands of years gold dust has been extracted from the rivers draining the Caucasus area by placing sheepskins on the stream bottom to trap particles. The expression the golden fleece is believed to have possibly been derived from this practice. Om his journey to Colchis Jason was challenged by a barbarian in the Aegean Sea to a boxing match to the death; he was given directions in the Sea of Marmara by a blind prophet tormented by Harpies; and the crew was beguiled by women on island without men. After barely making it through the Bosporus, the Argo was almost swallowed by vessel-eating rocks in the Black Sea. But finally Jason and the Argonauts made it to his destination. After reaching Colchis, the Argonauts sailed up the River Phasis. In Colchis, Jason was given a number of tasks by King Aettes, the king of the Cochians. These including putting yokes on dangerous bulls, plowing fields where dragon teeth grew into dragons and killing the sleepless snake that guards the fleece. Jason claimed the fleece, with the help of Medea, a princess who betrayed her family, by drugging the serpent. With the fleece in hand and the princess's father ships in pursuit Jason headed back to Greece where he claimed his throne. The story's postscript unfortunately is not a happy one. Jason later married another woman and the princess from Colchis got revenge by poisoning his bride and their children.⊛ Archeology, History and Recreating the Trip of Jason and the Argonauts The earliest complete descriptions of Jason’s adventures come from the Argonautica , an epic poem composed in the 3rd century B.C. by the Hellenistic poet Apollonius Rhodius. The unhappy ending was added later. [Source: Kristin Romey, Archeology magazine, March/April 2001] Jason and the Argonauts Rhodious’s poem is not the first to mention Jason’s journey. The Argonaut legend is among the oldest known in the Greek world. Homer alluded to it the Iliad and the Odyssey . Some of the participants in the Trojan War were described as the sons and grandsons of the Argonauts, which would placed the Argonaut’s story about 30 to 75 years before the Trojan Wars which are thought have taken place around 1200 B.C. There is little archeological evidence to support the existence of Colchis and Greeks in the region in the 13th century B.C. but there is evidence of Greeks in Colchis from the mid 6th century B.C. onward. Some historians and archeologist believe the Argonauts myth reflects the earliest Greek explorations even though there is no physical evidence that the Greeks were exploring the Black Sea in 13th century B.C. In 1984, adventurer Steve Severin built a 54-foot galley, like the one Jason used, and assembled a crew of strong rowers to follow Jason's route through along the Greek Adriatic and the Turkish Black Sea coasts. Researching and building the sail and oar vessel took three years and Severin used the same materials the Greeks used (mainly Aleppo pine) and fastened the timber together with mortise-and-tenon joints instead of nails, as the ancient Greeks did. The 1,500 mile journey took three months. On average 10 of the 16 rowers rowed at one time and when there was no wind they averaged about three miles an hour. They navigated by following the land with their eyes as the Greeks did.⊛ Jason and the Golden Fleece http://www.pbs.org/mythsandheroes/myths_four_jason.html Jason and the Quest for the Gloden Fleece (part of a book) Chapter 2 page 17 of the book Mythical Journeys, Legendary Quests by Moyra Caldecott http://books.google.com.ua/books?id=yqeAU68uePYC&pg;=PA33&lpg;=PA33&dq;=The+Jason+Voyage+%281984%29&source;=bl&ots;=jxhIj4ddS_&sig;=H9_-T8OQyEZ4DIv2t8Tps6oB0Zc&hl;=en&sa;=X&ei;=UtYXUcScNsjntQbx14GYAw&sqi;=2&redir;_esc=y#v=onepage&q;=The%20Jason%20Voyage%20(1984)&f;=false Modern Argonaut .Adventurer's Voyage Gives Credence To Ancient... http://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1144&dat;=19860206&id;=v7QeAAAAIBAJ&sjid;=m2IEAAAAIBAJ&pg;=2802,3256647 Fw: Jason and the Argonauts - FULL MOVIE & short version 11.53 mins http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tuPC_dNKpqE http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9jrJnM88ybo 11.53 mins All Greek gods were fallen angels and nephilim offspring of the fallen angels and human women who God called witches. Zeus, the so called chief god was satan, Lucifer the fallen archangel. The Seat of Satan: Ancient Pergamum & Zeus http://www.cbn.com/700club/features/ChurchHistory/Pergamon/EZ28_seat_of_satan_part_1.aspx “To the angel of the church in Pergamum write: ‘I know your works, and where you dwell... where Satan’s throne is. And you hold fast to my name, and did not deny my faith even in the days in which Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was killed among you, where Satan dwells.'" Revelation 2:12 Today, all that's left of the city of Pergamum, now in modern-day Turkey, are ruins. But when the Apostle John wrote his letter to the church there, it was one of the most influential cities in the Roman Empire. The people of Pergamum were known as the "Temple-keepers of Asia." The city had three temples dedicated to the worship of the Roman emperor, another for the goddess Athena, and the Great Altar of Zeus, the king of the Greek gods. Many scholars believe this altar is the “Throne of Satan” mentioned in the book of Revelation The attached photo is an exhibit of artifacts in the Odessa Ukraine Archaeological museum. The artifacts were found beneath the sea near the island of Zmeinyi also known as Serpent or Snake island which is in the territory of Ukraine. However, at the exhibit in Odessa some people from Greece set up a large picture of the bay of Cyprus, where Aphrodite the goddess of love was born, in the exhibit and they also included sand from Cyprus bay underneath the Zmeinyi exhibits. I took a number of pictures of the exhibit and I, and numerous others can see demon faces, skulls and other faces in the pictures.

Additional, Zmeinyi Island is home of the mythical Achilles who was a mortal a war hero of the Trojan war, of whose parents were Greek gods. It is said that he and other heroes wonder about this island and they protect seaman and he even comes to them in their dreams to guide them in to the island. His ashes were placed here thousands of years ago. Temples to him and to the god Apollo were found under the sea here some years back.Undersea cities of Greek origin have been found here that date back to 2 to 3,000 years.

Regarding Aphrodite, she was the lover of Ares the god of war who loved to kill men so much even all of the other gods hated him for this.

THE EARTH BEFORE THE FLOOD DISAPPEARED CONTINENTS and CIVILIZATIONS Conception of A. Koltypin about origin and evolution of mankind http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/conception_of_a_koltypin_about_origin_and_evoluti.html http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/index.html About necessity of the reform of education in the field of the Earth sciences http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/aim_-_the_reform_of_education_in_the_field_of_natu.html Battles of ancient gods. 66 million years from flourishing to decline of mankind http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/battles_of_ancient_gods.html Film "Avatar" - fantasy or the scene from the history of mankind? http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/film_avatar_-_fantasy_or_the_scene_from_the_hist.html Adityas, daityas, danavas - space aggressors from Indian legends, white and black gods, forefathers of mankind Adityas, daityas, danavas - space aggressors from Indian legends, white and black gods, forefathers of mankind Cross as a symbol of the Sun http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/cross_as_a_symbol_of_the_sun.html Global catastrophes, changes of the Earth's axis position and destructions on the Earth http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/global_catastrophes_changes_of_the_earths_axis_p.html Shift (displacement) of the Poles - slip (slipping, sliding) of the lithosphere or change of incline (tilt) of the Earth's axis? http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/shift_of_the_poles_-_slip_of_the_lithosphere_or_ch.html Why did so few remnants of highly developed civilizations save? http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/why_did_so_few_remnants_of_highly_developed_civili.html Images of a basilisk (cockatrice), a griffin (griphon), the babylonian dragon and other unknown animals http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/images_of_unknown_animals.html News http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/news.html Hyperborea - Svarga -Jambudvipa. The world in which gods and demons lived http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/where_gods_and_demons_lived.html UFO, USO, ULO - flight vehicles of ancients. Whether the meeting with gods will take place? http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/ufo_uso_and_ulo_-_flying_vehicles_of_ancients.html Liaisons and marriages of fallen angels with native inhabitants of the Earth. Formation of generation of giants http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/liaisons_and_marriages_of_fallen_angels__with_nati.html Colonization of the Earth by space agressors (fragment of the "Mahabharata") http://www.dopotopa.com/lang1/colonization_of_the_earth_by_space_aliens_fragmen.html









Evidence of a “firmament” (water) above the earth, as stated in the Bible

Discovery by satellite knocks the skeptics-More Bible Evidence

ARCHAEOLOGY NEWSFLASH NO. 300 PLEASE NOTE: I always answer email requests. If you receive no reply it is because no person alive sees emails addressed to info1@archaeologyanswers.com Please resend your question to info@archaeologyanswers.com. (info@ - not info1@) and I promise you an answer. THIS MAY SHOCK YOU But keep reading, and you may get excited, just as I did. You've heard of the possible release by madmen of a global virus plague? But were you aware of an even more deadly intellectual bomb that has been let loose upon us? Hitler's atrocities were based on it. So were those of Stalin, Mao tse Tung and Pol Pot. Now it is the turn of the New World Order crazies. As an archaeologist, I already feel the hot breath of this criminal syndicate. Their lovely tentacles are reaching right into my field of operation. You may be wondering, how on earth do New World Order plans impact on archaeology? Here's how. Archaeology, whether you know it or not, encroaches on some matters that these nice Globalists are determined to keep from you. In particular, there's one crucial ancient document which freaks them out. More on that soon. THE TICKING TIME BOMB But first, what is that intellectual ticking bomb common to both Hitler and the Globalists? It's the nihilistic mindset - which has dominated scientific thought for the past century. Put simply, it says you and I are here by accident - genetic mutants and useless eaters. It's no loss if we're trampled, crushed or got rid of. So dump your basic rights as an individual. Your rights become secondary to those of the State. They can brainwash your children against you, confiscate your property, vaccinate you forcibly, and so on. You see, if the survival of the fittest helps improve the race, then the use of force and cruelty to crush the weak and unfit is justified. Get the logic? This is how the 2012 Globalists are thinking. If you're going to sell a mess of whoppers like this, you need a good advertising campaign. You need to create a well- oiled propaganda offensive that is almost impossible to avoid. SEIZING THE PROPAGANDA MACHINE So, swilling in their trillions of dollars, they have got themselves a pretty tight grip on the propaganda machine - which is the education system. Of course, most ordinary educators are probably honest men and women who have not the slightest suspicion that they are being used. They sincerely believe in what they are teaching (namely, what they've been taught). They haven't joined the dots. So they remain unwitting puppets. Likewise with many people in the media. It's been well observed that: "Most journalists are so brain-dead themselves, so lacking in understanding of what they are part of, that they, like most of the population, play a part in advancing an agenda they do not even know exists." (Uncensored magazine, September-December 2009, page 3) And even though many leading scientists are now questioning the evolution theory, the damage has been done. It has had a free hand and little or no opposition in the universities and colleges, and through the press and television, all these years. And so the propaganda that you are merely an evolutionary accident has already moulded society's thinking. But it is now in danger of committing mankind to a course of automatic self-destruction. And yet most people remain blissfully unaware of what has happened. So they continue to believe the litany of Globalist lies being poured upon them by a compliant media. After all, some big man said it. It has to be true. If you were to tell us that donkeys fly, we would believe that too (as long as you said it on TV). We're talking about a deliberate, crafty campaign. And it is BIGGER than you may ever have suspected. Let's face it. The models with which we identify strongly influence our behaviour. The man who believes he came from a beast may be more likely to behave like a beast. The image is not only degrading. It is dangerous. Perhaps a little nicer is the alternate theory that mankind was seeded by astronauts from outer space. The same evolution started us off. The ETs simply sped up the process. Um, OK. Don't get me wrong. I do believe in variation of species. And I do believe that other worlds are inhabited. So there! Anyway, to sum it up, we have the Globalist death squad, driven by evolutionary reasoning, with a generous dash of egotism, who are plotting to eliminate most people now living. And That probably includes you and your family. Their global agenda has been preparing for several hundred years. And it now appears within reach. THE DOCUMENT AND THE DEATH SQUAD But as these nice murder mongers step up their pace, there's a problem. One special document continues to stand in their way... a document so powerful that, were it to be re-awakened in the psyche of the masses, could seriously hamper their plans. And here comes the archaeological shock - because what I am about to reveal to you may be very opposite from what you have believed. It is totally opposite from what these guys in charge of the propaganda machine have been telling us. It concerns the Genesis document. You must have heard of this Genesis document. It is part of that most widely translated piece of literature in the world - the Bible. Oh, yeah? someone sniggers. Well, here's news for you, mate. Let me stick my neck out right now and inform you that Genesis is a powerhouse of explosive, up-to-the-minute data that might actually save your life. So think again. For starters, it says the Globalists are doomed. WORTH MORE THAN GOLD With gold hovering this year around $1600 for a single ounce, some are asking, Can anything be more valuable than gold? The answer is YES. Genesis avows that you and your precious children are worth more than silver or gold. That every person on this planet is here by the design of a purposeful, compassionate Supreme Being, who is over all. That you were created a dignified, free being, answerable firstly to your Maker, then to your family. The State is to represent and serve you, not to oppress you. I sort of like that, don't you? And what else? The Genesis document encapsulates secrets that can empower you to survive the impending financial crash, the coming tyranny and beyond. Did you know that? When common people plug into its secrets, they become ignited, invincible and unafraid. This is exactly what the Globalist gangsters don't want - an informed, empowered and fearless population. This gang is beyond the pale. They are obsessed with you becoming submissive, slumbering, and subdued, so that they can more easily execute their dark plans. INVENTING THE GENESIS LIE So an essential part of their dumbing down of the population was to invent the Genesis lie. And what is that? Let's create the rumor that the Genesis document is just a hotch potch of old myths. Let's get it laughed out of town. What a lovely idea. More specifically, let's tell the people that: * There is no scientific proof validating the Genesis document. * That old Genesis' claim that Eve was created from one of man's bones is unscientific nonsense. * Tell them that there is no evidence for any past worldwide flood disaster as described in Genesis. * Let's tell them that Genesis was copycatted from Sumerian mythical texts. * That Genesis is merely a collection of tales put together for religious purposes. * That the manuscripts have been interfered with so many times - so you can never know what was originally in it. Shrewd move. Cast doubt on the document and thereby, hopefully, neutralise its power. What a great, massive mind control strategy! And so the sheeple will ignore the anti-Globalist message in Genesis. And we can dumb them down. May I ask you have you heard any of those claims I've just listed? Well, it's a fact. These nice people call on flimsy archaeological data to convince themselves and us that Genesis is just plain myth. Just believe us, they say. We're taking charge of you. This scam goes on every day… in the controlled universities, the media and even in religious seminaries. THE QUESTION WE NEED TO KEEP ASKING Now here is a question you might want to ponder seriously: (a) Was the evolution theory (the antithesis of Genesis) adopted because it was scientifically justified, or

(b) was it deliberately taken on board - despite scientific evidence against it - as the excuse for an agenda? And - are you sitting down? - just get this headline which was released on June 4, 2009, in Times Online: "ONE IN SEVEN SCIENTISTS SAY COLLEAGUES FAKE DATA" News reporter Hannah Devlin opens with this shocking revelation: "Faking scientific data and failing to report commercial conflicts of interest are far more prevalent than previously thought, a study suggests." It's true, you know, if you are a scientist who dares question the evolution "religion", you are denied funding. My files are literally bursting with case histories. Talk about cover-ups of the truth! Kenneth Kitchen, Professor of Egyptology in the School of Archaeology and Oriental studies, University of Liverpool, hits it on the head. He says, "scientific and archaeological research is not getting through to young people in schools and colleges - particularly all the evidence supporting the reliability of the Bible [and in particular Genesis]. "In some circles there even seems to be a deliberate withholding of such information, yet it is the fruit of leading scholars… known for their restrained, moderate, factual presentation of their researches." (Forward to Victor Pearce's book Evidence For Truth: Archaeology, 2nd edition) ARE YOU ANGRY ABOUT THIS? Doesn't it make you angry to think that you may have been cheated? That, ignoring a wealth of research, these trusted "experts" are deliberately blocking information from you? While others, less informed, follow one another like sheep, glibly regurgitating for us old anti-Genesis theories which they have not allowed to be corrected by factual discoveries. And did you know, those who claim to be modern critics are often the most resistant to modern discoveries. Yes, but WHY are they? Sometimes we can let our prejudices get in the way. And then there is the teenie-weenie matter of honesty, or lack of it. Their problem is, you see, that Genesis enables us to be wide awake to the Globalists' little game. No wonder they will never welcome Genesis into their play pen! GENESIS 100% SCIENTIFIC From my decades in front-line archaeology, may I assure you that for scientific and historical accuracy Genesis towers like Mount Everest high above every other ancient document on this planet. Read that again. And you'd better believe it. This is not a misprint. Do you want some facts? INTEGRITY OF GENESIS AS A FACTUAL DOCUMENT * Firstly, did you know this: scientists have discovered that our first common mother lived at precisely the same time back that Genesis has been claiming all along? (But when this discovery was announced, Science magazine said, "No one thinks that's the case." - Science, Jan. 2, 1998) Oh? Yes, scientists have been pulling Genesis through the ringer. And in every test it comes up sparkling clean. And this is shocking them. But they're not telling us these things. You may be surprised at how Genesis and confirmed modern science are fitting more and more like a glove. For example: * In Genesis are the principles of Quantum mechanics, telling us that nothing can exist until light first exists! A modern discovery. * There is now undeniable evidence that a global sea of original matter "froze" into solid rock in just a few minutes - just as Genesis claims. (And not in millions of years, as we were brainwashed to believe) * Genesis says that all living things were created and formed by "words" (the DNA language, which comes in intelligently designed sentences). * That a portion from one person's body can form the basis of another totally complete human being. (We now understand cloning.) * That languages began in the very region of the globe specified in Genesis. * That natural catastrophe on a global scale reshaped the earth's surface and reset all natural processes at the very time indicated by Genesis - 2345 BC. * That 5 fabled lost cities of Genesis destroyed by burning balls of sulphur from the sky did really exist (remains found). * Genesis contains amazing shipbuilding science as modern as our 21st century. * And the biggest surprise of all: Scientific tests reveal Genesis to contain the world's OLDEST piece of writing. I ask you, why have we not been told? * Numerical sub-surface designs not found in any other book on earth have been discovered, similar to an author's fingerprint, or manufacturer's watermark, embedded beneath the Genesis text. These are proving impossible to for any man to deliberately structure. So what Master Mind dictated this "impossible" Genesis book? * Genesis' uncanny prophetic foreknowledge describes Middle East politics today, just as they are occurring in 2012 AD. * Genesis' scientifically confirmed, uncorrupted accuracy of transmission over thousands of years is unparalleled in world literature. * Its 21st century science includes: the structure of the periodic table of elements; quantum mechanics; the value of pi; the value of the exponential variable (the base of the Natural Logarithm); details of physics, chemistry, biochemistry; anatomy... And that's just a sampling. The bottom line is this: These recent discoveries establish Genesis as a credible authority concerning the Globalist agenda. You may well ask, do any other books - or even "holy books" - contain such information? In raw honesty, it must be stated that neither Homer's Iliad, the Koran, the Apocrypha, nor ANY other work of man contains, for example, the complex, interlocking numeric designs found beneath the surface of the Genesis narrative. NONE! It is the fingerprint of a non-human Master Mind. It matches a fingerprint discovered in nature - and beyond human ability to produce. AHEAD OF SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY From first hand research as a front line field scientist over 45 years, I have been driven to this conclusion: The Bible (which contains Genesis) was right before science was. The book of Genesis is never catching up to truth. Rather, truth is forever catching up to Genesis! This is a remarkable and unique document. So cool! We need to start rethinking. Genesis is not for old ladies, Christians, Muslims or Jews. It is a heritage document for the whole world. If you only knew, my team and I have put Genesis through all of the archaeological tests - and it comes up clean. Of this you can be sure. There is not a person alive today who is in a position to refute the Genesis record. Donald J. Wiseman, Professor Emeritus of Assyriology, University of London, agrees: "It has been my long experience that…it is never contradicted by archaeological and historical evidence when that too has been subjected to strict scrutiny." (Forward to Victor Pearce's book Evidence For Truth: Archaeology, 2nd edition, 1998) LINDA'S LETTER Today's newsletter was motivated partly by an email that came in from a lady named Linda. She asked: "Have you had any contact with people not of this world? and if so what have they told you about the future of mankind?" A natural enough question, and a good one. Here's my answer. Yes, information from out of this world is coming to us. But there are two opposite forces at work. There is an epidemic of appearances by entities who claim to be from other worlds, but are not. If you value your life, you will not trust them. (See the startling evidence in UFO Aliens: The Deadly Secret.

http://www.beforeus.com/aliens.html ) So, we might ask, is there a standard by which

(a) all present day sources of information and

(b) all records of the ancient world

can be safely judged? Indeed there is. It is a source likewise not of this world - a source you CAN safely trust. There is good evidence that the Genesis document comes from this source. Genesis and its associated books contain some 1,000 prophecies of coming events - prophecies which are beyond the ability of ordinary man to forecast - which have been uncannily fulfilled throughout history since, and are still ahead of the newspaper headlines. This includes a blow by blow description of events to develop under the New World Order. And a detailed description of the future of mankind. These messages form part of the Bible, and as a scientist who insists on good, credible evidence, I believe that we can safely accept that these have come from the Supreme Mind of the Creator Himself. So we can trust them. The discoveries confirming Genesis which we have tabulated above should at least make us curious. Have we been missing something? Does our foundation need to be re-examined? TEST YOUR SOURCES A caution is advisable here. If any source makes claims which contradict the watertight testimony of Genesis, alarm bells should ring concerning that source. And not the other way around. The Genesis standard is without equal. We need to rigorously test our sources, because many plausible pretenders are in the world. If they speak not in harmony with the Genesis standard, it is because there is no sure truth in them. Here's a short cut to help you. This will eliminate many sources that you find on the Internet, and in documents, ancient and modern. Key words that should raise your guard include "evolved", "Anunnuki", and "messages from space brothers". Re Evolution: Variation in nature is not evolution. Variation takes place within clearly defined limits - it is merely a selecting from the gene pool of already existing information. For evolution to occur, new genetic information would need to be added. But mutations (genetic copying mistakes) cannot do this. Information cannot be built up by mutations that lose it. And as for other inhabited worlds, they do exist. But Anunnuki or other "space brothers" did not create us. Seeding of life on this planet by extraterrestrials would not answer these two problems:

(a) the origin of DNA so that life could begin.

(b) the origin of ET intelligence in the first place.

ETs from another planet also needed a beginning, programmed with their DNA. As for the flood of plausible speculation out there to tickle our fancy, some writers have made names for themselves, peddling it. But, under close scrutiny, most of their "evidence" turns to jelly. The bottom line is this. If you want to prove your origins, you'd better come up with an authority whose credibility surpasses that of Genesis. Or else accept what Genesis says. Stop cheating yourself. Give the Genesis document an honest chance. Its widely touted flaws have simply been caused by our past ignorance. Today, you CAN take Genesis literally. And benefit from it. If a man wants to understand the past, the present and the future, wouldn't it be preferable to consult with One whose knowledge is not limited by time? Discovering the Supreme One's fingerprint on the Genesis document gives you a clear edge. Experts in archaeology reject the empty pretenders to knowledge who downgrade the Genesis account. Genesis stands in a class by itself. It is a remarkable document - one of its kind. A WARNING Always ask yourself, Have I personally checked out the validity of my sources? Be sure of your ground. THE CARDIOLOGIST'S PATIENTS ALL DIE You can be sure that many an "expert" will not be happy with these findings. He may wish to shrug off this evidence. But he has a lot of explaining to do. If he was a cardiologist, all his patients would be dead. Should a gang this smugly ignorant be running the world? If a man's claim of objectivity holds, he should now follow the evidence to where it leads and not to where he wants it to go. So, would you like to check out some of that scientific evidence of Genesis' absolute, physical, factual truth? Here's where to get it… The Weapon the Globalists Fear: For the ebook: http://www.beforeus.com/weapon-ebook.html

Physical book: http://www.beforeus.com/shopcart_hc.html

(Just scroll down to Item No. 81) Seldom before in all these years have I offered a choice between two versions of the same report - e-book and hard copy in the same newsletter. Why am I doing this now? Because of the tremendous benefit you will derive from the discovery of Genesis in this dangerous time of globalisation. I just don't want you to miss out on such a shattering discovery. Best regards,

Jonathan Gray

info@archaeologyanswers.com DO YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS? Please email me your questions. I am here to help you with any questions on ancient mysteries. Just email me at info@archaeologyanswers.com ---------------------------------------------

PLEASE TELL YOUR FRIENDS

--------------------------------------------- Did you enjoy this information? If you know someone who would find these facts interesting, Click the URL below now to email it to them, or copy and paste the URL below into your browser.

http://www.beforeus.com You are welcome to put it on your own website exactly as it is, without change, including our email address. ==========================================

International explorer, archaeologist and author Jonathan Gray has traveled the world to gather data on ancient mysteries. He has penetrated some largely unexplored areas, including parts of the Amazon headwaters. The author has also led expeditions to the bottom of the sea and to remote mountain and desert regions of the world. He lectures internationally.

======================================== If you have received this mailing in error, or do not wish to receive any further newsletter mailings from us, simply click "Reply" and type IN THE SUBJECT LINE "unsubscribe".

Or write to

Surprising Discoveries

Pacific Coast Highway

PO Box 785

Thames 3540

New Zealand

HUMANS WERE HUMAN EARLIER THAN THOUGHT Science artists love to depict early humankind as intelligent apes - standing upright, but hairy in a specifically primate-looking fashion, eyes and ears high on the head. Yet, as paleoanthropologists uncover more information about ancient humans, the evidence consistently points toward a race of beings that were intelligent and capable, different from anatomically modern humans primarily in that they camped out in caves. Recent discoveries show that fire was tamed by the earliest of humans, and they used it for more than just keeping warm. Researchers from Boston University found ash and bone remnants in Wonderwerk Cave in the Northern Cape province of South Africa, according to details published in the Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences. The ash and bones and been heated to nearly 1000 degrees Fahrenheit (500 C) in what appear to be a consistent series of controlled fires 100 feet inside the cave. The site has been dated to the early Acheulean period, about a million years ago, a time when Homo erectus (Homo ergaster in Africa) was busy making tools. Whether the dating of the site is absolute or relative in the timeline of human history, it does offer strong evidence that humans were using fire to cook their food much earlier than previously thought. Prior to this discovery, there were indications that humans used fire as early as 1.5 million years ago, but most paleoanthropologists agreed that only the 400,000-year-old use of fire could be well-established. It is well known that Neanderthals and modern humans used fire; it appears that early Homo erectuswas able to control fire as well. Paleoanthropologists commonly place H. erectus at between 1.9 million and 143 thousand years ago, when these early humans lived in groups found in spots from Indonesia and China all the way to the southern tip of Africa. Because the brain cases of H. erectus were on average smaller than the brains of people today (yet within the modern-day range of brain size), with thicker face and jaw bones, artists often portray H. erectus with ape-like features. Yet, the evidence has long demonstrated that these early men were just as human as the humans of today. We cannot go back in time and have a conversation with them, but we can examine the tools they left behind, and they were not the handiwork of a people who were intellectually defective. Tool-Making Homo erectus craftsmen chiseled tools from stone in a distinctive teardrop or oval shape, chipping stone hand axes and other cutting tools from the earliest time of their known existence. The cutting tools were used to butcher the large animals they hunted. The H. erectus people are always described as hunters and gatherers, yet their tools also included picks, which means they also spent time digging in the ground. While the "cave man" has long assumed to have been intellectually weak, the sophistication of the artifacts indicates otherwise. (Let's see Warren Buffet go out and use his bare hands and local rocks to make a stone knife sharp enough to field dress a deer.) Communication: While there has been question about whether H. erectus could communicate as we do today, this people did have a human hyoid bone. Also, the Broca's area of the H. erectus brain was like that of modern humans, according to studies of skull endocasts done by Thomas Wynn. Scientists have been slow to agree thatH. erectus communicated just as well as we do (perhaps better), but the paleoanthropological community has also been reluctant to agree that Neanderthals sat around chatting, and Neanderthals had larger brains than modern man. Considering their sophisticated tool production, sufficient brains and a hyoid bone, there seems to be little reason to believe that H. erectus did not use spoken language, except for the same assumptions about early man that cause the artists to draw him looking like an upright chimpanzee. Red Deer Cave People: Even modern man gets sketched as ape-like because he is determined to have "primitive" features. A recent article on the Red Deer Cave People in Southwest China published in last week's China Daily shows a fine ape-man pencil drawing at the top, even though the Red Deer Cave People were dated to less than 15,000 years ago, nearly 60,000 years after the time when scientists say men were using fire to blacksmith tools. According to the common paleoanthropology timeline, these are young humans who should look anatomically modern, yet they have "archaic-looking" parietal lobes, large molars, and thick skull bones - qualities that H. erectus also shared. The most important difference is their lack of a strong modern human chin. "They look very different from all modern humans, whether alive today or in Africa 150,000 years ago," Darren Curnoe of the University of New South Wales told the BBC. The Red Deer Cave People were also tool makers that used shovels and stone hammers. Even pyramids and quartz stone-cutting tools have been found in their isolated Asian home. "It is not rare to see fossils that carry both early and modern Homo sapien traits. In the same era, there were many human groups in China. Red Deer Cave people could just be ordinary Chinese," an anonymous paleoanthropologist in China told reporters. The skulls of modern humans are relatively similar, but that does not mean that ancient people who had different skull characteristics were any less human than we are. It simply indicates that certain human family groups died out while one group lived on. Related Links: Latest Fossils Shed Lights On Evolution And The Migration Of Man

- China Daily

Humans Tamed Fire by 1 Million Years Ago

- Scientific American

Stone Age Man Used Fire To Make Tools - 50,000 Years Earlier Than We Scientists Thought

- The Telegraph

Microstratigraphic Evidence Of In Situ Fire In The Acheulean Strata Of Wonderwerk Cave, Northern Cape Province, South Africa

- National Academy of Sciences

Homo Erectus

- Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History

Oldest Homo Erectus Tools Found, Early Humans Had Tools Way Earlier Than Previously Thought

- The Huffington Post

Becoming Human: Homo Erectus

- Institute of Human Origins

Language Capabilities of Homo erectus & Homo neanderthalensis

- Laboratorio de Lingui­stica Informatica

The legend given below tells that reptiles or snakes were grandparents of living in different geographical zones of the Earth (Africa, the Sundo archipelago, New Guinea, islands of Pacific ocean) people, and that they had formerly possessed by gift of immortality or of longevity, and Moon affected on their transient mortal life.