Feinstein and Boxer Ask Californians to Lay Down Their Weapons During Statewide Manhunt : palookavillepost.com
(PP)- As an ex-Los Angeles police officer killed three people and went on a deadly shooting rampage in a vendetta to punish those he attributed for his firing, California Senators Dianne Feinstein and Barbara Boxer pleaded for calm, and asked both law enforcement and civilians to lay down their weapons.

An intense manhunt for Christopher Dorner that aroused fear across several states and Mexico focused late Thursday on Big Bear Lake, about 80 miles east of Los Angeles, where police found a burned-out pickup truck that belonged to the ex-military and former police officer Dorner.

Throughout the day, Senators Feinstein and Boxer made desperate pleas for their California constituents to turn in their guns and not confront the crazed gunman because this would be a perfect test of their anti-gun proposals.

“The Senators feel the best course of action is to remove all weapons from law enforcement and private citizens so no one else gets hurt,” said a Senate communications intern. “When the gunman realizes that nobody else is armed, he will lay down his weapons and turn himself in…. that’s just human nature.”

“I will bring unconventional and asymmetrical warfare to Los Angeles Police Department officers, on or off duty,” said Dorner in his angry manifesto published online. The rant also claimed that: “Unfortunately, I will not be alive to see my name cleared. That’s what this is about, my name. A man is nothing without his name.”

Other California lawmakers chimed in on the Senators’ anti-gun stance with Los Angeles’ Democrat Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa saying disarmament was a good idea, except for public officials. Republicans thought the idea was just crazy.

“Feinstein and Boxer want everybody to go unarmed as a madman is running a round shooting people,” said a Riverside, CA. alderman. “If that is the truth… I’m never going to San Francisco again… something must be in the water to make them that insane.”

Dorner, 33, had multiple weapons including a frivolously banned assault rifle, said Los Angeles police Chief Charlie Beck, who urged the suspect to surrender at an unusual press conference in an underground high security room where police were shaking in their boots.

“Of course he knows what he’s doing, we trained him. He was also a member of the Armed Forces,” he said. “It is extremely worrisome and scary.”

The Palookaville Post has learned that nearly 10,000-members of the LAPD were dispatched to protect more than 108 potential targets across the region on Thursday. The department also said that the federal government was in fact more dangerous than the lone suspect because their ideas of weapon confiscation can hurt millions of Americans over several generations.

Putting down their weapons is simply not an option for all legal gun owners. It is their Constitutional right and moral responsibility to protect their loved ones…. it should be obvious.

Ace Cub Reporter Jimmy Olsentwins