The Center for Medical Progress
Last week’s bombshell announcement that Oregon Health and Science University stem cell scientists had successfully produced human embryonic stem cells through a cloning technique deserves special attention. In some ways, the news should not be surprising because for over a decade now, stem cell watchers have known that somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), the technique used in the Oregon paper, has been proposed as the standard means to produce patient-specific embryonic stem cells for clinical use.

From the Oregon paper:

A battery of pluripotency tests performed on human NT-ESCs demonstrated their similarities to genuine IVF-derived ESCs. Transcriptional interrogation indicated that NT-ESCs departed from their parental somatic cell gene expression pattern with upregulation of pluripotency associated genes. In addition, NTESCs demonstrated the ability to differentiate into a variety of other cell types in teratoma tumors. In-vitro-directed differentiation induced formation of contracting cardiomyocytes, demonstrating their potential for regenerative medicine. Genetic analyses showed that all four NT-ESC lines tested to date contained normal diploid karyotypes, with no detectable gross chromosomal abnormalities or contribution from the oocyte genome apart from mtDNA.

Two of the most important observations in this study are the comparison between NT-ESCs and IVF-ESCs, as well as between NT-ESCs and iPSCs. The NT-ESCs seem to exhibit the same properties as IVF-derived pluripotent cells, including, unfortunately, the tumorigenic potential (a hurdle yet to be fully overcome by iPS cells as well). However, the success rate of the NT-ESC protocol for producing viable ESC lines is 4 out of 63 attempts, or a little over 6%–leaps and bounds ahead of the 1% successful pluripotency induction rate for iPS cell production. Interestingly, fetal fibroblast cells provided the nuclei to produce the NT-ESCs in the Oregon paper–another example of the various types of stem cell research informing each other.

In light of what appears to be a vastly superior production rate in cloned ESCs to iPSCs, the comments of Dr. George Daley, a major iPS proponent from Harvard, and Dr. Josephine Johnston, a bioethicist at the Hastings Center, in a recent NPR interview are curious:

FLATOW: One question for you before we go. If you were going to use them therapeutically, as you’re speaking, would there be any advantage – let’s say a woman needs some therapeutic use of these stem cells – would there be any advantage in taking an egg from the same person that you would take the skin cells to produce the stem cells from? DALEY: Well you ask an interesting question. I mean whether or not there’s any immunogeneticy or an immune response to proteins of the mitochondria, and there is some evidence that that can be – so your question is – yeah, there might be some advantages, but we have the IPS approach. So if I took a skin biopsy from that woman and reprogrammed her skin cells, I’d be bringing along with it not only her nuclear DNA but her mitochondria, and they would be identical to her. So the real question is: Does a cloned cell have any scientific advantage or medical value that we don’t already get from IPS cells? JOHNSTON: And it’s an important question. I happen to think IPS cells are much more flexible and easier to use and will ultimately be the dominant platform, but we have to do the comparison, and we have to answer the questions.

While the production of NT-ESCs is an extensive procedure requiring the elaborate process of egg donation, the tradeoff might seem to be the vastly greater yield than iPS cells–it is difficult to see how a 1% production rate can be described as “flexible.” Yet as with all ESC-like cells, safety concerns may continue to impede translational research. A rather pessimistic assessment comes from a CNN contribution by Dr. David King:

In addition to the extremely expensive process of cloning, for each patient you have to culture stem cells and reliably turn them into the tissue you want with 100% efficiency, so you don’t get a single left over stem cell that will cause tumors. You have to do all that to a standard of accuracy that will satisfy government regulators and medical liability lawyers when something goes wrong. Forget it. We don’t do anything remotely approaching this in medicine and it doesn’t look like medical budgets are growing, does it? There are other much better solutions to the tissue rejection problem that will cost a fraction of the price. The fact is that the cloning paper published on Wednesday is zombie science. Therapeutic cloning was dead and buried years ago, but it just seems to keep on going, and so do people’s hopes.

It is perhaps odd that at a time when regenerative medicine had been moving away from embryonic stem cells, after a decade of debate, hype, funding battles, disillusioned transition to iPS and fetal cell work, we are now back to the original concept. As we reported last month, the father of ES cell research, Dr. James Thomson, confirmed the until-now-recent shift away from ESCs and disputed the utility of NT-ESCs. As has been the case for many years now, it seems that only time and research will tell which cells contribute best to which therapies.