Clip Transcript
Following are excerpts from Egyptian opposition activists' responses to Morsi's speech. The commentary aired on Sada Al-Balad TV on July 2, 2013:

TV host: How do you comment on this speech [by Morsi]?

Former MP Hamdi Al-Fakharani: This is my only comment. A worn-out shoe is my only comment.

He holds up his shoe to the camera

There is no other comment.

[...]

Opposition activist Ihab Al-Khouli: This "former" president is addicted to his throne. This man is a liar and a deceiver. The Muslim Brotherhood does not...

Gets worked up and chokes

TV host: Relax, have some water... Calm down, Ihab.

Al-Khouli continues to shout

Ihab Al-Khouli: He doesn’t know that when he goes to meet the Lord, he will not see Muhammad Badi' or Kheirat Al-Shater next to him. He will be buried in a space of one square meter. More than 33 million people have taken to the streets, but they don't see them. They are blind. Don't they know what has happened to this country because of them? They dare to talk about foreign and domestic conspiracies?! Morsi sent letter to Peres and to Obama. He is asking for the Americans' protection.

The president challenges his own people. He is pitting his supporters against us. He wants to fight. All Egyptian blood is sacred. I swear to you that I won't go home before Morsi is gone. All the patriotic people have taken to the streets. We could not have convinced all these people to take to the streets if not for all the things that Morsi did.

Al-Khouli breathes slowly and strenuously

What is this stupidity? What is this insanity? We're talking about Egypt, whose civilization goes back 7,000 years. They cannot do such a thing. What is this madness? What is this stupidity, this insanity? I say to all Egyptians: Any honorable man who loves this country must remain in the streets and not go home until Morsi is gone. Until a few hours ago, we were saying...

The TV host becomes concerned for Al-Khouli's well-being

TV host: Ihab, I'm worried about you...

Ihab Al-Khouli: We said he must declare new elections...

TV host: Ihab, I beg you, for my sake...

Ihab Al-Khouli: This man is now done for, and so is the Muslim Brotherhood. Egypt is the graveyard of terrorism and extremism. The lie of the Muslim Brotherhood has come to an end.

Hamdi Al-Fakharani: Ihab, calm down. You might have a heart attack.

Ihab Al-Khouli: We haven't seen any of their leaders out in the streets. He's threatening us...

Hamdi Al-Fakharani: Calm down. You will die on us. Morsi is not worth it.

Ihab Al-Khouli: He opposes the army, the police, and the people – 33 million.

TV host: Calm down, for my sake. I'm worried about you.

Ihab Al-Khouli: He made that constitutional declaration. This was wrong, wrong, wrong...

TV host: Enough. Calm down, for me. Please, be quiet for five minutes. I'm worried about you. It's not worth it.

Ihab Al-Khouli: What's going on in Egypt?!

TV host: Let's take a break. I'm telling you, let's take a break now!

TV host signals to the TV crew to cut the show

Ihab Al-Khouli: What's going on in Egypt?!

[...]