Democrats’ America hating Islamists to open DNC with prayer for sharia to replace US Constitution « « Coach is RightCoach is Right
Democrats’ America hating Islamists to open DNC with prayer for sharia to replace US Constitution

By Derrick Hollenbeck, staff writer

When the Democrat National Convention hate America festival gets started it will begin with a “Jummah” or Muslim prayer group. There will be about 20,000 people gathered for a celebration of the Islamists plans to eventually overthrow our government and replace our Constitutional government with a Sharia controlled theocracy. This begs the question: who will be there and what do they represent?

The leaders of the Jummah will be Jibril Hough and Imam Siraj Wahha. Both men have a long track record of hatred for America and our way of life – especially the freedom of women to live productive lives. These two are Islamists, both avowed enemies of America, have been invited to celebrate their plans for our demise in return for filling the otherwise empty seats the cameras might accidentally show during the main hate fest the Democrats themselves will be putting on.

With full knowledge that Siraj Wahhaj is an unindicted co-conspirator in the 1993 World Trade Center bombing that killed six Americans, the Democrats invited him to kick off their hate festival. He is on record as saying it is the duty of all Muslims to replace the US Constitution with Sharia law.

Jibril Hough is a leader of a Charlotte North Carolina mosque which has helped funnel millions of dollars to terrorist groups that are fighting and killing American troops. The North American Islamic Trust (NAIT) owns the mosque building. The NAIT which is a front for Hamas and the Muslim Brotherhood, was also an unindicted coconspirator of the 1993 WTC bombing.

As has been the case with other Jummahs led by Siraj Wahhaj this one will be devoted to asking Allah to overthrow the Patriot Act and stop the New York Police Department’s surveillance of our Islamist enemies.

Another attendee at the Mulim/Democrat hate America gathering will be former military Chaplin James Yusuf Yee a virulently anti-American who was charged with sedition for aiding the enemy and only released when the government concluded its presentation of the evidence against him would expose national security secrets endangering Americans.

Also kneeling in prayer with Wahhaj Hough and Yee will be Hassen Abdellah a lead defense attorney for several 9/11 terrorists who later proudly admitted they were guilty. The notation on the Jummah flyer calls Abdellah: “A Lead Defense Attorney For First 1993 World Trade Bombing Suspects Hassen Abdellah Has Etched His Name In Islamic History As It Is Being Written Right Here In America.”

Prominent among the Democrats who are cheering the Islamists’ drive to force sharia law on us is Congresswoman Maxine Waters who claims that Republican resistance to Sharia law is fear mongering and bigotry. By backing Sharia law Democrats are as dangerous to us as any American hating Islamist. We cannot forget this in November.

Follow Coach at twitter.com @KcoachcCoach

To reach your Congressional representative, use this link:

http://www.contactingthecongress.org/

To read more use these links:

http://www.wnd.com/2010/02/126500/

http://times247.com/articles/dems-draw-in-muslims-with-jumah-at-the-dnc#ixzz24IOTiQeJ

http://exposingliberallies.blogspot.com/2012/07/maxine-waters-on-sharia-law.html

To read about the Democrats close ties to Communism over the past 70 years get you copy of Coach’s new book Crooks Thugs and bigots: the lost hidden and changed history of the Democratic Party available at: http://crooksthugsandbigots.com

In this world you may have knowledge or you may have repose, but you may not have both.

What have you done today to deserve to live in America? If you want suggestions of what to do to fight for our freedom see the “What each of us can do to defeat Obama” page at the top of the CiR homepage.

Comments on this or any other coachisright.com essay can be sent by following the posting instructions below.



Share and Enjoy:























Related posts: