Say no to Girl Scout cookies
I feel so sorry for the children of every one leaving disgusting and intolerant comments. You are all sick and twisted, and I have no idea what the hell you're going to say to God when you are kneeling in front of him and he asks you what you did to make this world a better place. You all hold your "principles" and "morals" for everyone to see, but inside, you're all decaying and rotting, that's why you focus on others, so you don;t have to see yourselves. There's a huge problem when people only know you're a "Christian" by your Facebook.

Posted by Ninoska Xix on 2012-01-19 01:52:50

I completely agree. Educate, defund, and reallocate should be our strategy here and on every other front in the culture war. Let the 'transgendered', the homosexuals, the feminists, the perverts spend their own money -- they will no longer obtain ours through cute girls or adorable animals used as a front. No more, no longer, never again.

Posted by InRussetShadows on 2012-01-19 01:12:19

People are not born gay. Sorry, that's simply factually inaccurate. If you look into the research, it is not scientifically reproducible -- even the studies done upon gay men's brains. It is not a part of life, like it or not. Homosexuality is a spiritual/psychological disorder, and some evidence of this can be seen in the APA classification of homosexuality as a mental disorder up until around, oh, 1970 or so. Have you looked into how that classification was reversed? I'll give you a teaser: it wasn't through any sort of scientific consensus.



And if you think that murder is an acceptable choice, that tells me much of your value for life. I hope you have never told your daughters that they too could have been rotting cells in a garbage bin if they were born in a different situation. Mother and murderer; may your sleep be troubled!

Posted by InRussetShadows on 2012-01-19 01:07:34

No, you make a fundamental mistake in thinking that the universe produces humans, and then say that god (small 'g') creates people. That is your first logical error. Your next error lies in your determination of God's (note: big 'g') character -- that He wills or purposes people to be born into the wrong body -- that He errs. Your third logical error lies in calling the people that speak the truth 'universe enforcers', as though they had the power to enforce anything. Your fourth error is to claim that no-one can judge (i.e. speak against) someone else for living their life in a certain way. If I know the truth and I fail to tell someone else what is, then I am letting them speak and live a lie.

Posted by InRussetShadows on 2012-01-19 01:02:32

Negative on your Info....

Posted by Cindy O'Neill on 2012-01-18 22:35:29

PROUD Supporter of the Girl Scouts of the USA. Everyone does have their opinion. Please do not believe everything you read. GO GIRL SCOUTS!!

Posted by Cindy O'Neill on 2012-01-18 22:34:26

I hope All posts appear here. I tried posting 15 minutes ago and so far: No Luck.

Posted by Cindy O'Neill on 2012-01-18 22:32:46

Really, Ian? Who cares? You don't care about standing up for what's right and true? Would you rather have someone else do it while you sit back and read the comments? This discission is not about religion or God. It's about what's right. Taking God out of the picture completely, all humans were born with a sense of right, and a sense of wrong. Killing people, obviously, would fall into the wrong category, wouldn't you agree? And if you saw a person with a gun to another person's head, would you just sit back and say "who cares, really"? If nobody stood up for what's right, where would we all be?

Posted by FujaBlue on 2012-01-18 21:25:23

The brain of an alcoholic is also shown to be different than other brains. This, however is not due to the fact that a person was born an alcoholic, but rather that repeated actions and processes actually can change the brain. So, it isn’t the way a person was born, but the way a person conditioned him/herself, or was conditioned.

Posted by mrs_robinson on 2012-01-18 21:21:55

Is'nt there more important things in life to worry about then pulling apart a organization that has been around for years. I have been in GirL Scouts for over 25 years and I am proud of it. Growing up I did not know about transgender, planned parenthood or where money went. I only knew and enjoyed camping , making friends and learning new things. I have memories of fun and innocent years of growing up with Girl Scouts. I encourage my daughter and her friends to become Girl Scouts. Please look around and see all the other things in life that are more important then destoring a good organization. So go and buy cookies at the store instead of supporting and helping girls. The way you feel about these things are adult issues and should not be taken out on children.

Posted by Donna Kopistecki on 2012-01-18 21:01:26

Boycotting girl scout cookies is idiotic, as is the reasoning behind said boycott. They're CHILDREN that want to be in a silly little CLUB. How ridiculous, that we have let our personal vendettas and set of religious codes get in the way of a child's happiness.

Posted by Kimmie Wolf on 2012-01-18 20:48:34

I'm buying as many cookies as I can. I support a women's right to choose. Regardless of my personal opinion about abortions I do not have the right to inflict my opinion on the rest of the world. There is a huge difference between being "Pro-choice" and "Pro-abortion". I may not believe in getting an abortion myself but I am not in any place to judge anyone else or take that right away. Pro-choice means a women's right to make her own decisions regarding her health care and privacy. Be careful what you are doing here by saying you want that right taken away. No one is forcing anyone to get an abortion and they are certainly not "selling" them. I wonder if anyone commenting here has ever volunteered in an abortion clinic or women's clinic offering counsel to women in this position? There's a lot more to do with this issue than most are aware of. For everyone that believe that getting an abortion is so morally wrong, how many of you take a daily medication for lets say controlling hypertension, hyperlipidemia, arrhythmias and diabetes? How many of you would want to be resuscitated in the case of cardiac arrest? Maybe you are taking away God's will in preventing disease. What these very difficult issues come down to your own personal moral code, which is not suppose to be enforced by the government. It's up to each individual to live their life according to their moral compass but it is not there right to inflict it upon others.

Posted by Gianna Petrone on 2012-01-18 20:31:10

I posted earlier and I would like to add another bit of information. I called Girl Scouts of the United States (the head office for Girl Scouting) and asked to speak with someone in finance. I spoke with Cheryl and let her know the information present in this article. She responded back and I am copying the information into this post

Caroline,



Hello! Thank you for your call earlier.



I passed on your question to our communications department and they confirmed that Girl Scouts of the USA does not have a relationship or partnership with Planned Parenthood (per FAQs on our website). In addition, Girl Scouts of the USA does not donate to Susan G. Komen.



Is there anything else I can assist you with?



Thanks for promoting accurate messaging about Girl Scouts,



Cheryl



Cheryl R. Olson, CPA

Director, Council Financial Consulting

Girl Scouts of the USA



Posted by Caroline Smith on 2012-01-18 18:01:29

Patty-let us leave religion out of it and ask the question what is the unborn? When a woman is pregnant, what is she pregnant with? When we get right down to it, she is pregnant with a unique human being with his/her own dna. In what other instance would it be ok to kill another human being just because he/she is not wanted? Would it be ok to make robbery legal just so that we can make it "safer" for the criminal?

Can a mother of a 2 year old kill him/her? Why or why not? What is the difference between the two?

Posted by mommyhacker on 2012-01-18 16:15:38

i think THIS statement demands some proof ... "the organization is active in the cover-up of statutory rape"



please provide links and/or reference material that can back up that claim, and not with hyperbole but with black&white research, court cases, you know ... facts

Posted by MisterWeenie on 2012-01-18 16:11:12

Who cares, honestly? Abortion, pro-life? Shut up and let people live their lives and let God decide what to do with them. And for those of you who don't believe in God, simply stop budding yourself into another humans life.

Posted by Ian Phillips on 2012-01-18 15:57:32

Would someone explain how a seven year old determines his sexual orientation or is this his mother's analysis? This is child abuse to the highest degree. The parent should be incarcerated.

As for GSUSA....shame on you for your involvement in the death culture....girl scouts like boy scouts are groomed to help people. The death culture is just the opposite...they get rid of those who need help. Never mind boycotting cookies.....just boycott the organization.

Posted by Jacqueleen on 2012-01-18 15:52:58



Actually, it wasn't proven. There are tests that have been done that show a difference in the hypothalmus of the brain in some transgendered people. However, to conlcude that they are "born that way" you would need to see what the brain looked like as a young child. That has not be tested. Brain differences can be explained by preoccupied thinking and imagination alone. Thinking, particularly repeated mental exercise, changes significantly the microstructure of the brain. If someone is obsessed with body shape and the desire to be the other sex, that repeated preoccupation could in itself be responsible for the brain change. Nothing is conclusive yet. Nothing has been "proven".



I didn't say transgenders don't exist. I'm saying that there is no proof that they are born that way.

Posted by lidiapurple on 2012-01-18 14:55:35

This is up to your troop leader to set things up of service!

Posted by Lori Schalles on 2012-01-18 14:30:40



Posted by Caroline Smith on 2012-01-18 14:09:22 This is a pathetic article. Obviously this person has done no real research into what Scouting is all about. If she bothered to even visit one of her local troops she would see that Girl Scouts is all about building "Girls of courage, confidence and character who make the world a better place". My girls have used their cookie money to but food for the local food pantry, make dog biscuits and cat toys for the local animal shelter, and make easter baskets for foster children. They have learned about budgeting and planning when a trip is planned. They have learned how to cook safely in a kitchen or out on a fire. As 2nd and 3rd graders they have learned CPR and how to use an AED. No organization is perfect, but the fact that a person would tell you not to buy cookies (a troop's primary way of raising money) essentially says that you should not invest in the young girls in your community. I have NEVER heard anything passed down from Council telling us to make our girls believe in abortion as an answer. What I do hear is to teach our girls that they can be anything and do anything they want in their lives. The message of Girl Scouting is to lift our girls up, teach them how to be productive members in society and to make this world a better place. If anyone has a question as to whether their Council is supporting Planned Parenthood then contact that council and ask. http://www.girlscouts.org/coun... is the link to find the council for your area. Dont spread rumors spread facts.

I feel every woman should have the right to choose. It is a choice that she will have to live with her entire life. Who is anyone to say what a woman can and cannot do with her body? I dont see any telling men they cant masterbate or any telling others they cannot dye their hair or wear colthing stlyes of their choice??? I understand that abortion is killing a child but maybe that child would be living a horrible life on earth. What if that woman was raped and got pregnant because of it? Is she wrong to get an abortion? I dont believe so. If she can live with that choice then she has to bear the repricussions from her choice, not you nor I. Im glad that the girl scouts support the right to choose. I was once a girl scout and I came from a single mom and we faced many hardships. Girl scouts gave me so many different experiences that I would have never been able to encounter without them. I dont see where religion has any part of this. Isnt it in the bible that god forgives? I dont want to be a part of a religion where im forced to be "one of the crowd". To me after reading some of these comments, the christian religion sounds more and more like communism

Posted by Nickki Marie on 2012-01-18 12:55:28

The brain of a transgender male was proven to be different than the brain of a "regular" male. Theres noticeable difference that make it look closer to a female brain in many parts. So they don't just "feel" like they are in a different body...they are. Saying transgenders don't exist is like saying its impossible for conjoined twins to exist. It's a birth defect just like anything else.

Posted by cooper16 on 2012-01-18 12:55:09

You might not personally molest a child but is it OK for others to do so? You probably would not beat your child up...but is it Ok for another non catholic parent to beat up their child? Is it OK for someone who is poor and has little food to come into your home and steal your food? We legislate morality all the time to protect citizens. Babies in the womb are our youngest, most defenseless citizens. I hope you will rethink your "logic". I was once VERY pro-choice also so I understand your feelings. Take them to prayer. You will change your mind. Most abortions have absolutely nothing to do with medical necessity. Most abortions are not even performed by a woman's dr. They are performed by a strange man, at a clinic the woman has never been to before in her life.

Posted by Liza Koon on 2012-01-18 12:20:26

No, shame on the girl scout councils that partner with Planned Parenthood! Traditional Christians don't want their little girls learning that it can be ok to make a "choice" to end an innocent human life, or their girls or boys to get the impression that God messed up and made a mistake with their physical gender and gave them the wrong one. If the girl scouts insist on this path of bringing contemporary morally relativist ideologies into their organization, they risk losing the support of serious-minded Christians who want thier kids to grow up with the strong values and principles taught in their faith- that unfortunately includes not financing this course through the cookies fundraiser.

Posted by bluesky3 on 2012-01-18 12:05:54

No one has the "right" to choose to murder. And more insulting, is that you think a woman has some special right to choose to murder her child.

Posted by lidiapurple on 2012-01-18 11:50:13

Transgendered means having the biological parts of one sex but feeling that you are the other sex. So, an autopsy wouldn't prove anything. Perhaps you are thinking of another condition?

Posted by lidiapurple on 2012-01-18 11:46:42

Actually people born transgender has been proven by medical autopsies. Perhaps you need a lesson in biology.

Posted by cooper16 on 2012-01-18 11:12:08

YOu really think these clinics are sterile and safe?! When states put health standards in place for these clinics MANY of them fail! They are not up to the standard of a hospital, and by law in many places you don't even need to be a doctor to give a woman an abortion before 8 weeks! It's a myth that legalizing abortion stopped "back alley" abortions. All it did was allow these butchers to put a sign up to allow women to know where to come. The back alley just became a clinic.

Posted by cooper16 on 2012-01-18 11:10:59

Abortion is a medical procedure, and should not be used for birth control. That being said, there are times it is the ONLY choice. A woman who really wants an abortion will have one, no matter if she has to do it herself. It is better done in a sterile environment than a back street. I am Catholic, and it would not be a choice, but I have no right to force my religious beliefs on anyone else. That should be between the woman, her God, and her doctor, and no one else, especially the government, has a right to interfere,

Posted by Patty Ramirez on 2012-01-18 10:32:22

Dear Ms. Walsh - Are you not aware of the fact that PP actually supports the rape and sexualization and trafficking of women and girls? Yes - the organization is active in the cover-up of statutory rape - asserting that there is something healthy and appealing about girls being introduced to sex by a more experienced older person. The organization's promotion of abortion services, in the US and worldwide, helps to support the sex trafficking industry. (How do you think they keep the girls/women working and unhindered by those inconvenient pregnancies?)

Posted by Laura Lowder on 2012-01-18 10:16:36

No matter what "good" an organization does, the promotion of the killing of children in the womb makes it morally evil. You need to understand the meaning of the word "disgusting."

Posted by Joseph Cocucci on 2012-01-18 10:13:24





Also, I don't know about you, but PP's agenda to sexualize young children is not compatible with good sense. Children deserve to be allowed their innocence - not forced into a premature adulthood with sexualization. Isn't that one of the attributes of the old pagan world we have been horrified by? Yet PP is somehow supposed to be doing heroic work in re-introducing pagan sexual values to our children?



Can you say SICK?



Posted by Laura Lowder on 2012-01-18 10:12:36 Because if you look at the PP Website, you'll see that PP's "good works" are a drop in the bucket that contains mostly evil. Look - PP was formerly The American Birth Control League. It was founded by Margaret Sanger, and one of its primary purposes was and still is today eugenics. Nonwhites are targeted by PP for abortion services. Look at the website blackgenocide.org to see for yourself.Also, I don't know about you, but PP's agenda to sexualize young children is not compatible with good sense. Children deserve to be allowed their innocence - not forced into a premature adulthood with sexualization. Isn't that one of the attributes of the old pagan world we have been horrified by? Yet PP is somehow supposed to be doing heroic work in re-introducing pagan sexual values to our children?Can you say SICK?

The internet provides pornography to millions; by posting on the internet and providing content you are supporting a system that provides pornography, drug access, and social promiscuity to billions. Same logic... flawed.

Posted by Drift on 2012-01-18 10:00:54

If you want to know what God says about His creation you might try reading His Word... the Bible. The whole Bible... not just selected passages, as some do, to substantiate any opinion. If you read His Word you would learn that He formed us in the womb. He formed and fashioned each life and He has a purpose for each life. If He formed us then you are correct in saying that there are an infinite number of possibilities in our characteristics, but we are not to live according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit. We are to show our love for God by obeying His commands. His commands are clear... and we are not charged with enforcing them but with speaking the truth in love. We are not ashamed by your "shame on you" we are ashamed by our culture that embraces deviance, distortion and death.

Posted by Carol on 2012-01-18 09:48:43

You are disgusting....get your facts right. Why don't you mention all of the GOOD things that Planned Parenthood does. This is just a shameful article.

Posted by gerbebes on 2012-01-18 09:35:13

herelikeyou, I don't think the intent here is to judge people; rather it is to judge the wisdom of encouraging children to act out gender identity crises. My personal judgement, as a person created by God, is to question that sort of wisdom.



Curious, that you failed to capitalize the word God in your comment....

Posted by AcceptingReality on 2012-01-18 08:48:27

I, for one, am appalled. When I found out "Girl Scout Cookies" don't contain real girls, well I just had to boycott them.

Posted by Lighspeed Snail on 2012-01-18 01:50:23

And how messed up is it that the boy scouts are banned in 350 school districts across America because some have refused to hire GAY MEN to lead their MALE troops! They don't hire WOMEN to lead the troops, for obvious reasons: the power dynamic could be abused! So how are GAY MEN not held to the same standard of decency? Because of the LEft's SICK view of social justice and equality! I have news for you lefties: THERE IS NO EQUALITY. And GAY PEOPLE have to follow the same rules as straight people. There have been HUNDREDS of instances of abuse by gay scout leaders against innocent children. IT is a DISGRACE. And what about FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION? In a free society, any privately funded group should be allowed to hire and fire whomever they want. But with the left, you get employers being forced to hire people based on the color of their skin and unable to fire based on sexual orientation. How messed up is that? This country represents freedom of choice, and the lefties just want to take that away and impose their world view on the rest of us, forcing us to pay for abortion, which we consider murder, through the government. DEFUND PLANNED PARENTHOOD AND MEDIA MATTERS!!!

Posted by libertyandtyranny on 2012-01-18 01:50:12

"...promiscuous sex..."



I guess we know why they call it "Girl Scout". ;-)

Posted by Lighspeed Snail on 2012-01-18 01:48:13

It varies by council. Some troops receive more or less "cookie money" then others.

Giving to the troop directly is still a much better option.



However, I would not support the organization either way.

Posted by גבריאל on 2012-01-18 01:41:31

I personally cannot understand how a person can be "born gay" - or even "born straight" for that matter!!

We don't develop sexually until much later in life. (um, PUBERTY? We aren't born with sexual desires!) Everyone needs to go study development, apparently.

Posted by גבריאל on 2012-01-18 01:39:38



However, you must look at the bigger picture; GSUSA itself supports pro-choice, regardless of the council or area.

It may not be directly in their curriculum (yet) but Girl Scouting DOES support pro-choice.



You may not be teaching pro-choice views to your troop, but you are representing an organization that supports them.



Think of it this way: is it Christ-like to join a Atheist-based cooking club, as long as you JUST cook?

Obviously, no such organization exists (to my knowledge). But if you were to join this club, you would support cooking AND Atheism - even if you focused solely on the cooking.



I would encourage you to re-think your decision.

Pray about it.

Think not only about your troop, but your impact on the world.



Look into American Heritage Girls (









Posted by גבריאל on 2012-01-18 01:34:52 I agree with your standpoint.However, you must look at the bigger picture; GSUSA itself supports pro-choice, regardless of the council or area.It may not be directly in their curriculum (yet) but Girl Scouting DOES support pro-choice.You may not be teaching pro-choice views to your troop, but you are representing an organization that supports them.Think of it this way: is it Christ-like to join a Atheist-based cooking club, as long as you JUST cook?Obviously, no such organization exists (to my knowledge). But if you were to join this club, you would support cooking AND Atheism - even if you focused solely on the cooking.I would encourage you to re-think your decision.Pray about it.Think not only about your troop, but your impact on the world.Look into American Heritage Girls ( http://www.ahgonline.org/) . Perhaps if you had a replacement for the fun activities, you would be less apt to support GSUSA.

Your specific troop, service unit, or council may not specifically be funding Planned Parenthood (or "selling abortions"), but you are still a part of GSUSA.

Therefore, you are still supporting abortion, since the organization itself is Pro-choice.

What goes for one counsel will eventually stand true for all; otherwise, it wouldn't be "fair".



While it may be indirect, your troop is essentially supporting abortion every time they sell a box of cookies. Unfortunately, there is no way around it.



I know this can be very difficult to accept. I was a Girl Scout for many years. I sold many cookies, and was in the process of earning my Gold Award.

However, I never really researched the organization I was involved in until last month... I just trusted my leaders and assumed I was supporting a good cause. When I found out what was really going on, I was DONE.



My troop never went out "selling abortions", but now that I know what my (former) organization supports, I could not stand for it.



True, GSUSA has provided me with many good experiences, but not good enough to support abortion.

Had I known earlier, I would have joined the local American Heritage Girls troop (same concept as Girl Scouts, without the liberal values).





Same experience... Cheaper price... No babies killed. =)

Posted by גבריאל on 2012-01-18 01:20:49

There is no further justification for this organization. The Heritage Girls have now taken their place for people to send their daughters without fear of them being mentally and emotionally damaged by all this feminist garbage.

Posted by Tish Morgna on 2012-01-18 00:19:45

Even if you don't think you are a bigot (which you are) you have to admit you are wasting your energy - if you really want to fight evil in the world, why not go after something truly harmful, by taking political action and writing articles against just one of the countless evils perpetrated against women every year. There are plenty to choose from, take your pick: human trafficking, domestic violence, and the rape of women and girls. These things happen every day, and you are distracting your audience from urgent problems with your inane blabbering about your horrible "sacrifices" with regard to the purchase of girl scout cookies. Get real.

Posted by Seanna Walsh on 2012-01-18 00:12:16





The brochure issue is also detailed here:

Posted by Dana Renee' on 2012-01-18 00:04:33 Girl Scouts of America specifically addresses these rumors on their website here: http://www.girlscouts.org/gs_c... The brochure issue is also detailed here: http://www.truthorfiction.com/...

Are you judging 777 Soldier for how he wants to live his life and believe? If judging people is wrong, you should not judge him. You believe that you are definitely right and 777 Soldier is definitely wrong? Isn't that a judgment call? What gives you the right to be the laws of the universe enforcer? In fact,how do you even know the laws of the universe? There seems to be a double standard in your thinking.

Posted by Martha McLean on 2012-01-17 23:39:45

A few years ago, I was a brownie leader, and I was very disappointed in the program. They did crafts, but no service. They really weren't promoting becoming better or helping the community, or morality or just anything to help the girls become better people. So after the year, I decided girls scouts was not worth my time or my daughter's time. Now I know why the program was so devoid of morality. We loved girl scout cookies. But they when the girl scouts are promoting promiscuity and other behaviors that hurt girls and society, I would rather take that $15 and donate to an organization that is promoting morality and keeping women safe.

Posted by Diane Robertson on 2012-01-17 23:29:13

Repeat a lie often enough and people accept it as true. It is not a FACT that people are born gay or not. There is no scientific evidence that proves this. But there is much agreement by scientists that early personal experience and environment play a big part in whether or not a person develops same sex attraction.



And people born in the wrong body???? Really?

Posted by lidiapurple on 2012-01-17 22:45:33

We have officially gone out of our heads when people think this universe in all its beauty and wonder can't produce humans who happen to be different than some may like. Some people, People created by god, may fall in love with someone of the same sex. Some people, created by god, tend to be far more feminine than others and may associate them self as being a female. This life is far more complex and full of variety than you could ever think you can comprehend. So don't try to be some sort of laws of the universe enforcer when you cannot possibly comprehend it. Lord help help us? Lord created us in all the beautiful varieties that we come in. You are wrong to judge someone for how they want to live their life. Shame on you. Shame on this website.

Posted by herelikeyou on 2012-01-17 22:41:16

you're begging the question.

Posted by C Anderson on 2012-01-17 22:37:46

This is nothing but propaganda perpetrated by hate mongers. You ARE NOT true Christians. To use the word of God to hate is one of the greatest sins in the eyes of the Lord. This organization has done more good then bad. Take your hate somewhere else. Also, you should not be proposing that other people shame children. That is also Child Abuse.

A REAL CHRISTIAN WOMAN

Posted by realchristianwoman on 2012-01-17 22:20:43

How about you don't use poverty to justify murder. Sounds like you are right in line with the sick mentality of PP.

Posted by 777 Soldier on 2012-01-17 22:06:39

We have officially gone out of our heads when someone can use the phrase"some people are born in the wrong body" and that person actually believes it and others do too. Lord help us.

Posted by 777 Soldier on 2012-01-17 22:03:09

Pray for the Holy Spirit, when asked to buy, tell them NO & then why, with love & compassion. If you defend God, He will defend you with our Heavenly Father.

Posted by Himandme on 2012-01-17 22:02:21

I really dont think that the girl scouts are promoting promiscuous sex by telling girls that if they are going to get drunk or high to plan ahead and keep condoms near where they will have sex. If girls are going to get drunk and have sex, they SHOULD be prepared with condoms. Just because some group tells them to keep condoms does not mean the group is telling them to go have sex. I took health education in high school and they mentioned having sex and being prepared. They even showed us how to use condoms...are you saying my high school was promoting promiscuity?



If you're not pro-choice, then good for you...but don't go bashing a company just because of their personal beliefs and we won't bash you for yours. I guess I'll stop donating money to my church then since I am pro-choice and since they don't believe in abortion, they don't deserve my money either.

Posted by Ithinkyousuck on 2012-01-17 20:13:50

I had already heard these concerns before I got involved with Girl Scouts this year. I decided not to run scared from people I don't agree with before fully researching the truth. At least where I live (the Pacific Northwest) Planned Parenthood has no involvement in troop activities, curriculum etc. Anyone is invited to have a booth at Jamborees and I'm sure Planned Parenthood is there with bells on. As can any other organization (Hint Hint!) Basically, a Girl Scout troop is what the troop wants it to be. If they want to raise money to travel, they can. If they want to learn about the environment, they can. If they want to learn homemaking skills, they can. As a Christian and as a parent, I want to be fully involved in what my children do and learn. I am part of the troop leadership so I know that nothing involving abortion, or religion or otherwise disagreeable is being taught. Our troop focuses on helping our community and learning how to be leaders. That's it. I think it's my responsibility to be involved and hopefully get to know girls I might not otherwise have a chance to know--hopefully with the opportunity to influence girls in a positive way. Remember, the only necessary for evil to triumph is for good men to do nothing.

Posted by Molly Sears Wehrley on 2012-01-17 19:26:18

I will no longer support the Girl Scouts until they make a public statement that is respectful of the inherent Dignity of all persons, who have been created from the moment of their conception, equal in Dignity, while being complementary as male and female

Posted by NDaniels on 2012-01-17 19:12:25





http://www.girlscouts.org/gs_c...



Again please document what you say against the GSA OR recind your acticle. Please

Posted by JonesinSC on 2012-01-17 19:08:15 Can you please document your claim. Every piece of information I can find talks about the World Organization doing these things -- NOT the GSA. The GSA does not follow everything the World Organization says. Here is a GSA web site that explains this.Again please document what you say against the GSA OR recind your acticle. Please

SO you think making the choice to murder some one equates to whether or not some one can care for a baby..?

Posted by cooper16 on 2012-01-17 18:50:33

This article made me like Girl Scouts more! Go Girl Scouts!

Posted by bailey0011 on 2012-01-17 17:49:48

eat them!

Posted by masonmommy on 2012-01-17 17:34:38





http://bluecollarphilosophy.co...



No cookies for us until things change.

Posted by BlueCollarTodd on 2012-01-17 17:33:23 I like the girl from out here in California who made a video about this.No cookies for us until things change.

Ben is right. Assuming that telling girls to "lead their own lives" means promoting sex and abortion? That's insane. And so is the woman who wrote this article.

Posted by Morgan Jurmalietis on 2012-01-17 17:29:56

Chientay, just like the fact that people are either born gay or not, some people are born in the wrong body and they do not feel comfortable unless they dress, act, and sometimes have operations so that they can be the person that their brain tells them they are. It's a part of life, like it or not, and it's a great thing that the girl scouts accept these people as normal because as this country gets more educated there are going to be more of these people out there. Right now, due solely to people like you, many of these people hide who they really are and end up living miserable lives because of it. They are just as equal as the rest of us!



I am a mother of two and personally would not have an abortion, but I DO believe that women should have a choice. I don't think it should be taken advantage of, which unfortunately some people do, but I am glad it is legal. Sometimes an abortion is the right thing to do. If you cannot trust a woman with a choice, then how can you trust her with a baby?



Why don't you get off your lazy bum and get educated!!

Posted by masonmommy on 2012-01-17 17:29:43

This makes me very sad, especially have a nine year old daughter in girl scouts. When I was a girl scout we met in the church and learned things like sewing and making dolls and making crafts which is also what my girl scout does. Now I have guilt for letting her sell cookies. What is this world coming to?

Posted by pokerwife1 on 2012-01-17 17:05:55

Cathy Ruse - shame on you! You are taking much needed funds away from girls that really need organizations like Girl Scouts. I am a Girl Scout leader and I can attest to the fact that I have never heard of any comments about pro chioce or abortion rights from my council or anyone else in the organization and this is certainly not talked about with the girls. We are an all volunteer organization and there are some people that have made mistakes with certain topics, but we are not all that way and certainly do not all support abortion. While we are tied to United Way (who also supports Planned Parenthood) for funding because of idiots like you who write stupid stories like this, we are not out there selling abortion or abortion rights to our girls. I have a troop of 15 girls, three quarters of half of whom are from single parent homes with financial strains. These girls would not get the opportunities to do half the things they get to do today if it were not for Girl Scouts and the funds that come from cookie sales. You may also want to check your facts. Each council provides different profit margins to their girls. We are given $0.55 per box sold of a $3.50 box of cookies. While still not a great percentage, it is more than 10% and the rest of the proceeds go for programming and summer camps. I don't believe anyone has ever been turned away when requesting a summer camp scholarship because they cannot afford it either. Get off your high horse and support little girls instead of being a political (*&^%!

Posted by ProudGirlScoutLeader on 2012-01-17 16:46:53

Cathy Ruse - shame on you! You are taking much needed funds away from girls that really need organizations like Girl Scouts. I am a Girl Scout leader and I can attest to the fact that I have never heard of any comments about pro chioce or abortion rights from my council or anyone else in the organization and this is certainly not talked about with the girls. We are an all volunteer organization and there are some people that have made mistakes with certain topics, but we are not all that way and certainly do not all support abortion. While we are tied to United Way (who also supports Planned Parenthood) for funding because of idiots like you who write stupid stories like this, we are not out there selling abortion or abortion rights to our girls. I have a troop of 15 girls, three quarters of half of whom are from single parent homes with financial strains. These girls would not get the opportunities to do half the things they get to do today if it were not for Girl Scouts and the funds that come from cookie sales. You may also want to check your facts. Each council provides different profit margins to their girls. We are given $0.55 per box sold of a $3.50 box of cookies. While still not a great percentage, it is more than 10% and the rest of the proceeds go for programming and summer camps. I don't believe anyone has ever been turned away when requesting a summer camp scholarship because they cannot afford it either. Get off your high horse and support little girls instead of being a political (*&^%!

Posted by ProudGirlScoutLeader on 2012-01-17 16:40:34

This article is about the truth. "Fundamental religious" people are not frightened by the truth. If it does cause distress to those who fear the truth, that is no reason to deny or hide it.

Posted by Catholic_Mom_of_6 on 2012-01-17 16:24:18

well damn, i just bought some cookies. now what?

Posted by Amy Eaton on 2012-01-17 15:59:40

No Ben, the article is about child abuse..plain and simple.

Posted by IL_Catholic_Dad on 2012-01-17 14:34:52

This is really sick. Girl Scouts was suppose to teach morals and build character. Now its only about using little girls to sell cookies so they can keep the profits, supports the murder of millions of babies, and that its okay for a boy to be a girl. I am sorry, but a girl is a girl and boy is a boy. You wouldn't do surgery to change a cat into a dog. People would be on your butt for animal abuse, but somehow it okay to change boys into girls and vise versa? I'm sorry that doesn't work. America just keeps getting screwy.

Posted by Chientay on 2012-01-17 14:32:04

this article is about homophobia, anti-abortion and anti-leftist feelings by the author, to scare fundamental religious people...

Posted by Ben on 2012-01-17 14:23:44

So if you buy something for $3 only 30 cents goes to the girls anyway? Why not just give them a few bucks and tell them to keep it, rather than support this institution.

Posted by Phil Lynch on 2012-01-17 14:04:02

Maybe a good way to support Girl Scouts is to donate directly to your local troop, instead of buying cookies, if you happen to know that it's a good one. It looks like one of the main problems with the cookies is that most of the funds (90%) don't even go to the local troop, but the head office, which has a "progressive" agenda.

Posted by jjalsevac on 2012-01-17 13:47:31