DNC Embracing Radical Islamists At National Convention
The first Muslim to deliver the daily prayer to the U.S. House of Representatives was black convert Siraj Wahaj in 1991. It was an artful prayer, though he would deliver a very different message elsewhere just one year later. His ideas of what he really wanted as regards our federal government were fairly clear, “If we were united and strong, we’d elect our own emir [leader] and give allegiance to him. . . . [T]ake my word, if 6-8 million Muslims unite in America, the country will come to us.”

Later, in 1995, he was a character witness for Omar Abdel Rahman, or blind sheikh, who was found guilty of conspiracy to overthrow the American government. The U.S. attorney for New York even listed Wahaj as an “unindicted persons who may be alleged as co-conspirators” in that case.

Yet, none of that seems to matter to Democrats intent on focusing on Islam as part of their party’s upcoming national convention with an event, “Jumah at the 2012 DNC.”

The Democratic National Convention will open with a focus on Islam. 20,000 Muslims are expected to attend according to the Bureau of Indigenous Muslim Affairs (BIMA), the national Muslim American non-profit coordinating the two days of events they claim are non-political.

As noted by M. Zuhdi Jasser here, the leaders of Jumah at the 2012 DNC are Jibril Hough and the same Siraj Wahhaj. “They are radicals,” writes Jasser. “These individuals embrace Islamist supremacy and have demonstrated support for radical ideologies.”

As for Jibril Hough, when not putting on events for the Democrat Party, he’s busy trying to undermine America’s war on terror.

‘Myrick’s latest attempt at fighting terrorism is nothing more than a fear campaign,’ said Jibril Hough, a spokesman for the Islamic Center of Charlotte. ‘It is nothing more than a new McCarthyism, or Myrickism. As Muslims, we have become expendable as politicians like Myrick seek political gain.’

Is it fair to say Democrats are embracing radicals at their upcoming national convention? It seems more than fair to say it, based upon the evidence.