What’s That Crop?
By Karlene Ponti / Photos by Steve Lenz

Walla Walla Valley farmers produce a wealth of crops, creating a sustainability few other regions can boast.

Residents of the Valley also enjoy the beauty of being surrounded by fields and agriculture.

But when the crops first begin to grow, it’s hard to tell what they might eventually be: Walla Walla’s famous sweet onions, corn, wheat, alfalfa or peas?

Debbie Williams, Washington State University county extension director, says the area has a wide variety of crops, with the most acres allotted to wheat. Wheat, in its many varieties, is the graceful staple of the world, from field to loaves of bread, nourishing rich and poor. In Walla Walla County, Williams says, there are about 300,000 acres in wheat.

“Most of it is dry land, a little of it is irrigated. And most of it is winter wheat,” Williams says.

As far as recognition goes, she says, because wheat is a grass, it may be difficult to tell it from barley and other grasses. Wheat has been grown in the area since at least the 1800s. A newer area crop, chickpeas (or garbanzos), adds to the richness of the Valley’s farms. Walla Walla County has grown many acres of chickpeas in the past.

Although relatively new to the area, chickpeas have an extensive history. Evidence of the crop, which dates back thousands of years, has been found in the Middle East, including ancient Jericho, one of the longest continuously populated cities in the world.

The plant has small feathery leaves on either side of the stem; it is as delicate-looking as it is hardy.

“The leaves are fern-like,” Williams says. “Peas and chickpeas look similar. They are both legumes — peas are taller, with white flowers.”

Chickpeas have a high protein content and are used in many recipes, including falafel and hummus.

Alfalfa is a very lush, green plant with bright purple flowers. A high-protein plant used for animal feed, it is also used by humans, in the form of sprouts and herbal remedies. It is a deep-rooted crop, making it very hardy. The plant is high in vitamins and minerals.

Alfalfa, also called “lucerne” in many countries, grows readily in many different climate extremes, so it can be cultivated in cold climates as well as hot. It loves lots of water.

A book on agriculture, written by Roman writer Palladius in the fourh century A.D., suggested that alfalfa came from ancient Iran.

Right now, the United States is the world’s largest producer of alfalfa. Walla Walla produces both hay and seed alfalfa.

“We are one of the more significant alfalfa-seed producers in the nation,” Williams says, “much of it from the Gardena area.”

She also says you can’t tell which is a hay field or a seed field. The plants grow between 1 and 2 feet tall, depending on growing conditions. As of 2010, the area had about 12,000 acres in alfalfa.

Corn is another ancient food — evidence of its cultivation and use dates back millennia. It is thought to have originated in the Western hemisphere and then migrated to Europe. Corn nourishes people all over the world — it is used for animal feed and is important in the production of many products, from ethanol to rayon to plastics.

Williams says the area has about 4,000 acres of sweet corn, mostly in irrigated circles north of Walla Walla.

“There are also small plots of seed corn,” she says.

From temptation to tradition, apples are a basic crop of the local area and the greater state of Washington. In Washington and Oregon, thousands of acres are devoted to tree fruit of all kinds.

“There are about 7,700 acres in the county,” Williams says. “We have the largest private apple orchard in the world, Broetje Orchards.”

Light-gold-colored globes with soft green leaves, Walla Walla sweet onions are the area’s signature crop. Local onions are known for their crisp, mildly peppery taste.

In addition to Walla Walla sweets, you can find yellow, red or white onions. Williams says that in 2011, there were about 700 acres planted in onions.

Another ancient crop, onions were grown in China 5,000 years ago. In Egypt about 3,500 years ago, onions were considered to symbolize eternity because of the onion’s circular structure.

A tasty addition to a salad, taco or casserole, onions have been used for food, medicine and magic for thousands of years.