Unbelievable, a new low: Look What Flag Liberals Want to ban now...
Lions and statues and flags – Oh my!

Cecil the lion, of course, met his demise at the hands of an American dentist who paid $55,000 to hunt the king of the jungle.

Outrageous! Was there a liberal uproar when Zimbabwe’s President Robert Mugabe ate a baby elephant for his 91st birthday?

Mmhmm…

After Dylan Roof murdered nine people in a historically black South Carolina church, people were consumed with the Democrat-inspired Confederate flag, because clearly the flag pulled the trigger.

Statues around the South featuring former confederate leaders have been defaced by ‘Black Lives Matter’ protesters and others because they somehow played a part in today’s society.

Silly.

Now, liberals have found a new target.

This time, they’re focusing on the Prisoners of War/Missing in Action (POW/MIA) flag.

Because racism, of course.

From Twitchy:

It’s not just a follow-up to the Confederate flag controversy; Perlstein notes that even ultra-liberal presidential candidate Bernie Sanders posted an image of the flag on his Facebook page along with the message, “They are all heroes” after Donald Trump took a cheap shot at prisoner of war Sen. John McCain. What’s Perlstein’s real beef with the flag? Because “Richard Nixon invented the cult of the ‘POW/MIA’ in order to justify the carnage in Vietnam in a way that rendered the United States as its sole victim” and to “paint the North Vietnamese as uniquely cruel and inhumane.” “The moral confusion was abetted by the flag,” he continues: “the barbed-wire misery of that stark white figure, emblazoned in black.”

Rick Perlstein thinks the Prisoner of War / Missing in Action flag is racist. https://t.co/P3wbnNGeIUpic.twitter.com/xJM5QJnD1B — (´・ω・｀) (@_icze4r) August 11, 2015

Responses…

@JessieJaneDuff @Newsweek I’d like to wrap this dude’s head in a POW flag and punch it until it becomes part of his DNA and he hates himself — Mental Enfilade (@mentalenfilade) August 11, 2015

@JessieJaneDuff Rick Perlstein is another libtard that would probably want to ban the American Flag also — SgtMaj-USMC (@retireleo) August 11, 2015

@retireleo @JessieJaneDuff Wouldn’t be surprised if that’s on someone’s radar already. Probably Obama’s Bcuz it offends too many foreigners. — PDP (@RIobserver) August 11, 2015

@JessieJaneDuff I will HAPPILY go to jail for felony assault if I witness a POW/MIA flag being tampered with. Happily. — Biff Winnetka (@HypocriLib) August 11, 2015

The difference between a liberal and a conservative?

A conservative doesn’t demand everything be banned – among numerous other issues.

Crazy.

The American flag will be next, it’s just a matter of time.