Time to boycott: Major US corporation CAVES to Black Lives Matter
Getty Images

At a time when our nation is more divided than ever, you’d think businesses in the private sector, particularly those that are extremely successful and popular, would want to be involved in the healing process, striving to use their platform to bring people together.

Apparently not if you’re Ford.

The Ford Foundation recently decided to create a new fund with an organization dedicating to providing support for a group heavily affiliated with Black Lives Matter.

Ford is investing in the Black-Led Movement Fund in partnership with Borealis Philanthropy Movement Strategy Center, and Benedict Consulting.

According to the Daily Caller, According to its website, the Black-Led Movement Fund seeks to “support philanthropic and field-building activities that strengthen the next generation of social justice leaders.”

The Black Led-Movement Foundation provides money and other resources to organizations that are focused on “black, queer, feminists and immigrant leaders who are shaping and leading a national conversation about criminalization, policing and race in America.”

The fund also tries to assist the Movement for Black Lives. The Black Lives Matter network endorsed the group’s latest platform and they fight for many of the same causes.

The Movement for Black Lives recently released a platform of demands it said would foster the “collective liberation” of the black community and minority groups. Some of its demands included reparations for slavery, economic justice and a call to “end the war on black people.”

The Ford Foundation has previously expressed its support for the Movement for Black Lives.

“We’ll provide long-term support to the Movement for Black Lives, so that these visionary leaders and organizations can continue to cultivate and maintain a movement of young black women and men who are pushing through established boundaries as they seek to realize the promise of equality and justice for all. That is what democracy needs to function—and it’s what the Movement for Black Lives is doing,” the foundation said on its website.

Well, if you were ever looking for a reason not to buy a Ford vehicle or to trade one in you already have, this seems to be just as good as any.

Looks like another American icon just caved to the liberal agenda. We see how well that worked out for Target…

Hopefully enough people will express displeasure over this to prompt Ford to stop playing politics and get back to making cars.

[Note: This article was written by Michael Cantrell]