Rumblr 'Tinder for Fighting' app lets you challenge people to brawls
In the film Fight Club, groups of bored men led by Brad Pitt were depicted meeting up in secret to take part in bare knuckle brawls.

But a new web-based application promises to make such fights a reality by pitting violent strangers against each other.

Described as a Tinder for Fight Club, Rumblr allows users to arrange impromptu fights based on their location.

Rumblr has been described as 'Tinder for Fight Club' (left). It allows users to upload pictures of themselves along with a short profile so they can challenge other users and arrange to meet them for a fight (right)

It features a chat function to allow opponents to trash talk each other and an interactive map showing where fights are happening so others can go along to watch.

According to the app creator's website: 'Rumblr is an app for recreational fighters to find, meet, and fight other brawl enthusiasts nearby.

IS THE RUMBLR APP LEGAL? People using the app may find themselves in breach of the law in some states and countries. Fighting in a public place is classed as disorderly conduct while arranging a fight to be attended by an audience could be considered an unlawful public assembly. In some areas seriously injuring someone in a fight can result in criminal charges even if the other person does not seek to press charges. In response to questions from MailOnline, the app's developers did warn that some users may risk prosecution if they used the app to arrange a fight. They said: 'Depending on where they fight, they may be. Regulations are different for every municipality and governing body.' They added, however, that those who criticised the app for encouraging violence were 'not open minded enough about the community we are providing value to'.

'You don't need to fight to use Rumblr.

'With Rumblr Explore, anyone can browse and attend fights close by that other Rumblr users have arranged - all for free.'

The app was initially due to be released on Apple's App Store, but was rejected.

Apple has strict rules about apps that encourage violence or result in physical harm.

Instead the app will be released as a web app, and it has already attracted more than 300,000 people from around the world.

Speaking to MailOnline, Rumblr's developers Matt Henderson and Jack Kim, said: 'We've been recreational fighters our entire lives and were tired of the inefficiencies that exist when trying to find someone to fight.

'Rumblr alleviates the trouble fighters have when searching for suitable opponents.

'We were actually rejected by Apple's App Store so we have decided to transition Rumblr into a public, globally accessible web application.'

The web app is due to be launched at at 5pm EST (10pm GMT) today.

According to the developers, it works by allowing users to build a profile of themselves, including statistics about their weight and ability.

The 1999 film Fight Club, starring Brad Pitt (pictured), showed groups of bored men meeting up at underground gatherings to fight each other. Rumblr aims to overcome some of the difficulties faced by real life 'recreational fighters' when looking for someone to challenge

Rumblr includes a chat feature that allows users to challenge each other, lay down insults and make arrangements for a brawl (left). They can then broadcast these details so they appear on a map (right), allowing other users to see fights that are happening in their area

The app uses these to match fighters together who are nearby, but it also allows users to challenge each other based on their profile picture.

It encourages the fighters to lay down a challenge by 'telling your match what you don't like about their picture'.

When a challenge is accepted, the users can arrange a time and location before broadcasting the final details to attract a cloud.

.@Capn_CoolChris Rumblr will be available as a web application at https://t.co/tcYjoatwH7 Monday, Nov. 9th at 5:00 PM EST. 👊 — Rumblr (@rumblrapp) November 9, 2015

WHY BOYS WITH BEARDS ARE BAD They may have become to the go-to fashion accessory for men, but those with beards are more likely to be sexist, get into fights, cheat on their partners and steal, two new studies have revealed. The first of the two surveys, which involved 500 men aged between 18 and 72 from India and the US, studied men with nine facial hairstyles varying in length - from light stubble to a heavy beard. The group was asked to pick one that best matched their own facial hair and were then asked to agree or disagree with a series of statements about gender roles. The results revealed that 86 per cent of Indian men and 65 per cent of American men had facial hair, and those with beards of any length agreed more with hostile sexist statements than men without any facial hair.

Fights are shown on a map and can be filtered to see those nearby, those involving women - called RumblrHER - and group fights.

According to Daily News, an email to those who registered for early access also reportedly claimed to be giving away ten pairs of golden brass knuckles to ten people who tweet about the app.

However, those using the app may find themselves in breach of the law in some states and countries.

Fighting in a public place is classed as disorderly conduct while arranging a fight to be attended by an audience could be considered an unlawful public assembly.

In some areas seriously injuring someone in a fight can result in criminal charges even if the other person does not seek to press charges.

In response to questions from MailOnline, the app's developers did warn that some users may risk prosecution if they used the app to arrange a fight.

They said: 'Depending on where they fight, they may be. Regulations are different for every municipality and governing body.'

They added, however, that those who criticised the app for encouraging violence were 'not open minded enough about the community we are providing value to'.