The Hitching Post specializes in small, short, intimate, and private weddings for couples who desire a traditional Christian wedding ceremony. We also perform wedding ceremonies of other faiths as well as civil weddings. We believe that every wedding is special and realize how important this day is to those who walk through our doors.

At one point in time a railway tunnel ran under where the Hitching Post now stands, which was built in 1955. It has been used for wedding ceremonies for over 50 years. Prior to that time, the Hitching Post was in a wood building in the same general area and Justice of the Peace officers (an elected position) ran the Hitching Post. During WWII, couples would line up around the door waiting for their chance to be married. In 1989 the current owners purchased the Hitching Post. A few years later they made the building uniquely stand out from the Coeur d’Alene backdrop by adding the front western façade.

The Hitching Post staff would be honored to be a part of your special day.

If you have a story you’d like to share about an experience you’ve had at the Hitching Post Wedding Chapel, please send it to info@hitchingpostweddings.com so we can share that with others.



A Northwest Tradition

The Hitching Post Wedding Chapel has been part of the Northwest, North Idaho and Coeur d’ Alene experience since 1919. Thousands of couples have come to the Hitching Post to be married, or renew their vows and get started on their lives together as husband and wife from all over the United States and the World. Farragut Naval Station on the beautiful Ponderay Lake was just a few miles north and during WWII sweethearts would arrive from all over the Nation and would line up waiting to be married. Today couples often will drop in to say hello, bring family to show them where they were married, take pictures and even renew their vows.

The Hitching Post Wedding Chapel is located in North Idaho in Coeur d’ Alene, just 30 miles east of Spokane, Washington. Coeur d’ Alene, Idaho has all the beauty of the mountains, trees and the beautiful Coeur d’ Alene Lake. The main Chapel seats 15 guests. The Wedding Chapel also has a Western Style room for weddings that seat 6-8 people and is available for intimate weddings plus a Victorian Style Living Room which is available for intimate weddings seating 5-7 guests.

At one time Justice of the Peace officers performed the weddings at The Hitching Post until the position of JP was eliminated in the state. Weddings are now done by ministers at the Hitching Post 6 days a week plus many couples have opted to have their wedding ceremonies at other locations such as by the Lake, Local Parks, on Boats, families homes, Farragut State Park, (formerly Naval Station), Spokane, ski resorts, the mountains, on horseback, hot air balloon, roller coaster rides, etc. where we provide ministers for them. We also provide ministers to perform weddings done in other states when that is requested.

We’ve had couples tell us their parents, and grandparents were married at the Hitching Post. Others say all their children have now been married here, or there is still 1 more to go or are a 4th generation to follow in the Hitching Post tradition.

Couples come in all kinds of wedding attire, Western, Traditional with Beautiful dresses and Tuxes, to casual and everything in between. They often come with their own theme, such as Hawaiian, full traditional Japanese attire, Bavarian, Scottish Highlander dress and other.

The Hitching Post is close to the Coeur d Alene Park and Beach as well as several golf courses. There is hiking on Tubbs Hill, swimming, parasailing, or a romantic walk on the boardwalk. There are many campgrounds, restaurants, hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts in the area. Silverwood entertainment park is just 15 miles north for a day of summer fun. Triple Play, Silvermountain water park and winter skiing are not far for more fun. Plus there is fishing on the lake, jogging on the Centennial Trail, Eagle Watching, Boat Tours and the JulyAmish Pow Wow to name a few.

Coeur d’ Alene makes a great place to Honeymoon.