The House of Aubernon: Alexandria's Genesis: The Truth and the Fallacy
Way back in 2011, a bit of Daria fan fiction I wrote sometime between 1998 and 1999 had taken on a life of its own in the years since leaving the fandom, resulting in its appearance on my Tumblr dashboard in mid-December of that year.

After the shock wore off, I had no option but to come out as the creator of the fictional posthuman/alien genetic construct Alexandria’s Genesis. Figuring that doing so on Tumblr wasn’t going to be enough to attempt — emphasis on “attempt” — to set the record straight, I turned to my own fashion blog to shed more light on this subject.

Since then, the post had become the most-read on my old blog, 33 avenue Miquelon; Miquelon is no longer my last name, by the way — it’s Aubernon now. Much to my disappointment, however, most who came to my blog through that post didn’t bother to go any further.

Though I am moving forward with a new blog — 33 avenue Miquelon’s final post was made on Halloween of 2013 — I figured I would repost the most-read post of all time here on Tumblr as both a tribute and testament to its surprising success among both the violet-eyed truthers and the realists, and as a way to insure that AG will not take away from the new endeavour.

Read, share, laugh, love, but always remember: Alexandria’s Genesis is not, was not, and — barring the advent of posthumanity (hint-hint, my little violet-eyed truthers) — shall never be real, no matter what you choose to believe; you will always be wrong.



Nearly 15 years ago (circa 1998), I was a huge fan of Daria, MTV’s favourite high school cynic. I had also discovered fan fiction then, and when I found some related to my favourite show, I wanted to leave my mark. I just didn’t know my mark would be the size of a logic-bomb crater.

On the night of 15 December 2011, something I created under a male pseudonym when I was 19 turned up on my Tumblr dashboard. Something that I made up as a silly back story for my two Daria-based Mary Sues (fan fiction characters who are “perfect” in every manner possible… and then some). Something that, in turn, was a projection of my personal gender identity and body image issues that I was starting to confront in my 20s.

This something, in the 15 years since I first wrote it, had taken a life of its own. This something was Alexandria’s Genesis, a fictional posthuman/alien genetic mutation I created in order to make my Mary Sues (one male, one female) more… special. Alas, AG had also evolved into “children of the violet ray” fodder, all to the point that some individuals legitimately believed that not only was it real, but that they actually had the condition.

An individual by the name of Cognized took their time to explain why it wasn’t, an explanation that was re-blogged by SexGenderBody, which I then read. My reaction to AG’s evolution from weak plot device to New Age idiocy was of shock, being appalled, and the kind of bemused outrage that could only come from a travesty like this.

I then wrote a response, outing myself as the (wo)man behind the curtain… but I don’t think it’s enough.

The short version: Alexandria’s Genesis is not, was not, and will never be a real thing; it was a silly little back story for someone’s entertaining first draft.

The long version? Come inside to see how this sausage was made…

The (Real) Origins of Alexandria’s Genesis

Let’s begin with the “genesis” story of AG: An English girl born before the Renaissance began in Sicily (circa 1330s) developed violet eyes from her original blue shortly after birth. Her parents believed Satan had cursed their child, but the local priest confirmed it to be a sign from God regarding a mythological “spirit people” who had first appeared in Ancient Egypt thousands of years earlier, only to vanish from history after migrating north.

The entirety of that opening is based on a mix of speculative fiction, regular fiction, and historical fact.

The (Utterly Batshit Insane) Characteristics of Alexandria’s Genesis

Here is where we enter transhuman/posthuman territory. Let’s break it down, shall we?

Why Did Alexandria’s Genesis Go Viral?

AG was overall a silly plot device that also comes off as unintentionally misogynistic and racist, but somehow escaped the confines of a (now-deceased) Daria fan fiction site into the wild open plains of The Internet. I can’t explain how this happened, or who first thought this was a real thing, but the elephant in the room has a question: Why is the only known document regarding a posthuman/alien genetic mutation posted on a fan fiction website? If I wanted to post this as a “real” document for New Agers to swallow hook-line-sinker, I would have just created some lame GeoCities website and been done with it.

Maybe you know?

Anyway, there you have it: Alexandria’s Genesis is simply a bad mashup of Daria, Art Bell, Twilight, witchcraft and Cylon skinjobs adopted by New Agers and others who should know better, but don’t and won’t. Thank you, Internet. Thank you, Tumblr.

P.S. - It turns out that I tried to expand upon Alexandria’s Genesis in 2001: Under the pseudonym Stefanie Acela, I divided the posthuman/alien mutation into two types, Type I matching what I wrote in “Purple Eyes…” while Type II showed none of the aesthetic characteristics of Type I. Just scroll down to the glossary section entitled “Few More Things About the New Era” to learn more.

Also: I never did write that follow-up essay explaining the two types of AG; that was when I walked away from fan fiction for the next 11 years until I discovered My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic.

Thankfully, nothing I write for that show will be mistaken for fact by the violet-eyed truthers.

Photos: TopTenz.net, Cameron Miquelon/33 avenue Miquelon, Flickr/Roger Wollstadt and Flickr/Xlibber.