The Hindu : Kerala News : Of studying predictions
News:



Advts:

Kerala



Of studying predictions





Babu Kalayil

Enthused by the predictions of a person who claims to possess the gift of extra sensory perception (ESP), the University of Kerala has granted permission to one of its senior professors to be a co-investigator in a project of the Department of Science & Technology under the Central Government.

Babu Kalayil has, over the years, through his ESP faculty made "predictions" on the movement of planetary bodies, including collision between celestial objects, earthquakes, unusual rise in temperature and the like. He claims to have predicted even the major earthquake that caused the tsunami in December 2004, exactly two months earlier.

The services of G. Renuka, Professor in the Department of Physics, will be made available for the scientific evaluation of the project, titled, "Effects of Extra Sensory Perception on ecological and space disasters", to be undertaken by the B.K. Research Association for ESP, an organisation based at Dhanuvachapuram in the district, of which Mr. Kalayil is the director.

Dr. Renuka, with three decades of research experience, has specialised in space plasmas, fusion plasmas and agro-meteorology.

She has already guided research work for nearly 15 PhDs. and 20 M.Phil. degrees. S. Antony, also possessing a research degree, is the principal investigator.

Dr. Renuka says that on August 2, 2001, Babu had predicted the presence of water on Mars, a month before a team of Hungarian scientists reported the presence of water on the red planet. Scientists at the Berkeley University of California had claimed to have discovered a new planet, 50 light years from the earth, in 2004. Mr. Babu had, in 1998, predicted the existence of such a planet. Dr. Renuka also notes that Mr. Kalayil had predicted, again using ESP, sounds similar to thunder emanating from Titan, one of the 10 moons of Saturn. It was in October, 2004, that he made this prediction, which was firmed up on January 16, 2005.

Predictions made on the basis of ESP usually do not have many takers, mainly on account of the fact that they are not supported by proper scientific data or established theories.

Mr. Kalayil's project has been submitted to the DS & T through the Kerala State Council for Science, Technology and Environment.

J. Ajith Kumar

Printer friendly page

Send this article to Friends by E-Mail

Kerala