Shortage at its highest since May 2008
EL UNIVERSAL Friday January 06, 2012 11:12 AM



The Central Bank of Venezuela (BCV) avowed that the shortage of products available for sale grew in December. According to the shortage index, 15.2 out of every 100 products that were requested by customers in grocery stores, supermarkets and stores were not available in the shelves.



This is the highest shortage level since May 2008 when it amounted to 16.3% and it represents a significant increase compared to 13.4% in November, although it is still very far from the highest level (24.7%) reported in January 2007.



José Guerra, director of the School of Economics at the Central University of Venezuela (UCV), thinks that the shortage of products is due, among other factors, "to falling domestic production and to the fact that in many cases the adjustment in the price of products is insufficient to cover business costs. In addition, increases are adopted with delay."



The BCV does not provide detailed figures on agricultural production, but it includes these data along with items such as restaurants and hotels. These three activities reported a 1.8% downturn in 2011.



At the same time, the number of workers in the agricultural sector dropped 5.8%, showing a fall in domestic production.



The imbalance between supply and demand is felt more acutely in foodstuffs and nonalcoholic beverages, which reported a 33.9% increase in 2011.



According to the BCV, the domestic inflation rate spiked 1.8% in December to reach 27.6% in the year, the highest consumer price index in the last three years.



"With an inflation that surpasses by far the CPI of trading partners, the only product that can be exported is oil," Guerra said.



The expert also said that "the government has given up its fight against inflation. Therefore, the only economic policy that it is implementing is to maintain a fixed exchange rate, which is obviously an ineffective measure."



An assessment of accumulated inflation in Venezuela's main cities in 2011 showed that Caracas reported the highest inflation rate (29%) whereas Merida reported the lowest jump (24%.)



Translated by Gerardo Cárdenas