Miley Cyrus: 'Worship Satan if You Want to Be Rich & Famous Like Me'

Former Disney star gives advice to young fans for music industry success

© press Pop star Miley Cyrus told her fans to worship Satan if they want to be famous like her

Pop star Miley Cyrus left her followers shocked and confused after advising her young fans to "worship Satan" if they want to become "rich & famous" like their heroes. The former Hannah Montana star left a group of fans bewildered after passing on the "pearls of wisdom" when asked for tips on how to gain success in the entertainment industry. Following filming the NBC TV talent show, The Voice, on which Cyrus is one of the judges, a flock of young admirers had gathered outside the backstage exit, hoping to catch a glimpse of their idol. As the Wrecking Ball singer made her way out of the exit with her security team, one of her star-struck fans asked her: "Hey Miley, do you have any advice for any of your fans that might want to follow in your footsteps and become a star?"

To which she responded: "Yeah: If you wanna be famous, and rich, it's easy... "But don't ask me, you need to ask Satan. "You can have it all." As a nervous laugh spread through the crowd, Cyrus stopped her bodyguards, seemingly annoyed by the response, and turned back to the crowd saying: "You think I'm joking? "You asked me how to make it as a pop star and I just told you everything you need to do. "If you want everything that I have, then all you have to do is ask Satan for it and you can have it. "You need to stop asking Santa for Christmas presents and praying to Jesus because none of them exist. "Satan is our Lord, and when you let him into your heart and worship him instead of your make-believe God, then you can have it all." Cyrus then stormed off with her entourage and jumped into the back of a Range Rover before speeding away. The group of her supporters was left shocked by her comments, with some visibly upset.

© press Miley Cyrus left the her fans shocked by admitted that she doesn't even like her own music