Job Announcement
Candidates must possess broad engineering expertise at least 1-year of which is in positions at or comparable to the GS-15 level. Must be a recognized subject matter expert possess (1) advanced knowledge of Planetary Protection, its requirements and mission categories. This includes demonstrated technical expertise to independently form technically sound judgments and evaluations in considerably complex situations; (2)demonstrated experience planning, executing, or overseeing elements of space programs of national significance. These elements include but are not limited to developing requirements, performing technical assessments, and preparing recommendations to leadership; and (3) demonstrated skills in diplomacy that resulted in win-win solutions during extremely difficult and complex multilateral discussions. This includes building coalitions amongst organizations to achieve common goals. You must provide examples as to how you meet these requirements. Please also see "How You will be Evaluated" section.



A. Degree: physical science, engineering, or mathematics that included 24 semester hours in physical science and/or related engineering science such as mechanics, dynamics, properties of materials, and electronics.



or



B. Combination of education and experience - education equivalent to one of the majors shown in A above

that included at least 24 semester hours in physical science and/or related engineering science, plus appropriate experience or additional education. Candidates must have a bachelor's degree, preferably an advanced degree in engineering, physical science, or mathematics that included 24 semester hours in physical science and/or related engineering science such as mechanics, dynamics, properties of materials, or electronics.





TECHNICAL QUALIFICATIONS



1. Advanced knowledge of Planetary Protection, its requirements and mission categories. This includes

demonstrated technical expertise to independently form technically sound judgments and evaluations in

considerably complex situations.



2. Demonstrated experience planning, executing, or overseeing elements of space programs of national

significance. These elements include but are not limited to developing requirements, performing technical

assessments, and preparing recommendations to leadership.



3. Demonstrated skills in diplomacy that resulted in win-win solutions during extremely difficult and

complex multilateral discussions. This includes building coalitions amongst organizations to achieve

common goals.



Under Executive Order 11935, only United States citizens and nationals (residents of American Samoa and Swains Island) may compete for civil service jobs. Agencies are permitted to hire noncitizens only in very limited circumstances where there are no qualified citizens available for the position.