CMHC Voices Against Violence
MasculinUT

The MasculinUT program does not treat masculinity as a “mental health issue,” and any such statements are simply not accurate. It was established to bring more men to the table to address interpersonal violence, sexual assault and other issues.

Like other UT programs related to sexual assault and interpersonal violence, MasculinUT is housed administratively in the university’s Counseling and Mental Health Center. Its goals include helping men explore ways to reduce sexual violence, helping students take responsibility for their actions, and fostering healthier relationships on campus and beyond.

These are important goals that we strongly stand behind. It has become clear that some of the communication and discussion surrounding MasculinUT did not convey this fully or clearly and was not effective at reaching the broad audiences the program envisioned. As a result, we will be reviewing the website and other content to ensure that it serves the program’s goals and will make any appropriate changes as we receive feedback from stakeholders.

Earlier this year, the UT System Board of Regents approved funding for mental health, student safety, and alcohol-related initiatives including efforts to reduce sexual assaults on campus. The new staff position that will oversee this program, and coordinate with other UT System schools, is part of those efforts funded by the Regents.

About MasculinUT

Project Goals and Guiding Principles

Why does UT Austin need MasculinUT?

Campus Partners

Previous Events

What do Healthy Masculinities Look Like?

What is Restrictive Masculinity?

Poster Campaign

Get Involved

MasculinUT is a project by Voices Against Violence in the Counseling and Mental Health Center led by a steering committee of UT Austin students, faculty, and staff. We aim to promote healthy masculinities on the UT Austin campus through public events, educational workshops, and other forms of student involvement. Our goal is to impact campus culture to increase acceptance of gender diversity, promote healthy relationships with an emphasis on consent, and prevent interpersonal violence.

Interested in getting involved or joining our mailing list? Contact us at: voicesagainstviolence@austin.utexas.edu

Upcoming Events/Projects:

Previous Events: