Henry Kissinger Just Gave Trump A MASSIVE Compliment, Stunned Even Trump With His Words
Henry Kissinger is an American diplomat and political scientist who served as the United States Secretary of State and National Security Advisor under the presidential administrations of Richard Nixon. He is one of the politicians who really understand politics and cares what people think about.

On Sunday he did an interview and said very amazing things regarding President Trump, UConservative reports. He starts with: “Donald Trump is a phenomenon that foreign countries haven’t seen.”

Trump is indeed a strange phenomenon. From when he first started to campaign, he was willing to say and do the things all the other candidates were not. Once more Trump managed to survive the things other candidates were not able to.

Liberals and all those who favor Clinton will never admit it. They will never admit that he is the one true leader. The man is doing changes like never before and does all of it for the sake of this nation’s people. After eight years of tyranny, we finally see a difference. Kissinger knows it and he continues with:

“Every country now has to consider two things. One, their perception that the previous president, or the outgoing president, basically withdrew America from international politics, so that they had to make their own assessments of their necessities.

And secondly, that there is a new president who’s asking a lot of unfamiliar questions. And because of the combination of the partial vacuum and the new questions, one could imagine that something remarkable and new emerges out of it.”

Trump’s victory is affecting many other elections around the world. People are looking at Trump’s election as America’s victory over the liberal elite. They are thinking that if it happened in America maybe it could happen there too.

America is in many ways the country that guides the world. As America goes so does the rest of the world.

Trump puts America and its people first. This is why people love him and this is why he will remain in charge for so long. There is not a single thing wrong with him and people need to open their eyes.