BE BEST
Quote It remains our generation’s moral imperative to take responsibility and help our children manage the many issues they are facing today, including encouraging positive social, emotional, and physical habits...

The mission of BE BEST is to focus on some of the major issues facing children today, with the goal of encouraging children to BE BEST in their individual paths, while also teaching them the importance of social, emotional, and physical health. BE BEST will concentrate on three main pillars: well-being, social media use, and opioid abuse.

BE BEST will champion the many successful well-being programs that provide children with the tools and skills required for emotional, social, and physical health. The campaign will also promote established organizations, programs, and people who are helping children overcome some of the issues they face growing up in the modern world.

WELL-BEING

By promoting values such as healthy living, encouragement, kindness, and respect, parents, teachers, and other adults can help prepare children for their futures. With those values as a solid foundation, children will be able to better deal with the evils of the opioid crisis and avoid negative social media interaction.

Play 1:00 First Lady Melania Trump Visits Children's Hospital at St. Mary's Medical Center First Lady Melania Trump Visits Children's Hospital at St. Mary's Medical Center

SOCIAL MEDIA

When children learn positive online behaviors early-on, social media can be used in productive ways and can effect positive change. Mrs. Trump believes that children should be both seen and heard, and it is our responsibility as adults to educate and reinforce to them that when they are using their voices—whether verbally or online—they must choose their words wisely and speak with respect and compassion.

Play 00:59 First Lady Melania Trump Hosts Roundtable with Technology Leaders First Lady Melania Trump Hosts Roundtable with Technology Leaders

OPIOID ABUSE

Opioid dependence, addiction, and abuse are an epidemic in this country. BE BEST will support the families and children affected by this crisis, bring attention to neonatal abstinence syndrome, and help educate parents on the importance of healthy pregnancies.

Play 00:50 First Lady Melania Trump Participates in a Roundtable on Opioid Abuse First Lady Melania Trump Participates in a Roundtable on Opioid Abuse

To learn more about BE BEST, follow along with First Lady Melania Trump on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.

Parents, click here to read “Talking with Kids about Being Online,” a booklet by First Lady Melania Trump and the Federal Trade Commission.