CNN Raided By FCC For Deceiving American Public
The CNN head office in Atlanta, Georgia, was raided by Federal Communications Commission (FCC) agents Tuesday in an operation related to the “violation of press guidelines” including “publishing and promotion of blatantly false information designed to deceive the American public,” according to reports.

The FCC arrived unannounced and seized documents and hard drives as part of their investigation, including all of the “source data” the network has used for their stories.

MSNBC and the Associated Press are also reported to have been raided by the FCC for violating press guidelines, including the “printing of blatant lies“, the “publishing and promotion of stories which require immediate retractions while not promoting the retractions“, according to a source within one of networks.

According to the FCC, “Broadcasters may not intentionally distort the news.” It is understood that CNN, MSNBC and the AP are under investigation for breaking FCC rules. The FCC states that “rigging or slanting the news is a most heinous act against the public interest.“

According to reports, the FCC has received “documented evidence” from within the three organizations that prove a “conspiracy to misinform and deceive” the American public. According to the FCC:

“The FCC may act only when it has received documented evidence, such as testimony from persons who have direct personal knowledge of an intentional falsification of the news. Without such documented evidence, the FCC generally cannot intervene.”

It is understood a whistleblower has leaked information that proves high-level interplay between CNN and Deep State government officials operating along partisan political lines. Newly revealed e-mails show that former FBI deputy director Andrew McCabe was aware of CNN’s internal understanding of a secret briefing about the infamous Steele dossier, days before CNN published any stories on the matter.

The FCC has an informal policy that allows the agency to remove the license of individual broadcasters if the commission deems that they are “deliberately trying to mislead, misconstrue, slant or stage news.“

News of the FCC raid follows the EPA’s announcement Tuesday that CNN and the AP were no longer welcome to attend the government agency press conferences.

Guards barred an AP reporter from passing through a security checkpoint inside the building, according to NBC News. CNN said in a statement that its reporter also was turned away from covering the event “after multiple attempts to attend.”