Trump Donates His Salary To Rebuild Military Cemeteries — Media Ignores Story
Rather than collect his presidential salary, Donald Trump has donated the entire $400,000 to the Department of the Interior where it is being used to construct and repair military cemeteries.

President Trump has donated his salary each quarter to various federal agencies.

The President of the United States donated his first-quarter 2018 salary to the Department of Veterans Affairs.

Goes without saying — the media has neglected to cover this very munificent move by the President.

White House sent their spending report to Congress. This was in it:

“Instead of taking his salary, Trump donated all $400,000 to the Department of the Interior where it will be used for construction and repair needs at military cemeteries!”

Media gave this no coverage. — MARK SIMONE (@MarkSimoneNY) July 31, 2018

Here’s what President Trump has done with his presidential salaries in the past:

Funding restoration projects at Antietam battlefield

Combatting opioid epidemic

Improving US infrastructure

News the media didn’t report today: Today @realDonaldTrump donated his $400,000 salary to rebuilding military cemeteries — Charlie Kirk (@charliekirk11) August 1, 2018

Typically, the stories published by media outlets in reference to President Trump are negative and they highlight all of the ‘screw ups’ he’s committing in the Oval office.

Yet, they rarely discuss the positive things Trump is doing in office, such as:

Recognizing Jerusalem as Israel’s capital

Enforcing Barack Obama’s red line in Syria

Getting NATO allies to kick in more money for our collective security

Driving the Islamic State from its physical caliphate

Installing conservative judges who will preside for decades

Withdrawing from the Paris climate agreement

Reversing Obama’s Afghan withdrawal

Enacting historic tax and regulatory reforms

Trump’s latest act of reestablishing the cemeteries of our fallen heroes with his own personal money, is essentially another favorable feat to add to the list of his substantive presidential contributions.

YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE:

11 Brutal Memes That Best Describe Trump’s Relationship With Putin

How Trump Sees His Life vs. How We See It

Author: Aaron Granger Facebook Linkedin

Share this: Facebook

Twitter

Pinterest

Google

Email