Oprah Winfrey Promotes “Shout Your Abortion” Movement Where Women Brag About Their Abortions
Oprah Winfrey waded deeper into political waters this summer by promoting the “Shout Your Abortion” movement and its attempts to normalize the killing of unborn babies.

The July issue of her “O” magazine featured “Shout Your Abortion” founder Amelia Bonow in its “Inspiration” section, CNS News reports.

Bonow, who began the campaign to urge women to brag about aborting their unborn babies, soon will be coming out with a new book by the same title, according to the report.

She told the magazine how it all began in 2015: “[W]hen I found out that the House of Representatives had voted to defund Planned Parenthood. I kind of unraveled.

“I opened Facebook and, without thinking, wrote, ‘Like a year ago, I had an abortion at Planned Parenthood…and I remember this experience with a nearly inexpressible level of gratitude.’ I hit Post 153 words later, and everything changed,” she continued.

Bonow said the campaign really took off when a friend shared her post on Twitter with the hashtag #ShoutYourAbortion.

“On some level, I’d internalized the stigma—though I honestly wasn’t ashamed. Then why hide? It wasn’t out of character for me to disclose something so personal online. What was out of character was my silence,” she said.

Click Like if you are pro-life to like the LifeNews Facebook page and receive the latest pro-life news.

She blamed the pro-life movement for trying to silence women who have had abortions, saying: “The anti- choice movement wants it to be terrifying to speak the truth, because we can’t advocate for something we can’t say out loud. But the more of us who speak out, the clearer it becomes that all sorts of people have abortions, including people you love.”

But it really is her own movement, the pro-abortion movement, that silences women whose abortion stories do not fit their narrative. Bonow’s pro-abortion campaign is not the first abortion story-telling movement either.

Long ago, pro-life advocates recognized the power of individual people and their stories in the abortion debate. The Silent No More Awareness campaign is just one example of the many pro-life storytelling outreaches. It encourages people who experienced pain and regret after their abortions to share their stories publicly, and its website documents thousands of stories of mothers, fathers, grandparents and others who experienced deep pain and remorse because of unborn babies’ abortion deaths.

“O” magazine is doing a disservice to its readers by promoting the “Shout Your Abortion” campaign. Bonow’s movement gives the impression that women are glad they aborted their unborn babies. The truth is that some women regret their abortions and others do not, but no matter what the women’s feelings, their abortions destroyed another human being, their own child’s chance to ever have a story.