Girl Scouts Gives Highest Award To Girl Who Organized A Pro-Abortion Campaign
As Girl Scout cookies season comes to a close, parents should be aware that the organization does not exactly have family-friendly values at its heart.

Though the organization's ties to abortion conglomerate Planned Parenthood have been known for years, the Girl Scouts of America have yet to be so forthright about their closeted support for abortion.

Until now.

According to LifeNews, the group MyGirlScoutCouncil.com, which has been monitoring the organization for years over its pro-abortion stance, discovered last Friday that the Girl Scouts of Southern Arizona honored a girl for her volunteer work on "reproductive health justice."

"Meghna Gopalan, recently profiled in a Tucson publication, received the Gold Award, the Girl Scouts highest honor, for her work," reports LifeNews. "Her project involved working with the pro-abortion Women’s March and its affiliate in Tucson. She said her goal was to 'educate people about and destigmatize access to women’s healthcare' — euphemisms for abortion."

"I’m planning on hosting an event to educate people about and de-stigmatize access to women’s healthcare," Meghan Gopalan said. "I’ve been working with El Rio Reproductive Health Access Project, and they offered ideas on reproductive health justice which would broaden the scope of the project a little bit. I got interested in the topic with the Supreme Court nomination of [Brett] Kavanaugh …"

Christy Volanski, co-editor of MyGirlScoutCouncil.com, said the Girl Scouts have a "cozy relationship" with the abortion industry. Former Girl Scouts CEO Kathy Cloninger even once admitted on NBC: "We partner with many organizations. We have relationships with … Planned Parenthood organizations across the country."

LifeNews profiled the more extensive network that the organization chooses to deny:

Although the Girl Scout organization maintains that it takes "no position" on abortion, parents, churches and pro-life activists have long complained of the pro-abortion slant of the Girl Scouts’ resources, role models and affiliations. In a national survey in 2013, seventeen Girl Scouts councils admitted to partnering with Planned Parenthood; other councils refuse to answer the survey question. Of the 315 Girl Scout councils in the U.S., 17 councils reported having a relationship with Planned Parenthood and its affiliates, and 49 reported they do not. The other 249 refused to disclose any relationship. In 2013, Girl Scouts USA shared a recommendation for abortion activist and former pro-abortion Texas legislator Wendy Davis as a 2013 Woman of the Year on its official Twitter account. The organization also suggested pro-abortion former HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius as a woman “with courage, confidence, and character.”

In 2017, Archbishop Joseph Naumann of Kansas City ended his diocese's longstanding affiliation with the Girl Scouts over their relationship with the abortion industry.