Death Ruled Suicide by Multiple Blunt Force Injuries?
6.3k SHARES Facebook Twitter

Daniel Best, 49, was part of the HHS effort to bring down Pharmaceutical company drug prices. He was found “unresponsive” near the garage door exit of an apartment building in Washington, D.C.’s Navy Yard neighborhood at 5:25 a.m. on November 1.

The Medical Examiner has ruled it a “suicide.” They also said he died of “multiple blunt force injuries” and then refused to release any other information. How does that work? I don’t care for “conspiracy theories,” in fact I usually ignore them. But this ruling by the medical examiner makes no sense whatsoever.

Cleveland.com reported

The city’s Office of the Chief Medical Examiner on Thursday said Best died from “multiple blunt force injuries” and it ruled his death a suicide. It would not release further information.

In announcing his death, HHS Secretary Alex Azar said the 49-year-old former CVSHealth and Pfizer Pharmaceuticals executive agreed to work at HHS “out of a desire to serve the American people by making health care more affordable.”

“He brought his deep expertise and passion to this task with great humility and collegiality,” Azar’s statement said. “All of us who served with Dan at HHS and in the administration mourn his passing and extend our thoughts and prayers to his wife Lisa and the entire Best family at this difficult time.”

The Washington Times noted,

Mr. Best served as an executive at CVS Health and the CVS Caremark Corporation before joining the Health and Human Services Department in April to help Secretary Alex Azar implement plans to cut prescription drug costs by restructuring Medicare and shining a light on sky-high list prices.

So here we have a mystery. How does one die of “multiple blunt force injuries” in a suicide? By all accounts, this man was well-liked and a good friend of Alex Azar.

In May, 2018, two months after Best’s appointment, Ike Swetlitz for STAT news wrote:

Daniel Best is suddenly leading the government’s campaign to bring down prescription drug prices. But nobody around town seems to know the guy. While he’s a Washington outsider, he’s the very definition of a pharmaceutical industry insider, having spent the last 13 years working for pharmacy benefit managers, the middlemen who negotiate drug prices. Their secretive contracting and business practices have drawn suspicion from lawmakers and administration officials.

Best comes to government directly from CVS Health, where he worked on negotiating drug prices for seniors, following 12 years at the pharmaceutical company Pfizer. According to a financial disclosure form, his salary and bonuses at CVS ran just over half a million dollars. Now, he’s advising Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex Azar on how to reduce prescription drug prices…

Conversations with pharmaceutical executives and former co-workers reveal that Best is a seasoned negotiator, a tough and unwavering advocate for patient access, and an all-around friendly guy. But one thing remains a mystery: whether he’ll advocate for his former colleagues in the PBM world, or if, in the words of a lobbyist, he’ll show the public “where the bodies are buried.”

So did he lie down under a garage door and let it hit him “multiple times” or did he beat himself to death with a baseball bat? How does that work? Add to the very few actual articles on his death- this man was described as one of Trump’s “senior” HHS officials working with Alex Azar. Things that make you go hmmmm.

Comments

comments