Trump HHS Official Found Dead: Ruled Suicide By 'Multiple Blunt Force Injuries'

Daniel Best, tasked by Trump with lowering Big Pharma drug prices, found dead

© press HHS official Daniel Best was found dead from 'multiple blunt force injuries' - death ruled suicide

Daniel Best, a pharmaceutical executive who recently took the lead at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, tasked with President Trump's initiative to "lower prescription drug prices" in the United States, was found dead with "multiple blunt force injuries" on November 1.

Officials in Washington, D.C. have just announced that his death has been ruled a "suicide."

According to Washington, D.C. Police, Best was found "unresponsive" near the garage door exit of an apartment building in D.C.’s Navy Yard neighborhood at 5:25 a.m. on November 1, and was pronounced dead by medical personnel who responded to the scene.

Following a two-week investigation, the city’s Office of the Chief Medical Examiner has announced that Best died from "multiple blunt force injuries" and ruled his death a suicide.

© press Daniel Best was leading Trump's initiative at the HHS to lower drug prices in the US

The Chief Medical Examiner’s verdict raised questions among the health community, with many people refusing to believe Best killed himself by repeatedly hitting himself with a blunt object until he died.

Erin Elizabeth of HNN described the ruling of Best's death as "confusing," saying:

“How does one kill themselves by hitting themselves with a blunt object? Repeatedly?”

BREAKING: Death of Trump HHS official, Daniel Best, tasked with getting lower drug prices from pharmaceutical companies is ruled a suicide, even though he died from "multiple blunt force injuries."



Nothing to see here folks. pic.twitter.com/qiWNH0epeQ — Mike Tokes (@MikeTokes) November 17, 2018





Political strategist Mike Tokes also described the death and coroner's verdict as "highly suspicious."

© press Daniel Best is survived by his wife, Lisa, and three children.

Unfortunately, the medical examiner wouldn’t release further information.

In announcing his death, HHS Secretary Alex Azar said the 49-year-old former CVSHealth and Pfizer Pharmaceuticals executive agreed to work at HHS "out of a desire to serve the American people by making health care more affordable."

“He brought his deep expertise and passion to this task with great humility and collegiality,” Azar’s statement said.

"All of us who served with Dan at HHS and in the administration mourn his passing and extend our thoughts and prayers to his wife Lisa and the entire Best family at this difficult time."

[RELATED] Detective Who Exposed Elite Pedophile Ring, Found Dead

Best is survived by his wife, Lisa, and three children.

As always, let us know your thoughts in the comments section below.