An Interview With Ann Coulter

John Hawkins:: Do you think the left has largely gotten a pass for being so completely, utterly, and entirely wrong about the effects of Reagan’s decision to abandon detente and challenge the Soviet Union?

Ann Coulter:: The fact that there still is a Democratic Party proves that.

John Hawkins:: If Jimmy Carter had somehow defeated Ronald Reagan in 1980, do you think the Soviet Union would still exist today?

Ann Coulter:: Yes. On the bright side, Jimmy Carter would have gotten his Nobel Peace prize a lot sooner.

John Hawkins:: Now I heard that you wrote an impassioned defense of tailgunner Joe in the book. Is that the case? If so, why do you think Joe McCarthy has gotten a bad rap?

Ann Coulter:: I know he got a bad rap because there are no monuments to Joe McCarthy. Liberals had to destroy McCarthy because he exposed the entire liberal establishment as having sheltered Soviet spies.

John Hawkins:: Despite the fact that Communism has been a blight on the world that eclipsed even Nazism, why do you think so many people on the left even today see no problem marching at a rally organized by Communists or supporting Communist regimes like Castro’s Cuba?

Ann Coulter:: Communism is like vegetarianism in that it’s actually not very healthy for most people but leftists continue to defend it because it seems like the thing to do.

John Hawkins:: In your opinion, if someone like Ronald Reagan or George W. Bush had been in the White House instead of Johnson, would we have won in Vietnam?

Ann Coulter:: Probably. More importantly, liberals wouldn’t be able to call every military action in defense of the nation since then: “the next Vietnam”.

John Hawkins:: What is the most important lesson Americans can learn from our experience in Vietnam?

Ann Coulter:: If you can possibly avoid it, do not go to war when the Democrats control either the executive branch or the legislative branch.

John Hawkins:: When you look back at the Clinton, Carter, & Johnson Presidencies, it becomes obvious that the Democrats have an abysmal record on foreign policy. Why do you think the left has such a difficult time dealing with foreign policy issues?

Ann Coulter:: There’s always a conflict of interest when people who don’t really like America are called upon to defend it.

John Hawkins:: Do you think the left is having a much tougher time getting away with their spin than say 10 years ago because of Fox, talk radio, & the internet?

Ann Coulter:: Yes. If the internet, talk radio and Fox News had been around in McCarthy’s day, my book wouldn’t be the first time most people would be hearing the truth about “McCarthyism.”

John Hawkins:: You’ve caught a lot of heat for a couple of quotes you made. In your column three days after 9/11, you said, “We know who the homicidal maniacs are.They are the ones cheering and dancing right now. We should invade their countries, kill their leaders and convert them to Christianity.” You also said in an interview with the New York Observer, “My only regret with Timothy McVeigh is he did not go to the New York Times Building.” Do you stand by those quotes or do you think that perhaps you should have phrased them differently?

Ann Coulter:: Ozzy Osbourne has his bats, and I have that darn “convert them to Christianity” quote. (Thank you for giving the full quote. I have the touch, don’t I?) Some may not like what I said, but I’m still waiting to hear a better suggestion.

RE: McVeigh quote. Of course I regret it. I should have added, “after everyone had left the building except the editors and reporters.”

John Hawkins:: What do you say to your critics who claim that you attack liberals just as viciously as you say Conservatives are attacked by liberals?

Ann Coulter:: Our insults are true.

John Hawkins:: If you gave the TV & news media an overall grade on their coverage of the Iraqi war, what would it be and why?

Ann Coulter:: I thought it was pretty good, especially the staging of Jessica Lynch’s rescue.

× 101 Things All Young Adults Should Know by Sir John Hawkins John Hawkins's book 101 Things All Young Adults Should Know is filled with lessons that newly minted adults need in order to get the most out of life. Gleaned from a lifetime of trial, error, and writing it down, Hawkins provides advice everyone can benefit from in short, digestible chapters. Buy Now

John Hawkins:: Do you think it was hypocritical for people to say that they,”support the troops” even as they claim we’re deliberately murdering children, waging an imperialist war, are only trying to steal Iraqi oil, etc? After all, how can anyone claim that’s what we’re doing and say they support the people who are carrying those acts out?

Ann Coulter:: They “support the troops” the way most Americans “support” diversity – it’s a meaningless platitude that pacifists repeat by rote.

John Hawkins:: Could you give us two or three examples of people on the left who acted unpatriotically during the Iraqi war (or the build up to it) and tell us what they did that was unpatriotic?

Ann Coulter:: Better yet, for a complete list just go to the D.N.C. Website, the Screen Actor’s Guild membership site, and the op/ed page of the NY Times (minus Bill Safire).

John Hawkins:: In chapter 1 of “Treason” you say, “Why can’t we ask: Who is more patriotic — Democrats or Republicans? You could win that case in court.” Who would that winner be (I think I know =D) and can you give us a short synopsis of why you think that?

Ann Coulter:: Republicans are historically more likely to defend the U.S. against its enemies, foreign and domestic, whereas the Democrats are historically one of America’s domestic enemies.

John Hawkins:: If you had to name 5 people on the American left who you found most contemptible, who would they be?

Ann Coulter:: Right off the top of my head I’d say Bill and Hillary Clinton and Hillary’s three ghost writers.

John Hawkins:: Was the timing of the release of “Treason” related to when Hillary’s book was coming out?

Ann Coulter:: HILLARY’S GOT A BOOK COMING OUT? You’re kidding – I didn’t hear a thing about it. Actually I waited 2 extra weeks just to give Hillary a chance to read her own book.

John Hawkins:: So who’s going to sell more books when it’s all said and done — you or Hillary?

Ann Coulter:: Hard to say, but based on the reviews of “Living History” so far, I’m confident more people will actually read my book.

John Hawkins:: Your little scrap with Katie Couric when Slander came out was memorable. Are you and Katie going to go around again this time?

Ann Coulter:: No, for reasons I cannot fathom, the Today Show turned me down this time. Instead I had a completely pleasant, serious interview with Diane Sawyer on Good Morning America.

John Hawkins:: So tell us a little bit about what you’re going to be doing on your new Human Events Online Blog –: CoulterGeist.

Ann Coulter:: The first thing, which I intend to do very soon, is to figure out how to post items.

John Hawkins:: Are there any blogs you read regularly or semi-regularly?

Ann Coulter:: Mickey Kaus, especially for his trademark “series skipper” which allows people to avoid reading those long gaseous “series” in the: NYT: andWAPO: that inevitably win pulitzer prizes.

John Hawkins:: Are there any political websites that you could recommend to our readers?

Ann Coulter:: Human Events: and of course the: Drudge Report.

John Hawkins:: Tell us a little bit about your new book, “Treason“.

Ann Coulter:: It’s mostly about sail fishing. Hahahaha!!!

John Hawkins:: Is there anything else you’d like to say or promote before we finish up?

Ann Coulter:: Please buy your children a copy of my book before they are old enough to vote.