Mere coincidence? Stormy Daniels and Cesar Sayoc worked at same Miami strip club – Cape Fear Caller
Amazingly enough, the suspected mail bomber, Cesar Sayoc, and the same chick, Stormy Daniels, who accepted well over $100,000 from attorney Michael Cohen, President Trump’s personal lawyer… they just so happen to have recently worked together.

With the realization that millionaires and billionaires quite often find themselves accused of rather salacious behavior, more than a few have come to the realization that settling out of court is usually much cheaper than spending hundreds of thousands of dollars to clear their name in court.

That’s what private citizen Donald Trump did when porn actress Stormy Daniels (born as Stephanie Clifford) accused him of having an affair with her.

As directed, lawyer Cohen gave Daniels $130,000 for her signature on an NDA (non-disclosure agreement).

But with all that aside, the Scripps Media news service is reporting that the accused would-be killer and the Louisiana-born stripper actually know each other.

As reported by KGTV of San Diego, CA (via WPTV of West Palm Beach, FL);

Mail bombing suspect Cesar Sayoc worked as a DJ at Ultra Gentleman’s Club in West Palm Beach, Fla., the same strip club where Trump accuser Stormy Daniels performed in April.

WPTV spoke to Ultra manager Stacey Saccal who confirmed that Sayoc worked as a DJ Thursday afternoon, the day before he was arrested in Plantation. She said Sayoc had worked there for two months as a DJ and doorman.

Saccal said there had been no complaints about Sayoc from other employees prior to his arrest Friday.

“I never knew that his van was covered in political stickers. I thought it was an ice cream truck,” Saccal said, noting that he parked far from the club.

As far-fetched as Sayoc’s achy-rapey van is an ice cream truck, what’s even more far-fetched is the odds against, and I mean astronomical odds, that Sayoc and Daniels know each other.

Now I realize that the world of pole-dancers and strip club DJs must be awfully select (sarcasm, off), but this is all just too much to give even the slightest whiff of credibility.

On a personal note, for over two decades I’ve lived in the same neighborhood, but I simply cannot recall one instance of ever randomly bumping into either next-door-neighbor away from our homes.

But I’m suppose to just buy-off that these two just happen to have crossed paths not all that long ago? If so, I have a bridge in Brooklyn I’d like to sell you.