Symptom-Free Carriers May Be Spreading Whooping Cough
Photo

Rapid increase in whooping cough may largely be a result of transmission from people who are infected with the bacterium but show no symptoms of disease, a new study suggests.

The incidence of whooping cough, also known as pertussis, has been increasing steeply in the United States since the early 2000s. In 2014, there were more than 28,000 cases, while from 1970 to 2001, there were never more than 8,000 cases in a year, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. But the reasons are unclear.

Various explanations have been suggested — the protection afforded by the vaccine wanes over time; the bacterium has evolved to evade immunity; vaccine coverage has not been wide enough. But this study has found that although all these factors probably contribute, asymptomatic transmission may be the most important cause of all. The study is in BMC Medicine.

Benjamin M. Althouse and Samuel V. Scarpino, postdoctoral fellows at the Santa Fe Institute, a nonprofit research center, tracked infections through three time periods: 1920-45, when no vaccination was available; 1946-2005, when the whole cell vaccine was used; and 2006-13, when the whole cell vaccine was replaced with the acellular version. (The whole-cell vaccine produced rare but sometimes serious side effects, and is no longer in use in the United States.)

Using epidemiological evidence and genomic analyses of the bacterium, Dr. Althouse and Dr. Scarpino conclude that the switch to the acellular vaccine from the more effective whole-cell vaccine accounts for the recent increase in incidence. In addition, they say, the vaccine complicates estimates of prevalence by hiding many infections.

The authors stress that the acellular vaccine is the best we have, and that vaccine coverage should be as high as possible. But asymptomatic transmission explains why “cocooning” — vaccinating all those who come in contact with babies too young to be vaccinated — does not work.

Transmission by people who do not know they are infected may also mean that achieving herd immunity — that is, vaccinating enough people to provide protection even to the unvaccinated — will be difficult, if not impossible, using the acellular vaccine.

The authors acknowledge that the Bordetella pertussis bacterium that causes whooping cough has evolved to develop some resistance to the new vaccine, but this evolution could not explain their epidemiological and genomic data without considering asymptomatic transmission. And it may be that people with symptoms transmit the infection more easily, especially by coughing. But this is probably outweighed by the fact that asymptomatic people do not change their behavior, and are likely to make close contact with many more people.

“There are interacting factors — individual susceptibility, vaccination, behavior,” Dr. Althouse said. “To properly predict where we are and where we will go, we have to consider all of the interacting systems together.”

Dr. Althouse said a new vaccine — more effective than the acellular vaccine — was needed. But, he added, “until we get that vaccine, it is more important than ever to be vaccinated, and we need to keep the vaccination levels high.”