Viral 'potato peeler' story is more than meets the eye
A screenshot of the fake story. We have blurred the website's logo to minimize the attention we give them, but the logo is fully visible in the video. (WPDE)

Conway, S.C. (WPDE) - It's gotten so much traction on social media that YouTube videos have been made about it.

In graphic details, the story claims:

A 37-year old woman in Conway, South Carolina who was the victim of a rape earlier this year has been charged for a revenge attack, in which she stalked her rapist and then assaulted him with a potato peeler, stripping the skin off his genitals.

Early yesterday morning, it is alleged the woman broke into the man’s property and knocked him out before restraining him to his bed with cable ties. She is then said to have taken a potato peeler and used it to remove the skin from his penis & testicles.

The story claims the woman faces charges for her attack.

It's a made-for-TV, good guy gets revenge plot, the sort of story your finger itches to share.

It was even posted by a "local news" website, with a network and channel number.



But the story is about as real as Binyah Binyah from Gullah Gullah Island.

"Nothing in our records or on our radar. Everything I have seen and heard indicates it is a hoax," HCPD spokeswoman Mikayla Mercer said.



Her counterpart in the Conway Police Department echoed that statement.

The "news" website itself presented several red flags for ABC 15 researchers.

First, the article was presented as a local news story, but the network and channel number did not match any of the three major news stations in the Grand Strand or Pee Dee.

The website also didn't have a geographic focus, as almost every local news station would.

The website itself was designed using a WordPress "magazine" theme and was registered to a budget domain host one week ago. None of the major owners of local TV news stations in the United States use generic WordPress themes.

The word "science" in the footer at the bottom of the website was spelled incorrectly, and the site did not have an "About" section or "Contact" section.

Finally, most of the stories were scandalous and sexual in nature, and some of the many advertisements would be considered inappropriate for a news website.

The article itself did not cite any named sources, only "prosecutors." Typically, news organizations only grant anonymity when a person's job or safety is threatened by speaking to a reporter.

In this case, ABC15 would normally cite someone from the solicitor's office.

So why would someone take the time to write the article and find a legitimate file photo of an Horry County police cruiser?

The same reason we have to take commercial breaks: to make money.

"These fake news scam stories figure out there's an audience for them locally, they're going to pop up more and more here," Renee Wikstrom, director of communications at the Better Business Bureau serving Coastal Carolina, explained.



The website had more advertisements on a single page than a news website normally would contain, meaning the creator was attempting to generate as much revenue as possible per click.

Wikstrom cautioned people that it could be more serious. She noticed the website wasn't encrypted, meaning the beginning of the URL, which should read "https://" was missing the "s".

"We want people to be aware that your personal information could be stolen," she said.

ABC 15's tip? If you see a headline from a website you don't trust, go to Google or another search engine and try to find the story somewhere else.

If you can find it on a website you're familiar with, including WPDE.com, it's probably legit.

If not? You may have discovered actual "fake news."