Winnebago County GOP headquarters vandalized overnight
ROCKFORD (WREX) – Disturbing graffiti covers the walls of the Winnebago County Republican headquarters in Rockford this weekend.

The vandalism appeared Sunday morning with the words ‘rape’ and ‘shame’ painted on the building.

Local Republicans believe the graffiti is directly connected to the hearings of Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh and his accuser Dr. Christine Blasey Ford.

Ford alleges Kavanaugh sexually assaulted her back in the 1980s, while the two were at a high school party.

Local Republicans say this kind of vandalism is disappointing, but not surprising, following the events of this past week.

“We can have our differences. We can have good spirited debate. I hope whoever is responsible for this will be brought to justice. You are a coward for doing it unless you come forward!” Rep. John Cabello posted on his Facebook page.

Senator Dave Syverson also weighed in on the graffiti, saying he sees it as some of the fallout from Senator Diane Feinstein’s actions during the Kavanaugh hearings.

“These are the unintended consequences, when you take politics to a level that she did,” Syverson said. “Unfortunately this probably wont’ be the last.”

Winnebago County Board Chairman Frank Haney released a statement, saying in part, “This is not who we are. I am extremely disappointed in the individual responsible for the ugliness at our local Republican HQ. Clearly, this person needs help. As a Republican, I am saddened and angry. I am also sad to see other folks in my party unfairly labeled and mischaracterized. Negative generalizations about a group of people has never served us well as a country. This situation is no different. Attacks of this nature aim to silence and destroy, neither of which will occur.”

Rockford Mayor Tom McNamara, a Democrat, also posted a statement about the vandalism on Facebook writing “This type of behavior is unacceptable and certainly does not live up to our community’s values. We all have differences but we must learn to disagree on policy without attacking people.”

13 News has reached out to the chairman of the Winnebago County GOP committee, but has not heard back, yet.

Rockford Police are investigating the vandalism.