What 'Energy Security' Looks Like in the 21st Century
For nearly a decade, lobbyists, academics and politicians alike have hailed the shale revolution as the guarantor of U.S. energy security. U.S. President Donald Trump has even taken their expectations a step further, envisioning a world of American "energy dominance," where the country's oil exports would fortify the supplies of its closest allies. But as the severe fuel shortages that swept across Texas and Louisiana in the wake of Hurricane Harvey have shown, America still heavily relies on those states' Gulf coasts to refine crude oil into gasoline, diesel and other petroleum products. True energy security, then, still seems to be just out of the United States' reach.

At least, it is based on some definitions of energy security, of which there are many. To the International Energy Agency, the term refers to "the uninterrupted availability of energy sources at an affordable price." But even this simple explanation raises more questions than it answers: What is an affordable price, and what's the tradeoff between the affordability and reliability of supplies? Faced with unique challenges in the energy sector, every nation would respond to these questions in a slightly different way based on their own priorities. And as technological progress reshapes the structure of global energy markets in the 21st century, the priorities of producers and consumers around the world will doubtless change.

U.S.: Steadying Prices and Loosening Up Logistics

For its part, the United States has traditionally centered its energy policy on the goal of self-sufficiency. Driven by fears of the price shocks that OPEC's 1973 oil embargo triggered, American politicians have long touted the idea of reducing the country's dependence on Middle Eastern producers. In doing so, they hoped, U.S. interests in the region would decline by default, creating room for the United States to someday withdraw from it entirely.

That belief, though certainly applicable in the 1970s, is now largely outdated. In a physical sense, U.S. energy supplies are quite secure: The country is already a net exporter of coal, and it is expected to become a net exporter of natural gas by the end of the year. Meanwhile, though the United States still imports about 8 million barrels per day of oil, the international oil market has become so flexible — and oil so fungible — that the United States could counter any shortfalls in supplies from one producer with output from another. Even in the worst-case scenario, in which oil trade through the all-important Strait of Hormuz ceases, Washington could mitigate oil shortages for some time by tapping into its strategic petroleum reserve.

Rather than preserving its access to oil, then, the United States is more interested in protecting itself from price changes in the market at large. After all, sharp dips in Middle Eastern oil production would push energy prices upward worldwide — including in the United States. A lengthy shipping shutdown in the Strait of Hormuz, moreover, would wreak havoc among Asian economies by restricting their energy supplies, carrying consequences that would ripple throughout the global economy as well. In light of these concerns, it is no surprise that the United States and Saudi Arabia remain such close allies: Riyadh has a long-standing policy of maintaining enough spare capacity to quickly ramp up its production in order to stabilize oil-starved markets.

The United States' energy strategy abroad, therefore, is simply an extension of its broader imperative to keep global sea lanes open. But as hurricanes Katrina and Harvey have made clear, the greatest threats can come from within. The United States' rigid distribution systems have opened the door to short-term supply crises, and though the country is unlikely to move its refining centers away from the coast, it may seek to build more flexibility into supply lines at home in order to mitigate the risk of severe shortages in petroleum products down the road.

Europe: Weaning Off Russian Supplies

Across the Atlantic, Europe is coming to grips with a problem of its own: For the Continent, there is no real substitute for Russian natural gas. Last year, European countries imported 190 billion cubic meters of Russian natural gas via pipeline, a volume equal to more than half the amount of liquefied natural gas traded by sea each year. To make matters worse, most Central and Eastern European nations lack the physical infrastructure that would be needed to bring in supplies from non-Russian producers — a shortcoming made painfully clear in the 2000s, when Russia twice cut off natural gas flows to Europe as a means to political ends. Consequently, Europe's energy policy revolves around Russia's ability to use energy supplies as a political weapon, and the Continent's inability to stop it.