Bet you didn't know: Alabama was the first state to...
The Nov. 30 edition of the New York Times crossword puzzle gave this clue to those trying to find the word to fill in the seven-letter answer to the No. 2 down question: First state to declare Christmas a legal holiday?

The answer, in case you didn't know, is Alabama.

In 1836, Alabama was the first state in the U.S. to declare Christmas a legal holiday.

Alabama's action came a little more than a decade after Clement Clarke Moore wrote "A Visit from St. Nicholas," popularly known as "Twas the Night Before Christmas," and two years after Charles Dickens published "A Christmas Carol." Both works were credited for introducing traditions such as gift giving to the U.S. and reviving the holiday after it was widely dismissed during the Reformation and under Puritans.

It wasn't until 1870 that the U.S. declared Christmas Day a federal holiday. It took another 37 years for the final state - Oklahoma - to declare Christmas a recognized holiday.

So now you know.

Welcome to Tuesday's Wake Up Call. Let's see what's going on:

Trump blocks people on Twitter

Donald Trump has an answer to some of his Twitter critics.

The president-elect has blocked people on his favorite social media site, according to reports. The people blocked by Trump cannot follow the future president, view his tweets or communicate with him on Twitter.

Among those blocked include a California mother of two, a nurse from Georgia and an actor in New York.

Deputy dies in massive sinkhole

A reserve sheriff's deputy died in a massive sinkhole that opened in San Antonio Sunday evening.

Dora Linda Nishihara of the Bexar County Sheriff's Office died in the 12-foot sinkhole that appeared near a connection between a newer and older pipe. The same sinkhole swallowed two cars.

Nishihara's car was found upside down, completely submerged and filled with gravel and dirt.

Crazy ants found in Texas

Researchers in Texas are trying to stamp out a particularly destructive type of ant.

Tawny crazy ants, also known as Raspberry crazy ants, have shown up in 23 Texas counties. Reports from several communities said the ants swarm across landscapes, nesting in any cavity they can find, including drywall and electronics.

The ants originated in South America and the recent spread is being attributed to the ants attaching themselves to items carried to other places by humans. Scientists in the state are testing a fungus that appears to spread quickly among the ants and has the capability of wiping them out.

North Carolina governor concedes race

North Carolina Gov. Pat McCrory has conceded the gubernatorial race to his Democratic challenger Roy Cooper, ending a month-long efforts that involved a recount.

McCrory conceded after the statewide recount showed Cooper's lead surpassing 10,000 votes. The Republican governor had alleged widespread voter fraud, but evidence provided by the counties failed to prove the claims.

Until tomorrow.