Michelle Obama extends 'Becoming' book tour dates to 2019
Michelle Obama has added 21 cities to her high-selling book tour.

People reported that the 2019 leg of the “Becoming: An Intimate Conversation with Michelle Obama” tour starts Feb. 8 and will run across North America and Europe. It’s the final leg of the tour.

>> Read more trending news

“I couldn’t be more excited to visit even more cities across the country and around the world,” Obama, 54, said in a statement. “I’ve been so humbled by the response to the tour thus far and the overwhelming interest we’ve received from so many communities we weren’t able to visit this year. That’s why I’m thrilled that we’re able to expand our conversations to these new settings and wider audiences. I can’t wait to continue the discussions that have been so meaningful for me and, I hope, for so many others.”

Former first lady Michelle Obama has added dates to her "Becoming" book tour. Photo: Jose Luis Magana/AP

The newly announced dates include a stop in Paris, which was rescheduled from Dec. 5. Obama canceled the stop to attend funeral services for President George H.W. Bush. It does not appear that the Berlin date, which was canceled for the same reason, has been rescheduled.

Related: Michelle Obama cancels Berlin, Paris book tour dates to attend George H.W. Bush's funeral

According to a news release, a portion of tickets for each stop will be donated to groups and organizations like charities, schools and community groups. The groups which get tickets will have free admission to the tour.

“Becoming” has sold more than 3 million copies in all formats across the U.S. and Canada and was No. 1 on the New York Times Bestseller list after one week of sales, according to Crown Publishing.

General public tickets for North America dates go on sale Dec. 15 at 10 a.m. local time on BecomingMichelleObama.com. More information on tickets is at the book website.

Dates for the 2019 leg of the “Becoming” book tour are below.

Feb. 8: Tacoma, Washington, at Tacoma Dome

Feb. 9: Portland, Oregon, at Moda Center

Feb. 12: Phoenix at Comerica Theatre

Feb. 28: Austin, Texas, at Frank Erwin Center

March 2: Houston at Toyota Center

March 13: St. Paul, Minnesota, at Xcel Energy Center

March 14: Milwaukee at Miller High Life Theatre

March 16: Cleveland at KeyBank State Theatre

March 21: Vancouver, British Columbia, Rogers Arena

March 22: Edmonton, Alberta, Rogers Place

April 9: Copenhagen, Denmark, at Royal Arena

April 10: Stockholm at Ericsson Globe

April 11: Oslo, Norway, at Oslo Spektrum

April 14: London at O2 Arena

April 16: Paris at AccorHotels Arena

April 17: Amsterdam at Ziggo Dome

May 3: Montreal at Bell Centre

May 4: Toronto at Scotiabank Arena

May 10: Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, at BB&T Center

May 11: Atlanta at State Farm Arena

May 12: Nashville, Tennessee, at Ryman Auditorium

Support real journalism. Support local journalism. Subscribe to The Atlanta Journal-Constitution today. See offers.

Your subscription to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution funds in-depth reporting and investigations that keep you informed. Thank you for supporting real journalism.