The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump: 27 Psychiatrists and Mental Health Experts Assess a President: Bandy X. Lee, Robert Jay Lifton, Gail Sheehy, William J. Doherty, Noam Chomsky, Judith Lewis Herman M
Most discerning Americans know Trump is a narcissist who mixes lies with delusion, slanders freely, and moment to moment must have the spotlight turned on him, even if it means, for example, undercutting his Secretary of State Tillerson and potentially dragging the world into a war in service to his ever-faltering self-esteem.



Lee's book appears to have been written by among the best that psychiatry/psychology have to offer. The authors are deeply moral professionals who see through the glass clearly, something we don't get often enough from mental health professionals.



What is most awesome about *The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump* is that most of what is written here rings true. The authors introduce concepts I was not familiar with such as those relating to Trump’s relationship with time. Unlike most of us who consider the future impact of our actions, Trump responds in the moment, to assuage his ego needs vs. thinking ahead about the harm his comments might cause. We are witness to his in-the-moment orientation in his attachment to Twitter. Some journalists and pundits have convinced themselves, and tried to convince us, that Trump’s Tweets and other interference's are strategic, meant to give him “wins”. The authors here confirm that this simply is not so. The delusion that Trump has some secret wisdom leaves us in danger of following Trump down the rabbit hole to our own destruction.



Trump’s presidency is a threat to our democratic republic, our freedoms, our values, and for the spiritually-inclined, our very souls. I am grateful to these courageous authors for doing what they can to save America and the world from Trump’s toxicity. History will look kindly on them; they chose well. It is up to each of us to do what little we can to protect what we have here in an era of vulnerability as a deranged leader tears at the fabric of our nation in service of his emotional needs. It can only get worse.