It's Even Worse Than You Think: What the Trump Administration Is Doing to America: David Cay Johnston: 9781501174162: Amazon.com: Books
Author Johnston opens by stating that 'the last forty-four presidents all pursued policies that they believed would make for a better America tomorrow. The Trump presidency is about Trump. Period.'



He spends hours each day in front of a television, watching the latest news about himself. When he doesn't like what he sees, he sends out nastygram tweets, often in the wee hours. His life philosophy can be summarized in a single word - revenge. He has left the vast majority of the nearly 4,000 positions under his control vacant, filling many of the rest with the least qualified and most aggressive 'political termites' who operate in secret, determined to undo government regulations and laws. The Department of Education is headed by someone with no background in education theory or administration, at HUD - a retired surgeon with no administrative experience or housing expertise, Secretary of Treasury is a Wall Streeter who made much of his fortune foreclosing on homeowners, and EPA is run by a lawyer who vowed to destroy it. Our Surgeon General is now a physician who owned tobacco company stocks. He has boasted about not paying banks that loaned him billions, conned thousands to pay up to $35,000 to attend Trump University - with professors who turned out to be fast-food managers and others with no experience in real estate.



A major source of Trump's influence comes from people who distrust respected news organizations and rely instead on those that have little regard for fact - especially when it comes to Trump. Two of the leaders - Fox News and Brietbart. He put more than 500 business entities into a supposedly blind trust, that trust consists largely of businesses managed by his two oldest sons. Trump told 'Forbes' that his sons tell him how much money his businesses are making on an on-going basis. When Trump stays at Mar-a-Lago, his country clubs, or Trump Tower, governments rent rooms, buy meals, and use golf carts for which they pay full retail prices.



Trump has refused to release his tax returns. After his inauguration, the Kuwaitis moved their annual soiree from the Four Seasons hotel to Trump's hotel; President Trump himself has also gone there numerous times for dinner and got out of his presidential limo in front of that location - providing invaluable advertising for his newest asset, one that charges the highest room rates in D.C. Candidate Trump had vowed to never play golf or visit his golf courses because there was so much work to do, then spent seven of the first nine weekends as president at his properties. During his first 202 days in office, Trump spent 65 days at Mar-a-Lago, his New Jersey golf course, or Trump Tower.



In 2012 the average inflation-adjusted income reported by the bottom 90% on tax returns was slightly less than that same group reported in 1967. For Republicans to go against Trump when half their constituents believe he is their best hope for a better future is to risk political suicide - starting with a primary challenge.



By the time congress too its regular August recess in 2017, Trump hadn't even nominated people for 368 of 591 key positions requiring Senate confirmation. After over 7 months in office he'd nominated only 36 of 188 ambassadors (he'd fired them all upon taking office, even careerists - instead of allowing them to stay until replacements were approved). Johnston sees this as not helpful for economic development or national security purposes. He blamed Democrats for the problem - despite Senate control of the Senate and all his nominees having been confirmed. Two-thirds of those appointed were politicos, the reverse of prior patterns. Meanwhile, Trump and Tillerson are pushing many highly qualified and experienced State Department employees to leave - less than 5% of applicants are hired.



On the other hand, some Trump appointments are made as 'special government employees' - allowed for up to 130 days and without Senate confirmation, then left in place at the expiration of the allowed time.



The 'Trade and Development Agency' is mandated to support job creation in the U.S. and exports to other nations. Its 58 employees, per the Trump administration, created 18,000 U.S. jobs - costing $75 million to produce $752 in exports for every dollar spent (Trump administration report only credits them with $85/dollar spent). Trump wants to shut the agency down - 'government should not be in the business of picking winners and losers, or providing subsidies.



The Keystone Pipline project will create 28,000 new jobs, per Trump. Keystone itself estimates only 3,900 full-time jobs, and they would last only up to two years. The State Department estimates another 12,000 long-term jobs would result - partly from producing solid dry fuel for producing electricity that is more pollution-producing than coal. Most of the work producing pipeline equipment has already been completed - much in other nations.



The bulk of Johnston's book consists of Trumpian claims of creating business growth (most was already underway), cutting worker safety regulations, and environmental/consumer protections.