Amazon.com: Watch Billy Joel: A Matter of Trust: The Bridge to Russia, A Documentary Film
At the invitation of the Kremlin, Billy Joel took the first large-scale rock tour to the Soviet Union in 1987, performing his greatest hits in Tbilisi, Moscow, and Leningrad as a good-will ambassador to a nation in the throes of change. In doing so, he became one of the powerful cultural influences that brought about the dissolution of that nation. Gorbachev introduced perestroika in 1986 and added glasnost in 1988, so Joel's concerts were of a piece with the new freedoms and opening to the West that transformed the Soviet bloc.



This 75-minute Showtime documentary captures the warmth, intimacy, and excitement of the tour, offering not only numerous clips from the concerts but also behind-the-scenes activities, a travelogue, and meetings with Russians. The many people involved (family, band, crew, producer, translator, and others) reflect on the pains and pleasures of the experience. Billy took his then-wife Christie Brinkley and baby daughter Alexa along; young Russians embraced them wholeheartedly and they reciprocated the feelings. Although he strained his voice a bit early on in the tour, he managed to overcome the problem and put on exciting, energetic shows.



It's important to note that this is a documentary rather than a concert film. If you want the music from the tour, you'll need to buy the two-CD set, the concert DVD or Blu-ray, or the deluxe editions that pair the DVD or Blu-ray with the CDs. The audio recordings present 11 tracks that weren't on the original LP, called simply "Concert," while the videos include seven songs not on the original VHS release, entitled "Live From Leningrad." The deluxe versions add this documentary, which makes a strong argument for acquiring one of them. The sound and picture are excellent, as are the performances of Billy and his band.



The Soviet tour was a career peak for Billy Joel, and these recordings and films remain vital historical documents.