Cornered: The New Monopoly Capitalism and the Economics of Destruction: Barry C. Lynn: 9780470928561: Amazon.com: Books
This is a straight, honest and passionate book. It’s written in the first person. It’s genuinely heartfelt and it’s a wake-up call. Author Barry Lynn sees himself as an evangelist here. It’s bad news he bears and he’s desperate for everybody to hear it: If we don’t pay attention, and time is running short, our world will soon be owned by a small cabal of neo-feudalist financiers.



He builds the argument in two parts: first “you are here” and second “this is how you got here.” From there, he actually leaves it to the reader to extrapolate.



The book the author really wanted to write was the “this is how you got here,” but in my view that part of the book is nowhere near as strong as the first part, which is a proper compendium of business-school case studies in monopolistic and oligopolistic behavior, including:

• Walmart, and how it works with a Chinese company called Menu Foods to dominate pet food.

• Luxottica, and how they came to dominate the optical business (from p. 31)

• The beer duopoly of SAB and InBev (from p. 36)

• The dominant position of Procter and Gamble in the US after it absorbed Gillette (from p. 42)

• The roll-up of the high street by Macy’s (from p. 57, and yes, post Amazon it sounds quaint)

• Jack Welch’s “#1 or #2” strategy (from p. 66) with a bonus case study (the RCA rollup into NBC)

• David Stockman’s rise and fall, with emphasis on his explicit pursuit of monopoly (from p.75)



The case studies are accompanied by

• a taxonomy of monopolistic behavior (p. 19)

• a primer on the benefits of common carriage laws and why the producer (not the intermediary) ought to be setting the price (p. 50)

• a case study on how monopoly stifles progress (the market for safe syringes, from p. 152)

• a primer on how patents can be a double-edged sword (and the story of the triple sublimation of George Westinghouse, Thomas Edison and Nikola Tesla, from p. 162)

• a busting of the monopoly innovation myth (p. 169)



Special emphasis is given to

(i) the “hydra” model of monopoly whereby a slew of allegedly competing firms depend on a single supplier for a vital part of their value chain and the risk this poses to the “resilience” of the system. Ford’s CEO Mullally is quoted here, in particular. He appealed for his competitors to be saved in 2008, remember, lest their demise hurt the suppliers he depended on!

(ii) the monopsony power that a small, concentrated number of agricultural aggregators exercise over the farmer, who these days operates once again in serfdom. For example, 80% of milk is bought by either Dean Foods or Dairy Farmers of America

(iii) the threat to biodiversity and the resilience of our ecosystem that these same companies (he names Monsanto and ADM) bring about when they insist on monoculture of their own special seeds.



The most evil guys in this book, however, are the moneymen, and chief amongst them J.P. Morgan, whose career reads like an anthology of all the above.



And that’s the rub: the “how we ended up here” part of the book, the book the author really wanted to write, has its moments, but in my view fails to convince. Lynn does not satisfactorily explain what it is that makes 1995-2005 different from 1945-1995. Even worse, he ascribes the entire process to politics, a topic he does understand, and therefore is in a position to discuss, but is in my view nothing more than the intellectual mantle under which the transition has taken place, rather than the actual mechanism. He knows he hates J.P. Morgan, he knows he hates Cerberus, but he does not actually understand how they operate and what laws made the difference.



If you’re looking for a manual to do some harm, the book is of no use: the line is not traced between the politics (however wrong the politics might be) and the actual legislation spawned by the politics, let alone the way monopolists used the relevant laws that brought about the outcomes. Simple as that! Compared with David Stockman’s “Great Deformation,“ which (hidden deep in its 750 pages) contains a virtual “how to” guide, this account is far too theoretical.



Regardless, the history of the politics as told by Lynn is totally fascinating and worth repeating:



The very foundation of the American state is ascribed to the struggle against monopoly. The Boston Tea Party of 1773 was a revolution against the Amazon of its day, the British East India Company, rather than the British Empire, the author alleges, and very convincingly too.



Next comes the necessary discussion about Alexander Hamilton (bad) and Thomas Jefferson (good), which neatly brings us to the civil war, which is seen through the same lens: the US decided to shut out via steep tariffs the international monopolies of the British and to foster its own productive capacities. The South, which had previously operated as part of this setup, found itself cut off the international market both for its output, which it was forced to sell domestically, and for its inputs, that it was also forced to source domestically, and the rest we know.



From there we move on to the progressive era. Harry Truman, we’re told, did not really cut the robber barons down to size because he cared about the economics of monopoly. His trust busting should be credited to the fact that the powerful monopolists were beginning to exert political power and had to be restrained. It is only because they were a political threat that he intervened, bottom line.



Woodrow Wilson is the author’s true hero from this era, and he’s credited with setting up the Federal Trade Commission, with speaking out against the practices of monopolists, with actively presiding over their breakup and with putting “Democratic-Republican” Louis Brandeis on the Supreme Court, whose antitrust ideas infused mainstream American thinking for decades, including the super-important FDR presidency when not only the welfare state was set up, but also important legislation like Glass-Steagall was enacted.



This is in juxtaposition with the turn for the worse in the thinking among our intellectuals after the war, best exemplified by the more “efficiency-minded” John Kenneth Galbraith, whom the author brands a “democratic socialist” and not particularly open to the idea of actively fostering competition. Indeed (p.146) Galbraith is accused of having “actively waged war against the very idea of antimonopoly law.” There are parallels to be seen here with Teddy Roosevelt and his desire for a better planning state, rather than an out-and-out rejection of corporate monopoly.



Even worse, this left the door wide open to the Chicago school of Milton Friedman, who calls upon the new god of the unfettered “free market” twelve times in his seminal “Capitalism and Freedom” and names government interference as the biggest impediment to progress, to redefine the terms of the game. (Lynn notes wistfully that “free market” is mentioned exactly once in Adam Smith’s “Wealth of Nations”, exactly once in Hayek’s “Road to Serfdom” and zero times in all of Schumpeter’s “Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy”) The result is that as of the Reagan presidency, the monopolist gets a get out of jail free card, provided he can be shown not to be raising the price.



Funnily enough, progressive Barry Lynn reserves his maximum contempt for Bill Clinton, who picked up where Reagan left off and, in the context of the “End of History” event that was the fall of the Berlin Wall, looked the other way as mergers and acquisitions went on overdrive, as Microsoft and Intel monopolized computing and Walmart killed the high street, but also enacted a series of laws that left the field wide open for finance (the ultimate enabler of the monopolist) to go wild, including laws that allowed interstate banking, the end of the Glass Steagall act, the deregulation of the derivatives market etc.



The basics were all in place, then, when the 2008 crisis hit for all business to consolidate into oligopoly or outright monopoly, with the weaker competitor in every single business either exiting the market, or being merged into the surviving player, and that’s where we find ourselves today.



What most annoys the author, however, is that we did not have to lose the narrative. It was the fair-trading US that won the Second World War and, contrary to how the story is told today by our very own intellectuals, the institutions that were put in place were those of a 100% benign empire: when we discuss Bretton Woods today we focus on the institutions that were established such as the gold standard, the IMF and the World Bank, but the main change was that the US could have organized a centralized imperial system, but instead decided to impose a system based on liberal trade (p. 197)



The US even deserves credit for the establishment of the EU: it was part of the decision to blend the German industrial system with that of the rest of Europe. The French baulked first, but the Americans were the ones paying to rebuild Europe, mainly through the Marshall Plan, and they got their way, ensuring peace and prosperity for two generations.



But the US never openly admitted it had created a decentralized, commerce-based, cosmopolitan “empire by integration” (p.202) because “the people who conceived this imperial system never trusted the world to support such high levels of integration, so they developed the habit of hiding their actions from the very people they believed they were serving” (p.203)



“And that, folks, is how Milton Friedman was able to seize the high ground,” you can hear the author say with sorrow. The direct result is that two very important terms we use daily have been perverted. Barry Lynn wants to set us straight:



1. “market” is a vital political institution, not a natural, superhuman mechanism as per Friedman

2. “a business is a political institution designed to govern people and properties.” It is not property itself. (p. 227) (an equally good definition can be found on p. 142)



Another thing we need to understand is that we don’t want competition because we want lower prices. We want “competition for the sake of competition,” in markets that are supported by government regulation (p. 96). That is the space in which citizens can thrive, where politics will be healthy and where growth can be shared by all, rather than re-distributed ex post to the losers.



I totally agree with Barry Lynn and there is little doubt that we are rapidly reaching the dead-end to which the deification of the market and the shareholder economy is leading us. But the call to arms at the end of the book is misplaced. There will not be a revolution (we’re far too rich for that these days) and if we don’t change the laws there also will be no change.



Sadly, what is called for here is not a change in attitude or ideology. What we need is a change in the statute. On that front, Barry Lynn comes up waaaay short.



And here’s the funny thing. His second-biggest bete noire in the whole book, “villain” David Stockman has written his own version of this book, where he explains exactly what happened:



"we have a rigged system -a regime of crony capitalism- where the tax code heavily favors debt and capital gains, and the central bank purposefully enables rampant speculation by propping up the price of financial assets and battering down the cost of leveraged finance."



Stockman further explains that



1. There is a large tax advantage to financing with debt rather than equity, because the cost of servicing debt can be carved out of your bottom line. This has always been the case



2. Tax on regular income (be it from dividends or from going to work every day) is much higher than tax on capital gains. This only became the case in the Reagan years, so it’s relatively new.



3. The Fed perceives GDP growth to be its chief mandate and its only tool to achieve this is cheap money, which was duly delivered, and especially so when asset prices were endangered. The Greenspan put and Bernanke QE are also very new.



These three factors have unleashed the four horses of the last 20 years' financial apocalypse of “corporate equity withdrawal” whereby every drop of value is squeezed out of corporations and shared by the 0.1 percenter class of financiers and their puppet CEOs.



1. 1992-2000 Tyco-style LBO acquisition bubble that aided and abetted but also fed off of the Internet bubble



2. The 1992-2008 private equity bubble that toward the end was 100% about Corporate Equity Withdrawal



3. The 2000-2008 GSE / mortgage broker / subprime / Wall Street / CDO housing bubble



4. The 1992- present corporate bond cum stock repurchase bubble to support stock option prices for CEOs and upper management.



What is unbelievably funny is that Lynn’s and Stockman’s politics read like the negative of one another. They each go through American history and if one guy loves a president, the other is guaranteed to hate him. Wilson, loved by Lynn is Stockman’s biggest object of scorn. Perhaps even hatred. Lynn loves “regulation,” where Stockman loves “the free market.”



Yet when it comes to markets, they are nigh-on indistinguishable. For example, they both hate traders, be it oil and commodities traders, futures traders or stock and bond traders. Very very funny. And they both fiercely abhor monopoly, much as Stockman once tried to put one together in the car supplier business.



Which takes me to my conclusion: if Barry Lynn were to update his book to 2017, he would do well to look for remedies to the problems posed by Stockman, starting probably with an equal withholding tax on all types of corporate distributions, be they bond coupons, dividends, buybacks or stock option grants, set at the top marginal income tax rate.



With that said, in the world of Google, Amazon and Facebook, a strong background in why we do not like monopoly remains highly relevant.