World Without Cancer: The Story of Vitamin B17: G. Edward Griffin: 9780912986500: Amazon.com: Books
Having previously read The Creature From Jekyll Island by the same author, I naturally wished to read this book - especially after my doctor wanted to have me for tested for bone cancer. And I am glad I did. The book presents the "trophoblast theory of cancer" in easy-to-understand terms, and this theory makes a lot of sense to me. I have since acquired the reprint of the book, The Enzyme Treatment of Cancer and its Scientific Basis, by John Beard, the originator of this theory, but it's on the stack marked "to read."



Mr. Griffin describes the work of Ernst Krebs, Jr., and makes a very strong case for amygdalin (tentatively labeled vitamin B17) and its derivative, Laetrile, as a preventative and treatment for cancer. I have since found a source for amygdalin in fresh, raw apricot seeds, and eat them as a snack several times per day in small quantities. Personally, I think they are delicious, but most of my friends think otherwise. Mr. Griffin also tells of the role of pancreatic enzymes in the control of cancer cells, and from outside reading it would appear an enzyme called serrapeptase that I'm taking for Lyme disease will work in this regard.



The second half of the book delves deeply into the world of "legal" drug cartels and the forces that appear to drive the medical and pharmaceutical establishment of the modern world. After reading Jekyll Island, above, this all seems to fit, although I am sure many readers might become a little impatient with his long analysis.



I would encourage everybody concerned with their health to read this book, as I think it contains good information regarding cancer and its origins, prevention, and treatment. However, I would also encourage people to read as much as they can find on the subject, from various points of view. Read the mainstream critiques of Laetrile with an open mind. Read about iodine and vitamin D. Read about sugar and consider the role it may play in promoting cancer.



By the way, I never did get that test for bone cancer, and that was well over a year ago. Since I have no intention of submitting to chemotherapy or radiation treatment, it really makes no difference.