The Satanic Bible: Anton Lavey: 9780352396709: Amazon.com: Gateway
Right away if anyone is wondering, this is the first, and most likely best Satanic Bible. Satanism is in vogue right now, but this right here is the roots. LaVey's books started the positive association of diabolical symbols for religious misfits looking to have a way to define themselves. Many people look at this book as either a thing of evil, or a trendy way to show how rebellious they are. In reality it is neither, it is a diatribe written by a charismatic amateur philosopher who had a passion for the pageantry of ritual magic.

I am not a member of the Church of Satan, nor do I speak for them good or ill. If one is interested in their thing, there is plenty of public material available.

That being said, one does not have to be thinking of joining the Church of Satan, to read and benefit from this book.

It has a very pragmatic, if at times cynical approach to navigating modern society, as well as a unique standpoint on religion and its purpose for humans.

LaVey uses his own observations from life, as well as slightly embellished traditions of the past to set up a unique and fun loving religious philosophy.

The second half of the book is about magic rituals, most of which I have done, and do not regret preforming. There is no blood sacrifice, or anything of a genuinely sinister nature involved with them. To me what LaVey's rituals are is a darkly dramatic parody of Western esoteric magick such as the Golden Dawn's system. Many practicing occultists and armchair witches might find some delicious inspiration in this section of the book.

When I first read this book I was suffering from a terrible sense of existential dread, prior to this, my favorite piece of edgelord literature was Ligotti's Conspiracy Against the Human Race. I really like how LaVey encourages people to create an internal pseudo-mythology so that they may live with a sense of purpose and destiny.

There is a lot to unpack here, and after reading it the first time, I immediately read the book again. Since then I have bought many copies of it for friends, and nearly destroyed the spine on my original.

Unfortunately there are some downsides to the philosophy and associated assumption of the title Satanist. One of which is that people never react positively to someone self-identifying as a Satanist. Another is that the "social morality" that the Satanic Bible essentially endorses allows for cronyism and other anti-social behaviors when taken to its logical extreme.

Anyone interested in seeing what Satanism is about, or anyone who thinks they might identify with the religious philosophy should certainly read this book. There is nothing inherently dangerous or wrong with reading and contemplating this book.

Best of luck to everyone in pursuing their most indulgent existences.