The Choice: How Bill Clinton Won: Bob Woodward: 9780743285148: Amazon.com: Books
The Choice is not really about the 1996 presidential race between Bob Dole and Bill Clinton so much as the 1995 and early 1996 primary, largely Republican, process. Woodward had excellent access to several Republican presidential candidates and potential candidates, including the eventual nominee Bob Dole. That access allows him to talk about the invisible and actual primary on the Republican side. Dole was the successful front-runner, but other featured candidates and almost-candidates are Texas Senator Phil Gramm, businessman and flat tax advocate Steve Forbes, former Nixon-staffer Pat Buchanan, former Education Secretary and Tennessee Governor Lamar Alexander, former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, California Governor Pete Wilson, and former General Colin Powell. Other candidates in the field get little to no attention, such as Arlen Specter, Alan Keyes, and Richard Lugar. Dole ran the primary from his perch as Senate Majority Leader, raising big money and big endorsements. In hindsight, his nomination seems certain but he had many challenges along the way including an inability to articulate a message, concerns he was not conservative enough, and a major insurgency by Steve Forbes (the Herman Cain of 1996).



On the Democratic side, the big story is infighting among senior Clinton aides such as George Stephanopoulos and Dick Morris. The major innovation of the Clinton campaign was to raise early money and use the Democratic National Committee to fund a barrage of ads defining Dole and Gingrich early in 1995 and 1996.



Woodward charts all this in great detail with great access. Some of the discussion is self-serving to those who provided the insight, but overall the book presents both sides of complicated issues and discussions. Unfortunately, the book ends rather abruptly when Dole resigned from the Senate just before selecting his running mate.



1996 was an interesting race. Dole was the last WWII veteran to run for President and was also in the odd position of having to work with the President he was challenging on a daily basis as Senate Majority Leader. He took his responsibilities seriously, backing Clinton on foreign policy issues and working to strike budget deals despite his political interest in seeing Clinton fail. It was a different time to be sure. The friendship Dole and Clinton developed in joint appearances following Clinton's presidency becomes apparent towards the end of the book, when Dole makes a major effort to seek Clinton's forgiveness for a perceived personal offense.



This book is worth reading, if only to show how different the Republican Primary process is today and how the presidency was pursued in one particular cycle.