Eva Braun: Life with Hitler: Heike B. Gortemaker, Damion Searls: 9780307742605: Amazon.com: Books
If you are looking for a wonderful narrative of Eva Braun's life similar in quality to Manchester's biography of Winston Churchill, don't hold your breath. As Gortemaker documents in this wonderful *historical study*, Braun and other top Nazis from the bunker crowd ordered almost all of her (and Hitler's) personal correspondence burned during the final days of the Reich. Although some documents survived the war, it is probably now impossible to craft a pleasing narrative of her life in the style of other great, READABLE, biographies.

Gortemaker's work is a "biography" in name only. More accurately, it is a historical analysis of the documentation available about Eva Braun. The reason why it is a critical must-read is because Gortemaker systematically analyses the giant constellation of theses ("myths") that have emerged in the aftermath of the fall of the Third Reich, and she blows them away. Her work obliterates these theses not only for Eva Braun, but also for Hitler, Speer, and many others. Although it is sad that one does not walk away from this book with the satisfied feeling of having experienced the narrative of Braun's life, you will be delighted to obtain a completely new perspective on the atmosphere of Hitler's intimate court. Gortemaker certainly projects a much more interesting, nuanced, complex, and *infinitely* multifaceted characterization of Braun, and in doing so, she also reveals dudes like Speer to be even much more devious than Dan Van Der Vat's final exposé already accomplished. Gortemaker forcefully made me realize that just because some Nazi said it after the war, doesn't mean there is an ounce of truth in the statement. One aspect that was really very welcome was that her treatise humanizes Hitler. Of course, he was the perpetrator of the Holocaust. However, it is so casually demonized and caricatured, that it is sometimes hard to remember that he was just a regular old human being.

If you are interested in getting an authentic understanding of the life of Hitler's court, and a sophisticated perspective on the personalities of the members of that court, this is a must read.