Congressional race explodes Another Donnelly tax claim, another anti-Chocola ad and more to come.

Another Donnelly tax claim, another anti-Chocola ad and more to come.

SOUTH BEND -- The 2nd District congressional race between U.S. Rep. Chris Chocola, R-Bristol, and Granger Democrat Joe Donnelly went supernova Thursday, with both Republicans and Democrats exploding with heated accusations. A release issued by the National Republican Congressional Committee claimed that in 2001 the IRS placed a lien against a Donnelly family business in LaPorte for unpaid payroll taxes. Donnelly didn't dispute that the incident occurred, but he said his active role in the business and any remuneration from the business ended in 1997, years before the lien was placed. The candidate was incensed by the release. "They think the only way they can win is to throw mud and to try and personally destroy me," Donnelly said. Meanwhile, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee launched a TV spot Thursday that accuses Chocola of taking campaign contributions from "big oil" and voting against a crackdown on price gouging, all while owning hundreds of thousands of dollars in oil stocks. "Joe Donnelly's supports are once again misleading voters," said Chocola spokesman Brooks Kochvar. According to Kochvar, Chocola has voted to prevent price gouging three times and introduced legislation to slap tough new fines on any wholesalers or retailers who are found guilty of price gouging. Kochvar didn't dispute the DCCC claim that Chocola owns $300,000 worth of oil stock or that he has accepted $43,000 in campaign contributions from "big oil." The Hill, an independent Washington, D.C., newspaper, reported Wednesday that the DCCC has reserved $51.5 million worth of television commercial time in 32 congressional districts. The paper did not list any such reservation in the 2nd District, but DCCC spokesman Bill Burton confirmed that an unspecified amount of time has been reserved for commercials here. NRCC spokesman Ed Patru said Republicans have not reserved air time here, but he declined to further discuss strategic issues. However, Patru said the 2nd District is "a very important seat for us" and "it's safe to say we'll be there for Chris Chocola." According to the NRCC release, the Donnelly family firm, Superior Marketing Equipment Co. (now Stewart Superior Corp.), had a $99,972 lien placed against it by the IRS in 2001 for unpaid payroll taxes. At the time, Donnelly was listed as the firm's vice president and general counsel. The report also stated that the lien was satisfied in November 2002. Patru noted that Donnelly had earlier blamed cash flow problems for being late in paying property taxes on his homes here and in Michigan City but was still able to put money into his congressional campaign. "Joe Donnelly was robbing Peter to pay Paul at the same time that he was robbing Paul to pay Peter," Patru contended. According to Donnelly, the LaPorte business had been owned by his grandfather and later his father and is now run by his brother, John "Jack" Donnelly of Randolph, N.J. "I left in 1997 and started my own business," Joe Donnelly said Thursday. That business is Marking Solutions Inc., a Mishawaka company. Patru maintained Thursday that Donnelly had both a leadership role in the LaPorte company and a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that it paid its taxes. In a Thursday telephone interview, Jack Donnelly confirmed his brother's claim, saying that his brother's title as vice president was a nominal one that involved no remuneration or involvement in business decisions after April 1997. Jack Donnelly said his brother was listed as a registered agent for the company because it made sense to have an agent of record living in Indiana. "I live in New Jersey," said Jack Donnelly, adding that he has served as president of the company since 1991. According to the company president, the firm lost a major domestic customer in 1998 and also encountered competition from China and Europe. The combination drove sales down 40 percent, the company fell behind on its payroll taxes, and it had to realign itself, he said. Jack Donnelly said that by the time the lien was filed the company had paid the taxes, but still faced penalty and interest charges, which were subsequently paid. The company later challenged those charges and received a rebate from the IRS, he said. According to Jack Donnelly, he did not discuss the situation with his brother at the time because Joe Donnelly was no longer active in the business. "It's a 100-year-old company, Jack Donnelly said of the stamp and ink business. "It happened once." Staff writer James Wensits: jwensits@sbtinfo.com (574) 235-6353