Law and Government: An Introductory Study Course by Doug Phillips (2011-10-18): Doug Phillips, Dr. Joseph C. Morecraft, Chief Justice Roy Moore, Dr. Paul Jehle: 9781937460075: Amazon.com: Books
Not "co-authored" by Roy Moore.



Few will agree w/ all the POV of this course w/ some probable Reformed Recontructionist classical Presbyterianish (Post millennial) POV. While both this POV & Baptist POV are Bible-oriented, the latter is likely to be premillennial & look for Christ to return to fix the world, instead of preparing the world for Christ. Roy Moore is not designated as "co-author" and his Southern Baptist perspective (cf. Clinton, Gore, & Carter) is unlikely to be in agreement w/ a presbyterian POV. Even though most will not agree w/ Vision Forum Ministries and Douglas Phillips, the ideas should stimulate your thinking and sharpen your mind. One should not assume that any contributor agrees with the others, except on an authoritative Bible.



The course consists of a Study Guide & 8 speech disks. Neither the Study Guide nor the entire set has a general author (or "co-authors") designated; think of it as having an editor, Vision Forum Ministries. The Study Guide (referred to in the media as a text) does have authors for particular parts: Douglas Phlllips (VFM leader), Don Hart, & only 1 small section with actual co-authors = Phillips & Wm Einwechter. No other autthors are listed, nothing by Roy Moore. The study guide does have a little to say about women's role in society and part of it has an anti-feminist POV, discouraging women from being in political roles of governance. Roy Moore is ln not listed as co-author of this or anything else in the Study Guide, nor did I find anything in the set which indicates Moore agrees w/ the part on women's role.



While you can buy just the Study Guide, this listing includes also 8 discs, 2 MP3 and 6 DVDs of speeches by ~9 different men. Roy Moore has a speech on tracks 8-9 of MP3 disc 1: "Christianity and the Courts" with Q& A wherein he discusses his struggle vs the authorities over his 10 Commandments plaque. This one speech is the only thing authored by Moore, and it is not about women, neither does it say anything negative about women.



The other speeches on the 8 discs are by Douglas Phillips, Howard Phillips, Larry Pratt, Edwin Vicira, Paul Jehle, Joseph Morecraft III, Don Hart, and William Einwechter. So if you call a speaker an author, the course has multiple authors, but the only thing co-authored is the small section in the Study Guide by Phillips & Einwechter.



The listing doesn't say "co-authored" either; the listing cherry picks 4 men to mention where author should be, probably including Roy Moore to promote sales. But instead of authors, the listing should list an editor: Vision Ministries Forum. In bibliographies some books have no "author(s)" but an editor where author would go.



So be prepared to have your presuppositions challenged and to have your thinking stimulated; maybe you will be annoyed -- but it will be good for you.