Amazon.com: Kardashian Dynasty: The Controversial Rise of America's Royal Family eBook: Ian Halperin: Kindle Store
Bestselling NYT celebrity biographer Ian Halperin with his experience associated with investigative reporting combined with his enthusiastic flair and customary writing style that hooks readers from the first page, presents: “The Kardashian Dynasty: The Controversial Rise of America's Royal Family”. Whether Halperin recalled facts or opinions from verifiable sources, highlighted manufactured controversy, the millions made from reality TV, modeling contracts or various endorsements the Kardashians represent a cultural and social phenomenon with millions of fans, viewers, and followers, including an unknown number of commercial sponsors.



The history and rise of the Kardashian-Jenner enterprise is well documented in “Kris Jenner.. and All Things Kardashian” (2011). Halperin writes about the dedicated matriarch throughout this new book. Without the extreme ambition, skilled/trusted management, and dedicated hard work of self-identified * “momager”- the Kardashians would not have thrived in the level of success and stardom they enjoy today. In earlier years, Kris revived Bruce Jenner’s declining career, as he gained more endorsements from commercial sports vendors and public speaking engagements.



The headline stories of this famous family are examined in detail: Are the private journals of Robert Kardashian actually genuine? Could all the controversy surrounding Kim’s sex tape be a copy-cat version of Paris Hilton’s or was Kim actually victimized by the ordeal? After only 72 days following Kim’s August 20th 2011 marriage to Kris Humphries, could the divorce and countersuit been pre-planned by the bride and groom? Was the show of care and concern over the recent emergency health crisis of Lamar Odom genuine as the Kardashians flocked to his hospital bedside? Halperin also added an extensive material about Paris Hilton, Kanye West, filming the shows, the OJ Simpson case. The positive male influence of Lamar Odom noted in Rob Kardashian’s life, raises questions about Bruce Jenner's role as the patriarch of this large blended family over the years.



Despite Kris best efforts of skillful management and damage control, the Kardashian-Jenner family was never a modern day idealistic version of the Brady Bunch. The constant glare of the scrutinizing media spotlight can be challenging in the best of circumstances. In her book: “Strong Looks Better Naked” (2015) Khloe Kardashian recalled her family watching together Bruce’s transformation to Caitlyn along with 16.9 million television viewers while interviewed by Diane Sawyer on 20/20. Featured on the July cover issue of Vanity Fair (2015), photographed in a beautiful pictorial spread by Annie Leibovitz, Caitlyn appeared absolutely stunning as a transwoman. It is understandable that Kris may be keeping a lower profile, in doing so she may be waiting or planning family events/situations for customary media notice. Many excellent individual and family photos included.

Remembering ~ Nicole Brown Simpson~ 1959-1994.