All the notes Trump, Obama, Clinton and more US leaders left at the Holocaust memorial
This week, President Donald Trump is in Israel, the second stop on his first foreign trip since taking office. On Monday, Trump visited Yad Vashem, Israel's Holocaust memorial, to commemorate the 6 million victims and take part in a wreath-laying ceremony at the Hall of Remembrance.

While there, Trump also left a note, following in the footsteps of other US leaders, including former presidents Barack Obama and George W. Bush, and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

"It is a great honor to be here with all of my friends — so amazing and will never forget!" Trump wrote in a note signed by him and first lady Melania Trump.

See all the notes below:



7 PHOTOS Notes from US leaders at the Holocaust Memorial in Jerusalem See Gallery Notes from US leaders at the Holocaust Memorial in Jerusalem The note signed by U.S. President George W. Bush is seen in the guest book at Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial in Jerusalem January 11, 2008. Accompanied by Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and President Shimon Peres, Bush toured on Friday Jerusalem's Yad Vashem memorial to the six million Jews killed in the Nazi Holocaust of World War Two, a traditional stop for foreign dignitaries visiting Israel. REUTERS/Jim Hollander/Pool (JERUSALEM) The message written by US President Donald Trump at the Yad Vashem Holocaust Memorial Museum guest book and signed by him and his wife Melania is seen after their visit on May 23, 2017, in Jerusalem. / AFP PHOTO / POOL / DEBBIE HILL (Photo credit should read DEBBIE HILL/AFP/Getty Images) The guest book signed by US Democrat presidential candidate Barack Obama is seen at the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial museum, which commemorates the six million Jews killed by the Nazis during World War II, in Jerusalem on July 23, 2008. Obama started his visit to Israel and the West Bank during which he will meet with Israeli and Palestinian leaders. AFP PHOTO/GALI TIBBON (Photo credit should read GALI TIBBON/AFP/Getty Images) JERUSALEM - MARCH 3: A Yad Vashem official displays the page in the guest book signed by U.S Secretary of State Hillary Clinton during her visit to the Holocaust memorial March 3, 2009 in Jerusalem. Clinton, on her first visit to the region as Secretary of State, laid a wreath in memory of the Six Million Jews who perished at the hands of the Nazis in World War Two. (Photo by David Silverman/Getty Images) A picture taken on October 18, 2015, shows the message left in the guest book by Mayor of New York Bill de Blasio during his visit to the Yad Vashem Holocaust Memorial museum in Jerusalem commemorating the six million Jews killed by the German Nazis and their collaborators during World War II. AFP PHOTO / GALI TIBBON (Photo credit should read GALI TIBBON/AFP/Getty Images) A picture taken on July 21, 2015 shows the message left in the guest book by US Defence Secretary Ashton Carter during his visit to the Yad Vashem Holocaust Memorial museum in Jerusalem commemorating the six million Jews killed by the German Nazis during World War II. AFP PHOTO/GALI TIBBON (Photo credit should read GALI TIBBON/AFP/Getty Images) JERUSALEM, ISRAEL - APRIL 21: United States Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel's message left in the guest book after his tour the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial April 21, 2013. in Jerusalem, Israel. Hagel will visit Israel, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and the United Arab Emirates on his first trip to the Mideast as Pentagon chief. (Photo by Uriel Sinai/Getty Images) Up Next See Gallery Discover More Like This HIDE CAPTION SHOW CAPTION of SEE ALL BACK TO SLIDE

Obama visited the memorial in July 2008, while he was still a U.S. senator and presidential candidate.

"I am grateful to Yad Vashem and all of those responsible for this remarkable institution," Obama's note in the guest book read. "At a time of great peril and promise, war and strife, we are blessed to have such a powerful reminder of man's potential for great evil, but also our capacity to rise up from tragedy and remake our world."

It continued: "Let our children come here, and know this history, so that they can add their voices to proclaim 'never again.' And may we remember those who perished, not only as victims, but also as individuals who hoped and loved and dreamed like us, and who have become symbols of the human spirit."

Bush visited Yad Vashem in January 2008, shortly before his second term ended. He, too, was brief.

"God bless Israel," Bush wrote in his note.

According to the Associated Press, the memorial chairman said Bush had tears in his eyes as he toured the memorial, and he reportedly told Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice that the US should have bombed Auschwitz to stop the genocide.

When first lady Laura Bush visited the memorial in May 2005, she wrote a longer message:

"Each life is precious. Each memory calls us to action to honor those lost. We commit (sic) ourselves to reject hatred and to teach tolerance and live in peace."

Secretary of State in March 2009, following an election in which she competed against Obama for the Democratic nomination for president. It was her first Mideast visit as the top US diplomat.

"Yad Vashem is a testament to the power of truth in the face of denial, the resilience of the human spirit in the face of despair, the triumph of the Jewish people over murder and destruction and a reminder to all people that the lessons of the Holocaust must never be forgotten," Clinton's note read. "God bless Israel and its future."

More from :

Trump leaves three words out of his Saudi Arabia speech

Roger Stone on Trump receiving Saudi award: ‘makes me want to puke’

Israelis nervous about sharing intel with President Trump after Russia gaffe