Temporary Cavitation Tissue Stretch

Last Updated on Thu, 15 Mar 2018 | Emergency Medicine

Fired from an appropriate and well-designed weapon, a bullet flies in air with its nose pointed forward; it yaws only 1° to 3°. Yaw occurs around the bullet's center of mass. In pointed rifle bullets, the center of mass is behind the midpoint of the bullet's long axis. Although the bullet's most naturally stable in-flight orientation would be with its heaviest part (its base) forward, for aerodynamically efficient flight it must fly point forward.

During flight, a bullet is stabilized against yaw by the spin imparted to it by the spiral grooves (rifling) in the gun barrel. The longer (and heavier) the bullet in relation to its diameter, the more rapidly it must be rotated to avoid significant yaw in flight. A gun barrel intended to fire a heavier bullet has rifling that makes a full turn in fewer inches of barrel length than the rifling in a barrel intended for a shorter, lighter bullet of the same caliber. This will cause a faster rate of bullet spin.

A gun with a shorter barrel will generally produce a bullet of lower velocity than would a weapon with a longer barrel when firing the same round. With shorter barrel length, the expanding gasses of the burning gunpowder have less time to accelerate the bullet before they are discharged into the atmosphere. A .22 long rifle round fired in a rifle will produce a bullet with up to 300 ft/s more velocity than would the same round fired in a handgun.

Although the bullet's spin is adequate to stabilize it against yaw in its flight through air, it is not adequate to stabilize it in its path through tissue, because of the higher density of the medium. If it does not deform, a pointed bullet eventually yaws to a base-forward position (180° of yaw). Expanding bullets lose the physical stimulus to yaw because, after mushrooming, their heaviest part is forward.

As a bullet passes through 90° of yaw or after it deforms into a mushroom shape, it is crushing its maximal amount of tissue (unless it fragments, which will crush more). It is slowed down rapidly, as its wounding potential is used up. The bullet creates a splash-type force in tissue, which spreads out radially. This force creates the temporary cavity. This aspect of the wounding process is analogous to the splash of a diver entering the water.

If a diver enters the water very straight and point forward (similar to a bullet at 0° of yaw), the splash may be minimal. If the diver does a belly flop (similar to a bullet at 90° of yaw), a large splash is induced. In tissue, this splash, the temporary cavity, produces localized blunt trauma. 9

The maximal size of the temporary cavity occurs several milliseconds after the bullet has passed through the tissue. Because forces follow paths of least resistance, temporary cavitation is likely to be asymmetric and spread out through tissue planes.

The temporary cavity caused by common handgun bullets is generally too small to be a significant wounding factor in all but the most sensitive tissues (brain and liver). Center-fire rifle bullets and large handgun bullets (e.g., .44 magnum), often induce a large temporary cavity [10- to 25-cm (4- to 10-in) diameter] in tissue. This can be a significant wounding factor, depending on the characteristics of the tissue in which it forms.

Near-water-density, less elastic tissue (such as brain, liver, or spleen), fluid-filled organs (including the heart, bladder, and gastrointestinal tract), and dense tissue (such as bone) may be damaged severely when a large temporary cavity displaces them or forms within them. More elastic tissue (such as skeletal muscle) and lower-density elastic tissue (such as lung) are less affected by the formation of a temporary cavity. —!Z Because of these tissue differences, transmitted blunt trauma from temporary cavitation caused by a bullet traveling 800 to 950 m/s can cause a more severe pulmonary contusion when the bullet traverses the chest wall musculature than the pulmonary contusion it would have caused if passing through the lung. 17

Although the formation of a large temporary cavity often has devastating effects in the brain or liver, its effect in wounds of the extremities has frequently been exaggerated.18 Fracture of large bones not hit by the bullet and tearing of major vessels or nerves by the temporary cavity are often mentioned in the literature but are rare in clinical experience. This includes a systematic review of 1400 rifle wounds sustained in the Vietnam conflict and analyzed in the Wound Data and Munitions Effectiveness Team (WDMET) study (R.F. Bellamy, personal communication). Most of the permanent damage done in wounds of the extremities is the result of structures being hit by the intact bullet, bullet fragments, or secondary missiles. As in all blunt trauma, shear forces develop and tear structures at points where one side is fixed and the other side is free to move. The temporary cavity is no exception. In the unlikely event that the blunt trauma caused by the temporary cavity tears a vessel wall, this is particularly likely to occur at the vessel origin.