Schar School of Policy and Government
Stuart Malawer

Distinguished Service Professor of Law & International Trade

Email: stuartmalawer@msn.com

Web:

http://www.globaltraderelations.net/

http://www.us-global-law.net/



Main: 703-993-4137

Fax: 703-993-8215

3351 Fairfax Dr., MS 3B1

Arlington, Virginia 22201

Curriculum Vita

Honors

Bio:

Stuart Malawer holds a Ph.D. from the Dept. of International Relations at the University of Pennsylvania. He has a J.D. from the Cornell Law School and a Diploma from the Hague Academy of International Law (Research Center). He also studied at the Harvard Law School and St. Peter’s College at Oxford University. Professor Malawer has recently been a member of the Virginia Governor’s trade missions to China and to India.

Dr. Malawer was awarded the Hardy Cross Dillard Award by the Virginia State Bar and served as Chairman of the International Practice Section of the Virginia State Bar. He has recently published three books on global trade law, national security law and the World Trade Organization. He has also recently published several articles on U.S. – China trade relations and litigation.

Professor Malawer was appointed by former Virginia Governor Tim Kaine to the Board of Directors of the Virginia Economic Development Partnership. In 2013 he was awarded a contract by the Commonwealth of Virginia to study cybersecurity and defense exports. He continues to serve as a board member of the International Cyber Center at George Mason University.

From 1990 – 1995, Professor Malawer served as the Director & Founder of the Graduate International Transactions Program at George Mason University (a master’s program in international affairs with more than 500 students enrolled). He was subsequently named the Distinguished Service Professor of Law & International Trade, as well as the Director of the Oxford Trade Program. This program was held annually in partnership with St. Peter’s College, Oxford University, at Oxford and Geneva, Switzerland, from 1997 – 2001. The GMU Alumni Association named Professor Malawer recently the Distinguished Faculty Member of the Year. Alumni established The Malawer-Paden Founders’ Scholarship that was formally announced by former Governor of Virginia Gerald Baliles.

Areas of Research