Panel To Diagnose State's Education
Spiralling enrollment. Stagnant test scores. Unprepared graduates. Public disgust.

Gov. Lawton Chiles is hoping a committee of high-powered state business, political and education leaders can start curing what ails Florida's battered public education system before he leaves office 21/2 years from now.

The Governor's Commission on Education has a broad title for a reason: its 52 members have about 2 years to scrutinize every area of public education, from pre-kindergarten through college graduation. Until all those pieces fit together, Florida's students will lag behind their peers across the country and the world, the governor said.

"We all talk about the international competition. We understand how important it is. Are we ready for it? I think we can all say right now, we aren't," Chiles said to the commission, which convened for the first time on Thursday in Fort Lauderdale.

The consensus among national and state experts addressing the commission is that public education has improved since the school reform movement of the 1970s and '80s prompted teachers to do more than lecture students and forced schools to include parents in their decisions.

And education reformers should take heart that the public is more open to new solutions, such as taxpayer-financed charter schools that create their own rules to reach children, said Frank Newman, president of the Education Commission of the States.

But there have been recent setbacks in Florida: an increasingly diverse student enrollment that has forced schools to adopt a variety of teaching methods, not all successfully; limited revenue that can't keep up with the needs that bus loads of new students impose each year; growing public discontent that has manifested in ballot box rejections of new taxes, such as last year's resounding repudiation of a 1-cent sales tax increase by Broward voters.

Chiles and other state leaders consider the mission of the largely white, mostly male panel as perhaps the most ambitious ever handed an independent committee diagnosing public education in Florida.