Special Session On Education Must Work Toward Viable Solution
Special sessions can be productive, or not, but in the one set for Nov. 3 Florida legislators don't have the luxury of failing to act. The Florida Legislature and Gov. Lawton Chiles bear a solemn responsibility to alleviate crowding in public schools and therefore improve education for the state's children.

They must set aside partisanship and think in terms of children's needs, not their own political futures. If the legislators falter in the quest to find money for new permanent classrooms, they will rightly be subject to the scorn of parents and of all Floridians who realize how serious the school-construction crisis has become.

This is not to suggest Florida's public schools necessarily are run efficiently or well. Too many school districts, most definitely including those of Broward and Palm Beach counties, remain top-heavy with administrators and bureaucrats who drain financial resources that should be used directly for children.

Legislators ought to remind the public-school hierarchy of the bureaucratic fat, and should do so forcefully. If there's a way to tie reduction of school district bureaucracy to provision of money for construction, it should be considered seriously.

The overall crisis, however, has become too serious to be shunted aside, no matter how annoyed legislators may be at the myopia and stubbornness of some school administrators. Although estimates of the financial need for school construction vary widely, Chiles is pegging it at $3.3 billion.

How can the chronically strapped state find such a huge sum of money, or anything close to it? Or, in another approach, should the state buck the responsibility to county school boards, giving them the authority to raise local sales taxes without a referendum? Some answers are expected in late October from the Governor's Commission on Education, which has been wrestling with school construction for months.

At this point, two kinds of solutions seem to be possible: A ragged patchwork quilt, stitched together from various sources, to assemble enough money to get through the current construction crisis. Or a long-term, permanent source of funds for school construction.