Vermont's legal marijuana era dawns
CLOSE Marijuana advocacy organization Heady Vermont holds a big bash in Johnson to celebrate Vermont's first day of legal pot on July 1, 2018. Ryan Mercer, Free Press Staff Writer

Marijuana leaves. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

As of today, recreational use of marijuana is legal in Vermont -- within boundaries of some clear and not-so-clear rules.

Vermont becomes the ninth state to legalize marijuana and the first state to do so through its state legislature. Gov. Phil Scott signed the law in January with "mixed emotions."

The law allows adults to possess up to 1 ounce of marijuana, two mature and four immature plants.

But authorities can't answer some questions and say clarity of the rules will come with case law. Some examples include how police will enforce the one-ounce marijuana limit when it comes to edibles, the boundaries in public vs. private consumption and what exactly a secure pot garden looks like.

There are some absolute rules, though, to be aware of if you partake in the new law. Here's what you should not do:

Don'ts:

Don't smoke in a car:Both drivers and passengers are forbidden from smoking. And the fines are steeper for anyone who smokes with a child in the car.

Don't smoke on Lake Champlain: The lake is considered federal waters under federal rule, which means marijuana is still illegal there.

Don't smoke on the beach, in a park, on the sidewalk or any other public place: In the law, marijuana use is limited to "individual dwellings."

Don't sell it: There is no legal commercial market for marijuana.

Map shows states where marijuana use is legal for recreational use and medical use. (Photo: ASSOCIATED PRESS)

And before you smoke, you should find out what your employer's rules are. The state may not punish you, but your workplace could. And if you're looking for a job or expecting a drug test, you should know how long THC can be detected in your system.

Growing marijuana comes with its own set of rules, including regulations on where you can grow.

CLOSE Here are a few key rules to know in Vermont's new marijuana legalization law, which takes effect on July 1, 2018. RYAN MERCER/FREE PRESS

What's happening:

For many Sunday will be just another, albeit stiflingly hot, day.

“I’m not sure that we’re going to see a sea change here,” Gov. Phil Scott said on Thursday during a discussion of the state's readiness for legalization. “I think a lot of what I was reacting to was what’s happening today so I’m not sure that we’re going to see anything different come Monday than we were seeing yesterday. Well, except for maybe Sunday.”

In Burlington, the growing supply store Green State Gardener on Pine Street saw a steady stream of customers Sunday morning.

"We definitely have seen a ramp up in interest and very excited after today to introduce this hobby, this therapeutic and recreational hobby to a whole host of new people," said Kelsy Raap, general manager of Green State Gardener.

Buy Photo A sign in Burlington advocates a “yes” vote for a non-binding referendum on cannabis legalization on Nov. 6, 2012. (Photo: Free Press File)

Those for whom Sunday is a day to celebrate there are a few options:

* Heady Vermont, a marijuana advocacy group, is hosting a "Legalization Celebration" at Willow Crossing Farm in Johnson today.

As of noon a few hundred people were inside the gates about an hour after they opened, with most sticking to the shade.

Evidence of people smoking pot was low-key at the event, which had an air of a large farmers market. There are vendors, classes and a camping area. Organizers are providing free water and encouraging people to visit a nearby river to cool down.

The Lamoille County sheriff said he had been meeting with Heady Vermont co-founder Eli Harrington for three weeks. Authorities have no intention of interfering with the party, just keep the roads safe as people arrive.

* The Original Green Mountain Cannabis and Music Festival is scheduled from noon to 8 p.m. at Layla’s Riverside Lodge in West Dover. Badfish, a Sublime tribute band, is headlining.

Both events require the purchase of tickets.

Read or Share this story: https://bfpne.ws/2NaozrI