Can Aaron Hernandez beat the rap?
The New England Patriots put Aaron Hernandez — onetime star, now murder defendant — in their rear view mirror a long time ago.

But in January, the disgraced player could be back in the same news cycle as his old team.

Advertisement

Jury selection for the Hernandez murder trial is slated to begin Jan. 9 — just as the Patriots hope to be preparing to play in the 2015 divisional playoffs. The election of Bristol County District Attorney C. Samuel Sutter as mayor of Fall River does not change the trial schedule, a spokesman said.

With success on the field and an appealing cast of new and veteran players, the Patriots rekindled comforting old themes of discipline and character. But Hernandez in the court room is a reminder of the key question raised after his arrest in June 2013 for the murder of Odin Lloyd, 27, of Dorchester: Where was that discipline and character when they drafted Hernandez?

Get This Week in Opinion in your inbox: Globe Opinion's must-reads, delivered to you every Sunday. Sign Up Thank you for signing up! Sign up for more newsletters here

From a PR perspective, the Patriots successfully moved on from that dark time.

The organization cut Hernandez loose hours after he was charged with Lloyd’s murder. Anyone who bought a Hernandez jersey could exchange it — a gesture designed to show the team’s disdain for a player once thought to epitomize the Patriot way. In July 2013, head coach Bill Belichick also addressed what he called a “sad day” involving “an individual who happened to be a New England Patriot.” When asked if the Patriots knew anything about Hernandez’ alleged involvement in a 2012 double homicide or a shooting incident in Miami, Belichick said “no.”

With that, the Patriots ended discussion of the larger judgment issue facing the NFL: a player’s athletic potential versus the risk of scandal based on prior behavior.

Advertisement

But they couldn’t duck the legal process. Belichick and team owner Robert Kraft were both interviewed by investigators and both are listed as potential prosecution witnesses. Whether either is called is questionable, since the witness list tops 300. The Patriots agreed to turn over 317 pages of Hernandez’s personnel and medical records. Some 34 text messages exchanged between Belichick and Hernandez are also part of the evidence.

In the court of public opinion, Hernandez swiftly went from hero to killer. In a separate case, he is also charged with first-degree murder in a 2012 double slaying in Boston. Yet, all charges against him must, of course, be proven beyond reasonable doubt in a court of law.

Massachusetts Superior Court Judge Susan Garsh recently ruled that a text message Lloyd sent to his sister minutes before his murder is inadmissible. In it, Lloyd said he was with “ NFL.” That was code for Hernandez, prosecutors argued, and showed he was trying to warn his sister of his danger. It also put Lloyd and Hernandez in the same place at the time of the murder.

Writing for Sports Illustrated, Michael McCann, a Massachusetts lawyer and director of the Sports and Entertainment Law Institute at the University of New Hampshire School of Law, described the judge’s ruling as a significant setback for the prosecution. As he notes, “There is no murder weapon. There are no credible witnesses who will testify that Hernandez is guilty. There is no admissible evidence of Hernandez shooting other people. The universe of incriminating materials against Hernandez has shrunk and his lawyers only need to raise doubt to win.”

Still, prosecutors have surveillance video that shows Hernandez and two friends picking up Lloyd at his home. There is also video of their car entering the industrial park where Lloyd’s body was found and surveillance photos of Hernandez, apparently holding a gun in his home, after Lloyd was killed.

“The case is going to come down to a lot of little things adding up,” said Thomas M. Hoopes, a well known Boston criminal defense lawyer who believes the circumstantial evidence against Hernandez is strong. “Can I put him (Hernandez) in the car? What are they going to establish about his state of mind before this guy got killed? And what did he do after the guy got killed?”

For the Patriots, the decision on drafting Hernandez probably came down to a lot of little things adding up. This trial may paint a clearer picture of that case, too.