Chiles' Last Call: Help Children, Control Guns
TALLAHASSEE — Gov. Lawton Chiles opened the 1998 Legislature on Tuesday with one familiar refrain and one surprise.

Chiles, a Democrat, used his eighth and final State of the State speech to sound a rallying cry for children's programs _ and to call for restrictions on firearm purchases made at gun shows.

The governor also asked for tougher clean-air standards that would allow local governments to decide where and when to allow smoking.

But it was the gun control proposal _ coming from Chiles, an avid hunter _ that took legislators by surprise.

The governor called for criminal background checks and a waiting period for purchases made at gun shows.

``Gun violence in our society has become background noise,'' said Chiles. ``Too many of our kids live in fear of guns on our schoolyards and in their neighborhoods. Let's give them a greater measure of safety.''

Gun control opponents immediately countered, saying the proposal would make Florida less safe.

``Unfortunately we're in a state that's No. 1 in violent crime in America,'' said Sen. Charlie Crist, R-St. Petersburg. ``And for us to make moves that would disarm our law-abiding citizens would be inappropriate.''

But Senate President Toni Jennings and House Speaker Daniel Webster, R-Orlando, said they may try to accommodate the governor.

``Even the gun people, the National Rifle Association, would like to talk about regulating things at the gun shows,'' said Senate President Toni Jennings, R-Orlando. ``It will be something we will be talking about.''

Chiles used his final appearance before a joint session of the Legislature to take a trip down memory lane, recounting his early days in politics, delivering political advice and musing about the state's future.

But some Republican leaders said the speech was notable for what the governor didn't say.

``What's missing was a little mention of the elderly, economic development and criminal justice, including the growing number of people we have on Death Row,'' said King.