Gorilla Safari Tours, Bwindi Impenetrable Forest National Park Uganda
Bwindi Impenetrable Forest National Park Uganda

Gorilla Trekking in Uganda, Bwindi Forest National Park

Welcome to Bwindi Forest National Park in Uganda. This information portal guides you on how to get there, attractions, where to stay, securing a gorilla safari permit, prominent Uganda gorilla safari companies, travel tips, what to wear, when to go ? and recent news about the Mountain gorillas in Uganda.

Gorilla Safari Information

Complete guide to gorilla trekking, where to find the gorillas, tracking rules, how to get a gorilla permit and choosing the right safari company.

You want to track the gorillas but not sure of the best months or time to visit Uganda? Check our this article from our senior advisor.

Bwindi has various gorilla families in different locations, be careful not to select the accommodation not close to the briefing point.

You can choose to take a charter flight from Entebbe or spend some hours on the road while enjoying the scenery. More information here.

Gorilla Trails

Within Bwindi Impenetrable Forest, there are 4 different areas where you can track the mountain gorillas, and they include Buhoma, Ruhija, Rushaga and Nkuringo. Each of these areas has specialized accommodation close to the tracking area.

How To get a gorilla permit?

Visiting the Gorillas of Uganda require that you get a tracking permit at a cost of $ 600. Here are some guidelines to follow

Which Uganda Safari Company To Use

Are you finding it hard to make up your mind on which tour company to book your safari with? Find our list of reliable agents.

How To Trek The Gorillas

Rules for gorilla tracking and more information.

What To Wear?

Gorilla Trekking gear guide, Good quality walking boots if trying any hikes or even climbs, warm layers of cloth for the cold evenings and clothing for wet weather remember it becomes cold and wet at this high altitude. However during the day, the sun is strong even when cloudy therefore always remember to carry and wear sunscreen as well as a sun hat. In addition, you may have to carry along waterproof bags to safeguard cameras plus additional equipment for the hike. Water plus snacks are additional recommended items plus a packed lunch for people doing full-day expeditions.

Gorilla Families

A list of habituated gorilla groups and where they are located.

Where Else Can I see The Gorillas?

You can visit the mountain gorillas in Uganda, Rwanda and Congo. See this link for Rwanda Gorilla Trekking

Nature Walks

Nature walks in Bwindi area, visit the Batwa, Munyangwa River and so much more.

Birdwatching

The diverse habitats in Uganda’s most ancient forest imply that is the perfect habitat for a diversity of bird species, with about 350 recorded different species, with 23 endemics. More info about Birding in Bwindi

Cycling Tours

The mountain bike ride ventures in Bwindi are managed by a woman’s group which offers trained guides, a repair -shop for these bikes and every participant that helps in this program receives direct reimbursement from visitors to Buhoma enjoying a ride on the bike.

Bwindi Impenetrable National Park is located in the southwestern part of Uganda on the rim of the Rift Valley. The hillsides which are mist-covered are sheltered by one of the ancient and very biologically varied rainforests in Uganda that dates back to more than 25,000 years, comprising of about 400 varied plant species. More notably, this “impenetrable forest” in addition protects an predictable 320 population of mountain gorillas – approximately half of the population in the world, among which are a number of habituated groups, that can be tracked by visitors.Bwindi is habitat to more than half the world’s population of Mountain Gorillas. actually there are over 300 mountain gorillas living here. Gorilla devotees for Uganda safaris from different corners of the world to enjoy this Ultimate Safari in Uganda – Mountain Gorilla tours / tracking in Bwindi Impenetrable Forest.The word “Bwindi” means “darkness” and taking a hike this magnificent forest will certainly unveil to you the reason why the forest was named so. You will as well be in position to fast tell why actually the forest is also regarded as Impenetrable. One requires to be realistically physically fit to take part in this mountain gorilla tracking / trekking adventure because it may involve climbing the steep terrain.

In addition to the endangered impressive mountain gorillas there are also 346 bird species and more than 200 butterfly species, about 324 species of trees, ten of which are only found in this areas in the whole of Uganda. This is really a destination to explore. Because there are few habituated Gorillas living here (gorillas that have been trained to withstand human presence and not likely to attack), actually the time offered to see them is limited and so are the permits which currently are offered at a cost of $500 per individual. No person ever complains after spending some time with these very fascinating Mountain Gorillas in Uganda within Bwindi Impenetrable Forest, which is among the most stunning rainforest anyone will ever come across.

This biologically varied region as well offers shelter to a additional 120 mammals, among which are various primate species like the baboons plus chimpanzees, in addition to elephants as well as antelopes. Furthermore, there are about 350 bird species supported within this forest, among which are twenty three Albertine Rift endemics. The adjacent towns of Nkuringo as well as Buhoma offer an remarkable collection of luxury lodges, budget campsites, restaurants, rustic bandas and craft stalls in addition to guiding services. A 3 day gorilla safari tour will cover plentiful Opportunities to discover the neighboring Bakiga plus Batwa Pygmy people’s cultures which they well showcase in performances plus workshops as well as on guided village walks.

While in Uganda, besides visiting the mountain gorillas, you can take a safari to Kidepo, Murchison Falls, Queen Elizabeth, Lake Mburo National Park and other interesting tourist areas that are worth checking out. Check Uganda safari destinations here, Bwindi Impenetrable Forest Reserve was gazetted in the year of 1942 and later in 1992 it was upgraded to the Bwindi Impenetrable National Park and in 1994 it was recognized as a World Heritage Site in Uganda. In local language (Lukiga), Bwindi actually means ‘Impenetrable.’ This repeated warning is apt, for Bwindi is all however impenetrable; 327 km2 of tangled plant life draped over a deep fissured landscape of steep, slippery valleys & high, draughty ridges. However if the terrain is far from easy to manage, it’s well worthy the effort. A trek through this, is among Africa’s most ancient rainforests, in search of the vulnerable mountain gorilla, ranks among one of the world’s premier wildlife encounters. Most tourists on African trip combine Tanzania safari adventures with gorilla trekking in Uganda and Rwanda in addition to a safari in Kenya or Mount Kilimanjaro Trekking in Tanzania.

Where Else Can you see the Mountain Gorillas? After your gorilla tours in Uganda, a visit to Volcanoes National Park Rwanda is a great opportunity to see the other half of the remaining mountain gorillas in the world. Visit the Volcanoes National Park Rwanda for packages to Rwanda. Besides the mountain gorillas, check this post on where to see gorillas in Africa. You can combine your Rwanda or Congo gorilla tour with climbing mount Nyiragongo. Bwindi could be very cold especially in the morning & night. The annual mean temperatures range is 7°C to 20°C with the coldest months being June & July.Hence warm clothing are required, plus wet weather gear because Bwindi receives up to 2390mm of rain every year. This is centered on during 2 wet seasons, short rains in March- May & heavy rainfall in the months of September-November.In Bwindi, rain often falls as long hours of soft drizzle,instead of short tropical deluge. A tour agent will help you prepare depending on the season. Most tourists who take on African safari holidays usually combine more countries in various destinations. If you would like to visit other neighboring countries to Uganda or Rwanda, consider Tanzania safari holidays for the great wildebeest migration safaris in Africa, Ngorongoro crater ,Serengeti and so much more. Kenya safari vacation spots include Masai Mara, Amboseli and others. In The Southern part of Africa, you can visit Botswana, Malawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe,South Africa and Madagascar.

Bwindi Impenetrable Forest National Park in featured in CCN, Newyork Times, African Safari Operators, Safari Geographic, Huffington Post, CNtraveler and so much more.

Socia Media

0 Users (0 Reviews) Ratings Leave your rating Reviews Sort by: Most recent Top score Most helpful Worst score Be the first to leave a review. Verified {{{ review.rating_title }}} Show more {{ pageNumber+1 }} Leave your rating Your browser does not support images upload. Please choose a modern one