Maternity and Parental Benefits
For information on how to create your account, visit the My Service Canada Account .

In the 2017 Budget announcement, the Government committed to provide more flexible EI maternity and parental benefits to support Canadian families. Starting December 3, 2017, claimants can access maternity benefits up to 12 weeks prior to their expected date of confinement. In addition, parents have the option to receive parental benefits over a longer period at a lower benefit rate.

Self-employed Canadians can apply for EI special benefits (sickness, maternity, parental, compassionate care and family caregiver benefits) if they are registered for access to the EI program. For more information please consult the publication called EI special benefits for self-employed people .

The Province of Quebec is responsible for providing maternity, paternity, parental, and adoption benefits to residents of Quebec through a program called the Quebec Parental Insurance Program. All other types of EI benefits, such as regular benefits, sickness benefits, compassionate care and family caregiver benefits, remain available to residents of Quebec.

Note: The number of weeks of EI maternity or parental benefits you are entitled to receive does not change, even if you have a multiple birth (twins, triplets, etc.) or if you adopt more than one child at the same time.

There are two options available for receiving parental benefits: standard or extended.

EI parental benefits are offered to parents who are caring for a newborn or newly adopted child or children.

EI maternity benefits are offered to biological mothers, including surrogate mothers, who cannot work because they are pregnant or have recently given birth. A maximum of 15 weeks of EI maternity benefits is available. Effective December 3, 2017, the 15 weeks can start as early as 12 weeks before the expected date of birth, and can end as late as 17 weeks after the actual date of birth.

If you made a false statement or misrepresentation on a previous EI claim, you may be required to accumulate more hours of insurable employment or earnings to qualify for benefits in the future. The increase in the number of hours or earnings you will need depends on the number and seriousness of misrepresentations that have been recorded in the five-year period before the start of your claim. For more information on mistakes and misrepresentations, see the section “Protecting Employment Insurance- with your help”.

For more information on EI benefits for self-employed fishers, consult the guide called Employment Insurance Benefits for Fishers .

To be eligible for EI parental benefits , each parent who applies for benefits must have accumulated at least 600 hours of insurable employment in his or her qualifying period. If you are a self-employed fisher , you must have earned $3,760 from fishing during the 31-week qualifying period immediately before the start of your benefit period.

To be eligible for EI maternity benefits , you must have accumulated at least 600 hours of insurable employment in your qualifying period. If you are a self-employed fisher , you must have earned $3,760 from fishing during the 31-week qualifying period immediately before the start of your benefit period.

Hours of insurable employment are the hours you work, for either one or more employers under written or verbal contracts of service, for which you receive wages.

When your normal weekly earnings are reduced by more than 40% because of pregnancy or your need to care for newborn or newly adopted children, you may be eligible for EI maternity or parental benefits.

EI parental benefits are payable only to the biological, adoptive, or legally recognized parents while they are caring for their newborn or newly adopted child or children. To receive parental benefits, you must sign a statement declaring the newborn's date of birth or, when there is an adoption, the child's date of placement for the purposes of the adoption and the name and address of the adoption authority. In cases where the child is not legally adoptable, parental benefits could be payable from the date you attest that you consider the placement a permanent one. In these circumstances, the Commission may, at any time, request proof certifying that the child for whom you are claiming parental benefits has been placed with you by a recognized authority and that the placement was not merely a temporary one.

EI maternity benefits are payable only to the biological mother who is unable to work because she is pregnant or has recently given birth. To receive maternity benefits, you need to prove your pregnancy by signing a statement declaring the expected due date or the actual date of birth.

Note: These rates and amounts are reviewed each year. For more information on the most recent rates and amounts, visit the EI premium rates and maximums .

Since Quebec has its own program that offers maternity, paternity, and parental benefits, the Government of Canada has adjusted the premiums accordingly for that province. In 2019, the premium rate for workers in Quebec is set at $1.25 for every $100 of earnings, up to a maximum amount of $663.75 for the year.

You need to pay EI premiums on all your earnings up to a maximum amount. In 2019, for every $100 you earn, your employer will deduct $1.62, until your annual earnings reach the maximum yearly insurable amount of $53,100. The maximum amount of premiums to be paid in 2019 is therefore $860.22.

If you are employed in insurable employment, your employer will deduct the applicable EI premiums from your wages or salary. There is no minimum or maximum age for paying EI premiums.

You may be eligible to receive EI maternity or parental benefits if:

For more information, see the publication called How to Apply for Employment Insurance Benefits .

You will also need the following employment information if you are or were an employee:

When you apply for EI maternity benefits , you must also provide the expected or actual date of birth.

To complete the online EI application, you will need the following personal information :

The website takes you step by step through the application process, and provides detailed instructions on how to complete the form.

To find out if you are eligible to receive EI benefits, you must submit an application online. It will take about 60 minutes to complete the online application.

There are many ways you can decide to use your extended parental benefits. For instance, one of the parents can take the entire 61 weeks of extended parental benefits, or both parents can share them.

In total, there are 61 weeks of extended parental benefits available to eligible parents of a newborn or newly adopted child.

There are many ways you can decide to use your standard parental benefits. For instance, one of the parents can take the entire 35 weeks of standard parental benefits, or both parents can share them.

In total, there are 35 weeks of standard parental benefits available to eligible parents of a newborn or newly adopted child.

Yes, but they have to share the benefits. Furthermore, both parents are required to choose the same parental benefit option, either standard or extended. The option chosen by the first claimant who completes the EI application will be considered as the option chosen by the second claimant. The choice is final once parental benefits have been paid on a claim. This means that you cannot change between standard and extended once parental benefits have been paid.

can be paid within a 78-week period after the week the child is born or placed for the purpose of adoption. The benefits are paid for a maximum of 61 weeks at a weekly benefit rate of 33% of your average weekly insurable earnings, up to a maximum amount.

Standard parental benefits can be paid within a 52 week-period after the week the child is born or placed for the purpose of adoption. The benefits are paid for a maximum of 35 weeks at a weekly benefit rate of 55% of your average weekly insurable earnings, up to a maximum amount.

When applying, you will have to select under which option you choose to claim EI parental benefits: standard or extended.

For biological or legally recognized parents , EI parental benefits can be paid starting from the child's date of birth. For adoptive parents , parental benefits can be paid starting from the date the child is placed with them for the purpose of adoption. In cases where the child is not legally adoptable, parental benefits could be payable from the date you attest that you consider the placement a permanent one.

If your newborn is hospitalized, the 17-week timeframe can be extended by the number of weeks your child is in the hospital, up to 52 weeks after the date of birth. You could receive 15 weeks of benefits, but the payments may be suspended until your child leaves the hospital. If you received maternity benefits before your child's birth and you want to receive the remaining benefits after the child comes home, contact us.

The date you submit your application is very important, since it affects the number of weeks of maternity benefits you are entitled to receive. If you have difficulty determining which maternity benefit period works best for you, call us at 1-800-206-7218 (TTY: 1-800-529-3742).

You cannot receive EI maternity benefits more than 17 weeks after the week you were expected to give birth or the week you actually gave birth, whichever is later. When the actual date of birth is different from the expected date of birth, you must let us know the child's actual date of birth as soon as possible by calling 1-800-206-7218 (TTY: 1-800-529-3742) or by visiting a Service Canada Centre.

You can apply for EI maternity benefits before you give birth. In fact, you can start receiving benefits as early as 12 weeks before your due date or before the actual week you give birth.

You should apply as soon as possible after you stop working, even if your employer has not issued your ROE yet. If you delay applying for benefits later than four weeks after your last day of work, you risk losing benefits.

Yes. You need to apply for EI benefits, since Service Canada first needs to determine whether you are entitled to receive them. Benefits are not paid to you automatically, even if you have received a Record of Employment (ROE) from your employer.

Receiving your EI maternity and parental benefits

When will I know if I am eligible to receive EI maternity or parental benefits If you are eligible to receive EI benefits, you should receive your first payment within 28 days of the date we receive your application and all required documents. If you are not eligible to receive EI benefits, we will notify you by letter or by telephone to explain why. If you disagree with our decision, you have the right to request a reconsideration. You can get more information on the status of your application by registering for My Service Canada Account on our website.

What is the one-week waiting period Before you can start receiving EI benefits, there is a one-week waiting period during which you will not be paid. This waiting period is like the deductible you pay for other types of insurance. You usually serve the waiting period at the beginning of your benefit period, unless you receive earnings during the first week. In that case, the waiting period will start during the first week you should begin to receive benefits. When EI parental benefits are shared, a single waiting period may apply. For example, if the waiting period has already been served for EI maternity benefits, then neither parent has to serve a waiting period if one or the other submits an application for EI parental benefits. At the end of parental leave, the parent who did not serve a waiting period might have to serve one, if that parent then applies for another type of EI benefit. If you already received EI benefits during the last 52 weeks and you have reactivated your claim and already served the one-week waiting period, you will not have to serve an additional waiting period.

If I am eligible to receive EI maternity or parental benefits, how much can I expect to receive We cannot tell you exactly how much you will receive before we process your application. The basic rate for calculating EI maternity benefits is 55% of your average weekly insurable earnings, up to a maximum amount. As of January 1, 2019, the maximum yearly insurable earnings amount is $53,100. This means that you can receive a maximum amount of $562 per week. The basic rate for calculating EI parental benefits depends on the option you choose: Standard parental benefits are paid at a weekly benefit rate of 55% of your average weekly insurable earnings, up to a maximum amount. For 2019, this means that you can receive a maximum amount of $562 per week for up to 35 weeks. Extended parental benefits are paid at a weekly benefit rate of 33% of your average weekly insurable earnings, up to a maximum amount. For 2019, this means that you can receive a maximum amount of $337 per week for up to 61 weeks. (The amount of $337 can be increased if you are eligible to receive the Family Supplement.) are paid at a weekly benefit rate of 33% of your average weekly insurable earnings, up to a maximum amount. For 2019, this means that you can receive a maximum amount of $337 per week for up to 61 weeks. (The amount of $337 can be increased if you are eligible to receive the Family Supplement.) Note: The amount of weekly benefits are reviewed each year.

Can I receive EI maternity or parental benefits if I am authorized to work in Canada You can access EI maternity or parental benefits if you are authorized to work in Canada and your Social Insurance Number (SIN) has not expired.

Is the benefit rate higher for low-income family members Yes. If we determine that your net family income is $25,921 or less per year, that you have children, and that you or your spouse receives the Canada Child Tax Benefit, you are considered a member of a low-income family. You may be eligible to receive the EI Family Supplement. It would be applied automatically by Service Canada. No action is required from you. The amount of EI Family Supplement you receive depends on: your net family income (up to the $25,921 yearly maximum); and

the number of children in your family, and their ages. The Family Supplement may increase your benefit rate to as high as 80% of your average insurable earnings. If you and your spouse claim EI benefits at the same time, only one of you can receive the Family Supplement. It is usually better for the spouse with the lower benefit rate to receive the Family Supplement. If your income level rises, the Family Supplement gradually decreases. You are no longer eligible to receive the Family Supplement when your net family income is greater than $25,921. Note These amounts are reviewed each year. For the most recent amounts, visit Employment Insurance and the family supplement page.

The Family Supplement is automatically added to eligible claims.

The Family Supplement cannot increase your total benefits to more than the maximum weekly amount of $562.

Do I pay income tax on EI benefits Yes, your EI benefits are taxable. This means that federal and provincial or territorial taxes will be deducted from your benefits.

How long will I receive EI maternity or parental benefits EI maternity benefits can be paid for a maximum of 15 weeks. You cannot receive EI maternity benefits beyond 17 weeks after the expected or actual week of childbirth, whichever of the two is later. EI standard parental benefits can be paid for a maximum of 35 weeks. The payments must be made within 52 weeks (12 months) of the week your child was born or the week your child was placed with you for the purpose of adoption. EI extended parental benefits can be paid for a maximum of 61 weeks. The payments must be made within 78 weeks (18 months) of the week your child was born or the week your child was placed with you for the purpose of adoption. The eligibility period for EI parental benefits can be extended for members of military families The Government of Canada introduced a new measure in July 2010 to extend the eligibility period for EI parental benefits, up to a maximum of 104 weeks. This extension is available to Canadian Forces members who are prevented from collecting: all their standard parental benefits during the regular 52-week eligibility period; or

all their extended parental benefits during the regular 78-week eligibility period; because their parental leave has been deferred or interrupted by an imperative military requirement. The regular eligibility period starts during the week of birth for a newborn or the week a child is placed with you for the purpose of adoption and continues for the following 52 weeks for standard parental benefits or 78 weeks for extended parental benefits.

Does receiving my EI benefit statement mean my application is approved Shortly after you file your EI application, we will mail you an EI benefit statement. Receiving the EI benefit statement does not mean that your application has been approved. This statement simply provides you with your EI access code and instructions on how to complete your EI reports. Important information about your EI access code Your EI access code is the four-digit code printed in the shaded area of your EI benefit statement. You need to have it with you whenever you want to obtain information about your benefit claim and when you submit your EI reports. Your access code is used to identify you and ensure the confidentiality of the information you provide. Do not share your access code with anyone, since you will be held responsible if someone accesses your information or modifies your claim without your knowledge. Always store it in a safe place and, for added protection, be sure to store it separately from your Social Insurance Number. If you received a temporary access code, you will need to change it. You can also change your current access code for security reasons. Simply call the EI Telephone Information Service at 1-800-206-7218 (TTY: 1-800-529-3742). Choose "1" and follow the instructions to change your access code. If you lose your access code, please call the EI Telephone Information Service at 1-800-206-7218 (TTY: 1-800-529-3742) from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday to Friday. Choose "0" to speak to an agent. You can also visit a Service Canada Centre. In either case, we will ask you questions to verify your identity before we issue you a new access code.

Do I have to submit EI reports to receive maternity or parental benefits You do not have to submit EI reports while you are receiving maternity and parental benefits, unless you are working. In that case, you must let us know by contacting the Service Canada Centre in your area. You will then have to complete EI reports. For more information on filing EI reports, see the Internet Reporting Service page.

How will I receive my benefits There are two ways to receive your EI benefits: we can deposit them directly into your bank account; or

we can mail them to you. Receiving benefits by direct deposit Direct deposit ensures that you will get your payment as quickly as possible and is reliable, convenient, and easy to set up. When you use direct deposit, your EI payments are deposited automatically into your bank account. You can sign up for direct deposit when you apply for EI. You can also sign up for direct deposit online, by phone, in person, or by mail. Note: You need to let us know if you change your bank account information or if you move. Receiving benefits by mail If you do not register for direct deposit, we will mail your payments to you.

When do my EI benefits stop You will stop receiving EI benefits in any of the following cases, whichever comes first: you have received all the weeks of benefits to which you were entitled; or

the maximum benefit period has been reached

52 weeks for maternity and standard parental benefits,



78 weeks for maternity and extended parental benefits; or

the payment timeframe during which you can receive benefits has ended, as follows:

EI maternity benefits must end 17 weeks after the week you were expected to give birth or the week you actually give birth, whichever is later;

the week you were expected to give birth or the week you actually give birth, whichever is later;

EI standard parental benefits must end 52 weeks after the week your child was born or was placed with you for the purpose of adoption; or

the week your child was born or was placed with you for the purpose of adoption; or

EI extended parental benefits must end 78 weeks after the week your child was born or was placed with you for the purpose of adoption.

What will happen if I work or receive other payments during my benefit period If you work while receiving maternity or parental benefits and have served your waiting period, you will be able to keep 50 cents of your EI benefits for every dollar you earn, up to 90% of the weekly insurable earnings used to calculate your EI benefit amount. This 90% amount is called the earnings threshold. If you earn any money above this threshold, we will deduct it dollar for dollar from your benefits. For more information, visit the Working While on Claim page. When you work and receive benefits at the same time, you must not combine the hours and earnings of more than one week. It is essential that you report your work earnings and hours for the week you worked. If you notice that you made an error on your report (for example, if you forgot to report some work hours or you did not report them in the right week), tell us immediately so that we can make the necessary corrections. When you receive other payments The following types of income will be deducted from your EI maternity and parental benefits: other income from employment (including self-employment), such as commissions;

payments received as compensation for a work accident or an occupational illness, such as compensation for lost wages;

payments received under a group health insurance plan or a group wage loss replacement plan;

certain payments received under an accident insurance plan to replace lost wages;

retirement income from a retirement plan, a military or police pension, the Canada Pension Plan, the Quebec Pension Plan, or provincial employment-based plans; and

allowances, amounts, or other benefits paid under provincial legislation, such as benefits under the Quebec Parental Insurance Program. Other types of income have no impact on your EI maternity and parental benefits, including: disability benefits;

survivor or dependent benefits;

workers' compensation benefits paid under specific regulations;

additional insurance benefits paid under a private plan approved by Service Canada (for example, payments for pain and suffering or medical expenses that you receive from an insurance company after you have been injured in a car accident);

additional maternity/parental benefits paid by your employer from a supplemental unemployment benefit plan (as long as the income, benefits, and additional amounts combined do not exceed 100% of your weekly earnings);

sickness or disability payments received under a private wage loss replacement plan; and

retroactive salary increases. Note: You are responsible for reporting all monies paid or payable to you, cash or other, while receiving EI maternity or parental benefits. When you receive money during the waiting period Any amounts you receive that are allocated to the one-week waiting period, including vacation pay or severance pay, will be deducted dollar for dollar from the first three weeks of benefits that you are entitled to receive.

Can I receive EI maternity or parental benefits and other types of EI benefits in the same benefit period Yes, you can receive up to 50 weeks of benefits in a 52-week benefit period. However, when maternity or parental benefits are combined with other types of special benefits (sickness, compassionate care or family caregiver), the maximum number of weeks for which benefits may be paid may increase to 102 weeks. Please note that you must meet the eligibility criteria specific to each type of benefits you claim. If you receive EI regular benefits combined with EI special benefits, the maximum number of weeks for which benefits may be paid is normally 50 weeks during a benefit period of 52 weeks. The only exception is when EI regular benefits and extended parental benefits are paid during the 52-week period. As extended parental benefits are paid at a benefit rate of 33% of your average weekly insurable earnings, once 50 weeks of benefits have been paid, the weeks of extended parental benefits will be converted to an equivalent number of weeks that would have been paid at the 55% benefit rate. This conversion will determine how many more weeks of regular benefits and special benefits can be paid to reach the equivalent of 50 weeks paid at the 55% benefits rate. Any weeks where you return to work during this period will be considered weeks paid for the purposes of calculating the equivalent of 50 weeks paid at the 55% benefit rate. Once the number of additional weeks that can be paid is determined, the 52-week benefit period will be extended to allow for the additional weeks to be paid. Example: A claimant becomes ills and receives 10 weeks of sickness benefits. He then applies for extended parental benefits and receives 15 weeks. The claimant is laid off from his employment and applies for regular benefits. After proving his availability for work, the claimant is paid up to 25 weeks of regular benefits. At this time 50 weeks of benefits have been paid to the claimant, therefore a conversion calculation is required to determine how many more weeks he can receive before reaching the equivalent of 50 weeks paid at the 55% benefit rate. The 15 weeks of extended parental benefits paid at the 33% benefit rate are converted to 9 weeks of benefits at the 55% benefit rate. In total, 10 weeks of sickness benefits, 25 weeks of regular benefits and the equivalent of 9 weeks of standard parental benefits have been paid at the 55% benefit rate, for a total of 44 weeks. There are 6 more weeks that may be paid on the claim, before reaching the equivalent of 50 weeks paid at the 55% benefit rate.

Am I allowed to leave Canada while receiving EI maternity or parental benefits Yes, you can receive EI maternity and parental benefits while you are outside Canada. However, if you leave the country, please let us know by calling 1-800-206-7218 (TTY: 1-800-529-3742) and pressing "0" to speak with a representative. Note: Different provisions may apply to Quebec residents who receive Quebec Parental Insurance Program benefits.