PDQ®
PDQ (Physician Data Query) is NCI's comprehensive source of cancer information. It contains cancer information summaries on a wide range of cancer topics; drug information summaries on many cancer-related drugs and drug combinations; and dictionaries of general cancer terms, drug terms, and genetics terms. PDQ also contains a directory of professionals who provide genetics services.

PDQ Cancer Information Summaries, Editorial Boards, and Levels of Evidence PDQ Cancer Information Summaries

The PDQ cancer information summaries are comprehensive, evidence-based summaries on topics that cover adult and pediatric cancer treatment, supportive and palliative care, screening, prevention, genetics, and integrative, alternative, and complementary therapies. PDQ Editorial Boards

Comprised of experts in cancer-related specialties, the six PDQ Editorial Boards produce and maintain the evidence-based cancer information summaries. Levels of Evidence

PDQ cancer information summaries include level-of evidence designations to help readers understand the strength of the evidence supporting the use of specific interventions or approaches.

NCI Drug Information Summaries NCI Drug Information Summaries

A collection of consumer-friendly summaries from NCI that provide information about many FDA-approved cancer drugs and drug combinations. Summaries for individual cancer drugs cover the uses of these drugs, research results, possible side effects, approval information, and ongoing clinical trials. Summaries for cancer drug combinations list the drugs that make up the combination and explain what the combination is used for.

NCI Dictionaries Dictionary of Cancer Terms

A dictionary of cancer-related terms and definitions written for a non-technical audience. New terms are reviewed by a multidisciplinary panel of reviewers, and approximately 30 terms are added each month. NCI Drug Dictionary

A dictionary that contains technical definitions, alternate names, and links to related information for FDA-approved and investigational agents that are being used or tested in the treatment of cancer or cancer-related conditions. NCI Dictionary of Genetics Terms

A dictionary of genetics-related terms written for healthcare professionals. This resource supports the PDQ cancer genetics information summaries and definitions are written and reviewed by members of the Cancer Genetics Editorial Board.

Cancer Genetics Services NCI Cancer Genetics Services Directory

A searchable directory of individuals who provide services related to cancer genetics (cancer risk assessment, genetic counseling, genetic susceptibility testing, and others).

Other Ways to Get PDQ Information Cancer.gov Content Dissemination Program

Information about Cancer.gov's content dissemination program, which makes cancer information available in XML format for use in Web sites and in other information products.