Bush Signs $48.3 Billion State Budget
TALLAHASSEE — Gov. Jeb Bush on Friday signed a $48.3 billion state budget, boasting about education and health care spending priorities that will dominate his re-election campaign message while downplaying the $288.8 million worth of cuts he made to legislators' special projects.

"I'm not in a confrontational mode with the Legislature," Bush said. "I have enormous respect for the work that they do and the pressures that they do it under. But there are some areas where we will have respectful disagreement."

Projects Bush cut range from drug treatment programs to new water plants to highway expansions to parks, all liberally scattered across the state. The cuts account for less than 1 percent of the new budget that goes into effect in July. It also provides for a 7.5 percent tuition increase for public university students and a 6.3 percent increase in school spending.

Although most of the legislative reaction fell largely along partisan lines, Bush cut programs sponsored by Democrats and Republicans alike.

Republican Senate President John McKay said he was "deeply disappointed by many of the vetoes." McKay protested that the "governor's process is highly subjective" and "empowers bureaucrats not accountable to the voters."

Since his 1998 election, Bush has warned legislators that he will not tolerate "turkeys," special-interest projects that usually benefit only one legislator's district or have not had a thorough state review or meet a statewide need.

Bush described the job of making vetoes as "delicate." He said it was important that a governor make certain that taxpayer money is spent wisely. Still, legislators take pride in their hometown projects, and governors have to be sensitive to legislators' wishes because they rely on them to get their own programs into law.

Though Bush was widely expected to make a record number of vetoes this year, he did not. Previous years' cuts were higher than this year's $288.8 million veto list. Bush slashed $313 million out of the state budget in 1999 and another $313 million in 2000. The money Bush cut this year will be left in the state's reserve accounts.