Global Diarrhea Burden
Diarrhea: Common Illness, Global Killer

Fact Sheets: Diarrhea: Common Illness, Global Killer (Africa cover) Cdc-pdf [PDF – 4 pages]

Diarrhea: Common Illness, Global Killer (Asia cover) Cdc-pdf [PDF – 4 pages]

Diarrhea: Common Illness, Global Killer (Latin American cover) Cdc-pdf [PDF – 4 pages]

Diarrhea kills 2,195 children every day—more than AIDS, malaria, and measles combined 1.

Diarrheal diseases account for 1 in 9 child deaths worldwide, making diarrhea the second leading cause of death among children under the age of 5. For children with HIV, diarrhea is even more deadly; the death rate for these children is 11 times higher than the rate for children without HIV 2. Despite these sobering statistics, strides made over the last 20 years have shown that, in addition to rotavirus vaccination and breastfeeding, diarrhea prevention focused on safe water and improved hygiene and sanitation is not only possible, but cost effective: every $1 invested yields an average return of $25.50 3.

Learn how simple and inexpensive interventions to prevent and treat diarrhea can save the lives of children around the world.

Stopping Diarrhea

Most diarrheal deaths are preventable using simple, low-cost interventions.

Diarrhea: What we know

It causes death by depleting body fluids resulting in profound dehydration.

Diarrhea can have a detrimental impact on childhood growth and cognitive development 4 .

. About 88% of diarrhea-associated deaths are attributable to unsafe water, inadequate sanitation, and insufficient hygiene 5, 6 .

. Rotavirus is the leading cause of acute diarrhea and causes about 40% of hospitalizations for diarrhea in children under 5 7 .

. Most diarrheal germs are spread from the stool of one person to the mouth of another. These germs are usually spread through contaminated water, food, or objects.

Diarrhea Deaths Diarrhea kills more children than malaria, measles, and AIDS combined. Proportional distribution of cause-specific deaths among children under five years of age, 2012 (excluding neonatal deaths) 1 .

Water, food, and objects become contaminated with stool in many ways: People and animals defecate in or near water sources that people drink. Contaminated water is used to irrigate crops. Food preparers do not wash their hands before cooking. People with contaminated hands touch objects, such as doorknobs, tools,

or cooking utensils.



Diarrhea: Proven Ways to Save Lives

Vaccinate for rotavirus

for rotavirus Provide Safe water Adequate sanitation and human waste disposal

Promote Handwashing with soap Breastfeeding to reduce exposure to contaminated water

Treat appropriately with oral rehydration therapy and antibiotics

appropriately with oral rehydration therapy and antibiotics Train health care providers and community health workers on diarrhea treatment

health care providers and community health workers on diarrhea treatment Educate mothers and caretakers about caring for ill children and when to seek medical assistance

mothers and caretakers about caring for ill children and when to seek medical assistance Build laboratory diagnostic capability and identify the causes of diarrhea

Top of Page

Pathways to Diarrhea

Pathways to Diarrhea Pathways to Diarrhea. Illustrates how contamination can occur. Click to enlarge.

What Can Be Done

Use effective interventions and proven treatment for diarrhea.

Governments and ministries of health can:

Provide rotavirus vaccination

Invest in safe drinking water, hygiene, and sanitation infrastructure

Monitor progress and needs through the collection, analysis, and reporting of quality data

Support clear and targeted health promotion and behavior change programs

Non-governmental/aid organizations can:

Increase the adoption of proven measures against diarrhea Rotavirus vaccination Breastfeeding Oral rehydration therapy Household and community systems for treating and storing water

Educate communities on the importance of safe water, sanitation, and hygiene

Enhance and support government initiatives that invest in safe drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene infrastructure

Ensure the sustainability of interventions

Focus on the provision of safe water, sanitation, and hygiene when responding to emergency and conflict situations

Health care providers and clinical facilities can:

Ensure availability of adequate medical supplies such as oral rehydration solution

Improve training programs for health workers and educate them on the proper treatment of diarrhea

Ensure that facilities for handwashing, provision of safe water, and proper disposal of human waste are provided at ALL healthcare facilities

Encourage appropriate antibiotic use

Meet demand for health workers

Support community health workers Improve training programs Seek creative ways to motivate them



Communities can:

Support and promote the importance of community health workers

Ensure safe water is provided close to people’s homes

Discourage/eliminate open defecation

Develop strategies for proper disposal of human waste

Construct basic sanitation facilities

Promote handwashing

Preventing Diarrhea, Saving Lives