Choosing Home Water Filters & Other Water Treatment Systems
You might be surprised to learn that the main function of popular refrigerator and pitcher filters is to improve the taste of your water, and most don’t fully protect against germs and many other contaminants.

Some people do not like the taste of their tap water. Sometimes this is because of the disinfectant (like chlorine) that helps keep the water safe from germs. Sometimes minerals or other naturally occurring contaminants like sulfur-containing compounds that are not harmful change the taste of the water. Activated carbon filters (the type of filter found in many refrigerators and pitcher filters) can help reduce unpleasant tastes and odors. Reverse osmosis systems can also improve taste and also reduce the levels of common chemicals such as lead. Check the label to ensure that taste and odor (NSF 42) are addressed by the particular filter you are considering. Keep in mind that if you use a chlorine-removing whole-house filter, you might end up increasing the amount of germs that grow in your plumbing.

Most harmful contaminants can’t be seen, smelled, or tasted. Some harmful contaminants, like volatile organic compounds (VOCs)Cdc-pdf [PDF – 2 pages] that sometimes contaminate private wells, can give water a bad taste and might smell like gasoline or other chemicals. There are many different kinds of VOCs, and they have different health effects: Some cause cancer, irritate skin, affect mucous membranes, or damage the nervous system, liver, or kidneys. To identify the best filter, special testing may be needed to determine which VOCs are present in your water. It is best to use a point-of-entry filter system (where your water pipe enters your house), or whole-house filter system, for VOCs because they provide safe water for bathing and cleaning, as well as for cooking and drinking. Activated carbon filters can remove some VOCs.

If you have a private well and notice a change in the taste of your water, consider having your well water tested. If you have a public water system and notice a change in the taste of your water, report this to your water company. Just keep in mind that the taste and smell (or lack thereof) of water is not necessarily an indication of how free it is from germs and chemicals.

More Information