Health Education Framework
2019 Revision of the Health Education Framework

The California Department of Education (CDE), Instructional Quality Commission (IQC), and State Board of Education (SBE) are currently in the process of revising the 2019 Health Education Curriculum Framework for California Public Schools, Transitional Kindergarten Through Grade Twelve (Health Education Framework), which is scheduled for adoption by the SBE in May 2019.

The Health Education Framework is aligned to the 2008 California Health Education Content Standards, which support the development of knowledge, skills, and attitudes in eight overarching standards: (1) essential health concepts; (2) analyzing health influences; (3) accessing valid health information; (4) interpersonal communication; (5) decision making; (6) goal setting; (7) practicing health-enhancing behaviors; and (8) health promotion in six content areas of health education: nutrition and physical activity; growth, development, and sexual health; injury prevention and safety; alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs; mental, emotional, and social health; and personal and community health in the 2008 Health Education Content Standards, which can be downloaded from the Curriculum Frameworks and Instructional Resources Division Content Standards web page.



The adoption of the California Healthy Youth Act 2016 (California Education Code [EC] sections 51930–51939) requires school districts to ensure that all students in grades seven through twelve, inclusive, receive comprehensive sexual health education and HIV prevention education.

Elementary School: It is permissible to teach knowledge and skills related to comprehensive sexual health and HIV prevention education in grades kindergarten through grade six (K–6), inclusive. All instruction and materials in grades K–6 must meet the instructional criteria or baseline requirements in EC Section 51933. Content that is required in grades 7–12 may be also be included in an age-appropriate way in earlier grades. (EC sections 51933, 51934[b].)

For information on the California Healthy Youth Act, please visit the CDE Comprehensive Sexual Health & HIV/AIDS Instruction web page or the California Legislative Information web page .





Public Comment for the Revised DRAFT 2019 Health Education Framework

The first 60-day public comment and review period took place from April 2018 through June 2018, and the second 60-day public comment and review period took place from November 1, 2018, through January 11, 2019. The public review and comment period is an opportunity for any interested individuals or organizations to provide comments and suggested edits on the draft Health Education Framework to the Instructional Quality Commission (IQC).



On May 8, 2019, the State Board of Education took action to adopt the Health Education Framework with the revisions of removing the following resources:

My Princess Boy

Who Are You?: The Kids Guide to Gender Identity

Changing You!: A Guide to Body Changes and Sexuality

The What's Happening to My Body?: Book for Boys

The What’s Happening to My Body?: Book for Girls

S.E.X: The All You Need to Know Sexuality Guide to Get You Through Your Teens and Twenties

These changes will be made to the final, published version of the 2019 Health Education Framework, which will be posted and published in Fall 2019.

Revised Draft Health Education Framework (April 2019 Revision)

The chapters posted on this web page do not reflect the State Board of Education revisions. The final version of the Health Education Framework will be available Fall 2019.



Curriculum Framework and Evaluation Criteria Committee (CFCC)

CFCC Meeting Agendas and Notices

The public meeting notices/agendas provide details on each of the focus group meetings. All CFCC meetings were open to the public, and there were opportunities for public comment at each meeting. Audio recordings of each of the CFCC meetings are available upon request by emailing healtheducationframework@cde.ca.gov or calling 916-319-0450.

CFCC Members

On March 9, 2017, the State Board of Education appointed 20 members to the CFCC to assist in the revision of the Health Education Framework. The work of the CFCC guided the writing of the draft Health Education Framework.

Focus Groups

The CDE convened four focus group meetings in November 2016 to provide input on the revision of the Health Education Framework. The meetings were open to the public, and there was an opportunity for public comment at each meeting. The report of findings from these four focus group meetings informed the work of the CFCC.

Health Education Focus Group Report (PDF)

The Focus Group Report summarizes the comments received at the four focus group meetings.





Additional Resources

Health Framework California Public Schools, Kindergarten Through Grade Twelve (2003) (PDF; 2MB)

Please note that the 2003 Health Framework is no longer current. It does not reflect the Health Education Content Standards adopted by the State Board of Education in March 2008. In addition, the section on Family Living (pages 63–64) is inconsistent with the current state law. For current information on HIV/AIDS prevention education, see the Comprehensive Sexual Health & HIV/AIDS Instruction web page.

Content Standards - Kindergarten Through Grade Twelve (PDF; 1MB)

Adopted by the State Board of Education in March 2008.

Professional Development and Resources for the 2019 Health Education Curriculum Framework Revision— Assembly Bill 97 (2017)

Assembly Bill 97 (2017) allocated funding to provide professional development and resources for teachers, administrators, and paraprofessionals on the 2019 Health Education Framework revision. Additionally, an online repository of resources will be made available to support the implementation of the Health Education Framework.

2017–18 Funding Results

Questions: Curriculum Frameworks and Instructional Resources Division | healtheducationframework@cde.ca.gov | 916-319-0881

Last Reviewed: Friday, May 31, 2019