Weeding Out the Facts: The Reality About Cannabis and Crohn's Disease
Expand all Collapse all

Anecdotal evidence has suggested possible benefit to inhalational cannabis in Crohn's disease, and existing research supports a role for the endocannabinoid system in mediating colonic inflammation.1x1Wright, K. et al. Gastroenterology. ; 129: 437–453

Abstract | Full Text | Full Text PDF | PubMed | Scopus (115) | Google ScholarSee all References In a recent study published by Naftali et al, the investigators described a significant clinical response, defined as a ≥100-point decrease in Crohn's Disease Activity Index (CDAI) in patients with active Crohn's disease who used tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-rich cannabis for 8 weeks versus placebo.2x2Naftali, T. et al. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. ; 11: 1276–1280

Abstract | Full Text | Full Text PDF | PubMed | Scopus (123) | Google ScholarSee all References After an additional 2-week washout period, the mean CDAI of the cannabis group rebounded to pretreatment levels, and there was no difference in mean CDAI between the placebo and cannabis groups at 10 weeks. On the basis of their findings, the authors concluded that cannabis use produced a significant, clinical, steroid-free benefit in patients with active Crohn's disease.

This was the first controlled study evaluating cannabis, a widely used recreational drug, in Crohn's disease. Although these results appear promising, they must be interpreted cautiously. Despite being cannabis naive, most patients could distinguish their assigned therapy and essentially were unblinded. This was also a very small study that was underpowered, and the authors acknowledge that larger-scale trials are needed to clarify the effects of cannabis in Crohn's disease.

The various amounts of cannabinoids in cannabis strains have been an impediment to their study in clinical research. In this prospective study, the investigators standardized the THC in cannabis cigarettes and tested placebo cigarettes to confirm undetectable cannabinoid levels. However, a previous 2011 study from Australia found serum THC levels to be higher when cannabis was consumed with alcohol versus cannabis alone.3x3Downey, L.A. et al. Accid Anal Prev. ; 50: 879–886

Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (68) | Google ScholarSee all References Alcohol consumption and other factors that might affect THC bioavailability were not reported in these patients, and serum measurements to confirm consistent THC delivery were not obtained.

One significant limitation of this study is that the results were based on subjective parameters and were obtained during active use of a known mind-altering drug. Although there was an improvement in clinical status after 8 weeks of cannabis use, the CDAI includes variables such as general well-being, abdominal pain, and body weight.4x4Best, W.R. et al. Gastroenterology. ; 70: 439–444

Abstract | Full Text PDF | PubMed | Scopus (2544) | Google ScholarSee all References Cannabis is widely used for symptomatic relief of many gastrointestinal-related issues—chronic pain, anorexia, and nausea—which all contribute to general well-being.5x5Izzo, A.A. et al. Pharmacol Ther. ; 126: 21–38

Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (225) | Google ScholarSee all References Endoscopic data were not collected, and there was no difference in objective inflammatory markers to indicate disease modification. Given the rapid rebound of CDAI scores to pretreatment levels after the 2-week washout period, it seems more plausible that cannabis ameliorated the symptoms of Crohn's disease, rather than actually modulating the disease. Additionally, the psychoactive effects of cannabis presumably could have contributed to the improvement in scores of the cannabis group during therapy.

Although U.S. federal law has classified marijuana as an illegal substance since the 1970s, individual states began diverging from this stance in the 1990s. The shift in political attitudes, increased access to dispensaries, and greater social acceptance for cannabis open a national dialogue concerning the role of marijuana in chronic gastrointestinal conditions.

This study introduces the idea of cannabis in the management of Crohn's disease, but is insufficient to support the authors’ suggestion of using cannabis to achieve clinical, steroid-free benefits. Further trials are needed to clarify whether cannabis attenuates inflammation or simply alleviates symptoms. Most concerning to us is the misguided promotion of mass media for cannabis as a primary therapy to induce clinical remission, whereas current data only implies a complementary role to conventional treatments. There is not enough evidence to use cannabis to treat patients with Crohn's disease or other inflammatory gut disorders outside of approved clinical trials. It is paramount for health care providers to effectively communicate the limitations of such trials to our patients, and it is our goal that this letter provides a critical analysis of this high-profile pilot study.