Ex-Warrensville Heights officer says city fired her for viral Facebook video about police shootings
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- A former Warrensville Heights police officer who posted a Facebook video decrying use of force by officers says in a lawsuit that she was fired in retaliation for the video.

Nakia Jones says a seven-minute Facebook video she published in July 2016 didn't sit right with city officials and people within the inner-ring suburban police department where she had worked since 2002, according to a lawsuit she filed Tuesday in federal court in Cleveland. The video garnered more than 8.2 million views and showed Jones passionately talking about how she believed racist white police officers have no business being in uniform.

Jones was in a car crash while on duty in May 2017 and took medical leave. While on leave, she attended public-speaking engagements, and the city fired her in October for misusing paid leave time, according to the lawsuit.

She says that was just an excuse to retaliate against her exercising her First Amendment rights. In addition to the city, the lawsuit names Mayor Brad Sellers and police Chief Wesley Haynes as defendants. Jones says her constitutional rights were violated and that, in addition to retaliation, she was discriminated against for being black and a woman during her 15 years at the department.

Jones is asking for an unspecified amount of back pay and damages.

(You can read the lawsuit here or at the bottom of this story. WARNING: It contains offensive language.)

Calls left for Warrensville Heights' law director and her assistant were not returned.

Jones' video shows her speaking about how there is too much violence and that black men and children need to stop picking up guns and follow a better path.

But her words were even more pointed and fervent when she addressed the 2016 death of Alton Sterling, a black man shot during a struggle with two white police officers in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

Jones said white police officers have no business being police officers if they are racist.

"How dare you stand next to me in the same uniform and murder somebody," she said in the video. "How dare you. You ought to be ashamed of yourself. If you're that officer and you know you have a God complex and you're afraid of people who don't look like you, you have no business wearing the uniform. Take it off."

Soon thereafter she was invited by ABC News to sit on a panel with President Barack Obama for a town hall on race. Co-workers became angry and would call off so they would not have to work with her, according to her suit.

Others wouldn't talk to her and one co-worker told another that "she needs a bullet in the back of her head," the suit says.

The mayor and chief held a meeting with the entire police department to discuss Jones' Facebook video. Jones says her co-workers and the mayor openly ridiculed her during the meeting.

Jones says she had short-term memory issues following her May 2017 car crash. While her neurologist said she could not return to work until Nov. 1, a city-hired doctor evaluated her and said she should return to work on Oct. 9, the suit states.

During her treatment, her neurologist encouraged her to take public speaking engagements to help her recovery, according to the lawsuit.

The city required her to return to work on Oct. 9. Her first day back on shift was set to be Oct. 13. However, she used three days of sick leave and flew to Philadelphia to give a speech, the lawsuit states.

A week later, the city fired Jones, also citing other speaking engagements she attended while on medical leave, according to the suit.

"The Defendants would not have taken the adverse employment action but for her continuous engagement in constitutionally protected speech," the lawsuit states.

The case is assigned to Chief U.S. District Judge Patricia Gaughan.

If you would like to comment on this story, please visit Thursday's crime and courts comments section.