21-year-old immigrant convicted in beating death of former Pearland classmate

A suspect has been charged in the disappearance and murder of Joshua Wilkerson. Hermilo Vildo Moralez, 19 yoa, of Pearland has been charged with Murder, a First Degree Felony. In addition to the Murder charge, Moralez is charged with Failure to Identify, a Class C Misdemeanor and Attempting to Take a Weapon from a Peace Officer, a State Jail Felony. Moralez was identified early in the investigation as a person of interest when he was observed loitering in the area of Josh Wilkerson?s abandoned vehicle. When questioned, Moralez provided false information relating to his identity. When his true identity was discovered, he was taken into custody and charged with Failure to Identify. His bond on that charge is $2,000. As the investigation progressed, Moralez agreed to cooperate with search and rescue activities on the ground. Moralez was handcuffed and walking with detectives through a field Wednesday afternoon when the group reached a fence. As investigators negotiated over the fence, Moralez attempted to pull a detective?s weapon from his holster. Moralez was immediately restrained and returned to the city jail. As a result, Moralez was charged with Attempting to Take a Weapon from a Peace Officer. His bond on that charge is $30,000 A motive for the killing has not been identified and no details regarding Joshua Wilkerson?s remains are being released. No bond has been set for the Murder charge. less A suspect has been charged in the disappearance and murder of Joshua Wilkerson. Hermilo Vildo Moralez, 19 yoa, of Pearland has been charged with Murder, a First Degree Felony. In addition to the Murder ... more Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close 21-year-old immigrant convicted in beating death of former Pearland classmate 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

A 21-year-old man has been found guilty in the 2010 slaying of a Pearland teen.

A Brazoria County jury on Monday convicted Hermilo Moralez, who was charged with murder in the beating death of his missing classmate, Josh Wilkerson. The trial began after jury selection Jan. 16 in the 300th State District Court.

The punishment, or sentencing, phase of Moralez' trial started Monday afternoon, officials with the Brazoria County District Attorney's Office said.

Wilkerson's partially burned remains were discovered in a Fort Bend County field, where his body had been dumped with his hands and feet bound.

The week before Thanksgiving 2010, Wilkerson disappeared after leaving the campus of PACE Center, Pearland school district's alternative high school.

His parents notified police later that evening when they found his truck in a strip mall parking lot. After an extensive search by authorities and volunteers, the teen's body was found the next day across the county line.

In November 2011, Moralez, a Belize national, was transferred to a state mental hospital after it was determined that he was not competent to stand trial.

At a hearing last year, jurors heard from two psychiatrists who testified that Moralez was well enough to go through the judicial proceeding.

Brazoria County District Attorney Jeri Yenne tried the case against Moralez.

Authorities said Moralez, then 19, admitted beating Wilkerson to death with a wooden rod. At the time of his arrest, he did not have legal status in this country, according to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.