Some hardy Chicagoans brave the polar vortex to get to work, help others: 'We just have to buckle down and do our jobs'
Armed with steaming hot coffee and hand warmers, multiple socks and layer upon layer of thermal gear, residents across the Chicago area steeled themselves against an arctic surge that gripped the upper Midwest on Wednesday as dangerously cold conditions brought the city and suburbs to a near-standstill. The now-infamous polar vortex was at it again, plummeting the region into a cold snap so frigid it made the South Pole look like a day at the beach.

It was such a precipitous drop in temperature — minus 23 degrees — at a certain point, all residents and business owners could do was shake their stocking-covered heads in disbelief.

“A couple of people have come in asking me if I’ve seen a penguin outside,” said David Avalos, who served a steady stream of resilient customers ordering cream cheese turnovers at La Luz Bakery in north suburban Mundelein.

The sustained blast of subzero temperatures was far from a laughing matter, however, leading to dozens of frostbite injuries at area hospitals and several traffic crashes on ice-covered interstates in Illinois and northwest Indiana. Thousands of people who had to make the frigid trek into work endured harrowing commutes on delayed commuter rail and CTA trains, emergency visits to gas stations for wiper fluid and anti-freeze or bone-chilling waits at bus stops.

“I didn’t have a clue it would be this bad until I got out here,” said Tyler Peterson, pulling a tan scarf over his face as he stood unprotected from the flag-snapping wind on Mannheim Road in Stone Park, waiting for a bus that would take him home to Hillside after an overnight shift in a nearby warehouse.“I can feel it on my skin and all over my body, even with the layers.”

Other closures left travelers with few options but to stay hunkered down at home. Amtrak suspended service into and out of Chicago, and thousands of flights were canceled at O’Hare and Midway airports. Even the U.S. Postal Service suspended service.

The polar plunge set a record low for Jan. 30. The temperature reached minus 23 at O’Hare International Airport, with a wind chill of 52 degrees below zero, according to the National Weather Service. That shattered the previous mark of minus 15 set in 1966.

“Today’s about as cold as it can get in Chicago,” said Matt Friedlein, a meteorologist with the weather service.

And the wrath of the polar vortex has not yet passed. The all-time record low temperature for Chicago, minus 27, was in play overnight into Thursday, weather forecasters said, and temperatures were not expected to visit zero or above until Thursday night. Normal highs are not expected until Saturday.

Shuttered schools and looking for warmth

With schools shuttered and many businesses and government offices closed because of the extreme conditions, most people heeded weather and health experts’ advice, staying inside, huddling up at home with a good book, binge-worthy television or stir-crazy children. Chicago Public Schools canceled all classes and activities that were scheduled for Wednesday and Thursday. Most schools and some churches and other institutions have been listing closings on the Emergency Closing Center website. Most colleges, courts, cultural institutions and libraries were closed Wednesday, and many plan to be closed Thursday morning as well.

Parts of the South Side in Chicago looked like ghost towns as normally crowded outdoor Metra platforms were empty and Red Line stations were abandoned. Churches, day care centers, banks, nail shops and hair salons posted closed for business signs on their doors. But elsewhere, life went on, especially for those who had to work. Trucks rumbled over salt-covered roads delivering groceries and supplies, many fast-food places, grocery stores and pharmacies throughout the city and suburbs were open, and auto supply stores did brisk business.

Willie Taylor nursed a cup of coffee in the McDonald's lobby in Englewood. He said his wife needed to report to her job at a local grocery store, so he got up early to get the car warmed up and drive her there.

“I came out to crank the car and I've been moving around ever since," said the 71-year-old Auburn Gresham resident. "You've got to move around in this weather. You can't just stand in one place.”

In the western suburbs, Peter Thomas arose, as always, at 3:45 a.m., when the temperature was already well south of zero, and made it to the Elmhurst train station in time to open his coffee shop, Pilot Pete’s, for commuters catching the first Metra of the day.

“People today need coffee more than any other day,” he said.

About a dozen hardy commuters waited for the 5:34 a.m. train, including Donald Moore, who walked more than half a mile from his house almost completely mummified.

“I had a bunch of layers,” said Moore, who works at the CME Group, a financial company in the Loop. “The only thing cold was the slightest exposure around the eyes, but yeah, I made it here.”

Rebecca Steinmann, an emergency department nurse at Lurie Children’s Hospital, wasn’t taking any chances. She had her husband drive her to the station from her house eight blocks away, even though she was armored against the cold with thermal underwear, hand warmers and toe warmers. She was hopeful she wouldn’t see many cold-related injuries when she arrived at work.

With most people holed up inside, the effects of the cold initially appeared to be minimal, according to area hospital and health officials. Chicago hospitals saw 14 emergency department visits for frostbite and/or hypothermia between 5:30 a.m. Tuesday and 5:30 a.m. Wednesday, according to the Illinois Department of Public Health. Across the rest of the state, hospital emergency departments had 16 visits for those conditions between 2 a.m. Tuesday and 10 a.m. Wednesday.

Loyola University Medical Center in Maywood had six cases of frostbite as of late Wednesday morning — a higher-than-usual number for a winter day, spokesman Jim Ritter said. But many hospitals across the Chicago area reported relatively quiet emergency departments overnight Tuesday and Wednesday morning.

Warmup for those who need it