Sabrina Corlette, J.D.
sc732@georgetown.edu

@SabrinaCorlette

Sabrina Corlette is a Research Professor at the Center on Health Insurance Reforms (CHIR) at Georgetown University’s Health Policy Institute. At CHIR she directs research on health insurance reform issues. Her areas of focus include state and federal regulation of private health insurance plans and markets and evolving insurance market rules. She provides expertise and strategic advice to individuals and organizations on federal and state health insurance laws and programs and provides technical support through the publication of resource guides, white papers, issue briefs, blogs and fact sheets. She has published numerous papers relating to the regulation of private health insurance and health insurance marketplaces. A full list of her publications is available here. She also serves on the Standards Committee for the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) and on the Public Health-Health Care Collaboration Work Group to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Prior to joining the Georgetown faculty, Ms. Corlette was Director of Health Policy Programs at the National Partnership for Women & Families, where she provided policy expertise and strategic direction for the organization’s advocacy on health care reform, with a particular focus on insurance market reform, benefit design, and the quality and affordability of health care.

From 1997 to 2001, Ms. Corlette worked as a professional staff member of the U.S. Senate Health Education, Labor and Pensions (HELP) Committee, where she served as health legislative assistant to Senator Tom Harkin (D-IA). After leaving the Hill, Ms. Corlette served as an attorney at the law firm Hogan Lovells (formerly Hogan & Hartson LLP), where she advised clients on health care law and policy relating to HIPAA, Medicare and Medicaid, and the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.

Ms. Corlette is a member of the D.C. Bar and received her J.D. with high honors from the University of Texas at Austin and her undergraduate degree with honors from Harvard University. She lives in Alexandria, Virginia with her husband and two daughters.