Here's a running list of everything that's closed in the Chicago area because of weather
Scores of Chicago-area schools, Illinois universities and public institutions from the Adler Planetarium to Lincoln Park Zoo are closed this week as near-record-low temperatures slam the Midwest.

Aside from large institutions like Chicago Public Schools, which were closed both Wednesday and Thursday, the closures included everything from Lou Malnati’s delivery to U.S. Postal Service delivery.

Lou Malnati’s protected its delivery drivers by closing all area stores, while the Lincoln Square Athletic Club closed its indoor pool Wednesday morning because icicles were forming on a ceiling vent and falling into the pool below, it reported in a memo.

Navy Pier was closed Wednesday, and it warned anyone who might be brave enough to endure the wind whipping off the lake Thursday that some attractions, such as the Centennial Wheel and Beach Chicago, will remain closed.

The most widespread impact came when CPS canceled all classes and activities scheduled for Wednesday and Thursday. Friday already was a day students were not to report to school, according to the CPS calendar, effectively amounting to a five-day break for students.

With CPS buildings closed Wednesday and Thursday, the district suggested families bring children to Chicago Park District field houses, which are open as warming centers. In response to the school closings, which affect more than 300,000 students, the Park District announced it was offering drop-in centers at many of its parks from 8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.. To register your child, visit chicagoparkdistrict.com.

Chicago schools’ district and network offices will be open Thursday. School officials said they plan to add at least one instructional day to the end of the school year to make up for the cancellation, a change that would require approval by the Chicago Board of Education.

The South Shore Line, which suspended service Wednesday, saying in a news release that an early morning test train encountered significant problems remained out of service Thursday, along with the Metra Electric line.

Late Tuesday, Amtrak canceled all trains to and from Chicago for Wednesday and cancelled Midwest corridor service for Thursday, but restarted most inter-city routes, with all but one train expected to run again Friday, , according to a news release.

Beyond CPS, many other schools in the Chicago area have announced closures. A list can be found at the Emergency Closing Center.

An Archdiocese of Chicago spokeswoman said she believed almost all of the archdiocese’s 209 schools in Cook and Lake counties would be closed Wednesday and Thursday but said the superintendent ultimately left the decision to individual school principals..

Scores of other Chicago-area government offices, museums, and public and private businesses also plan to close this week for safety. Check our list before heading out in the cold:

Museums and institutions:

The Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago, and its downstairs restaurant Marisol, was to be closed Wednesday and Thursday.

The American Writers Museum was closed Wednesday, and its “Chicago by the Book” event was rescheduled to Feb. 25. It was reopening at noon Thursday.

Navy Pier was closed Wednesday and many restaurants and attractions were limiting hours or closed Thursday.

Brookfield Zoo was to be closed Wednesday and Thursday.

Lincoln Park Zoo closed early on Tuesday was to remain closed on Wednesday and Thursday. The polar bears will have both indoor and outdoor access.

The Field Museum was closed on Wednesday and Thursday.

The Adler Planetarium was closed Wednesday and Thursday.

The DuSable Museum of African American History was closed Wednesday and Thursday.

The National Museum of Mexican Art was closed Wednesday and Thursday.

The Chicago History Museum will be closed Wednesday and Thursday.

The Spertus Institute was closed Wednesday and was to reopen at noon Thursday.

The Art Institute of Chicago was to be closed Wednesday and Thursday.

The National Hellenic Museum was to be closed Wednesday and Thursday.

The Shedd Aquarium was to be closed on Wednesday and Thursday.

At the Chicago Architecture Center, all programs and events for Wednesday have either been rescheduled or postponed. All tours scheduled for Wednesday and Thursday have been canceled. The CAC was to reopen to visitors at noon on Thursday. Tours will resume Friday.

The Museum of Science and Industry was to be closed Wednesday and Thursday. It was to reopen at 9:30 a.m. Friday.

Kohl Children’s Museum in Glenview was closed Wednesday.

Chicago Artists Coalition was to be closed on Thursday and reopen Friday.

More details on cultural institution closings are available here.

Colleges and universities