Everglades Bill Heads For Repair
TALLAHASSEE — Moving quickly to control political fallout, Gov. Jeb Bush signed a controversial Everglades restoration bill on Tuesday that is tepidly backed by the sugar industry and angrily opposed by environmentalists because it delays plans to restore the famed River of Grass.

The new law eases a timetable for cleaning up the Everglades and has unleashed a host of complaints from a federal judge, Congress and others who have warned that it could put at risk the federal government's commitment to pay half the $8 billion cost of Everglades restoration work.

But Bush was undeterred by the criticism and signed the measure only a day after it arrived on his desk with just the two prime legislative sponsors -- Sen. Al Lawson, D-Tallahassee, and Rep. Joe Spratt, R-Sebring -- as his witnesses.

"It is the tough choice, but it is the wise choice," Bush said.

The governor immediately asked the Legislature, already in a special session on the budget, to take up a "glitch bill" to address critics.

Opponents fear the law lessens clean water standards for dumping into the Everglades by sugar farmers, South Florida residential developments and others. Critics also warn the new law could delay by 10 years the date for getting rid of the phosphorus that pollutes the Everglades.

Bush's action comes after thousands of calls and letters to his office claiming the legislation delays the final phase of phosphorous pollution cleanup from 2006 to 2016.

"When voters visit the Everglades and see a river of cattails instead of a river of grass, when they see more birds circling municipal waste dumps than in the Everglades, they should remember Jeb Bush," said Alan Farago, a Sierra Club official in Florida.

Within hours of Bush's signing of the bill, the Senate Natural Resources Committee approved the governor's proposal meant to appease critics. Bush asked legislators to make nine changes, to clarify what critics have called "loose" language that they see could help the sugar industry escape paying $300 million to $400 million of the cost of the cleanup. Most of the changes involve striking phrases that vaguely call for cleanup at the "earliest practicable date" and to the "maximum extent practicable."