Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia Pope Francis, with a bruise around his left eye caused when he accidentally hit his head against the window of the popemobile during a visit to the old sector of Cartagena,Colombia, is greeted by faithful on September 10, 2017. Hide Caption 1 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia Colombian faithful take pictures of Pope Francis as he leaves San Pedro Claver church in Cartagena, Colombia on September 10, 2017. Hide Caption 2 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia Pope Francis celebrates an open air mass at Contecar, Cartagena's maritime terminal, during the last day of his visit to Colombia on September 10, 2017. Pope Francis prayed Sunday for a peaceful end to Venezuela's "grave crisis" which has left scores dead. Hide Caption 3 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia Pope Francis stands on the popemobile surrounded by bodyguards during his departure from Medellin to Bogota on September 9, 2017. Hide Caption 4 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia People wait for the passage of Pope Francis on his way to the San Jose School and Foster Home in Medellin, Colombia, on September 9, 2017.The Pope visited the Colombian city of Medellin, former stronghold of the late drug baron Pablo Escobar, on the fourth day of a papal tour to promote peace. Hide Caption 5 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia Pope Francis greets veterans after arriving at the Apiay Naval Base in Villavicencio, Colombia, on Friday, September 8. The Pope is on a five-day visit to Colombia, making good on his promise to travel there once the government and FARC rebels reached a peace deal in their decades-long civil war. Hide Caption 6 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia A woman holding a rosary awaits the start of a Mass in Villavicencio on September 8. Hide Caption 7 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia Pope Francis boards a plane at Bogota's Catam military airport as he heads to Villavicencio on September 8. Hide Caption 8 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia Francis confers with Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos before a ceremony Thursday, September 7, at the presidential palace in Bogota. Hide Caption 9 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia Crowds gather in Bogota's Bolivar Square as they wait for Pope Francis on September 7. The Pope and Vatican diplomacy have worked for several years to help Colombia achieve peace. Hide Caption 10 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia Francis addresses a welcoming ceremony as he arrives in Bogota on Wednesday, September 6. Hide Caption 11 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia Pope Francis prays in the chapel of the Nunciature in Bogota on September 6. Hide Caption 12 of 14

Photos: Pope Francis visits Colombia People welcome Francis to Bogota as he makes his way from the airport to the Nunciature on September 6. Hide Caption 13 of 14