H.R.4903 - 113th Congress (2013-2014): Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2015
There are 2 summaries for H.R.4903. Reported to House without amendment (06/19/2014) Introduced in House (06/19/2014) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

Reported to House without amendment (06/19/2014)

(This measure has not been amended since it was introduced. The summary has been expanded because action occurred on the measure.)

Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2015 - Makes appropriations for the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) for FY2015.

Title I: Departmental Management and Operations - Makes appropriations for: (1) the Office of the Secretary of Homeland Security and executive management, (2) the Office of the Under Secretary for Management, (3) the Office of the Chief Financial Officer, (4) the Office of the Chief Information Officer, (5) intelligence analysis and operations coordination activities, and (6) the Office of the Inspector General.

Title II: Security, Enforcement, and Investigations - Makes appropriations for: (1) U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), including for border security fencing, infrastructure, and technology; (2) U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), including to reimburse other federal agencies for the costs associated with the care, maintenance, and repatriation of smuggled aliens unlawfully present in the United States, to identify and remove from the United States aliens convicted of a crime once they are judged deportable, and for detention and removal operations, including transportation of unaccompanied minor aliens; (3) the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), including for civil aviation security services (including explosives detection systems), surface transportation security activities, the development and implementation of intelligence and vetting activities, and transportation security support; (4) U.S. Coast Guard; and (5) U.S. Secret Service.

Requires: (1) the Border Patrol to maintain an active duty presence of not less than 21,370 full-time equivalent agents protecting U.S. borders in FY2015; (2) ICE funding to maintain a level of not less than 34,000 detention beds through September 30, 2015; and (3) the TSA Administrator to submit a semiannual report, by April 15, 2015, updating information on a strategy to increase the number of air passengers eligible for expedited screening.

Title III: Protection, Preparedness, Response, and Recovery - Makes appropriations for FY2015 for: (1) the National Protection and Programs Directorate, including for the Federal Protective Service (FPS) and the Office of Biometric Identity Management; (2) the Office of Health Affairs, including for BioWatch operations; and (3) the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), including for grants for state and local programs (including the Urban Area Security Initiative), firefighter assistance grants, emergency management performance grants, the U.S. Fire Administration, disaster relief, the flood hazard mapping and risk analysis program, the National Flood Insurance Fund, the predisaster mitigation grant program, and the emergency food and shelter program.

Requires the revenues and collections of security fees credited to the account of FPS to be available until expended for necessary expenses related to the protection of federally owned and leased buildings and for the operations of FPS, provided that the Secretary of DHS and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) shall certify in writing to the House and Senate Appropriations Committees, not later than 60 days after this Act's enactment, that FPS operations will be fully funded in FY2015 through revenues and collection of security fees.

Requires the Director of FPS to include with the submission of the President's FY2016 budget a strategic human capital plan that aligns fee collections to personnel requirements based on a current threat assessment.

Title IV: Research and Development, Training, and Services - Makes appropriations for FY2015 for: (1) U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (CIS), including for the E-Verify program; (2) the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC); (3) the Office of the Under Secretary for Science and Technology; and (4) the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office.

Prohibits the use of funds made available in this Act for grants for immigrant integration to provide services to aliens who have not been lawfully admitted for permanent residence.

Title V: General Provisions - (Sec. 501) Sets forth limitations and prohibitions on the availability, use, reprogramming, or transfer of funds for specified programs and activities under this Act.

(Sec. 513) Prohibits the use of funds available in this Act to amend the oath of allegiance required under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA).

(Sec. 521) Prohibits the use of funds by CIS to grant an immigration benefit unless the results of required background checks have been received and do not preclude granting the benefit.

(Sec. 524) Prohibits the use of funds provided in this or any other Act to approve a waiver of the navigation and vessel-inspection laws for the transportation of crude oil distributed from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve until the Secretary of DHS takes adequate measures to ensure the use of U.S. flag vessels.

(Sec. 525) Prohibits the use of funds for CBP to prevent an individual from importing a prescription drug from Canada if: (1) such individual is not in the business of importing a prescription drug; and (2) such drug complies with specified provisions of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and is not a controlled substance or a biological product. Makes this section applicable only to individuals transporting on their person a personal-use quantity of the prescription drug, not exceeding a 90-day supply.

(Sec. 527) Prohibits the use of funds made available in this Act: (1) for planning, testing, piloting, or developing a national identification card; (2) to transfer, release, or assist in the transfer or release to or within the United States, its territories, or possessions, of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed or any other detainee who is not a U.S. citizen or a member of the U.S. Armed Forces, or who is or was held on or after June 24, 2009, at the U.S. Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by the Department of Defense (DOD); or (3) to employ unauthorized aliens.

(Sec. 534) Requires any company that collects or retains personal information directly from any individual who participates in TSA's Registered Traveler or successor program to safeguard and dispose of such information in accordance with specified requirements.

(Sec. 543) Requires the DHS Secretary to ensure enforcement of all immigration laws.

(Sec. 544) Requires a specified amount of the funds made available for the Federal Network Security Program to be used to deploy federal systems technology to improve the information security of agency information systems, including to assist and support government-wide and agency-specific efforts to provide adequate, risk-based, and cost-effective cybersecurity.

(Sec. 546) Prohibits funds made available under this Act from being used: (1) by a federal law enforcement officer to facilitate the transfer of an operable firearm to an individual if the officer knows or suspects that the individual is an agent of a drug cartel unless U.S. law enforcement personnel continuously monitor or control the firearm at all times, (2) to implement the National Preparedness Grant Program unless explicitly authorized by Congress, or (3) to provide funding for the position of Public Advocate within ICE.

(Sec. 550) Prohibits the use of funds under this Act to pay for the travel to or attendance of more than 50 employees of a single component of DHS, who are stationed in the United States, at a single international conference unless the Deputy Secretary or a designee determines that such attendance is in the national interest and notifies the Senate and House Appropriations Committees within at least 10 days of that determination and its basis.

(Sec. 554) Prohibits the use of funds made available in this Act for new CBP air preclearance agreements entering into force after February 1, 2014, unless: (1) the Secretary has certified that air preclearance operations at the airport provide a homeland or national security benefit, (2) U.S. passenger air carriers are not precluded from operating at existing preclearance locations, and (3) a U.S. passenger air carrier is operating at all airports contemplated for establishment of new air preclearance operations.

(Sec. 556) Prohibits the use of funds to require a chemical facility to employ or not employ a particular security measure for personnel surety if the facility has adopted personnel measures designed to: (1) verify and validate an individual's identification, (2) check an individual's criminal history, (3) verify and validate an individual's legal authorization to work, and (4) identify individuals with terrorist ties.

(Sec. 558) Prohibits the Secretary from imposing any new border crossing fee on individuals crossing the southern or northern U.S. borders at a land port of entry or from conducting any study relating to the imposition of a border crossing fee.

(Sec. 560) Directs the Secretary to submit annual reports on the purchase and usage of ammunition and weapons by DHS.

(Sec. 565) Deems Gerardo Ismael Hernandez, a Transportation Security Officer employed by TSA who died in the line of duty on November 1, 2013, at the Los Angeles International Airport, to have been a public safety officer for purposes of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Street Act of 1968.

(Sec. 566) Prohibits the use of funds appropriated for ICE to: (1) pay for an abortion, except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term, or in the case of rape or incest; or (2) require any person to perform, or facilitate the performance of, any abortion.

(Sec. 569) Directs OMB and DHS to ensure the congressional budget justifications accompanying the President's budget proposal for DHS include estimates of the number of unaccompanied alien children anticipated to be apprehended in the budget year and the number of agent or officer hours required to process, manage, and care for such children.

(Sec. 570) Rescinds specified fundsfrom certain DHS accounts and programs and from unobligated balances made available in the Department of the Treasury Forfeiture Fund.