UMD Commencement
The university is pleased to provide a real-time stream of the campus-wide ceremony on the commencement website beginning at 1 p.m. Sunday, May 21. The ceremony will also be cablecast on UMTV in Prince George's and Montgomery counties. On-campus viewers can watch UMTV on channel 38. Off-campus viewers should check their local listings for UMTV.

Congratulations to the class of 2017! The University of Maryland welcomes you to our May 2017 Commencement website, where graduates, family members and the university community may find information about the ceremonies. These events are not only a celebration of the graduating students’ accomplishments at the University of Maryland, but also an occasion to acknowledge our joint enthusiasm for their future endeavors. The university recognizes that commencement is a milestone in our graduates’ lives and, as such, we strive to ensure that everyone enjoys their experience. The campus-wide ceremony will begin at 1 p.m. Sunday, May 21, and the individual college and school ceremonies will occur at various times on Saturday, May 20 and Monday, May 22. The colleges and schools will contact graduating students with specific information pertaining to the individual ceremonies. Contact the college or school directly for more information regarding the individual ceremonies.

Tickets

Tickets are required for the Spring 2017 campus-wide ceremony.

Each student will receive 4 tickets.

Each graduate will receive four guest tickets and one processional ticket for their personal use. Graduates may claim tickets through their online athletic ticket account beginning Friday, May 5. All students who have applied for Spring 2017 graduation and completed the graduation checklist will receive an email from the ticket office on Friday, May 5, with instructions for claiming their 4 tickets. For questions regarding claiming tickets or issues logging into your athletic student ticket account please contact the ticket office at 301.314.7070.

Additional tickets are not available for purchase or download. Students who need extra tickets to the campus wide ceremony should reach out to friends or classmates who may not be attending the campus wide ceremony or using all of their tickets, and obtain additional tickets from them. Please note that the tickets have bar codes and will be scanned. Copies of tickets will not be accepted.

Most individual college and school ceremonies don’t require tickets, however we recommend that you check with your college and or school to check that there is not an RSVP or ticketing system in place.

For questions regarding your graduation application please contact Diploma Services at diploma@umd.edu or 301.314.8270.

For any other ticketing questions contact the Office of Special Events at events@umd.edu or 301.405.4638.