The Story Of Saving Pvt. Lynch: Truth Or Fiction?

The final story has not been told, and no one contests Lynch's bravery during a horrifying ordeal. But the Iraqi doctors who treated her tell a less Hollywood-ready version of her rescue: They say they worked hard to save her life, they deny reports that she was slapped by an Iraqi officer and they say there was no resistance when the U.S. forces raided the building.

Seven weeks after her dramatic rescue marked a turning point in the public relations campaign of the Iraq war, a return to Nasiriyah raises questions about the telling of her story, and about the roles of the Pentagon and the U.S. news media in turning the petite 19-year-old Army private from West Virginia into the face of good battling evil in the Iraq war.

The story of Jessica Lynch is the tale of how a modern war icon is made, and perhaps how easily officials and journalists with different agendas accepted contradictory, self-serving versions of what happened to her.

Nonetheless, over the next 24 hours, the world would be introduced to Lynch as a plucky heroine who had "fiercely" fought off her Iraqi captors before being rescued in a daring raid by commandos who purportedly snatched her from the clutches of Saddam Hussein's nastiest henchmen. Her limb fractures were reported as "multiple gunshot wounds."

On her last night there, when she would hide beneath her sheets as the sounds of battle erupted, everyone at the hospital knew that the feared Iraqi Fedayeen fighters had fled by the time U.S. Special Forces troops arrived to rescue her.

NASIRIYAH, Iraq — Despite her pain and fear, Jessica Lynch sipped juice and ate biscuits under the watchful eye of Iraqi doctors and nurses who shielded her from thugs during her eight days of captivity in an Iraqi hospital in March.

"The Americans were jumping over fences and running around," said Hassan Hamoud, who lives nearby. "They could have walked into the hospital and no one would have stopped them."

Yet experts in war propaganda say the official tale fit all too nicely into the neat story line the Bush administration wanted to push and the American public wanted to hear.

The Pentagon insists it did not embellish the Lynch tale when it first announced the rescue at its Central Command headquarters in Doha, Qatar. But a few whispers to reporters by anonymous U.S. officials -- about Lynch's "to-the-death" gun battle before she was captured, her supposed gunshot wounds and her mistreatment at the hospital -- set the plate for a feast by television networks and newspapers that could not resist such a made-for-TV plot.

Ultimately, Lynch may not be able help sort out the real story: Doctors say she has lost her memory, at least about the incidents that put her into the Iraqi hospital.

For the past several weeks, British and Canadian journalists have been casting doubts on the Pentagon's version of the Lynch rescue.

Pentagon officials say any suggestion that the Lynch rescue was concocted, or that U.S. commanders would send troops into the path of danger solely for a publicity stunt, is "ridiculous." U.S. officials say the elite Special Forces would never have risked entering the hospital in a less forceful way. They were entering a combat zone where Iraqi guerrillas had been resisting fiercely for days, many of them disguised as civilians.

Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks described the April 1 mission as "a classic operation, done by some of our nation's finest warriors, who are dedicated to never leaving a comrade behind." Seven weeks later, the staff at Saddam Hussein Hospital in Nasiriyah tell a much more subdued story about the dangers how Lynch was rescued.

Harith al-Houssona, an Iraqi doctor, said Iraqi soldiers brought Lynch into the hospital with a broken right arm, fractures of both legs, a dislocated right ankle and a gash in her head -- all wounds he said are common in road accidents.

"There was never a bullet wound," said al-Houssona, who operated on Lynch to install a metal plate in her leg.

Despite her nationality, the staff was proud of how they had treated Lynch as a "guest" rather than a war prisoner. They said the staff donated two of the three pints of blood she was given. After awakening two days later, Lynch was cared for by two nurses in round-the-clock shifts. The two, one of whom had three daughters about Lynch's age, even sang softly to her, they said.

And they dismiss as false a well-publicized story told by an Iraqi lawyer about how he had seen a dark-clad man slapping Lynch in her hospital bed.