Hey, Sorry, But 5 Of Your Favorite Things Are Racist
It gets worse. In the late 19th / early 20th century, not many people were keen to hire the Irish ... except the police. If you were willing to get shot in the noble pursuit of beating other poor folks about the head and shoulders with an old timey club, you too could join the force. Pretty soon, the "paddy wagons" weren't just transporting Paddies; they were also driven by them. It's amazing what systemic racism can do when it puts its mind to it!

1 Zombies Evolved From The Horrific Fates Of French Slaves Zombies Evolved From The Horrific Fates Of French Slaves

via The Daily Mail

If you want to blame anyone for the glut of zombies in modern fiction, you can blame George Romero and his 1968 indie hit Night Of The Living Dead. But if you want to get to the source of the problem, you might want to jump into your time machine and travel to 17th/18th-century Haiti. WARNING: This will not be an enjoyable trip for the melanin-privileged.

via Child Hope

Trust us on this ...

Continue Reading Below Advertisement

Back then, Haiti was known as Saint-Domingue, and was a French colony that took in all the slaves they could brutally work to death. That turned out to be a lot. African slaves worked on the sugar plantations in inhumane and brutal conditions. Half of the workers would die within their first few years of servitude. The other half tended to kill themselves. Which is actually worse than you think: See, the religion of the Haitian natives forbade suicide. The slaves believed that upon dying, your freed soul could spend the afterlife back in Africa, but that those who took their lives would be forced to roam the same place where they died for all eternity.

Eventually, the Haitian myth got mixed up with voodoo beliefs about powerful shamans being able to raise the dead. Over time, all of this came together to create a brand-new myth of corpses rising from the grave to roam the land while killing everything in their path. And then hundreds of years later, we made movies about how these monstrosities might be good boyfriend material.

For more ways you're being totally intolerant, check out 8 Racist Words You Use Every Day and 5 Things You Say Often With Horrible Historical Origins.

Subscribe to our YouTube channel, and check out 7 Racist And Sexist Ads That Are Shockingly Recent, and other videos you won't see on the site!

Also, follow us on Facebook, and we'll be your best friends forever.