Delaware High School 1973: What Actually Happened?!
If you googled the words: "Shooting at Delaware High School in 1973" in an attempt to discover the story behind this picture featured above, then congratulations you have found the answer! So allow me to present to you the true story behind this image. But just so that you believe me, I am going to recount for you my research journey to discover the truth.





It all started with this meme featured above repeatedly appearing in my Facebook newsfeed after the school shooting in Parkland, Florida.

There were two things that stood out to me:

#1.) Its vague reference to a "Delaware high school" as if that were an actual name of a high school. For the record Delaware High does not exist, I checked.

Then finally:

#2.) It's suggestion that a would-be school shooter would warn their armed classmates before attacking. This was not only odd but no school shooter in the history of school violence has ever directly warned their school before attacking. Sounds a bit counter-intuitive for a mass murderer, wouldn't you agree?

So began my search for the truth...





My inquiries led me to this post by Reddit user Nantan Lupan. Naturally I messaged him and waited for about a week before I concluded that Lupan was either dead or no longer active. So I reverted to the details mentioned in the meme and I began checking the history of nearly every high school in Delaware, looking for a school shooting or an attempted school shooting in the 1970's and I came up empty.

I even emailed the Library of Congress to see if they had any information on the photo featured above and they didn't have any information either.Though their response suggested that I wasn't the first person to ask about it. So I then went back to the original post on Reddit and dug through the comment history.





Low-and-behold I discovered the following exchange between Nantan and some other reddit users. Lupan claimed this photo was from CR and that acronym led me to Caesar Rodney High School in Camden, Delaware. Which led me to a yearbook from 1973 posted in Photobucket online. After less then an hour of searching through the yearbook I discovered the following photo below:





JACKPOT!

Attempts to make contact with the user who posted the yearbook failed with no response. So I made contact with the Caesar Rodney High School Alumni Facebook group.



According to members of that same group these two gentlemen were seniors Kendall Cool (on the left) and Carl Willoughby (on the right). One day in the spring of 1973 they brought out their hunting rifles for a photo-op by one of the entrances to Caesar Rodney High School for the school's newspaper. The article was a response to rumors of bomb threats that were intruding on final exams that year. Naturally this photo made its way into the yearbook and the local paper as well.





Now you know the truth!

So please Like, and Share

Interested in ending school violence?

Then join us on Facebook!