Cool Technology
With over 1.5 million units sold worldwide, this is the best solution to watch your favourite movies and shows for free!

We all know how frustrating overpriced cable bills and subscription services can be.

You pay for cable, Netflix, movies and sports on demand... it adds up.

And of course there is all this hardware. Your receiver, AppleTV or Firesticks, DVD Player and often expensive Smart TVs.

So it doesn’t come as a surprise that more and more people are searching for cheaper, simpler solutions to cut cable bills and get rid of all the hardware.

Thankfully, there is a solution to legally watch HDTV for free!

A US-based startup company has come up with a new innovative and inexpensive gadget that is changing the way people consume media.

What is it?

It’s called Octa Air. It is a new "super" antenna that can pick up over-the-air TV signals no other antenna was able to pick up before. So you get over 100 channels completely free and legal in South Africa

Developed by a NASA engineer using military technology, the Octa Air Antenna uses a discrete mud flap modern design which makes it the most reliable and technologically advanced antenna to hit the market today. But there is a main differnce - it allows you to watch almost every channel, movie or show for free. With no subscriptions and completely legal.

How Does it Work?

It’s easy! Just connect Octa Air with any TV or monitor your have. All cables are included in the package. Press the power button and done. No seriously, it literally takes 10 seconds and you are able to watch all your favorite channels.

But how can you watch for free? The secret to that is a law that no cable company in the world wants you to know about. It states that every cable company has to provide additionally to the normal signal a over-the-air signal. So in order to not break the law the cable companies distrubute this signal but in a low frequency- so almost no antennas were able to pick it up reliably. Until now - Octa Air changes that.

"This device has saved me tons of money!"

You can tune into almost every channel 24/7 for free. Everything Ultra HD of course. One thing to note is that the optimal range is 30 miles from a TV broadcast point. But they are all over the world. Weather and environmental factors may also impact reception but with Octa Airs advanced technology this barely will impact you.

What sounds to be to good to be true is reality, no strings attached. That’s one reason why Octa Air is selling globally like crazy at the moment. Now, before you cancel your cable or satellite subscription, it is important to note that there were a few channels that you can not get with the antenna. But in the end, you are able to receive about 85% of the same channels and more importantly, they were the most popular channels that people actually watch.

See Octa Air in Action

But is it legal?

YES! Definitely. It is completely legal to use as the cable companies distrubute the signal completely free.

Of course cable companies are not happy with the situation but they can’t do anything about it. They are required by law to keep the signal going. And now with advanced antennas like Octa Air you can actually pick it up.

How Much is it Going To Cost Me?

You’re probably thinking that this device is very expensive... False! Octa Air is on sale at the moment for R 585! One time payment - no subscription, no monthly costs.

Where can I buy one?

You can buy it directly from the company’s website by clicking here.

UPDATE: TODAY ONLY 50% Discount on Octa Air

If you want to save thousands of dollars and stop paying for cable or satellite tv, and don’t mind losing out on a few random channels you probably won’t even watch, you should try the Octa Air Antenna.

Start to watch all your favorite channels for free...

Now that you’ve been informed about this brilliant invention, let me show you how easy it is to set up. All you need to do is to follow these 3 steps:

Step 1 Order Octa Air today to take advantage of the 50% OFF sale

Order Octa Air today to take advantage of the 50% OFF sale

Step 2 When you receive it, open the package and connect it to any TV you like with cables included and press the power button.

When you receive it, open the package and connect it to any TV you like with cables included and press the power button.

Step 3 Watch HDTV for free... Octa Air will automatically show you all the channels, just pick one and enjoy!



It’s As Simple As That!

TIP: Octa Air is a great gift because it will save everybody, who receives it, a ton of money!