State laws and cousin marriage
US State Laws

By KC & Christie Smith



Click on a state below for actual marriage statutes. CousinCouples.com does not guarantee the accuracy of the information available on the various state laws. This information is for entertainment purposes and does not constitute legal advice.





E1 Permitted when couples will not bear children E2 Prohibits double first cousins only E3 Genetic counseling required prior to marriage

¹ Indiana, Kentucky, Nevada, Ohio, Washington and Wisconsin currently prohibit marriage between first cousins once removed. ² Exemption : some marriages are permitted by the established customs of aboriginal culture - see state law

U.S. State Laws Explained Second cousins may legally marry All States First cousins may legally marry AK, AL, CA, CO, CT, FL, GA, HI, MD, MA, NJ, NM, NY, NC, RI, SC, TN, VT, VA

and Washington DC First cousins and first cousins once removed cousins prohibited AR, DE, IA, ID, KS, LA, NH, MI, MN, MO, MS, MT, ND, NE, OR, OK, PA, SD, TX, WV, WY

IN, KY, NV, OH, WA, WI First cousins and first cousins once removed prohibited only if they can bear children or are over a certain age AZ, IL, ME, UT,

IN, WI First cousins may marry if the submit to genetic counseling ME Only double first cousins prohibited NC Cousin marriages allowed only if permitted by aboriginal culture of the couple MN Cousins may legally evade state laws and marry elsewhere

(Interpretation of law unclear)

(Not legal but Ethridge v. Shaddock may have set a precedent to overturn) IN*, KS, LA, NE, OK, WA, WV, WY,

MI

AR** Cousins are prohibited from marrying, but are not defined as incest

(defined as incest only if over 18)

(defined as incest only if under 18) ID, LA, MN, MO, MT, OR, PA, WA, WV, WY

AZ

SD, Cousin marriage is defined as incestuous only if couple is of reproductive age or ability WI Cousin marriage is defined as incestuous All prohibited states, excluding those listed in the previous two (2) categories Half cousins can marry ( absolute , apparent ) NE, NV

AZ, KS, MT, OK Adopted cousins may marry with proof of eligibility LA, MS, OR, WV, Uncle/Niece and other consanguineous marriages allowed if permitted by aboriginal culture CO, MN Uncle-in-law/Niece-in-law marriages allowed CT

* Indiana

While most marriages are void if contracted elsewhere to evade Indiana's law, cousin marriages do not fall under the statute which would make it void:



IC 31-11-8-6

Sec. 6. A marriage is void if the parties to the marriage:



For more information, you should consult the book, " Forbidden Relatives " -- it has more detailed information on each state. Also you should post your question on the message board.