Choose Kerry
In the aftermath of Sept. 11, George W. Bush helped to unite the nation as it waged war against al-Qaida. Unfortunately, his obsession with Saddam Hussein then caused him to lead the nation into an ill-conceived war in Iraq.

That conflict has cost more than 1,000 American lives, diverted resources from the fight against al-Qaida, and contributed to a hemorrhaging of red ink at the U.S. Treasury that threatens the economic foundation of the nation. In the process, the Bush administration has managed to squander international good will built up by U.S. presidents since the end of World War II.

President Bush has failed the test of leadership. The South Florida Sun-Sentinel Editorial Board recommends voters on Nov. 2 replace him with John Kerry.

The Massachusetts senator possesses a prodigious intellect capable of grasping the complexities of the serious issues facing the nation and the world. He has surrounded himself with advisers who have equally sharp minds and proven track records, including former U.S. chief delegate to the United Nations Richard Holbrooke and former Secretary of the Treasury Robert Rubin.

The United States must chart new and constructive courses in foreign and fiscal policy, but this will happen only with more capable leadership than the Bush administration is able to provide.

THE WAR IN IRAQ

By now, it's abundantly clear Saddam Hussein did not possess weapons of mass destruction, and that the justification for waging war on Iraq was built on a false premise.

The president may have been misled by faulty intelligence. Nevertheless, he rushed to war without allowing U.N. weapons inspections to run their course, and without a viable plan to ensure stability in Iraq after large-scale military operations were over.

Because the occupation was so badly botched, Iraq has become a breeding ground and haven for terrorists. Gen. Eric Shinseki, former Army chief of staff, warned the administration that troop strength was grossly inadequate, and was shown the door for speaking the truth. Meanwhile, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, and others who engineered the occupation fiasco, remain in their jobs.