Harvard University
Daniel P. Schrag is the Sturgis Hooper Professor of Geology at Harvard University, Professor of Environmental Science and Engineering, and Director of the Harvard University Center for the Environment.



Schrag studies climate and climate change over the broadest range of Earth history. He is particularly interested in how information on climate change from the geologic past can lead to better understanding of anthropogenic climate change in the future. In addition to his work on geochemistry and climatology, Schrag studies energy technology and policy, including carbon capture and storage and low-carbon synthetic fuels.



Schrag currently serves on President Obama's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. Among various honors, he is the recipient of the James B. Macelwane Medal from the American Geophysical Union and a MacArthur Fellowship. Schrag earned a B.S. in geology and geophysics and political science from Yale University and his Ph.D. in geology from the University of California at Berkeley. He came to Harvard in 1997 after teaching at Princeton. C U R R I C U L U M V I T A E Date of Birth:

January 25, 1966 Education:

B.S. 1988, Yale University (Geology & Geophysics and Political Science)

Ph.D. 1993, University of California at Berkeley (Geology) Ph.D. Dissertation Supervisors:

Donald J. DePaolo (U.C. Berkeley)

Frank M. Richter (Univ. of Chicago) Post-Doctoral Supervisor:

John M. Hayes (Indiana Univ.) Honors:

James B. Macelwane Medal, American Geophysical Union (2001)

MacArthur Fellow (2000)

Technology Review TR100 - 100 young innovators for the next century (1999)

Ocean Drilling Program Fellowship (Berkeley) (1992)

Samuel Lewis Penfield Prize in Mineralogy (Yale) (1988)

Katherine K. Walker Prize in Political Science (Yale) (1988)

Frank M. Patterson Prize in Political Science (Yale) (1987)

Westinghouse Science Talent Search Finalist (1984) Professional Experience:

Sturgis Hooper Professor of Geology , 2009-

Professor of Environmental Science and Engineering, 2007-

Professor, Dept. of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 2000-

Harvard University

Associate Professor, Dept. of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 1997-2000

Harvard University

Assistant Professor, Dept. of Geosciences, Princeton University 1994 -1997

Visiting Researcher, Indiana University 1993

Geologist, Newmont Mining 1988 Memberships:

President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology; American Geophysical Union; Geochemical Society; American Meteorological Society; American Academy for the Advancement of Science; Canadian Institute for Advanced Research Service:

Professional:

Board of Reviewing Editors, Science (2002 - 2005); Associate Editor, Geochem., Geophys., Geosyst. (1999 - ); Advisory Committee for Earth Institute of Columbia University (2002 - ).



University:

University Center for the Environment (Director); Center for Geographic Analysis (Steering Committee); Committee on Oceanography; Board of Tutors for Environmental Science and Public Policy; Committee on Collections for Earth and Planetary Sciences; Faculty Advisory Committee on Affiliated Housing. Research Interests:

Application of geochemistry to problems concerning the geologic record of climate change, history of the oceans and atmosphere, and interactions between the environment and life. Publications: See Research page for list of publications. ©2010 President and Fellows of Harvard College

HARVARD UNIVERSITY | EPS HOME