You won't believe what men are doing to their penises before sex
GUYS are gluing their schlongs before sex for the most bizarre reason.

GETTY HEALTH WARNING: Experts advise against this new sex trend

Every now and then a new bizarre sex trend crops up, from detoxing your vagina with herbs to smearing your testicles with deodorant, but this might be the weirdest yet. Jiftip is a product that has been created so that men can glue their urethras shut before sex. The company’s tagline is “feel your partner, feel freedom, feel safe” and offers lads a guide on how to apply a layer of polyurethane film to the tip of the penis. On the makers website, Jiftip is described as a “hypoallergenic feel shield”.

Facts you didn't know about the penis Interesting facts about the penis including average penis size, erections, sensitivity and sexual pleasure 1 / 17 Reddit Koro, dubbed 'penis panic' is a certified mass hysteria where men believe their members are in danger of vanishing. It's more common in Africa and the Far East

They say: “The top layer is polyurethane film, the adhesive layer is used in specialty skin bandages, but with a maximum grip. “The tip is where most of your headaches come and go. “Want to keep out foreign invaders and send eager baby-seeds back to their room? Jiftip seals the part nature can't protect.” Despite the penis product being created as a condom alternative, it’s worth noting that Jiftip is not recommended for safe sex.

JIFTIP SEX GLUE: Jiftip suggests men stop sperm with a thin film

The makers admit it is “not a condom and it is not approved for STIs or pregnancy prevention purposes” and should be used for “pleasure enhancement and convenience only”. Predictably sexual health professionals advise against men trying out the dangerous sex trend. Lelo’s relationship expert told Daily Star Online: “This doesn’t seem viable, or even particularly trustworthy.

“Jiftip seals the part nature can't protect” “I mean, common sense alone would tell you that gluing your penis closed is probably not in anyone’s interest. “Why would anyone think covering your urethra with sticky polyurethane is preferable to wearing a condom? Condoms are great. “Jiftip’s website is suspiciously cagey about the details and ingredients. If I’m expected to use this the product the way it’s intended, I think I’d need more information than that.” Instead the sexpert recommended that randy couples stick with condoms.

Penis size, virginity and fetishes: 12 shocking sex stats revealed If you have ever wondered how you measure up in the bedroom, check out the top 12 most shocking stats discovered by a huge new sex survey 1 / 10 Getty Images/Caiaimage Around 70% of youngsters have sex once a week, but 36% get between the sheets several times a week