Sex crazed men gluing their WILLIES shut for pleasure slammed by top docs
MEN in Britain are finding a controversial way to use tiny bits of glue on their manhood.

A product named "Jiftip" is banking on men hating condoms so much that they’ll use a tiny sticker to shut their willies instead. What makes the stickers unique is that they don’t cover the entire manhood but just the top. Jiftip claims their products facilitates pleasurable sex, while keeping "man seeds" inside the penis during ejaculation. While it may sound like a dream come true for those who don't like the way condoms feel during sex, doctors warn there is no evidence the product is effective in preventing STDs or pregnancies. Nothing, they insist, is safer than a condom for men.

Sexy intimate tattoos Celebs share their most intimate bikini line tattoos. 1 / 15 Lottie Moss/Instagram Lottie Moss reveals booty tattoo as she strips to TEENY thong

“In my opinion, blocking ejaculation could be painful” Marcus Drake Speaking to Daily Star Online, consultant urological surgeon Marcus Drake said: "It is an interesting one. "The product has a disclaimer telling people it does not prevent STD and pregnancies, but then a disclaimer is found in all contraceptives. "The product says it sends man seeds back and stores them in the pee pipe to be released when the sticker comes off. But they are not sent back at all, they're simply blocked, so it's a stupid thing to say."

Getty WARING: Doctors are warning against the product

Celebrity manhood malfunctions From Instagram eggplants to accidental bulges. We check out the best manhood malfunctions! 1 / 22

Prof Drake from North Bristol NHS Trust added: "Their approach is not logical - sticking something on, when there is force coming up underneath it, is counter intuitive. "I was looking at comments for people who used the product and found nothing very obvious online, which was quite surprising. "In my opinion, blocking ejaculation could be painful. "Damage could include pain, inflammation, irritation or ongoing soreness." A 2016 Public Health England found, there were approximately 420,000 diagnoses of sexually transmitted infections in England. This was a 4% from previous year, but unfortunately, it may have been more the result of fewer tests being carried out, rather than fewer STIs being transmitted, said the report. And in its key message, it stressed: "Consistent and correct use of condoms can significantly reduce risk of STIs." Prof Drake seconded the message.

The 10 best sex positions if you're trying to conceive Check out the 10 most popular sex positions if you’re trying to conceive 1 / 10 Getty Images Missionary - 75%