Constitutionality of prayer debate heats up in Pico Rivera
PICO RIVERA – After a newly appointed mayor took a Bible off the dais and chose not to schedule prayer at each council meeting, the country’s 220-year-old debate over church and state has sprung up in Pico Rivera.

Since he became mayor in January, Gregory Salcido has tried to include less religion during council hearings.

“It’s a very black-and-white situation, clearly defined in the Constitution,” Salcido said after the January meeting. “When our framers crafted the First Amendment of the Constitution, they put the establishment clause in to protect the integrity of both institutions.”

Invocations were returned to the next meeting at the request of the other councilmen. But a Bible that had been placed on the dais several years ago was removed.

State and federal case law says city councils can have invocations but the prayers must be kept generic, said Pico Rivera City Attorney Arnold Alvarez- Glasman.

An appeals court in 2002 ruled the name of a specific deity can’t be mentioned.

“Some cities have adhered to the (court ruling), and some have stopped doing invocations,” he said. “Others still do the invocation and request the clergy person doesn’t end the prayer with a deity’s name.”

Other cities have staff or elected officials read a non- sectarian prayer, he said.

But there are wide-ranging interpretations on the definition of rights and statutes laid out by the Constitution.

Pico Rivera City Councilman David Armenta said his position as a public official shouldn’t quash his personal liberties or freedom to express his religious beliefs.

“I’m the one who brought the Bible to the dais and if I were mayor I’d bring it back,” Armenta said. “If I were Muslim and I wanted to display a Quran, I’d have every right, because the people voted for me. Everyone is entitled to their personal opinion.”

Armenta said during his term as mayor he reached out to the various religious communities represented in the city to come and give the invocation.

He pointed out that “In God We Trust” is on U.S. currency and that public officials are often sworn in using holy books of their choosing.

Those without religious beliefs said even non-sectarian prayer shouldn’t be part of public meetings.

“There is no religious language in the American Constitution and it wasn’t because these people were anti-religious,” said Ed Buckner, president of American Atheists. “It was because they didn’t want the government being involved in religion. It’s not just for the protection of atheists, it’s for the protection of religious liberty for everyone.”

Peter Eliasberg, managing attorney for the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California, said government-sanctioned prayer sends a message of favoritism to those who have religious beliefs versus those who don’t.

“When the government is putting prayer as part of the agenda of the council meeting and selecting who does it, they’re fostering their own particular message through this person they select,” he said.

Kevin Lewis, professor of theology and law at Biola University in La Mirada, said government-sponsored prayer is constitutional and communities should decide whether they want it at public meetings.

“The bottom line is, it’s permissible,” he said. “But at what point does it become sectarian and exclusionary? And that’s what circuit courts are battling out right now.”

The debate was highlighted recently when R. Rex Parris, mayor of Lancaster, called for “growing a Christian community” in his annual state of the city address, sparking an outcry from civil rights groups.

The Council on American Islamic Relations (CAIR) filed a complaint with the Department of Justice alleging civil rights violations.

Parris apologized Tuesday.

“There has to be the right balance between religious inclusion as well as upholding the Constitution,” said Munira Syeda, Southern California CAIR spokeswoman. “The Constitution has established clear lines that shouldn’t be crossed.”

Buckner acknowledged the debate may never be solved.

“The argument goes back to the founding of the nation,” he said. “It’s … a long- standing, ongoing fight and it will probably never end.”

bethania.palma@sgvn.com

562-698-0955 ext. 3028