Meet the 50-year-old Marilyn Monroe lookalike who has made $4m
Looking just like an A-list celebrity certainly has its perks. But looking like a celebrity who is widely regarded as one of the sexiest women who ever lived - and getting paid for it? Well, that's just incredible.

Susan Griffiths, 55, from Tustin, California, has made an astonishing $4 million over the course of her career as a Marilyn Monroe impersonator.

Appearing on film, in advertisements, and even at corporate events, Susan has been racking in cash for her uncanny resemblance to the Gentlemen Prefer Blondes star since the '80s.

Uncanny resemblance: Susan Griffiths (pictured) has made a career as a Marilyn Monroe lookalike

Seeing double: The 55-year-old (left) has been told her whole life how much she looks like the late actress (right)

Getting her start: Susan was working as a department store sales clerk when her co-workers told her to audition for a lookalike agency

'People always told me I looked like Marilyn,' she told the LA Times in an interview in the early 90s. 'There was always a resemblance.'

But it wasn't until colleagues at a Macy's department store, where she was working at a cosmetics counter, urged her to audition for an impersonator agency that she decided to capitalize on her doppelgänger status.

She had never even seen one of Marilyn's movies until she was 21, but she decided to audition and sign with an agency.She then honed an on-stage act that she performed in Hawaii and Las Vegas with the tribute show Legends in Concert.

'I had to learn to sing,' she said. 'Marilyn wasn't known for being an incredible singer. It wasn't like I had to come up to the standards of Judy Garland. But I had to study with several vocal coaches.'

She also had to speak like the Seven Year Itch bombshell, who was known for her sultry, breathy voice: 'At first it took a lot of practice to get Marilyn’s mannerisms right, especially her breathy voice, which was the hardest. I spent hours poring over her movies and practicing. Now everything is just second nature.

On screen: She appeared in the 1994 film Pulp Fiction, as well as a TV movie about Marilyn in 1991

Emulating an icon: The How to Marry a Millionaire star (pictured) is widely regarded as one of the sexist women who ever lived

Happy birthday, Mr. President: Susan (seen here off-duty) has mastered Marilyn's breathy voice

Getting the look: Though Susan naturally looks a lot like Marilyn, it takes expertly-applied make-up to look like the star did on screen and in photoshoots

For a while in the late '80s and early '90s, Susan retired her act - but couldn't avoid the call of being a celebrity lookalike forever. She revisited impersonating Marilyn for the 1991 TV movie Marilyn in Me.

From there, she went on to play Marilyn several more times on film, most notably in the cult classic Pulp Fiction with John Travolta.'

'Every time he saw me, he’d make comments about how similar I looked to Marilyn,' she said.

She appeared on TV shows, as well, including Growing Pains, Quantum Leap, The Defenders, and Cybill.

She also booked ads and commercials, doing spots for Chanel No. 5, McDonald's, Popeye's, Amstel Beer, Acura, and Visa.

In November 2008, she posed as Marilyn - complete with white dress, perfectly-coiffed blonde hair, and pouty red lips - on the cover of GQ with Jimmy Kimmel.

'It was surreal to see myself on the cover of a magazine that is on all the newsstands,' she wrote on Facebook.

A-list gigs: Susan said it was 'surreal' to see her face on the cover of GQ with Jimmy Kimmel

Selling the look: Susan (left) has also appeared in ads for Chanel No. 5, McDonald's, and Visa, posing as the real Marilyn (right)

Star for hire: She charges $1,500 to $4,000 for public appearances and is available for corporate events

Though she takes pains to apply her make-up and bleach her brown hair to look like Marilyn's she insists she's had no surgery to further the likeness, and often gets stopped on the street when she isn't done up.

'People even approach me when I’m bare-faced and wearing a hat covering my distinctive hair, exclaiming how much I look like Marilyn,' she said.

She continues to do her Marilyn act at private events, charging $1,500 to $4,000 for a single appearance.

'One of my most unbelievable moments was the night Kentucky billionaire, Steve Wilson, hired me as his date for the Kentucky Derby in 2010,' she recalled. 'There was a red carpet and I had my own personal bodyguard, it was an extraordinary evening.

Starstruck: While acting in the 1994 film Pulp Fiction, directed by Quentin Tarantino (left), John Travolta reportedly commented repeatedly on how much Susan looked like Marilyn

Paying homage: She was once offered the opportunity to pose for Playboy, but thought it would be disrespectful to Marilyn's memory

Lookalike love: She is dating a fellow lookalike, Dean Martin impersonator Andy DiMino (right)

'I was also offered a chance to model nude for Playboy while impersonating Marilyn, but I turned it down, as I felt it was disrespectful to her memory,' she added'

Being a dead-ringer for the actress has come with difficulties, too. Susan said that some past boyfriends have only dated her because of the resemblance, while others hated that she was stopped everywhere she went.

Luckily, she eventually met Andy DiMino, 63, who is an impersonator himself. He plays Dean Martin, and the couple have now been together for 12 years.

'It’s easier being in a relationship with someone in the performing industry because they get how unpredictable it is,' she said.

But despite past romantic struggled, Susan is still thrilled she's had the chance to make a career out of her likeness to such a beloved celebrity.