Nairobi County (Kenya)
This page is part of © FOTW Flags Of The World website

Nairobi County (Kenya)

Last modified: 2015-06-13 by bruce berry

Keywords: nairobi county | kenya |

Links: FOTW homepage | search | disclaimer and copyright | write us | mirrors



image by Jens Pattke, 10 May 2015

Background

Nairobi County is one of 47 counties in Kenya and was established in 2013 based on the boundaries of the former Nairobi Province, one of the former eight provinces which were subdivided in terms of the new Constitution.

As its name suggests, Kenya's capital city of Nairobi is situated in the county.

Bruce Berry, 16 March 2014

Description of the flag

The flag of Nairobi County was adopted on 23 August 2013 and is a rectangular bi-colour having a dark green background with a yellow triangle with its base at the hoist reaching into the fly. In the yellow triangle, set towards the hoist, is the shield taken from the county Arms. In the upper fly is a gold lion 'rampant guardant', also taken from the county Arms.

The flag is described in the Nairobi City County Flag and Other Symbols Bill (2013) as follows:

The flag is rectangular in shape, consisting of Four Elements:

The Shield, as contained in the Court of Arms, is a symbol of prosperity, opportunities, Justice and abundance — the good quality of life Nairobi has to offer. The Yellow "path" represents forward thinking and leadership position of Nairobi City County within the region and the African continent. It symbolizes prosperity and hope the County offers its residents. The Green "Veils" are symbolic of a new dawn for the city where prosperity thrives. It brings out an enlightenment of a people who are ready for each new day. The Golden Lion is a symbol of majesty, leadership, strength and courage. Always facing forward (right), it also represents the County Leadership as fearlessly moving the city and its people towards a prosperous future (as directed by the yellow path).

The design of the flag is similar to that of the President of Namibia, with the lion badge being similar to that used on the Kenya colonial ensigns. The shield is based on the Nairobi City Coat of Arms.

image sent by Jens Pattke, 10 May 2015

The county Coat of Arms is described and illustrated in Part II of the Nairobi City County Flag and Other Symbols Bill (2013) as follows:

The County Court of Arms is the official insignia of Nairobi City County and is made up of the Font, Rings, the Cranes, the Shield, the Ground and grass and a ribbon and strap-line. These elements come together to create a symbol of oneness, leadership, courage, prosperity, abundance, justice and dignity, opportunity for citizens and visitors of Nairobi City County.

Jens Pattke, 15 March 2015