District Attorney files eight felony, misdemeanor charges against former Pico Rivera official
LOS ANGELES – Former Pico Rivera Mayor Ron Beilke was charged Wednesday with two felony counts and six misdemeanors stemming from his time on the city council, according to court documents.

Beilke was due to be arraigned Wednesday morning in Department 30 of Los Angeles Superior Court’s Clara Shortridge Foltz Criminal Justice Center but his hearing was continued to March 8.

If convicted he faces a maximum of seven years, eight months in state prison and could lose the right to hold public office, said Deputy District Attorney Sandi Roth.

“We intend to fight this,” said Beilke’s attorney, Anthony Willoughby. “My client feels he hasn’t done anything wrong and he wants his name vindicated.”

Willoughby said Beilke “absolutely” intends to plead not guilty. Beilke, 50, could not be reached for comment.

Beilke was charged with felony perjury for signing a 2008 statement of economic interest form prosecutors allege was dishonest, and for felony conflict of interest for voting on a contract with the Krikorian Theater while receiving gifts from the company, Roth said.

He was also charged with misdemeanors for accepting gifts in excess of the legally allowed value and conflict of interest for voting on a road improvement project adjacent to his business, which prosecutors allege benefited him financially, according to court documents.

Beilke in 2008 used $3,464 in free movie passes – 433 visits for himself and up to four guests – from the Krikorian, Roth said. Meanwhile he voted on a contract between the city and the theater’s owner and a related zoning ordinance.

Elected officials were prohibited in 2008 from accepting gifts from a single donor in excess of $390 in a 12-month period, said Dave Demerjian, head of the D.A.’s public integrity unit.

Ron Beilke timeline SEPTEMBER 2002

Ron Beilke opens Wienerschnitzel restaurant at Washington and Rosemead boulevards. MARCH 2005

Beilke elected to Pico Rivera City Council. APRIL 2005

Longtime City Manager Dennis Courtemarche put on leave and fired. MAY 2005

Chuck Fuentes, longtime Beilke friend and political ally, hired as City Hall consultant. DECEMBER 2005

Fuentes appointed city manager. MARCH 2006

Beilke votes on Rosemead Boulevard project near his business, according to prosecutors. SEPTEMBER 2006

Fuentes fired. Construction on Krikorian Theater starts. NOVEMBER 2006

Beilke and Councilmen Pete Ramirez and David Armenta served with recall papers. Beilke again votes on Rosemead Boulevard project, according to prosecutors. DECEMBER 2006

DA’s Public Integrity Unit receives complaints of conflict of interest on Beilke. MARCH 2007

Beilke allies Bob Archuleta and Gracie Gallegos-Smith win council seats, cementing a voting majority. MARCH 2007

Archuleta, Beilke and Armenta vote to rehire Fuentes as city manager. APRIL 2007

Beilke served with recall papers. FEBRUARY 2008

Beilke votes on Rosemead Boulevard project, according to prosecutors. JULY 2009

DA’s investigators search Beilke’s home, business and office at City Hall in response to complaints. NOVEMBER 2009

Beilke loses bid for re-election, unseated by Armenta and challenger Gustavo Camacho. FEBRUARY 2010

Beilke charged with two felony counts and six misdemeanors stemming from alleged actions while in office. From staff reports



“In addition, they can’t vote or take official action on anything involving the donor of that gift,” Demerjian said. “Once they receive the gift they have to wait 12 months before they take official action.”

Beilke is also accused of accepting $2,650 worth of catering from El Rodeo restaurant for his wedding in 2008, Roth said.

Three misdemeanor counts stem from his votes approving contracts for street improvements at the intersection of Rosemead and Washington boulevards, where his Wienerschnitzel franchise is located, Roth said.

The improvements included the addition of a traffic light on Rosemead Boulevard just north of Washington Boulevard, she said. The light allows northbound traffic to turn left into the parking lot of the shopping center, where his restaurant is located.

Prosecutors allege the votes were a conflict of interest because his business benefitted from the project, she said.

Willoughby said he feels prosecutors were treating his client unfairly and targeting Beilke for what he called technical violations.

“I feel it’s selective prosecution and an abuse of the prosecutors’ powers,” Willoughby said. “(Beilke’s conduct) is not the type of conduct that should give rise to prosecution.”

Willoughby said the form used by officials to report gifts is ambiguous, especially wedding gifts.

“I’m not even so sure this wedding gift should have been reported,” he said.

He called Beilke’s votes on street improvements an inadvertent benefit.

“There are people that go out and do things and try to hide it, and there are people who made a technical mistake,” Willoughby said. “They (the D.A.’s office) shouldn’t be in the business of making a technical violation a criminal charge. Either a person has engaged in criminal conduct or they haven’t.”

Beilke served on the council from 2005 to 2009. He ran for one of two open seats in November but was ousted by incumbent David Armenta and challenger Gustavo Camacho.

While his tenure was sprinkled with controversy, he is credited with pushing through a 1-percent sales tax increase, approved by voters in November 2008.

The city’s sales tax is now one of the nation’s highest, at 10.75 percent, but it was key in helping stabilize the city’s finances and winning an “A” bond rating, officials have said.

Pico Rivera has secured about $30 million in bonds to move forward with a major library renovation and parks overhaul.

Last year the city was featured in a two-part CNN documentary, “Latino in America,” on the plight of Latin American immigrants coming to and living in the United States.

The premise of series, hosted by CNN’s Soledad O’Brien, was that Pico Rivera – with 92 percent of its about 67,000 residents identified as Hispanic or Latino according to U.S. Census data – is the “Latino Mayberry.”

But Beilke’s criminal charges are just one issue of many in recent months that have plagued the middle class community east of Los Angeles.

In July, then-Mayor Gracie Gallegos-Smith resigned citing family issues. Shortly after, it came to light she had been convicted of felony auto insurance fraud in 2007, while on the City Council.

She didn’t disclose her conviction to the public, saying it was a personal issue that had no bearing on her role in public office.

In September, a whistle-blowing parking enforcement officer disclosed that some members of the council and the city manager had given direction to rig parking ticket devices, preventing their cars from being cited.

“I’m glad the D.A. is following through with the job that the public has entrusted them to do,” said resident Raul Murga, who filed the complaints against Beilke. “I think it speaks volumes to other politicians that at least in L.A. County, public corruption will not be tolerated.”

bethania.palma@sgvn.com

562-698-0955, ext. 3028