'I fell for a 300-year-old pirate' Woman fed up with real men marries GHOST
TRIANGLE NEWS Amanda on her big day with her bridesmaids

Amanda Teague says she couldn't find her ideal fella, so she looked to the afterlife to find a kindred spirit. And the 45-year-old reckons she has found the perfect man - a Haitian pirate called Jack who died in the 1700s. She reckons the fact Jack is dead is not a problem and - like any ordinary couple - they go on dates, have arguments and even have sex. Amanda, who works as a Captain Jack Sparrow impersonator, hired a registrar and sailed into international waters so she could legally marry him - using a spiritual medium to allow him to say "I do" during the ceremony.

TRIANGLE NEWS Amanda on her big day

She told the Daily Star Sunday "He is my soulmate. I am so happy. It is the perfect kind of relationship for me. "There are a lot of people out there who don't know about spiritual relationships, but it could be right for them. I want to get the message out there." Amanda's love affair with the spirit started in 2014 when she was lying in bed and could feel his energy beside her. She says she initially wasn't interested in making contact with the spirit until she realised she could speak to him. The spirit used to sit with her when she watched TV or while she was driving her car and the pair started to get to know each other.

TRIANGLE NEWS Amanda wed Captain Jack on a boat off Ireland

Amanda says she soon started developing "strong loving feelings" towards him. She says: "We became really close. The more I learned about him, the more I liked him. "One day he said to me 'We can actually be together you know' but I had never heard of an intimate relationship between a spirit and a human before. "I did some research and found out it is a real thing and there are lots of people in spiritual relationships."

TRIANGLE NEWS Amanda retcons her job as a Jack Sparrow impersonator is what first brought them together.

“We became really close. The more I learned about him, the more I liked him.” Amanda Teague Amanda, who has been married before, had five children with her ex-husband. But she says she has never been able to relate to any living person the way she connects with Jack. Amanda says in his past life her husband was a Haitian pirate who lived more than 300 years ago. He was eventually caught and executed for his exploits on the high seas. Amanda says Jack was engaged to be married but was jilted.

The weirdest weddings from around the world Monkeys getting married, a woman marrying her dog and even mass wedding ceremonies, are these the weirdest weddings around? 1 / 29 www.stageapnee.com A couple's underwater wedding in Monaco