Arnold Schwarzenegger attends Thousand Oaks bar shooting benefit concert
He's the former Governor of California and remains an active member of his community.

And Arnold Schwarzenegger was the guest of honour at the ACM Lifting Lives Presents: Borderline Strong Concert at Thousand Oaks Civic Arts in California on Monday night.

The Hollywood star, 71, took to the stage to introduce the benefit concert, hosted by the Academy of Country Music to help the families and friends of the victims of the Borderline Bar and Grill shooting last November.

Introducing the acts: Arnold Schwarzenegger was the guest of honour at the ACM Lifting Lives Presents: Borderline Strong Concert at Thousand Oaks Civic Arts in California on Monday

Arnold sported a cowboy hat as he introduced the country music acts performing, who included Jimmie Allen, Trace Adkins and Cassadee Pope.

All proceeds from the event went towards the Ventura County Community Foundation’s Conejo Valley Victim’s Fund.

Schwarzenegger took to social media to praise everyone who took part in the charity concert, three months after the tragic shooting.

Important cause: The Hollywood star, 71, took to the stage to introduce the benefit concert, hosted by the Academy of Country Music to help the families and friends of the victims of the Borderline Bar and Grill shooting last November

Country music lover: Arnold sported a cowboy hat as he introduced the country music acts performing, who included Jimmie Allen, Trace Adkins and Cassadee Pope

He wrote: 'I was inspired by how these fantastic artists and the community came together to support the victims and their families. This is America. #BorderlineStrong'.

The concert was organised in memory of the 12 people who were tragically killed in the California bar shooting last year.

Ex-marine Ian Long, 28, stormed into the Borderline Bar and Grill, shooting dead 12 before turning the gun on himself.

Tragic loss: The concert was in memory of the 12 people who were tragically killed in the California bar shooting last year

Long targeting people as young as 18 during the bar's weekly College Country Night where students from nearby schools line dance and listen to music.

Among those killed was a Ventura County sheriff sergeant named Ron Helus, who was responding to the emergency call.

Before SWAT teams entered the building, Long took his own life in an office inside.

Raise money: All proceeds from the event went towards the Ventura County Community Foundation’s Conejo Valley Victim’s Fund

Survivors used bar stools to smash windows to climb out of and some hid beneath pool tables.

One woman ran into the kitchen and was told by staff to climb a ladder into the attic.

Long served in the Marines as a machine gunner for five years between 2008 and 2013, during which time he was decorated with 10 medals and toured Afghanistan, but was alleged to be plagued with PTSD.

Speaking out: Arnie encouraged his followers to the support the cause and to praise those who participated in the event