Sandy Hook ‘truther’ gets suspended sentence

Matthew Mills, 32, of Brooklyn, N.Y., appears before Superior Court Judge William Holden in Bridgeport Tuesday, Nov. 17, 2015, on a charge of interfering with police and second-degree breach of peace for allegedly trying to disrupt the annual charity race in honor of murdered Sandy Hook teacher Victoria Soto. less Matthew Mills, 32, of Brooklyn, N.Y., appears before Superior Court Judge William Holden in Bridgeport Tuesday, Nov. 17, 2015, on a charge of interfering with police and second-degree breach of peace for ... more Photo: Autumn Driscoll/file Photo / Hearst Connecticut Media Buy photo Photo: Autumn Driscoll/file Photo / Hearst Connecticut Media Image 1 of / 7 Caption Close Sandy Hook ‘truther’ gets suspended sentence 1 / 7 Back to Gallery

BRIDGEPORT — In this case it wasn’t the truth, but the plea, that set Sandy Hook ‘truther’ Matthew Mills free.

Faced with going to trial, the New York banker — who police said angrily confronted the family of murdered Sandy Hook teacher Victoria Soto claiming the massacre of children and teachers in Newtown never took place and the hero teacher didn’t exist — decided Monday to accept a plea deal instead.

He pleaded guilty under the Alford Doctrine to one count of interfering with police, and was sentenced by Superior Court Judge William Holden to a suspended 1-year term and two years’ probation.

Soto’s younger sister, Jillian Soto, who was sitting just a few feet away in the courtroom during the plea, declined comment.

“We are not going to tolerate this type of behavior,” Assistant State’s Attorney Craig Nowak said later of Mills.

Holden ordered Mills to have no further contact with the Soto family.

Under the Alford Doctrine, Mills didn’t admit his guilt but conceded he could have been found guilty and faced a stiffer sentence if he went to trial. The judge, in accordance with Alford plea procedure, then found him guilty.

Mills had no comment as he left the Golden Hill Street courthouse.

“He felt he would have prevailed if the case had gone to trial, but he wanted to put this behind him in the best interests of himself and his family,” his lawyer, James Hardy, said later.

Victoria Soto, of Stratford, has been hailed as a hero after police said she was killed while protecting her first-grade students from gunman Adam Lanza at the Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown in December 2012.

Hundreds were attending the third annual race in Stratford to raise money for educational scholarships in Soto’s name last Nov. 7 when, police said, Mills approached Jillian Soto. They said Mills shoved a photograph in the younger Soto’s face and began angrily charging that not only did the Sandy Hook tragedy not take place, but that Victoria Soto never existed.

Police said the photo was of the Soto family, including Victoria Soto, sitting on a seawall in Stratford.

Jillian Soto became very upset at Mills’ actions and repeatedly asked him to leave her alone, but police said he persisted until officers arrived on the scene. He then ran off and was captured following a short foot chase with officers on Main Street.