If we mean to remove memorials of white supremacists, that includes Lincoln
"In this enlightened age, there are few I believe, but what will acknowledge, that slavery as an institution is a moral and political evil in any country."

All Americans would certainly agree with the statement above. In light of the recent tragic events in Charlottesville, maybe knowing who wrote it might help generate, if not agreement, some level of understanding. Sadly, the miscreant dirtbags who perpetrate violence are probably too far gone for that.

The effort in Dallas to remove Gen. Robert E. Lee's monument is among many similar efforts underway across Texas and the South. As a descendant of several Confederate veterans, and a member of the Sons of Confederate Veterans, I can support the removal of the Lee monument. It may surprise you to learn this.

I supported the removal of the Confederate battle flag from the South Carolina capitol, in large part because it was historically inaccurate. The battle flag never flew over a state capitol. Instead, South Carolina should've done what Texas has done for at least 30 years, and fly the first national flag of the Confederacy instead of the St. Andrews cross inspired battle flag used by the KKK.

The city of Dallas shouldn't do this in a haphazard manner. Instead, the city council should develop guidelines to measure monuments, as well as the names of parks, streets, and public schools. Statues and other memorials that don't live up to the guidelines should be removed or renamed. Certainly, any commemoration of a white supremacist should run afoul of these guidelines.

Should we replace the Robert E. Lee statue with a statue of a more politically acceptable historic figure, such as Abraham Lincoln? Would anyone object to a statute of Honest Abe?

Well they should object. When measured by any standard, the "Great Emancipator" was clearly a white supremacist.

During Lincolns 1861 inaugural address, he endorsed a constitutional amendment to forever protect slavery, commonly referred to as the Corwin amendment, as an inducement for the seceded states to rejoin the Union. Lincoln told the inaugural audience: "I have no objection to its being made express and irrevocable."

Lincoln was quite prepared to perpetuate slavery to save the Union, writing abolitionist Horace Greeley: "If I could save the Union without freeing any slaves, I would do it."

During his famous debates with Sen. Stephen Douglas, Lincoln explained to the crowd: "I am not, nor ever have been, in favor of bringing about in any way the social and political equality of the white and black races ... I am not nor ever have been in favor of making voters or jurors of Negroes, nor of qualifying them to hold office, nor to intermarry with white people; and I will say in addition to this that there is a physical difference between the white and black races which I believe will forever forbid the two races from living together on terms of social and political equality. And inasmuch as they cannot so live, while they do remain together there must be a position of superior and inferior, and I as much as any other man am in favor of having the superior position assigned to the white race."

Lincoln was no different than most white males, North and South, at the time. He was a white supremacist. He also supported the deportation of blacks to either Central America or back to Africa, telling a black delegation visiting the White House in 1862: "It is better for us both, however, therefore, to be separated," and that for blacks to refuse to colonize elsewhere would be "extremely selfish." In December of 1862 he told Congress while asking for funding for the effort, "I cannot make it better known than it is already is that I strongly favor colonization."

Monument removal is a slippery slope fraught with unintended consequences. Would a monument to Buffalo Soldiers pass muster? Probably not. After all, couldn't it be argued that Buffalo Soldiers participated in a genocidal, white supremacist, war against an entire race of people, the Plains Indians, that in effect enslaved them on reservations?

I'm sure the comments that follow this narrative will say: "Secession was treason and Jeff Davis, General Lee and all Confederates should've been hung, not commemorated." However, the events of 1776, 1810 (Mexico's secession from Spain) and 1836 would also therefore be treasonous acts. And by the way, a reason Jeff Davis wasn't tried for treason after the war was the concern by Washington he would be acquitted.

Early in this narrative I wrote I can support the removal of Confederate symbols. All that is needed to gain my support is to change the name of Dallas' Lincoln Street, Lincoln Park and Lincoln High School. Surely any criteria council would adopt would support the removal of white supremacist names, and Lincoln was certainly that.

And, that quotation above about slavery being a "moral and political evil"? That was in a letter written by Robert E Lee in 1856 while stationed in Texas, five years before the Civil War began. Lee also wrote from Texas in January 1861, "I can anticipate no greater calamity for the country than the dissolution of the Union," and, "secession is nothing but revolution."

History is not easily compartmentalized. It isn't simply right versus wrong, black versus white, or blue versus gray. But there's an entire crowd of folks who want to do just that because they believe it is all those things, and most egregiously, they believe there is an individual right for all to go through life unoffended.

Equal treatment. Fairness. Consistency. Who in this progressive and enlightened age can oppose any of those principles? In fact, maybe if we just removed all names and statues of historic figures. All streets would have numbers and letters, and all schools, like in New York City, would be Public School No. _.

We certainly don't want people to go through their snowflake lives being offended by history.

Jerry Patterson is a former Texas Land Commissioner, state senator and retired Marine Vietnam veteran. He wrote this column for The Dallas Morning News.