Your Body is Acidic. This is what You NEED to Do!
Many people who are reading this may have a high acidity level in his or her body. This is due to the typical first world diet of processed foods, refined sugars, and GMOs. However, many people do not know that an acidic body is a breeding ground for cancer.

How long have we known this? Since 1931. That is right. 84 years.

In 1931, Dr. Otto Warburg won the Nobel Prize for showing that cancer thrives in anaerobic (without oxygen), or acidic, conditions. In other words, the primary cause of cancer is acidity of the human body. (CancerCompass)

Also, the presence of high acidity is also a sign that there may be cancer in the body. Otto Warburg was awarded the Nobel Prize for his discovery that weakened cell respiration causes cancer due to lack of oxygen at the cellular level. According to Warburg, damaged cell respiration causes fermentation, resulting in low pH (acidity) at the cellular level. (CancerCompass)

How this happens is clearly illustrated in Warburg’s award-winning study:

A normal healthy cell undergoes an adverse change when it can no longer take in oxygen to convert glucose into energy. In the absence of oxygen, the cell reverts to a primal nutritional program to nourish itself by converting glucose through the process of fermentation. The lactic acid produced by fermentation lowers the cell pH (acid/alkaline balance) and destroys the ability of DNA and RNA to control cell division. The cancer cells then begin to multiply. The lactic acid simultaneously causes severe local pain as it destroys cell enzymes. Cancer appears as a rapidly growing external cell covering, with a core of dead cells. (CancerCompass)

So what are we supposed to do?

Maintaining pH balance in our bodies is important. One can do this by changing their diet and eating foods that promote alkalinity is key. Some foods that promote a balanced pH include celery, broccoli, peppers, kale, and avocados.

Home Remedy

If you believe your body acidity is high, here is a quick and easy home remedy to use. Signs of high body acidity include mucus buildup, joint pain, cold hands or feet, reduced sex drive, chemical sensitivity, heartburn, a metallic taste in the mouth, and muscular pain. Experiencing any of these symptoms could mean high body acidity.

INGREDIENTS

⅓ Teaspoons Baking Soda

2 Tablespoons Fresh Lemon Juice or Organic Apple Cider Vinegar

DIRECTIONS

Mix everything together. The mixture will start to fizz. Wait until the fizzing stops and add 8 ounces of water. Drink the mixture in one sitting.

This remedy with help to balance pH levels in the body. It will also help with stomach acid and reduce acidosis.

To learn more about Dr. Otto Warburg and his studies about cancer, take a look at the video below.