Texas bill to protect religious adoption agencies that deny prospective parents likely to become law
But advocates worry the bill will make it easier for religious agencies to discriminate against potential parents who are lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender. Since only Christian groups are contracted with the state, they’ve also raised concerns taxpayer-funded agencies will be protected if they reject parents of other faiths.

"Hundreds of faith leaders from Texas and across the nation have warned that bills like this are about discrimination and hurting people, not protecting religious freedom," said Kathy Miller, president of the Texas Freedom Network.

But conservative lawmakers pushing the bill said it’s necessary to keep faith-based agencies operating in Texas.

"Without this bill, we stand to lose 25 percent of our service providers,” said bill sponsor Sen. Charles Perry, R-Lubbock. “The bill is not discriminatory.”

Perry noted that some adoption agencies have considered closing or halting expansion because they fear they’ll be sued over their religious beliefs, as many do consider faith in their decision to allow or deny adoptions or foster placement.

Republican senators said families seek faith-based agencies for adoption because of the beliefs they intend to pass on to their children.

“A parent has a right to raise their child in the religion they see fit,” said Sen. Van Taylor, R-Plano.

But Senate Democrats who opposed the bill said it put the needs of agencies before those of children in need of homes.

“I was so concerned about this bill that I just don’t even know where to begin,” said Sen. Sylvia Garcia, D-Houston. “You say that it was not meant to discriminate. It’s not meant for anyone to discriminate against placement of children in same-sex couples.”

Garcia said she also worried how a “sincerely held religious belief” would be defined. Garcia noted that people could claim their religion allows for abusing a child as discipline. She unsuccessfully tried to amend the bill to allow for children 12 years or older to object to religious education because of their beliefs.

Perry stressed that the intent of the bill is to ensure agencies don’t close so that more children can be placed with parents and foster families. He said criminal law protects children from such abuse.

The bill would also prohibit the state from taking "adverse action" against such groups for placing a child in a religious school and denying a child in their care access to abortion or contraception, among other things.

Sen. Carlos Uresti, D-San Antonio, sent up a handful of amendments that he said aimed to make sure children were placed in homes that best served their needs. All failed.

“The best interest of the child should be our No. 1 priority,” Uresti said.

State agency rules for kids in foster care require them “to live in a safe, healthy, and comfortable place” and be “treated with respect.”

But earlier this year, these rules were changed to remove explicit protections for LGBT children, according to KXAN-TV. It used to read, "I have the right to fair treatment, whatever my gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, religion, national origin, disability, medical problems, or sexual orientation." The words "gender identity" and "sexual orientation" were removed in February, and the beginning was changed to, "I have the right to 'be treated fairly.' "

The debate on the bill came late Sunday night as the House was approving legislation that would bar transgender students from using the bathroom that matches their gender identity.