Statement of Position and Purpose
We believe that gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex Catholics in our diversity are members of Christ's mystical body, numbered among the People of God. We have an inherent dignity because God created us, Christ died for us, and the Holy Spirit sanctified us in Baptism, making us temples of the Spirit, and channels through which God's love becomes visible. Because of this, it is our right, our privilege, and our duty to live the sacramental life of the Church, so that we might become more powerful instruments of God's love working among all people.

We believe that gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex persons can express their sexuality and gender identities and expressions in a manner that is consonant with Christ's teaching. We believe that we can express our sexuality physically, in a unitive manner that is loving, life-giving, and life-affirming. We believe that all sexuality should be exercised in an ethically responsible and unselfish way. We believe that our transgender and queer communities can express their core identities in a sincere, affirming and authentic manner.

DIGNITY is organized to unite gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex Catholics, as well as our families, friends and loved ones in order to develop leadership, and be an instrument through which we may be heard by and promote reform in the Church.

To be such an organization, we accept our responsibilities to the Church, to our Catholic heritage, to society, and to individual gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex Catholics. TO THE CHURCH: We work for the development of sexual and gender theology leading to the reform of its teachings and practices regarding human sexuality, gender identities, and gender expressions, and for the acceptance of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender, queer and intersex peoples as full and equal members of the one Christ. TO SOCIETY: We work for justice and equality through education and by supporting social and legal reforms. TO INDIVIDUAL GAY, LESBIAN, BISEXUAL, TRANSGENDER, QUEER and INTERSEX CATHOLICS: We reinforce their sense of self-acceptance and dignity and encourage full participation in the life of the Church and society.