Patrick Moore

Credentials

Honorary Doctorate of Science, North Carolina State University (2005). [1]

Ph.D. in Ecology, Institute of Resource Ecology, University of British Columbia (1974). [1]

Honors B.Sc. in Forest Biology, University of British Columbia. [1]

Background

Patrick Moore is a Canadian nuclear energy advocate and founder of Greenspirit Enterprises, a a PR company he started in 1991 that works “with many leading organizations in forestry, biotechnology, aquaculture and plastics, developing solutions in the areas of natural resources, biodiversity, energy and climate change.” [3]

Moore is often incorrectly referred to as a founder of Greenpeace. According to a statement by Greenpeace, “Patrick Moore frequently portrays himself as a founder or co-founder of Greenpeace, and many news outlets have repeated this characterization. Although Mr. Moore played a significant role in Greenpeace Canada for several years, he did not found Greenpeace.” [49], [4]

While Moore worked with Greenpeace Canada, and worked with Greenpeace International between 1981 and 1986, he broke away from Greenpeace after he concluded that “the environmental movement had abandoned science and logic in favor of emotion and sensationalism.” According to Greenpeace, “what Moore really saw was an opportunity for financial gain. Since then he has gone from defender of the planet to a paid representative of corporate polluters.” [2], [5]

After he left Greenpeace, Moore began work with the Nuclear Energy Institute front group, the Clean and Safe Energy Coalition (CASEnergy). Moore stepped down from his leadership role at CASEnergy in January 2013, however said he would remain an active member. [16], [38], [39],



Moore has worked for the mining industry, the logging industry, PVC manufacturers, the nuclear industry, and in defense of biotechnology. Greenpeace issued a 2010 statement distancing itself from Moore, saying he “exploits long gone ties with Greenpeace to sell himself as a speaker and pro-corporate spokesperson, usually taking positions that Greenpeace opposes.” [5]

Moore has been criticized for his relations with “polluters and clear-cutters” through his consultancy. His primary income since the early 1990s has been consulting and publicly speaking for a variety of corporations and lobby groups such as the Nuclear Energy Institute. [7], [8]

As of 2014, Moore was also listed as a board member of NextEnergy, a Canadian energy services company. [6]

Refusal to Drink Pesticide that “Won't Hurt You”

After the World Health Organization released a study concluding that glyphosate, the active ingredient in Monsanto's Roundup herbicide, is “probably carcinogenic,” Pat Moore told a French filmmaker that glyphosate is safe to drink. [50], [51]

Upon being offered some glyphosate to try, Moore refused to take up his own suggestion, ending the interview and telling the filmmaker, “I'm not an idiot.” Video below. [52]

Stance on Climate Change

Jun 12, 2018

In a debate including Michael Mann, Judith Curry, and David Titley, Moore said in response to a question: [82]

“I didn't say CO2 emissions were not affecting climate change. I said that it is an insignificant effect. CO2 is a greenhouse gas, but it is in the atmosphere at four one hundredths of a percent. How can we something in the atmosphere that is invisible, tasteless, odorless, colorless at 0.04% be the most powerful agent in the universe at this point in time? Obviously the climate changed dramatically throughout history with nothing to do with CO2.”

2015

“As I have stated publicly on many occasions, there is no definitive scientific proof, through real-world observation, that carbon dioxide is responsible for any of the slight warming of the global climate that has occurred during the past 300 years, since the peak of the Little Ice Age,” Moore said at the 2015 annual lecture for the Global Warming Policy Foundation.[53]

February 25, 2014

“There is no scientific proof that human emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) are the dominant cause of the minor warming of the Earth’s atmosphere over the past 100 years,” Moore declared in testimony before the U.S. Senate Environment & Public Works Committee. [84]

May 24, 2007

“We do not know if we are a small or large part of the present global warming. It is not possible through science to determine an exact answer to this question. Certainly the natural factors, and there are many, that have acted to change the climate many times through the history of the Earth, are still operating today. They have not gone away. But human emissions of CO2 is a new (natural) factor. So it is very unlikely that we are the only factor causing the present global warming but we may be one of the factors,” Moore said in an interview with EUWatch. [9]

2006

According to an article in the Honolulu Advertiser, “Moore contended that global warming and the melting of glaciers is positive because it creates more arable land and the use of forest products drives up demand for wood and spurs the planting of more trees. He added that any realistic plan to reduce reliance on fossil fuels and the emission of so-called greenhouse gases should include increased use of nuclear energy.” [10]

Key Quotes

March 2, 2019

In a Tweet, Moore described Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who has proposed a plan to transition the US to renewables titled the Green New Deal, as a “Pompous little twit.” [78]

June 12, 2018

Spweaking at an event ”Conversations on Climate Change” hosted by the law firm Spilman Thomas & Battle, Moore said:

“The fact is fossil fuels are 100 percent organic as in the scientific definition of organic. Organic chemistry is the chemistry of carbon. Organic used in food is a marketing term. Nothing to do with science. Produced with solar energy, 100%, they are a product of life fossil fuels. They are not some evil demon sent here from hell. They produce the two most important foods for life when they're burnt: CO2 and water and they are the largest storage battery of energy on this planet. So I say celebrate CO2. It is the most life-giving substance along with water on this planet and it's doing the world a lot of good.” [83] […] “The word consensus, when used in a sentence with science, is false because consensus is a political and social work and that is a different arena than science.” [83]

June 2016

The following is an excerpt from Patrick Moore's report for the Frontier Center for Public Policy, “The Positive Impact of Human CO2 Emissions on the Survival of Life on Earth”:

“The combustion of fossil fuels for energy to power human civilization has reversed the downward trend in CO2 and promises to bring it back to levels that are likely to foster a considerable increase in the growth rate and biomass of plants, including food crops and trees. “Human emissions of CO2 have restored a balance to the global carbon cycle, thereby ensuring the long-term continuation of life on Earth. “This extremely positive aspect of human CO2 emissions must be weighed against the unproven hypothesis that human CO2 emissions will cause a catastrophic warming of the climate in coming years. The one-sided political treatment of CO2 as a pollutant that should be radically reduced must be corrected in light of the indisputable scientific evidence that it is essential to life on Earth.” [45]

October 2015

In the 2015 annual lecture for the Global Warming Policy Foundation, Moore suggested that we should “celebrate carbon dioxide”: [53]

“[H]uman emissions of CO2 have already saved life on our planet from a very untimely end. That in the absence of our emitting some of the carbon back into the atmosphere from whence it came in the first place, most or perhaps all life on Earth would begin to die less than two million years from today.” [53] “To conclude, carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels is the stuff of life, the staff of life, the currency of life, indeed the backbone of life on Earth.” [53]

March 31, 2015

CO2 in the atmosphere there would be no life on this planet. Surely that should be enough to permit questioning the certainty of those who demonize this key molecule,” Moore CO2 as the giver of life it is.” “If there were noin the atmosphere there would be no life on this planet. Surely that should be enough to permit questioning the certainty of those who demonize this key molecule,” Moore wrote in the opinion section of The Province . “We should celebrateas the giver of life it is.” [26 ]

October 2014

“When we started Greenpeace it was to stop nuclear war and the destruction of human civilisation, that of course is the 'peace' in Greenpeace. “The 'green' is the environment and that's good as well, but they lost the concerns for humans… They have turned, basically, into an evil organisation,” Moore said. July 2014 Patrick Moore was a speaker at the Heartland Institute’s Ninth International Conference on Climate Change (ICCC9) in Las Vegas, Nevada. His speech, titled “Confessions of a Greenpeace Dropout” can be viewed below. [20] “Why did I leave Greenpeace after 15 years? When I began with Greenpeace, they had a strong humanitarian orientation to stop all-out nuclear war, to save civilization from destruction. By the time I left 15 years later—that's the 'peace' in Greenpeace of course—by the time I left 15 years later, Greenpeace had drifted into a position along with the rest of the movement as characterizing humans as the enemies of the Earth,” Moore said in his presentation, later highlighted by the Heartland Institute in 2018. [76] Confessions of a Greenpeace Dropout DeSmogBlog has done in-depth research on the other speakers and sponsors from Heartland's ICCC9, which can be found here. Moore was the recipient of the Heartland Institute's Speaks Truth to Power Award, also given at ICCC9. Footage of his acceptance speech can be viewed below.

June 13, 2012

Moore's Greenspirit Strategies Ltd. offered the following description on its page “Who are the Founders of Greenpeace”: [11]

“I support sustainable forestry, which is sometimes best done by making clearings where new trees can grow in the sun. I have given my reasons for supporting nuclear power, vinyl and genetic engineering in my books, all of which stem from a concern for the environment and human welfare. And is Greenpeace suggesting environmentalists should be against “mining”? Have these people stopped riding bicycles, texting on cell phones, typing on laptops, and riding mass transit? How could they say anything more ridiculous?” [11]

November 21, 2009

Moore gave a talk at TEDx Vancouver. Some excerpts below:

[3:08-3:48] “You see people should, sort of, wake up to the fact that the climate stopped warming more than 10 years ago. Nineteen ninety-eight was the warmest year we’ve had in the last 100 years. Since then there’s been a slight cooling trend. Yes, the Arctic ice was lowest in 2007 in any summer since we started measuring it, only in 1979, so we don’t really have a very long dataset here, but for the last two years it has been rebuilding. Antarctica never did get warm, it has remained cold and the sea ice around Antarctica has not shrunk in the slightest, and you can find this easily on the Internet.” [21]

[7:35-8:13] “I think it is crazy for Al Gore to suggest that in 10 years from now, we will not be using any fossil fuels. That is apparently his goal, and politicians of the world over are clambering over each other to make more wildly ridiculous promises about 80% reduction in fossil fuels or a carbon neutral world. Personally, I do not think a carbon neutral world is feasible: Not with this many people, and not if people are going to bring themselves out of poverty in the developing countries. It’s just not going to happen, and maybe it isn’t necessary to have a carbon neutral world.” [21]

March 4, 2008

Claiming that the winter of 2007-2008 was the coldest in years, Moore dismissed scientific analysis of Arctic ice loss due to man-made climate change:

“There’s so much ice the polar bears can’t get at the seals.” [88]

March 4, 2005

In an op-ed for the Toronto Sun, Moore expressed doubt about human activity as a contributing factor in climate change:

“The world’s climate has always been changing; it is impossible to tell if our activities are responsible for global warming.” [87]

Key Deeds

May 6, 2019

Moore became Chairman of the Board for the CO2 Coalition. In a press release, the organization announced Moore’s new role by stating: [92]

“The new leadership will educate the public about the benefits of carbon dioxide, the main building block of life on Earth. They will explain how the increase in CO2 in the atmosphere from human emissions is spurring increased growth of crops, forests and plants. They will also focus on discussing how CO2 is also a very weak greenhouse gas that may have the added benefit of slight warming of the climate.They will highlight the U.S. government data showing that the modest warming, even if caused in part by industrial CO2 has resulted in no increase in extreme weather such as hurricanes and droughts or changes in the rate of sea-level rise.” [92]

Commenting on his new leadership role, Moore said: [92]

“We aim to position the CO2 Coalition as the go-to source for information on the benefits of CO2 for the environment and civilization. Human CO2 emissions are causing a greening of the Earth, which will increase agricultural and forestry production, as well as increasing the fertility and abundance of global ecosystems.” [92]

March 12, 2019

Patrick Moore appeared on an episode of Fox and Friends in which he said “The whole climate crisis … is not only fake news, it's fake science,” Media Matters reported. Moore also criticized the Green New Deal and continued to defend comments he had made about Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: [80]

Moore said:

“Well, it's a silly plan. That's why I suggested [Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez] was a pompous little twit. 'Twit,' meaning, 'silly' in the British lexicon and, 'pompous,' meaning, 'arrogant.' She really rubbed me the wrong way when she said she's 'the boss,' because she can make up a proposal that's completely ridiculous and no one else did. And that is what's wrong about this. “In fact, the whole climate crisis, as they call it, is not only fake news, it's fake science. There is no climate crisis. There is weather and climate all around the world. And, in fact, carbon dioxide is the main building block of all life. That's where the carbon comes from in carbon-based life, which is all life on land and in the sea. And, not only that, a little bit of warming would not be a bad thing for myself, being a Canadian, and the people in Russia wouldn't mind a little couple of degrees warmer either.”

In the video, Moore is incorrectly introduced as a “founder of Greenpeace.” In a later tweet, President Donald Trump quoted Moore on climate change and repeated the false title. Greenpeace responded on Twitter — see the interchange below:

As numerous news sources have noted, this isn't the first time Greenpeace has released a statement on Moore. See DeSmog's recent reporting here. [81]

For example, below is an excerpt from Greenpeace's 2010 statement: [5]

“Patrick Moore has been a paid spokesman for a variety of polluting industries for more than 30 years, including the timber, mining, chemical and the aquaculture industries. Most of these industries hired Mr. Moore only after becoming the focus of a Greenpeace campaign to improve their environmental performance. Mr. Moore has now worked for polluters for far longer than he ever worked for Greenpeace. Greenpeace opposes the use of nuclear energy because it is a dangerous and expensive distraction from real solutions to climate change.”

Moore later thanked Trump for his message in another Tweet, noting he would be in an upcoming meeting of the CO2 Coalition:

March 6, 2019

Moore appeared on a Breitbart News Tonight to discuss the supposed “cynical and corrupt machinations fueling the narrative of anthropocentric global warming and 'climate change'.” [79]

“Fear has been used all through history to gain control of people’s minds and wallets and all else, and the climate catastrophe is strictly a fear campaign — well, fear and guilt — you’re afraid you’re killing your children because you’re driving them in your SUV and emitting carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and you feel guilty for doing that. There’s no stronger motivation than those two,” Moore said. [79]

During the interview, Moore discussed his post on Twitter that Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, behind the Green New Deal, was a “Pompous little twit.” During the interview, Moore described Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez as a “bully.” [79]

“I saw a bully, and I don't like bullies. And I don't like people who are bullies that don't even know what they're talking about,” Moore said. [79]

December 14, 2018

The Heartland Institute released a report written by Willie Soon and Patrick Moore among others criticizing Greenpeace, claiming the group promotes “socialist and anti-capitalist ideals.” According to the authors, “Greenpeace are not actually helping to protect the environment, or exposing real problems.” [77]

February 4, 2018

In January 2018, more than 200 scientists endorsed an open letter calling on the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) to remove climate change denier Rebekah Mercer from its board and to “end ties to anti-science propagandists and funders of climate science misinformation.” The New York Times reported that those among the AMNH letter calling for Mercer to step down were Michael E. Mann, director of the Earth System Science Center at Pennsylvania State University, and Katharine Hayhoe, director of the Climate Science Center at Texas Tech University. [69]

Moore was among a group of climate change deniers who responded with their own open letter, calling for the AMNH “not to cave in to this pressure.” The letter was signed by numerous individuals with ties to groups funded by the Mercer Family Foundation such as Will Happer of the CO2 Coalition; Richard Lindzen, a fellow at the Cato Institute; and Craig Idso, the chairman of the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change. There are a number of signatories affiliated with the Heartland Institute, which has received over $5.78 million from the Mercer Family Foundation since 2008. [70]

The letter reads: [71]

“The Earth has supported abundant life many times in the geological past when there were much higher levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. It is quite likely that future generations will benefit from the enrichment of Earth’s atmosphere with more carbon dioxide. “Make no mistake, the agitators are not defending science from quackery — quite the contrary!”

June 12, 2018

Moore was a speaker at an event titled “Conversations on Climate Change” hosted by the law firm Spilman Thomas & Battle. According to the event description: “Climate change is undeniable. But is human activity causing it, and if so, to what degree? How are current public policies helping or hurting the situation? All these questions and more will be addressed at Spilman Thomas & Battle's Environmental Forum: Conversations on Climate Change.” Speakers included Michael E. Mann, David W. Titley, Patrick Moore, and Judith Curry. [83]

February 23, 2017

Patrick Moore was a signatory of a petition (PDF) organized by Richard Lindzen of the Cato Institute urging President Donald Trump to pull the United States out of the United Nations international convention on climate change (UNFCCC). [66]

“In just a few weeks, more than 300 eminent scientists and other qualified individuals from around the world have signed the petition below,” Lindzen wrote in the letter. [66]

DeSmog investigated the list and found that only a small handful of the signatories could be considered “even remotely ‘qualified’ or ‘eminent’ — but not in the field of climate science.” The list included individuals “interested in climate,” and one signatory who only identified as an “emailer who wished to sign the petition” while some signers provided no affiliation or address whatsoever. [67]

August 2016

Moore was a “Founding Member“ Climate Exit (Clexit), a group led by climate change denier Christopher Monckton. According to Clexit's founding statement (PDF), “The world must abandon this suicidal Global Warming crusade. Man does not and cannot control the climate.” [62], [63]

Desmog reports on how the group grew in the wake of the UK's decision to leave the EU. A key member of Clexit's “60 well-informed science, business and economic leaders” is Hugh Morgan, a former board member of the Reserve Bank of Australia and former CEO of Western Mining Corporation with close ties to Australia's Liberal party. [64], [65]

According to Clexit's founding statement:

“If the Paris climate accord is ratified, or enforced locally by compliant governments, it will strangle the leading economies of the world with pointless carbon taxes and costly climate and energy policies, all with no sound basis in evidence or science […]” [63]

July 29, 2016

Moore was a guest on “Conversations That Matter” at the Vancouver Sun where he discussed his views on a variety of topics including GMOs, global warming, and nuclear energy. On ocean acidification, Moore said “It's a meme. It's fabricated.” [74]

He also claimed that global temperatures have been flat for twenty years: “The temperature of the Earth is not going up on an exponential curve. It's basically been flat for twenty years, except for this last El Niño which spiked like it did in 98,” Moore said. [74]

June 7, 2016

Moore released a new report at the Frontier Center for Public Policy titled “The Positive Impact Of Human CO2 Emissions On The Survival Of Life On Earth.” According to the press release, the report “highlights scientific literature that is often ignored in mainstream discussions about climate change policies.” That is, it is humanity's role to emit as much carbon dioxide as possible to ensure the continued survival of the planet: [46]

“This paper serves as a discussion about the role of atmospheric CO2 in the maintenance of life on Earth and the positive role of human civilization in preventing CO2 from trending downward to levels that threaten the very existence of life.” [46]

According to the FCPP's report description and executive summary, “life on Earth would begin to die as soon as two million years from now” without man-made CO2 emissions: [47]

“It is calculated that if the decline in CO2 levels were to continue at the same rate as it has over the past 140 million years, life on Earth would begin to die as soon as two million years from now and would slowly perish almost entirely as carbon continued to be lost to the deep ocean sediments. The combustion of fossil fuels for energy to power human civilization has reversed the downward trend in CO2 and promises to bring it back to levels that are likely to foster a considerable increase in the growth rate and biomass of plants, including food crops and trees. Human emissions of CO2 have restored a balance to the global carbon cycle, thereby ensuring the long-term continuation of life on Earth.” [47]

His full report (PDF) is available online. The following is excerpted from the report's conclusion: [45]

“[H]uman emissions are restoring a balance to the global carbon cycle by returning some of the CO2 back to the atmosphere that was drawn down by photosynthesis and CaCO3 production and subsequently lost to deep sediments. This extremely positive aspect of human CO2 emissions must surely be weighed against the unproven hypothesis that human CO2 emissions are mainly responsible for the slight warming of the climate in recent years and will cause catastrophic warming over the coming decades” [45]

May 2, 2016

Moore was listed among “Key Scientists” appearing in Marc Morano's movie, Climate Hustle. The full list included the following: [33]

Marc Morano's Climate Hustle was released in U.S. theatres on May 2, 2016. Bill Nye described it as “not in our national interest and the world’s interest.” [54]

The film was produced by the Committee for Constructive Tomorrow (CFACT) and CDRCommunications. As noted at Desmog's project, ClimateHustler.org, CFACT has received funding from ExxonMobil, Chevron, as well as hundreds of thousands of dollars from foundations associated with Richard Mellon Scaife. CFACT has also received at least $7.8 million in “dark money” through DonorsTrust and Donors Capital Fund. [55], [56]

CDR Communications was behind the 2010 video by the Cornwall Alliance titled Resisting the Green Dragon, which claimed environmentalism was a “false religion” and a “global government” power grab. Chris Rogers of CDR Communications is also chairman of The James Partnership, the umbrella arm that includes the Cornwall Alliance as one of its projects and pays the salary of Calvin Beisner, Cornwall’s founder and spokesperson. [57]

Climate Hustle initially premiered on December 7, 2015 in Paris, France during the COP21 United Nations summit on climate change. [58], [59]

“We are putting together what I think is the most comprehensive, unique, entertaining and humorous climate documentary that has ever been done or attempted,” Morano had said before the film was released. [60]

“The reason that this is a unique film,” Morano has said, “is that we are going for a pop culture-friendly… sarcastic approach and we actually give both sides in this movie.”

In an interview with Ezra Levant, Morano said:

“I am not interviewing a lot of the main climate sceptical scientists because I feel like they have been interviewed by many other people and their stories have been told. I am trying to find another layer of scientist whose stories have not been out there yet. You will see a lot of new names in this.” [60]

See a preview of the film below:

At the Paris premier of the film, reporters from Desmog and the Irish Times were denied entrance after having their RSVPs accepted days earlier. [61]

March 30, 2016

Moore labelled research by scientist Ken Caldeira as “fake” on Twitter, as reported in a blog post by Ben Heard, who had met Caldeira at COP321 in Paris and discussed the research that Moore took issue with. [86]

Moore was “suggesting the measurement methodology for calcification of coral was flawed to the degree this constituted 'fakery'.” Heard added: “That’s quite a claim. Albright et al (2016) was published in one of the world’s most competitive peer-reviewed journals (Nature). That does not make a serious flaw constituting fakery impossible, however it’s improbable. Caldeira himself has over 200 published papers, over 11,000 citations, an h-index of 51 and an especially solid record of publication since 2005 including a focus in coral reefs.” [86]

Heard encouraged Moore to write to him to discuss what evidence he had to counter the research by Caldeira. Moore responded with an article he claimed was “double-blind, peer-reviewed.” However, the report Moore linked to was “ not a journal article but a report from a think-tank” — namely the Frontier Center for Public Policy (FCPP). [86]

Little is known about FCCP's funding sources, although the Conservative Transparency database has one transaction on file for the Frontier Centre: A donation of $25,000 from the notorious climate change denial thinktank the Heartland Institute in 2007. Moore himself is listed as Chair of the Energy, Ecology and Prosperity Program at FCPP. [85]

“So this report was scoped, commissioned, funded and published through the organisation at which the author holds a senior position. That does not constitute “the highest ethical and academic standards” in any sense comparable to actual journal publication,” Heard noted. “Furthermore a Scopus check of Dr Moore reveals five publications, two citations, none on this topic, none since 2006 and an h-index of 1. Even assuming Scopus is not capturing some of Dr. Moore’s work, even acknowledging his long and interesting career, it is abundantly clear he is no expert in mechanisms and impacts of ocean acidification let alone among 'the most credible experts in their field'.” [86]

Heard voiced some of his concerns about the peer review of the FCPP paper on Twitter, to which Moore responded “GFY”: [86]

“I’m not against non-journal publications: they can be invaluable and serve a different purpose to journal articles. However there is a difference between think-tank publications and peer-reviewed journals. Suggesting equivalence is wrong,” Heard wrote in his blog commentary. [86]

March 29, 2016

Patrick Moore was a featured speaker at a conference titled “The Climate Surprise: Why CO2 Is Good for the Earth” hosted by the CO2 Coalition and The New Criterion in New York City. [40]

According to the event description, “Members of the CO2 Coalition and many other experts argue that carbon dioxide enrichment of the atmosphere provides manifold benefits for humanity. And observed surface warmings are much smaller than predicted by climate models. Economic models that fail to include the benefits of CO2 and the serious exaggerations of climate models and are being used to advocate “cures” that are much worse than the non-existent disease.” [40]

Videos of the conference are available at The New Criterion's YouTube page. Featured speakers listed at the event included the following: [40]

February 2, 2016

DeSmog UK revealed that Moore had been paid by the European coal lobby association EURACOAL to speak to members of the European Parliament and EU officials at a dinner debate. An EEF press officer confirmed to DeSmog UK that coal lobbyists EURACOAL invited Moore to speak. [72]

When asked whether EURACOAL paid for Moore to present that evening, Brian Ricketts, secretary-general of EURACOAL, told DeSmog UK: “Yes, you are correct. EURACOAL did cover Dr. Moore’s travel expenses from Canada and the time he devoted to preparing and giving his presentation to a small group in the European Parliament.” [72]



“Unfortunately, I cannot disclose exactly what was paid [to] Dr. Moore as that would not be very professional,” he wrote via email. “However, it reflected c.5 days’ work for preparation time and long-haul travel.” [72]

The European Energy Forum offered this in the event description, which lists Moore as the main speaker: [73]

“With COP21 concluded, the EU must make an important decision: to continue its high-ambition climate change agenda or to moderate its ambition. This decision will have a profound impact on the future of coal in Europe.” [73]

EEF’s account of the dinner stated that Moore told MEPs “there is no definitive scientific proof that human emissions are the dominant influence on climate” and that carbon dioxide in fact benefits the planet by increasing plant growth. [72]

When asked to comment on the story, Moore said: “I consider DeSmog to be a hate site. So bugger off.”

December 9, 2015

Patrick Moore reported Greenpeace to the FBI shortly after a Greenpeace Investigation (“Academics for Hire”) found several academics were willing to accept funding from fossil fuel interests to write articles promoting carbon dioxide.[34]

According to Moore, “[Greenpeace] is now an enemy of the State, an enemy of humanity and, indeed, an enemy of all species on Earth.” [35]

December 7, 2015

Patrick Moore appeared at the United Nation’s Conference on Climate Change, COP21, in Paris, France with the Heartland Institute, the Committee for a Constructive Tomorrow (CFACT), and the Competitive Enterprise Institute (CEI) to “hold a ‘counter-conference’ … called the Day of Examining the Data.” [36] Other notable climate science deniers that were in attendance at the “counter-conference,” included: Robert Carter, S. Fred Singer, Christopher Essex, James Taylor, Christopher Monckton, Wolfgang Müller, James Inhofe, and Willie Soon. [37]

Watch Patrick Moore's “counter-conference” presentation with the Heartland Institute, below (Patrick Moore's presentation begins at 4:02:30):

December 1 – 3 2015

Patrick Moore was a speaker at the “Paris Climate Challenge” (PCC) an event organized by the newly created Independent Committee on Geoethics (ICG) with the goal of “Challenging the groupthink of COP21.” Moore's paper, published by the Frontier Center for Public Policy (FCPP) was titled “Ocean 'acidification' Alarmism in Perspective.” [68]

November 19, 2015

Patrick Moore, Richard Lindzen, and William Happer headlined a “climate summit” arranged by the Texas Public Policy Foundation preceding the UN climate summit in Paris (COP21). [31]

“Let’s celebrate CO2!” Moore declared at the event. “We know for absolute certain that carbon dioxide is the stuff of life, the foundation for life on earth,” Moore said. “We are dealing with pure political propaganda that has nothing to do with science,” he continued. “The deserts are greening from rising CO2 ,” he added. “Co2 has provided the basis of life for at least 3.5 billion years,” Moore said. [ 31]

TPPF ) is influenced by donations from a relatively small group of corporations. For example, the director of Texans for Public Justice TPPF ’s donors are a Who’s Who of Texas polluters, giant utilities and big insurance companies. TPPF is thinking the way its donors want it to think.” Critics have suggested the Texas Public Policy Foundation () is influenced by donations from a relatively small group of corporations. For example, the director of Texans for Public Justice has said that ’s donors are a Who’s Who of Texas polluters, giant utilities and big insurance companies.is thinking the way its donors want it to think.” [32]

October 2015

“The contention that human emissions are now the dominant influence on climate is simply a hypothesis, rather than a universally accepted scientific theory. It is therefore correct, indeed verging on compulsory in the scientific tradition, to be skeptical of those who express certainty that 'the science is settled' and 'the debate is over',” Moore said.

According to Moore, returning CO2 to the atmosphere is necessary to maintain life on Earth:

CO2 have already saved life on our planet from a very untimely end. That in the absence of our emitting some of the carbon back into the atmosphere from whence it came in the first place, most or perhaps all life on Earth would begin to die less than two million years from today.” “[H]uman emissions ofhave already saved life on our planet from a very untimely end. That in the absence of our emitting some of the carbon back into the atmosphere from whence it came in the first place, most or perhaps all life on Earth would begin to die less than two million years from today.” [53]

He concludes that “carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels is the stuff of life, the staff of life, the currency of life, indeed the backbone of life on Earth.”

September 3, 2015

Patrick Moore, listing himself as a director of the CO2 Coalition in his signature, wrote an article in the Opinion Pages of Wall Street Journal titled “ Obama’s Half-Baked Alaska ” where he suggests that there is no need to be worried about glacial ice receding because it has happened in the past. [30]

“All of this happened long before human emissions of greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide, could have had any impact,” Moore writes. “There is no reason to believe that those factors have suddenly disappeared and now humans are the all-powerful shapers of global climate destiny. Yet this entirely unproven hypothesis of catastrophe is compelling to those who would control our beliefs.” [30]

Moore added, “carbon dioxide is essential for all life on Earth, that plants could use a lot more of it, and that the real threat is a cooling of the climate, not the slight warming that has occurred over the past 300 years.” [30]

July 2015

Patrick Moore has been in a number of videos featured by the conservative group PragerU including the following: [41]

According to their website, PragerU's mission is to “spread what we call 'Americanism' through the power of the Internet. Our five-minute videos are conservative sound bites that clarify profoundly significant and uniquely American concepts for more than 100 million people each year.” They focus on “Judeo-Christian” values including “freedom of speech, a free press, free markets and a strong military to protect and project those values.” [42]

According to Conservative Transparency, PragerU has received $215,000 from the conservative Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation. [43]

Sample video and transcript below for ”What They Haven't Told You About Climate Change”: [44]



Transcript:

The only constant… is change. That's true about life. And it's true about the climate. The climate has been constantly changing since the earth was formed 4.6 billion years ago. For example, in just the past 2000 years, we have seen the Roman Warm Period, when it was warmer than today…Then came the cooler Dark Ages… Followed by the Medieval Warm period, when it was at least as warm as today… Then we had the Little Ice Age – that drove the Vikings out of Greenland. And, most recently, a gradual 300-year warming to the present day. That's a lot of changes. And, of course, not one of them was caused by humans. During the past 400,000 years there have been four major periods of glaciation – meaning that vast sheets of ice covered a good part of the globe – interrupted by brief interglacial periods. We are in one of those periods right now. This is all part of the Pleistocene Ice Age which began in earnest two and a half million years ago. It's still going on, which means that we are still living in an ice age. That's the reason there's so much ice at the poles. Thirty million years ago the earth had no ice on it at all. So, then, what about carbon dioxide, the great villain of the Global Warming alarmists? Where does that fit in to this picture? Not as neatly as you might think. Temperatures and carbon dioxide levels do not show a strong correlation. In fact, over very long time spans – periods of hundreds of millions of years – they are often completely out of sync with each other. Over and over again, within virtually any time frame, we find the climate changing – for reasons we do not fully understand. But we do know there are many more factors in play than simply the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere – factors such as the shape and size of the earth's elliptical orbit around the sun, activity from the sun, and the amount of wobble or tilt in the earth's axis, among many others. Even the relatively short 300-year period from the peak of the Little Ice Age to the present has not been steady. The latest trend has been a warming one, but it began nearly a century before there were significant carbon dioxide emissions from burning fossil fuels. And, there has been no significant warming trend in the 21st century. Contrary to media headlines, the trend over the past couple of decades has been essentially flat. Meanwhile human-caused CO2 emissions are higher than ever. About 25 percent of all the CO2 emissions from human sources have occurred during this period of no net warming. So, what are we in for next? Will the temperature resume an upward trend? Will it remain flat for a lengthy period? Or, will it begin to drop? No one knows. Not even the biggest, fastest computers. All the information I've presented – the increases, decreases and plateaus in temperature over the ages and into the last centuries – is available to anyone who wants to seek it out. Yet to state these simple facts is to risk being called a “climate change denier.” Not only is that absurd, it's mean-spirited. It's absurd because no one, not even the most fervent skeptic, denies that the climate is changing. And it's mean-spirited because to call someone a climate change denier is to intentionally link them to people who deny the Holocaust. So, maybe it's time to stop the name-calling. Predicting the climate, one of the most complex systems on earth with thousands of inputs, many of which we don't understand, isn't an exact science, or anything close to it. Maybe it's just a tad arrogant to suggest that we can predict the weather or the climate or just about anything 60 years from now. The science is not “settled.” The debate is not over. The climate is always changing. It always has. And it always will. I'm Patrick Moore, Co-Founder of Greenpeace, for Prager University.

Here's a video response and debunking of Moore's PragerU video:

March 2015

Patrick Moore published an opinion/blog piece in The Province where he says that carbon is not pollution, and that instead “We should celebrate CO2 as the giver of life it is.”

According to Moore, global warming has paused since 2000. Moore also mentions a common talking point by climate change skeptics that “Contrary to popular belief, at 400 parts per million (0.04 per cent), CO2 is lower now in the atmosphere than it has been during most of the 550 million years since modern life forms emerged during the Cambrian period.”

Here's a breakdown of Moore's main arguments, discussed at Skeptical Science:

October–November, 2014

Patrick Moore conducts a speaking tour across Australia financed by the Galileo Movement, which describes Patrick Moore as “a co-founder of Greenpeace,” despite Greenpeace itself contesting that “Patrick Moore did not found Greenpeace.” [23] Rex Weyler, a former colleague of Moore's and actual co-founder of Greenpeace International, stated: “Moore has served as a corporate public relations consultant far longer than he ever worked for Greenpeace, and he has never worked as a scientist.” [24] Moore's speaking tour includes “one-on-one meetings with news organisations, politicians and business leaders with a mix of public lectures and town hall meetings for the general public throughout Australia,” and it hopes to “have a substantial influence on decision makers in Australia promoting sensible environmental policies.” [25]

October 9, 2014

Patrick Moore attends Amherst College to deliver a presentation titled “Confessions of a Greenpeace Dropout,” which was put on and paid for by the Amherst College Republicans. [22] Moore argues that “current climate change trends are not particularly dangerous, even if they continue until no permanent ice remains at the North and South poles,” according to The Amherst Student, Amherst College's Independent Newspaper. [22] Roughly 20 minutes into Moore's presentation, nearly half of the audience, made up of the Green Amherst Project's members, exited the room in protest of Moore's claims regarding anthropogenic global warming. Moore responded to the protest in a question-and-answer session following his presentation by saying, “fifty people walk out, and I say that's a pretty Taliban thing to do,” and described the protestors as “the real deniers,” and “as having a 'Taliban mindset.'” [22]

July 7 – 9, 2014

Patrick Moore was a speaker at the Heartland Institute’s Ninth International Conference on Climate Change (ICCC9) in Las Vegas, Nevada. [20]

See Moore's keynote presentation, “Confessions of a Greenpeace Dropout” below: [76]

DeSmogBlog has done in-depth research on the other speakers and sponsors from Heartland's ICCC9, which can be found here.

February 25, 2014

Moore testified before the U.S. Senate Environment & Public Works Committee in a hearing entitled “Natural Resource Adaptation: Protecting Ecosystems and Economies.” [84]

“Today, we live in an unusually cold period in the history of life on Earth and there is no reason to believe that a warmer climate would be anything but beneficial for humans and the majority of other species…It is “extremely likely” that a warmer temperature than today’s would be far better than a cooler one.” [84]

December 30, 2012

In a blog post, Moore appeared to acknowledge that fossil fuels were contributing to rising CO2 levels, but disputed the scientific consensus that it plays any role in global temperature increases:

“Global climate change is another area where extreme statements are made, in this case on both sides of the debate, when there is little in science to defend them. Some things are quite certain. Carbon dioxide levels are rising and our consumption of fossil fuels and deforestation in the tropics are probably the main causes. There is a lot of evidence that the earth’s climate is warming: the glaciers in Alaska are retreating and great egrets are visiting northern Lake Huron. But here the consensus ends.” [91]

September 29, 2011

In an interview with The Energy Report, Moore elaborated on his skepticism about man-made climate change:

“I am a skeptic on climate change. I know the climate is changing, and it always has been. I've studied this intensively over many years. I started what I call the Carbon Project here in British Columbia back in 1989 in order to bring everybody together to discuss this subject and figure out the facts behind it. Since then, I have watched as hysteria has grown, as if the whole world is going to come to an end and civilization is going to die because of humans causing this climate change. I don't buy that, and I certainly know we don't have any proof of it. I'm not denying that we might be playing some role, but the natural factors that have always caused climate change have not suddenly disappeared. I'm very skeptical of the alarmist nature of climate campaigning.” [90]

November 21, 2009

Patrick Moore was a presenter at a TEDx Talk in Vancouver, British Columbia, where he argues against adopting climate polices that will “put hundreds of millions of people into energy poverty,” and recommends “waiting to see what happens,” in terms of climate, because he thinks we don't know what will happen. A video of his presentation can be viewed below [21]:

June 5, 2008

Moore was quoted in a Columbia Basin Herald editorial claiming that:

“We don’t have scientific proof we are the cause of global warming. If you do (have proof) please write it down on a piece of paper.” [89]

March 2007

Patrick Moore participated in “The Great Global Warming Swindle” documentary. [12]

The Great Global Warming Swindle stars prominent skeptics including Tim Ball, Roy Spencer, Fred Singer, Patrick Michaels, Nir Shaviv, Nigel Lawson, Ian Clark, Piers Corbyn, Philip Stott, Paul Reiter, Richard Lindzen, Syun-Ichi Akasofu, Paul Driessen, and others.

September 2006

Patrick Moore wrote a letter to the UK's Royal Society, where he stated that “there is no scientific proof of causation between the human-induced increase in atmospheric CO2 and the recent global warming trend, a trend that has been evident for about 500 years, long before the human-induced increase in CO2 was evident.” [13]

2005 – 2009

SourceWatch has a full list of Moore's speaking appearances for the period 2005-2009, and includes many in which he promotes nuclear power.

2003 & 2005

Appeared on Penn & Teller: Bullshit! in episodes Environmental Hysteria (2003) and Endangered Species (2005). Note that the videos are no longer available on YouTube due to a copyright complaint from CBS. [14], [15]

March 1971

Patrick Moore applied for a berth to join Greenpeace's Phyllis Cormack, one year after Greenpeace had already been in existence. [23]

Affiliations

Patrick Moore's “Past Clients” include:

Social Media

Publications

Note that Greenpeace mentioned this article as having provided inaccurate information on Nuclear Power. [4]

Books:

Sources