2017 U.S. Dog Bite Fatalities
2017 dog bite fatalities ::

Statistical information gathered by DogsBite.org is verifiable through news reports and other criteria.1 Our Fatality Citations section documents sources used in our dog bite fatality research.

2017 dog bite fatality statistics 2

2017 U.S. Dog Bite Fatalities by Breed 2017 fatal dog attacks by breed

In 2017, 7 dog bite fatalities involved canines from , thus producing a death count total of 49 rather than 39. 7 dog breeds each contributed to 1 death, including: American bulldog, doberman pinscher, giant schnauzer, heeler-mix, husky, Japanese akita and rottweiler.

2017 analysis and 13-year period summary

39 U.S. dog bite-related fatalities occurred in 2017. Despite being regulated in Military Housing areas and over 900 U.S. cities, pit bulls contributed to 74% (29) of these deaths. Pit bulls make up about 6.5% of the total U.S. dog population. 3

During the 13-year period of 2005 to 2017, canines killed 433 Americans. Two dog breeds, pit bulls (284) and rottweilers (45), contributed to 76% (329) of these deaths. 32 different dog breeds contributed to the remaining fatal dog maulings.

In 2017, the combination of pit bulls (29), their close cousins, American bulldogs (1) and mastiff-type guard dogs and war dogs (2) contributed to 82% (32) of all dog bite-related fatalities. Rottweilers inflicted 1 death, killing an 18-month old Phoenix boy.

German shepherds had the second highest death rate in 2017, inflicting 4 deaths, followed by mixed-breeds with 3 deaths and two breeds with 2 deaths, Labrador retrievers and mastiff-types, and 2 deaths involving unknown/unreleased breed data.

Victim age groups and gender

Annual data from 2017 shows that 38% (15) of the fatality victims were children ages 8-years and younger and 62% (24) were adults, ages 21-years and older. Of the total adults killed by canines in 2017, pit bulls were responsible for 88% (21).

Victims 50-years and older suffered the most, accounting for 75% (18) of all adult fatalities. Death by adult age groups show: 21-29 years, 13% (3) deaths; 30-49 years, 13% (3) deaths; 50-69 years, 38% (9) deaths and 70+ years, 38% (9) deaths.

In 2017, female victims (22) were greater in number than male victims (17). Among children ages 8-years and younger, male victims dominated, 73% vs. 27% and among adults 21-years and older, female victims dominated, 75% vs. 25%.

Of the 15 children killed by dogs, newborns 2 to 4-weeks old accounted for 27% (4) of all deaths and babies 2 to 20-months old accounted for 40% (6). Combined, these two vulnerable age groups accounted for 67% (10) of all children killed by dogs.

Dogs and property statistics

In 2017, 51% (20) of all dog bite fatalities involved more than one dog, up from the 12-year average of 46% (2005 to 2016). 38% (15) involved 2 or 3 dogs and 13% (5) involved a pack attack of 4 or more dogs. All 5 fatal pack attacks involved pit bulls.

In 2017, 69% (27) of the attacks resulting in death occurred on the dog owner's property and 70% (19) involved pit bulls. Of the 12 deadly off-property attacks, 83% (10) were inflicted by pit bulls and 75% (9) involved more than one dog attacking.

In 2017, only 26% (10) of all cases had spay/neuter information. 70% (7) of this subset involved sterilized dogs with three of those cases also involving unaltered dogs. Pit bulls made up 86% (6) of the known sterilized dogs that killed in 2017. 4

Rescued or rehomed dogs inflicted 15% (6) of all dog bite fatalities in 2017. Pit bulls were responsible for 83% (5) of these deaths, including killing a person within hours of adoption. 67% (4) were vetted by an animal agency or foster prior to adoption.

Household and time factors

Family dogs inflicted 72% (28) of all dog bite fatalities in 2017; family pit bulls accounted for 64% (18) of these deaths. Of the 29 deaths inflicted by pit bulls, 62% (18) involved killing a family or household member vs. 41% (12) non-family. 5

In 2017, 21% (8) of attacks resulting in death involved a dog or person new to a household (0-2 month period). Children ages 2-months and younger accounted for 75% (6) of these deaths. Family dogs inflicted all 8 fatalities in this subset.

15% (6) of all dog bite fatalities in 2017 involved a babysitter or grandparent watching a child or the dog being "watched" by a person other than its owner when the dog inflicted a deadly attack. Pit bulls carried out 83% (5) of these attacks.

13% (5) of all dog bite fatality victims in 2017 were either visiting or living temporarily with the dog's owner when the fatal attack occurred, down from a record 42% high in 2016. Of this subset of 5 fatal dog maulings, 100% were inflicted by pit bulls.

Criminal charges and states

In 2017, 21% (8) of all fatal dog attacks resulted in meaningful criminal charges, equal to the 12-year average. 6 All 8 cases with criminal charges involved pit bulls, including one adopted from a city shelter that joined in a deadly pack attack.

All 8 cases with criminal charges involved pit bulls, including one adopted from a city shelter that joined in a deadly pack attack. 38% (3) of all criminal charges in 2017 were brought in Georgia, including a second-degree murder charge against a grandmother. Charges against dog owners in two other Georgia cases include involuntary manslaughter and reckless conduct.

Ohio led all states in fatal attacks in 2017 incurring 4 deaths. Texas and Georgia followed, each with 3 deaths, and a group of seven states followed, each with 2 deaths: Alabama, Arizona, California, Florida, Illinois, Kentucky and Virginia.

New state-level legislation was proposed in Virginia and Alabama after a fatal pit bull attack in 2017. In Ohio, another attempt is underway in both chambers to pass the Klonda Richey Act, in part spurred by a Dayton man killed by a pit bull in 2017. 7

Discussion notes and graphics

2017 dog bite fatality victims

Logan Braatz

6-years old | Atlanta, Georgia

Logan Braatz, 6-years old, was brutally killed by up to three dogs while walking to a school bus stop with a group of children. The dogs, a pit bull, pit bull-mix and unidentified breed, also critically injured 5-year old Syrai Sanders -- the dogs severed her scalp from her skull. Both children were transported to Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta at Egleston. Logan was transferred to Grady Memorial Hospital's trauma unit, where he died. Aerial footage from a news chopper captured the horrific aftermath of the attack, showing clothing and other items strewn across the area of the attack. Multiple adult witnesses provided chilling accounts about what happened that morning. The owner of the two pit bulls suspected in the attack, Cameron Tucker, 31, was arrested and charged with two counts of misdemeanor reckless conduct, and later, one count of felony involuntary manslaughter. A judge later reduced the charges to misdemeanor manslaughter. [ ]

Date of death: January 17, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull and pit bull-mix

Unknown (1) Relationship to dog: Non-family Sex of dog: Unknown Owner of dog: Neighbor Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: Yes (MISD)

Skylar Julius

2-months old | San Marcos, Texas

Skylar Julius, 2-months old, was killed by the family dog. Animal control impounded a German shepherd that was inside the home. On January 17, police and EMS were dispatched to a home on Sagewood Trail for a report of a baby with "numerous animal bites." The infant was transported to a local hospital, where she was pronounced dead. San Marcos Police Department Commander Kelly Earnest said the father told police he fell asleep while the baby was napping in an infant bouncer next to him on the couch. He woke up about 20 minutes later and found her cold to the touch, unresponsive and injured. The family had owned the male dog for more than 8-years and had raised the dog since it was a puppy, she said. The family said the dog did not have a history of aggression. San Marcos Police Department later stated in a news release, "there was not enough probable cause to obtain a warrant for blood tests on the father for drugs or alcohol. The father would not consent to testing for drugs or alcohol." [ ]

Date of death: January 17, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: German shepherd Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Parents Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: Pending

Louise Hermida

75-years old | New York, New York

Louise Hermida, 75-years old, died after being attacked by her own dog. She was mauled in the basement of her 27th Street home. The dog also bit her 39-year old autistic son, who managed to escape to a neighbor's home to get help. Police said she suffered "trauma to her upper torso." Hermida was transported to a local hospital where she was pronounced dead. Her family adopted the dog nearly 6-years earlier from Animal Care and Control when the dog was about a year old. The male dog, named Boss, was described as a mastiff-great dane mix. No photos were ever released of the dog. Two weeks before attacking its owner, Boss killed a small terrier in the neighborhood. Hermida had been planning to return the dog to the shelter because it was too aggressive and uncontrollable, but did not act soon enough. Family members said Hermida was trying to break up a fight between Boss and another dog when Boss attacked. Neighbors said the family kept up to ten dogs in the basement of their home. [ ]

Date of death: February 13, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Mastiff-great dane mix Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Victim Spay/Neuter: Yes 8 Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Child John Doe

5-years old | Clarksville, Tennessee

Child John Doe, 5-years old, was killed by his family's two English mastiffs. Emergency personnel responded to a home on Charles Thomas Road about 8:20 am. They discovered the boy with "extensive injuries" from being mauled by the two dogs. The child was transported to Tennova Medical Center where he died from his injuries. Both dogs were taken into custody by Montgomery County Animal Control. Police said both dogs were under a year old. Later news reports stated 6-months old. Montgomery County Animal Control released a photograph of the two dogs being held in quarantine. Clarksville Police Lt. Steve Warren said, "Our hearts certainly go out to that family, and to the first responders, it was a tough call for them too." Police opened an investigation into the dog attack. News footage of the home on Charles Thomas Road, a new subdivision, showed high fencing around the victim's backyard. As of March 2, 2017, no additional information, including the identity of the child, has been released. [ ]

Date of death: February 16, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: English mastiff (2) Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Unknown Owner of dog: Family Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Jamie Owsley

21-years old | Quincy, Illinois

Jamie Owsley, 21-years old, died after being bitten in the neck by a family pit bull. The attack occurred at his home at 1005 1/2 Jersey Street in the early morning hours of February 26. The dog involved was one of three pit bulls belonging to his roommate and cousin Kerry Talburt II. Talburt told police around 3:00 am he heard some rustling in the living room, where Owsley slept, and heard his dog barking and growling. He got up and went to the living room. "He saw his pit bull, Hercules, had his mouth latched onto Owsley's neck. Talburt stated he grabbed the dog and pulled him off, took him into his bedroom, and put him in his kennel," states the Quincy police report. Forensic Pathologist Dr. Denton ruled his cause of death was "penetrating and crushing injuries of the neck, due to a dog attack." It is believed Owsley suffered a seizure before the attack. Owsley was a big fan of the Denver Broncos who sent out a tribute after learning about his death. "He's gone too soon and will be missed." [ ]

Date of death: February 26, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Roommate Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Valentine Herrera

76-Years old | Los Angeles, California

Valentine Herrera, 76-years old, was savagely attacked by two pit bulls and died nearly one month later while hospitalized. The attack occurred on February 2, in the 2600 block of Lincoln Park Avenue. Herrera was walking his pomeranian, named Dodger, when the pit bulls escaped their property and attacked Dodger, killing him. When Herrera intervened, the pit bulls attacked him. The dogs knocked him to the ground and tore into his flesh. Herrera was rushed to LA County-USC Medical Center where he underwent brain surgery. Herrera remained in critical condition until he died on February 27. Neighbor Frank Carrasco, who witnessed the violent attack, said the owner of the pit bulls did not attempt to help the elderly man sprawled on the ground and bleeding after the attack. Several days before the attack, the same two pit bulls killed a neighborhood dog belonging to Stephanie Grezelle. As of March 2, 2017 no charges have been filed and no results from the dangerous dog hearing held on March 1 are known. [ ]

Date of death: February 27, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (2) Relationship to dog: Non-family Sex of dog: Male (2) Owner of dog: Neighbor Spay/Neuter: No Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: Pending

Jase Fohs

8-months old | Lusby, Maryland

Jase Patrick Fohs, 8-months old was savagely killed by a family pit bull while under the care of a babysitter at his home. On March 23, Calvert County Sheriff's deputies were dispatched at about 1pm to a home on Prancer Court for a report of a dog attack. They arrived within one minute of the initial call. When they reached the scene, they saw the dog actively attacking the baby. They open fired on the animal, killing it, but Jase was already dead. At a news conference the next day, Calvert County Sheriff Mike Evans said the dog was a pit bull, about 6 to 8 years old. The family had owned the dog since it was a puppy. The pit bull attacked the baby "out of the blue," the sheriff said. The dog weighed about 65 pounds and had no prior record of aggression, he said. The dog had also been around the infant its whole life. The babysitter, who is a family friend and neighbor, unsuccessfully tried to stop the violent attack. She was taken to the hospital with minor injuries, the sheriff said. No criminal charges will be filed. [ ]

Date of death: March 23, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Unknown Owner of dog: Family Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Cecille Short

82-years old | Oklahoma City, Oklahoma

Cecille Short, 82-years old, and her dog were slaughtered by two pit bulls while walking in a residential neighborhood. The attack occurred near the 11600 block of Windmill Road in northwest Oklahoma City. Police officers fired on both dogs, killing one, and rammed the other with a vehicle. One pit bull survived and was taken into custody where it will be held as evidence in the homicide investigation. Both dogs belong to a neighbor who lives about a block away. Animal control had received complaints about the dogs before. Neighbors had issued their own warnings about these dogs as well. After a photograph of the dogs emerged from social media, there was confusion over the breed of the large white dog, an XXL pit bull or American bully, both are designer pit bull breeds. Police believe the dogs escaped from a sizable hole in the owner's fence who was away at the time of the attack. On May 10, 2017, the owner of the dogs, Antwon Demetris Burks, 31, was charged with second-degree manslaughter. [ ]

Date of death: April 6, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull and pit bull-mix Relationship to dog: Non-family Sex of dog: Mixed Owner of dog: Neighbor Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: Yes

Maurice Brown

60-years old | Dayton, Ohio

Maurice Brown, 60-years old, was brutally killed by a pit bull while walking down an alley. The dog had attacked a rodent before breaking loose from its chain and mauling Brown. Neighbors heard the man shouting at the top of his lungs, "Jesus, help me, help me" before his death. Officers shot and killed the pit bull that was actively attacking Brown. Three other pit bulls from 345 Middle Street were taken into custody. Brown was transported to Miami Valley Hospital where he was pronounced dead. A drone captured the scene in the alley after a fire crew did a wash down to remove the bloody scene. The mauling area was extensive. Brown's death marks the third fatal dog attack in Dayton since 2014. After the death of Klonda Richey in 2014, legislation was introduced to strengthen criminal penalties after vicious dog attacks. The Klonda Richey Act failed to pass. Over a year after Brown’s death, a first-degree misdemeanor charge was filed against Anthony Austin, 28, the caretaker of the pit bull that killed Brown. [ ]

Date of death: April 25, 2017 Chained: Yes Breed of dog: Pit bull Relationship to dog: Non-family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Tenant Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: Yes (MISD)

Lisa Green

32-years old | Breinigsville, Pennsylvania

Lisa Green, 32-years old, was savagely killed by her pit bull-mix on the rear deck of her home on Spring White Drive. Neighbors rushed over and saw the dog tearing at her neck. "The dog started biting on her neck, started removing pieces from her neck," Vidya Chellapilla said. Another neighbor threw a hambone at the dog. But the dog does not take it. "He's so engrossed in attacking her," Loretta Ottinger said. Next she jabbed the dog in the eyes with a narrow board, but the dog grabbed it in its jaws and broke it. Then another neighbor came to the scene, off-duty Slatington police Chief David Rachman. The dog "flipped her head up, grabbed her by the throat and then thrashed around," he said. Rachman fired on the dog, ending the mauling. Two years earlier, the dog attacked a neighbor's husky, Rachman said. An unidentified man told WFMZ the same dog bit his grandson in the face a few years ago. Green had the 3.5-year old dog, named Leon, for about two-and-a-half years, according to Ottinger. [ ]

Date of death: April 27, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull-boxer mix Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Victim Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Kamiko Dao Tsuda-Saelee

6-months old | Las Vegas, Nevada

Kamiko Dao Tsuda-Saelee, 6-months old, was brutally mauled to death by her family's pit bull. The attack occurred at the baby's home in the 9100 block of West Brilliant Prairie Court. Kamiko had been playing in a baby walker near the dog when the animal suddenly attacked her, investigators determined. The baby's mother, Layla Tsuda, had stepped away to the bathroom. When she returned the dog was biting the infant's head. Tsuda was able to stop the attack, but Kamiko had already suffered significant injuries, according to police spokeswoman Laura Meltzer. The baby was transported to Centennial Hills Hospital Medical Center where she was pronounced dead. The coroner said the baby died of multiple blunt force injuries to the head. The male pit bull, named Mana, had been with the family for nine years, family members said. The family said they were blindsided by the attack -- the dog had never bitten anyone before. Clark County Animal Control euthanized the pit bull shortly after the deadly attack. [ ]

Date of death: May 8, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Parents Spay/Neuter: Unkown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Sandra Keiser

71-years old | Redding, Connecticut

Sandra Keiser, 71-year old, died after being attacked by her own dog. The attack occurred at her home on Deacon Abbott Road around 10:30 pm on May 12, according to Redding Police Chief Doug Fuchs. She suffered "very serious injuries," he said. She was transported to Danbury Hospital, where she later died. In a strangely worded narrative, Fuchs said the dog attack set off a "series of events" which led to Kaiser's death. Fuchs described the dog as a "mixed-breed" and "rescue" dog, but was "not a pit bull." The dog had been living at Kaiser's home for six years. Fuchs did not identify the shelter or rescue group that adopted out the dog, nor was a photograph provided of the dog. No preliminary autopsy results were released. As of June 9, 2017, autopsy results remain pending. Dog attacks that cause "severe injuries" and the person dies as a direct or related result (dog bites a contributing factor) are included in DogsBite.org statistical data -- the underlying cause of death is not restricted to "dog bites." [ ]

Date of death: May 12, 2017 Chained: Unknown Breed of dog: Mixed-breed Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Unknown Owner of dog: Victim Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Susannah Murray

3-weeks old | Grand Rapids, Michigan

Susannah Murray, 3-weeks old, was mauled to death after being left alone with three pit bulls loose in the home. The attack happened in the 1100 block of Kalamazoo Avenue SE. The baby was left alone in a bouncy chair in the home for about five minutes, while two adults were out on the porch. When one of the adults checked on the infant, she found her bloody with severe head injuries. The family pit bull nearest the infant, a male, had blood around its mouth. A female family pit bull was also in the room with the baby. Susannah was transported to Helen Devos Children's hospital and underwent seven hours of emergency surgery, but did not survive. The dogs were taken to the Kent County Animal Shelter and placed under quarantine. All three pit bulls were "rescues," according to family members. There were two males and one female in the household. On June 19, 2017 prosecutors announced that no charges would be filed. All three dogs were euthanized; none of the pit bulls could be ruled out. [ ]

Date of death: May 26, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (2) and pit bull-mix (1) Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Mixed Owner of dog: Mother Spay/Neuter: Yes (3) Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Margaret Colvin

91-years old | Virginia Beach, Virginia

Margaret Colvin, 91-years old, was brutally killed by a pit bull her daughter had acquired from a rescue group earlier that day. On May 31, Forever Home Rescue and Rehabilitation Center (FHRC) adopted out a 1.5 year old male, neutered pit bull named Blue to Colvin's daughter, Linda. The dog arrived at their home wearing a shock collar. When Linda removed the collar, the dog instantly pounced on Colvin who had fallen down nearby. Linda described the act as playful initially. Then Blue began to rip off Colvin's flesh, violently mauling her. Linda beat the dog with a hammer and an iron skillet. By the time rescue workers arrived, Colvin's intestines were on the floor. Colvin underwent multiple surgeries, including an arm amputation. She died of her injuries early the next morning. Blue was formerly a death row dog at New York City Animal Care and Control after biting a child. The dog was pulled by a Pennsylvania rescue then sent to FHRC for "rehabilitation." As of June 10, 2017 police continue to investigate. [ ]

Date of death: June 1, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Daughter Spay/Neuter: Yes Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: Pending

Marcos Raya, Jr.

18-months old | Phoenix, Arizona

Marcos Raya, Jr., 18-months old, was brutally killed by his father's male rottweiler at his home in South Phoenix. Police said the child's grandmother was babysitting and doing chores when she opened the back door of the home. The family rottweiler rushed inside, grabbed the baby boy then dragged it outside, viciously attacking him. The grandmother was unable to pull the large dog off the baby; she called 911 for help. He "never stood a chance," Phoenix fire spokesman Captain Rob McDade said. "The amount of bites this child suffered was the reason this child succumbed to his injury." When Phoenix police officers arrived, the rottweiler was still actively attacking the child. One of the officers open fired on the dog, injuring it and stopping the attack. The child was transported to a pediatric trauma hospital in "extremely critical condition," McDade said. He died at the trauma hospital. Fire officials said the dog belongs to the child's father and has been a family pet for three years. [ ]

Date of death: June 9, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Rottweiler Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Father Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Melissa Barnes

65-years old | Bozeman, Montana

Melissa Barnes, 65-years old, died after being savagely attacked by two pit bulls. The fatal mauling occurred about 8 am on June 24 at 5499 Love Lane, Gallatin County Sheriff Brian Gootkin said. Barnes was doing yard work when two dogs belonging to her tenant, Wayne Bartlett, followed his girlfriend's two children outside. The pit bulls viciously mauled her in front the children. Bartlett and his girlfriend were away at the time of the attack; the children were under the care of his niece. Bartlett and at least one of his pit bulls had lived on the property with Barnes for six years. She was airlifted to a trauma hospital in Billings for treatment. Doctors pronounced her brain dead the following day. Barnes was kept on life support for organ donation for several days longer while doctors awaited the rabies tests results on the dogs. Neither of the canines was current on vaccinations. Bartlett voluntarily gave up both dogs to be euthanized. According to Bartlett, his pit bulls had never shown aggression in the past. [ ]

Date of death: June 25, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (1) and pit bull-mix (1) Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Mixed Owner of dog: Tenant Spay/Neuter: Yes Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: On Criminal charges: (Fined)

Vinson Tucker

79-years old | McCreary County, Kentucky

Vinson Tucker, 79-years old, was killed by a pack dogs while visiting an auto wrecking business in Whitley City. About 9:00 am, Kentucky State Police received a report about a body lying in a property off Highway 1651. Upon arrival, detective Billy Correll discovered Tucker deceased. Video surveillance obtained by police showed that Tucker was mauled to death by four dogs on the property. Correll said Tucker had stopped by to visit the owner when the attack happened. A neighbor shot two of the dogs, police shot a third dog and the other ran off, Correll said. Though police described the dogs as strays, Eric Branson, Tucker's neighbor, said the dogs belong to the owner of Stephens Towing and Wrecker Service, Mike Stephens. "It's hard to say you don't own a dog if you take care of it and it lives at your house, at your business," he said. Branson witnessed the aftermath of the attack and said, "It was the worst thing I ever saw in my life." Police did not release the breed of dogs involved, but Stephen's daughter stated publicly in January that her father has at least one pit bull at his auto wrecking shop. [ ]

Date of death: July 11, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (1) and unknown (3) Relationship to dog: Non-family Sex of dog: Mixed Owner of dog: Business owner Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: On Criminal charges: Pending

Michael Parks

60-years old | Fostoria, Ohio

Michael Parks, 60-years old, died after trying to break up a violent pit bull fight. About 11:00 pm, Parks let his pit bull, named Mia, outside. The dog bolted across Davoli Street and began attacking another pit bull being walked by its owner, 41-year old Amy Loving. While trying to break up the fight, Parks was bitten multiple times. One bite was directly on his recently installed dialysis shunt. He began bleeding profusely. Fostoria Fire Division's EMS squad transported him to ProMedica Fostoria Community Hospital, where he later died. Dr. Mark Fox, the Hancock County Coroner, said Parks died from bite wounds. The attack occurred at 845 Davoli Street in the Dillon Crossing subdivision. Authorities are unsure if one or both pit bulls injured Parks. "We’re not exactly sure which dog bit him, if it was the one or both," Fostoria Police Chief Keith Loreno said. "He did have serious injuries as a result." According to the police report, Loving’s dog was "badly mangled" in the attack. It is unknown if her dog survived. [ ]

Date of death: July 21, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (2) Relationship to dog: Family and non-family Sex of dog: Female (2) Owner of dogs: Victim and neighbor Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: No

Jacob Brooks

4-years old | El Paso, Texas

Jacob Brooks, 4-years old, died after being mauled by a pack of family dogs. The attack occurred at his home in the 9100 block of Morelia Road. Police said his mother had left him in an enclosed trampoline in the backyard where four dogs roamed. He got out of the enclosure and the dogs fatally mauled him. A teenage neighbor, who was playing basketball nearby, heard a woman crying and saying her son ran away. He decided to look in her backyard first, which is when he encountered the dogs and found her mangled son. He managed to pry one of the dogs off the boy, but then had to defend himself against the dogs. Police discovered Jacob's lifeless body at the scene. Animal control seized four dogs involved in the attack, described as one pit bull and three shepherd-mixes. Neighbors said the family's dogs were aggressive and had escaped their property before. On September 29, 2017 authorities arrested and charged his parents, Brittany Brooks, 27, and Ashley Brooks, 29, with Injury to a Child. [ ]

Date of death: July 27, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull-mix (1)

German shepherd-mix (3) Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Female (4) Owner of dog: Mother Spay/Neuter: Yes (1) and unknown (3) Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: On Criminal charges: Yes

Paris Adams

20-months old | Hartwell, Georgia

Paris Adams, 20-months old, was killed by two family pit bulls while under the care of his grandmother. Sandra Adams, 70, was charged with second-degree murder, second-degree cruelty to children and involuntary manslaughter. Just before the attack, Adams and the child were outside her home. When Adams attempted to re-enter the home, the two pit bulls inside charged out, knocking Adams to the ground and brutally mauling the child. At some point, Adams was able to get the dogs back into her home. Instead of calling 9-1-1, Adams transported the baby to a nearby location where she picked up the boy's mother, then drove to Reddy Urgent Care in Hartwell, where Baby Paris was pronounced dead. The next morning, District Attorney Parks White announced a string of criminal charges against the grandmother. Adams had been cited for the same two pit bulls on multiple occasions in the past. In March 2018, Sandra Adams pleaded guilty to involuntary manslaughter and was sentenced to 10 years probation. [ ]

Date of death: August 1, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (2) Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Mixed Owner of dog: Grandmother Spay/Neuter: Mixed Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: On Criminal charges: Yes

Baby John Doe

3-weeks old | Bangor, Maine

Baby John Doe, 3-weeks old, died eight days after being attacked by a family dog. On July 29, police and fire departments responded to a call about an injured infant, Bangor police Detective Sgt. Brent Beaulieu said. The child had been injured by “a family pet,” and was transported to Eastern Maine Medical Center in Bangor. “Unfortunately, the child succumbed to the injuries and was pronounced dead at the hospital,” Beaulieu stated in an August 6 news release. The 21-day old baby was sleeping in a bassinet in the same room as his parents and their family dog. The couple awoke to find the husky-shepherd mix attacking the baby, Beaulieu said. At the time of the attack, the baby, his parents and the family dog were visiting relatives at a home in western Bangor. The attack occurred about 5:30 am, Beaulieu said. The couple told police the dog had never shown aggression before. The dog will be euthanized and no charges will be filed, Beaulieu said. Police did not identify the names of the infant or his parents. [ ]

Date of death: August 6, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Husky-German shepherd mix Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Unknown Owner of dog: Parents Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: No

Michael Obergas

2-months old | Houston, Texas

Michael Obergas, 2-months old, was mauled to death by a large family dog while he slept in a bassinet in a secure bedroom. One of the dogs was able to open the door and attack the infant after his parents stepped away, according to Houston Police. On August 19, homicide detectives responded to a home about 3:10 pm in the 5900 block of Nelwyn Street in north Houston. The baby was mainly mauled in the torso area, according to news reports. Michael was transported by ambulance to Memorial Hermann Greater Heights Hospital, where he was pronounced dead. Investigators questioned and released the baby's parents. The Houston Police Department's homicide division investigated the case, as they do in all deaths involving babies. The two male family dogs, a giant schnauzer and labrador both named Jack, were surrendered to BARC, Houston's animal control agency. It could not be determine which of the dogs attacked the infant, so both dogs were euthanized. No charges were filed against the parents. [ ]

Date of death: August 19, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Giant schnauzer (1)

Labrador retriever (1) Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male (2) Owner of dog: Parents Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Alicia Malagon

76-years old | Blountstown, Florida

Alicia Malagon, 76-years old, was killed by a pit bull she was dog-sitting for relatives. The attack occurred after she brought her own dachshund to her daughter and son-in-law's home on Northwest Lamont Road. Once there, a pit bull named Blue attacked her dog. When she tried to separate the two, the pit bull attacked her. When deputies arrived they discovered a "significant blood trail" leading from a bedroom to the kitchen, where they found Malagon unresponsive in a large pool of blood. She was bitten in several places, but "most noticeably was her right leg, which sustained extremely deep and large lacerations," deputies wrote. Malagon was able to crawl to a phone and call her son-in-law, but told him she would be fine. Still, he contacted his brother and asked him to check on her. When his brother arrived, he had to breakdown the door. He found Malagon on the kitchen floor fading in and out of consciousness. She was transported to Calhoun-Liberty Hospital where she was pronounced dead. [ ]

Date of death: August 26, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Daughter Spay/Neuter: No Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Grace Walks

41-years old | Fort Lake, Florida

Grace Walks, 41-years old, died after being attacked by one or both family dogs. A bite report from Palm Beach County Animal Care and Control shows the attack occurred on August 27 on the 900 block of Pinto Drive in Fort Lake. Walks was pronounced dead at the scene. One or both dogs were involved in the attack, a 6-year old male American bulldog, named Max, and a 9-year old female pit bull, named Holly. Walks lived at the residence with her father and mother-in-law. Neither was home at the time of the attack. Both dogs were registered to Walks' mother-in-law. A next-door neighbor discovered her body at 8:15 am inside a fenced-in yard, where both dogs were loose. He tied up Max and called police. The Palm Beach County Medical Examiner's report said she died of injuries sustained during the dog attack. "Exsanguination due to facial lacerations and neck punctures due to dog mauling" was the cause of death and the manner of death was accident. Both dogs were put down and tested negative for rabies. [ ]

Date of death: August 27, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: American bulldog (1) and pit bull (1) Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Mixed Owner of dog: Mother-in-law Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Connie Storey

62-years old | Philadelphia, Mississippi

Connie Storey, 62-years old, was horribly mauled by her son's pit bull just after midnight on September 9. The attack occurred outside her home off Deemer Road in the Beatline community. "Her son came home and found her around 1:30 a.m. and called 911," Neshoba County Sheriff Tommy Waddell said. "She was able to tell deputies that she was feeding the dog." She was then taken by ambulance to meet an emergency helicopter. "With the extent of her injuries, the decision was made to notify AirCare. She was airlifted to Jackson," Waddell said. Connie died while hospitalized at University Medical Center in Jackson 12 days after the vicious attack. According to the dog's owner, Josh Storey, the dog had attacked him previously. After Connie's death, a man who claimed to be her brother left disturbing comments on social media. After his own sister died, Marty Holley stated, "The family does not blame the breed." Marty also falsely blamed the deadly attack on rabies. No criminal charges were filed. [ ]

Date of death: September 20, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Son Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Barrett Hagans

1-month old | Pike Township, Ohio

Barrett Hagans, 1-month old, was mauled to death by a family pit bull while he slept in his bassinet. The attack occurred on the first night the infant spent at his father's home in Pike Township, along with his two pit bulls. His father awoke the next morning to his baby dead with extensive head injuries from the mauling. Deputies and an ambulance were dispatched to the home on Wooster Raod at about 6:10 am. The county coroner pronounced the baby dead on the scene. The Knox County Dog Warden's Office removed two pit bulls from the residence. Both dogs were "euthanized for examination" by a court-ordered search warrant. The stomach contents of both dogs were examined. Knox County Coroner Dr. Jennifer Ogle said the baby died from "extensive blunt and crush force injuries with puncture injuries" by a male pit bull or pit bull-mix. The autopsy found no other trauma besides what was inflicted by the canine. Knox County Prosecutor Chip McConville declined to file any charges against the father. [ ]

Date of death: September 20, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Father Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Kathy Nichelson

61-years old | Cherry Log, Georgia

Kathy Nichelson, 61-years old, was mauled to death by a pit bull while visiting the owner's home. The attack occurred at 890 Goose Island Road. Kathy was attacked shortly after arriving at the residence and exiting her car. A passerby who saw her severely injured on the ground tried to render aid to her. Then the dog reappeared and attacked him, biting him on the face. He escaped by climbing over the top of a vehicle and back into his van, where he called 911. Arriving emergency responders rendered aid to the victim, while deputies stood watch, in case the pit bull returned. After the dog flew out from under the porch, threatening a deputy, it was fired on and shot to death. Kathy was pronounced dead at the scene. The owner of the dog, Dante Holloway, was arrested and charged with involuntary manslaughter and reckless conduct. While being arrested at a traffic stop, deputies also found small bags in his vehicle commonly for narcotic use. One bag had white residue, which tested positive for methamphetamine. [ ]

Date of death: September 28, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull Relationship to dog: Non-family Sex of dog: Unknown Owner of dog: Friend Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: Yes

Javien Candelario

7-years old | Lowell, Massachusetts

Javien Candelario, 7-years old, was horrifically mauled to death by two pit bulls while over a dozen people watched. Witness David Swiniarski said, "Everyone was screaming, but no one knew what to do." Javien had been playing with friends when he approached a dilapidated chain link gate about 4.5 feet high between 56 and 58 Clare Street. Behind the fence were two pit bulls. Javien went to pat the dogs, according to Lowell city councilor Rodney Elliott. "The dogs pulled him over the fence," Elliott said. Several neighbors claimed the boy jumped the fence. When police arrived Javien was already dead. Officers fired on one of the pit bulls, but it jumped the fence and fled. That dog ventured over a mile away before being killed in a hail of police gunfire over an hour later. Prior to the Massachusetts legislature passing a state preemption bill in 2012, barring cities and towns from adopting or enforcing breed-specific laws, Lowell had a pit bull ordinance in place to prevent these very types of attacks. [ ]

Date of death: October 21, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (2) Relationship to dog: Non-family Sex of dog: Mixed Owner of dog: Neighbor Spay/Neuter: No Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Sharon Lindemann

75-years old | Johnson County, Arkansas

Sharon Lindemann, 75-years old, was found dead in her driveway after being attacked and killed by a dog. The attack occurred on Private Road 2227 near Hartman. Sharon's sister, who also resides at the home, made the gruesome discovery when she returned from work. She called 911 panicked. "My sister is unconscious in the driveway," she told the operator. "I don't know what's wrong, but she's got a big gash in her neck." Johnson County Coroner Pam Cogan said the victim had bites, scratches and puncture wounds consistent with a canine attack. "It was certainly a lot of injuries to the body," Cogen said. "It was not a pleasant sight at all." Cogan believes Sharon was likely dead for four to six hours before her sister found her. The Arkansas State Crime Lab said she was killed by "multiple blunt force and penetrating injuries." As of January 1, 2018 the suspected dog is described as a pit bull and a DNA sample from the animal is currently being analyzed at a lab, according to friends close to the victim's sister. [ ]

Date of death: October 30, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (pending) Relationship to dog: Non-family Sex of dog: Unknown Owner of dog: Neighbor Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: Pending

Sophia Booth

2-weeks old | Cleveland, Ohio

Sophia Booth, 2-weeks old, died after being bitten in the head by the family dog. The deadly attack occurred at 6:53 pm at 13304 Carrington Avenue in the Puritas-Longmead neighborhood, according to Cleveland Police. The baby girl was transported to MetroHealth Medical Center, but did not survive her injuries, described as head trauma. She was pronounced dead about two hours later. Police said the dog escaped from the kitchen area where it was fenced in, and bit the baby girl who was in a bedroom on the first floor. The attacking dog was a 4-year old German shepherd, according to police. A sign in the family home's front window depicted a guard dog with the language: "Warning! Security Dog." One neighbor described the dog as "ready to attack constantly" and another described it as a "vicious." Police provided no details about the history of the dog. Authorities took the animal into custody. The case will be presented to the Cuyahoga County Prosecutors Office. No charges are anticipated. [ ]

Date of death: November 3, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: German shepherd Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Unknown Owner of dog: Mother Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: Pending

David Baber

65-years old | Hamlet, North Carolina

David Baber, 65-years old, was mauled to death by his own two dogs. The attack occurred in Baber's fenced-in backyard at 308 West Hamlet Avenue. A 9-year old boy witnessed the attack and threw bricks at the dogs, trying to get them to stop. "Only they wouldn’t get off of him. They bit his neck. He’s got a hole in it," little Kanorie said. He later jumped the fence back into his own yard to avoid being hurt. The two dogs, a male pit bull and a mixed-breed dog, were captured by police and taken into custody. Baber owned five dogs that he would walk each morning. Kanorie's mother, April Parnell, said he could only walk them in pairs of two and could only walk his "energetic" male pit bull alone. Parnell said that prior to attacking Baber the same two dogs had gotten into a fight earlier that day. Baber broke apart the dog fight by throwing punches at the animals, she said. Hamlet Police Chief Scott Waters called Kanorie a "hero" for his actions. "I just thank God above that the dogs didn’t turn on him," Waters said. [ ]

Date of death: November 4, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (1) and mixed-breed (1) Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male and unknown Owner of dog: Victim Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Tracy Cornelius

46-years old | Guntersville, Alabama

Tracy Cornelius, 46-years old, was killed by four pit bulls after she tried to save a woman's life. On November 29, a woman walking along Jason Road was attacked by four pit bulls belonging to Cornelius' brother. Cornelius lived two doors down. She saw the attack and rushed over to help. The dogs then turned on her and brutally attacked her. Cornelius' own dog intervened to help her, but was also killed by the pack of dogs. She was transported to Marshall Medical Center North, where she was pronounced dead. The surviving woman was airlifted to a hospital in Huntsville. In total, authorities seized or killed seven pit bulls; all but one of the dogs belonged to Cornelius' brother. In Marshall County there is no leash law or fencing requirements. The attack occurred on the dog owner's property and at least one of the dogs was leashed at the time. In March 2018, Doyle Simpson Patterson Jr., 47, and Amanda Dawn Albright, 40, were arrested after a grand jury indicted them on charges of manslaughter and assault. [ ]

Date of death: November 29, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (4) Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Unknown Owner of dog: Brother Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: On Criminal charges: Yes

Korbin Williams

8-years old | Gaffney, South Carolina

Korbin Williams, was killed by multiple dogs while walking on Daniel Morgan School Road. He had been walking with another 8-year old boy near his home when three dogs attacked them both. "Korbin sustained multiple bites over his body by the dogs while the other boy was bitten once on the leg," Cherokee County Coroner Dennis Fowler said. "While the dogs were still attacking young Korbin, his friend ran to his nearby home for help," Fowler said. Korbin was pronounced dead at the scene, dying of blood loss. Korbin was familiar with the dogs, "having cared for them by feeding and playing with them daily," Fowler said. The dogs belonged to Korbin's neighbor. Korbin's mother had been caring for the dogs while the neighbor was out of town, Cherokee County Sheriff Steve Mueller said. The dogs escaped the neighbor's yard by crawling under the fence, Mueller said. Arriving deputies shot and killed two of the dogs. The third dog fled, but a neighbor shot it to death the next day. No charges are expected. [ ]

Date of death: December 1, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Mixed-breed (3) Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Unknown Owner of dog: Neighbor Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: No

Emily Colvin

24-years old | Section, Alabama

Emily Colvin, 24-years old, was brutally killed in front of her home by a pack of pit bulls belonging to her neighbors. The dogs also attacked a relative who came to help her. Jackson County Sheriff’s Office responded to the call and found Emily dead on arrival. The dogs "chewed that poor girl to pieces," one first responder said. A deputy shot one of the pit bulls, killing it. Authorities confiscated four other pit bulls involved in the attack. The other victim, Emily's relative, was treated for her injuries and released. She had been talking to Emily on the phone and came to her aid when she heard the dogs attacking. Emily's husband -- they were still newlyweds -- was not home at the time. Tiger Frazier, Emily's friend, said she had complained about the dogs to her coworkers before the attack. The same dogs had killed llamas in a nearby field some time ago, Sheriff Chuck Phillips said. In April 2018, Brian Graden, 43, and Melody Graden, 45, were charged with criminally negligent homicide in connection to her mauling death. [ ]

Date of death: December 7, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (5) Relationship to dog: Non-family Sex of dog: Mixed Owner of dog: Neighbor Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: Yes

Dorothy Ford

77-years old | Alsip, Illinois

Dorothy Ford, 77-years old, was attacked and killed by a family pit bull. About 3:30 pm, Alsip police were dispatched to a home in the 11600 block of South Komensky Avenue for a report of a woman being mauled by a dog on her back deck. When officers arrived, she was already dead. The dog, described as a 6-year old pit bull, continued to act aggressive so officers shot and killed it. "It was pretty horrific," said Deputy Chief Shawn Schuldt of the Alsip Police Department. "If I go through the rest of my career without seeing something like this, that would be a good thing." Police had received no prior complaints about the dog. Schuldt said the dog was well fed and cared for and officers found no signs of mistreatment or abuse. Police Chief Jay Miller said the dog belonged to a relative of Ford and had lived in the home since it was a puppy. The most recent serious attack in Alsip, three years ago, also involved a pit bull, Miller said. "It's like every time there's an incident like this, it involves this breed," Chief Miller said. [ ]

Date of death: December 11, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Unknown Owner of dog: Relative Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Bethany Stephens

22-years old | Goochland County, Virginia

Bethany Stephens, 22-years old, was killed by her two pit bulls while taking them for a walk. The dogs later fed on her corpse. "It was an absolutely grisly mauling. In my 40 years of law enforcement, I've never seen anything quite like it. Hope I never see anything like it again," Goochland County Sheriff James Agnew said during his first press conference. Deputies discovered her dismembered body after she had been dead for at least a day. After her death, rumors flared on social media, bolstered by media reports echoing them, claiming she was murdered or attacked by a bear. Sheriff Agnew had to give a second press conference to end the rumors. The two pit bulls, Tonka and Pacman, were 2.5 year old males and came from the same litter, though Bethany had only acquired Pacman about 1.5 years ago. Several weeks prior to her death, she had been keeping the dogs in outdoor kennels at her father's home, stopping by to visit and feed them about 5 days per week. Previously, they had been indoor dogs. [ ]

Date of death: December 13, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (2) Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male (2) Owner of dog: Victim Spay/Neuter: Mixed Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: No

Carol Harris

69-years old | Phoenix, Arizona

Carol Harris, 69-years old, was fatally attacked "while helping to rehab an orphaned akita in the hopes of him becoming adoptable." The attack occurred at the Canine Country Club and Feline Inn where the dog was being housed. An employee found the dog off leash with blood on its mouth. Then he found the victim with significant bite injuries. "The dog appeared to be covered in what appeared to be blood on him and he then discovered the woman," said Jose Santiago with Maricopa County Animal Care and Control. She was transported to a hospital in "very critical condition." She did not survive her injuries. Carol had been working with a rescue group, Akita Advocates, of which she was an officer and the "backbone of the rescue," according to the group. Her husband, Kenneth Harris, said the couple has four foster akitas and two of their own. He plans to keep all six of them and doesn’t want anyone to "blame the breed" for his wife’s death. The attacking dog, a 6-year old male akita named Izanaghi, was put down. [ ]

Date of death: December 20, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Japanese akita Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Rescue Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Lorraine Saylor

66-years old | Arjay, Kentucky

Lorraine Saylor, 66-years old, was brutally killed by her neighbor's pit bulls on Christmas Eve. Her husband, Johnny Saylor, woke up that morning and started looking for his wife. When he went outside, two dogs attacked him. His brother, James Saylor, lives next door. He ran over when he heard the attack. He threw a doorstop at the dogs to distract them. This gave his brother time to grab a pistol. Johnny shot both dogs, killing one, the other fled. Then he found his wife unresponsive on the ground with severe wounds. Bell County Coroner Jay Steele said she suffered massive injuries on her neck, face and shoulder. She was pronounced dead at the scene. The owner of the dogs, Johnny Dale Lankford, 42, was being held at the Bell County Detention Center on unrelated charges of domestic assault and unlawful imprisonment when his two pit bulls attacked Lorraine and her husband. He was charged with harboring a vicious animal after her death. A week later, he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to one year in jail. [ ]

Date of death: December 24, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Pit bull (2)

Relationship to dog: Non-family Sex of dog: Male (2) Owner of dog: Neighbor Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: Yes (MISD)

Deborah Onsurez

56-years old | Modesto, California

Deborah Onsurez, 56-years old, was killed by a pack of dogs. At about 7:50 am, Stanislaus County Sheriff's deputies were dispatched to the 500 block of Crows Landing Road after a report of an unresponsive person. When they arrived, they found the lifeless body of Deborah Onsurez in the driveway of a business. She had severe injuries and was pronounced dead at the scene. The preliminary investigation led detectives to believe that stray dogs killed her. Authorities captured seven dogs they identified from surveillance cameras from businesses near the attack site. The dogs were captured on surveillance cameras after the attack; the attack itself was not captured. Animal Services Agency Executive Director Annette Patton said the dogs, "were very aggressive" and "one of them had to be chemically captured." The seven dogs, of which only five were still alive, were a variety of mix-breeds, including: doberman pinscher, German shepherd, heeler, labrador and pit bull. All five dogs will be euthanized. [ ]

Date of death: December 28, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: Doberman pinscher-mix

German shepherd-mix

Heeler-mix

Labrador-mix

Pit bull-mix Relationship to dog: Non-family Sex of dog: Mixed Owner of dog: Unknown Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: Yes On/Off property: Off Criminal charges: No

Discoveries and clarifications

Jane Marie Egle

59-years old | Asheville, North Carolina

Clarified: April 16, 2018

Dog bite fatality victims are sometimes discovered or clarified one or more years after the attack, particularly when DNA testing is involved, which can take 6-12 months to analyze. This section pertains to 2017 dog bite fatality victims that were identified in subsequent years through media reports or police reports and have not yet been added to annual 2017 statistics, but have been added to DogsBite.org combined year fatality statistical data (from January 1, 2005 to present).

Jane Marie Egle, 59-years old, was killed by her own South African boerboel. On May 1, the Buncombe County Sheriff's Office responded to her residence after receiving a call for assistance. They found Egle dead on the floor. One of her boerboels -- Egle bred and sold boerboels -- was also in the home acting aggressively. Authorities "destroyed" the dog at the scene. Six additional adult boerboels seized at the scene were also put down. An autopsy was conducted May 3. The cause of death was "exsanguination due to multiple penetrating and blunt force injuries of the head and neck, consistent with canine bites due to dog mauling," according to the medical examiner's report. Police never released the cause of death. The only incident report released by the sheriff's office indicated the victim had "minor" injuries. The autopsy report, which was not released until April 16, 2018, revealed the male boerboel had ripped out the front of Egle's throat. [ ]

Date of death: May 1, 2017 Chained: No Breed of dog: South African boerboel Relationship to dog: Family Sex of dog: Male Owner of dog: Victim Spay/Neuter: Unknown Multiple dogs: No On/Off property: On Criminal charges: No

Additional victims - excluded

Deaths involving minor dog bite injury, dog-related caused injury (killed by a car while fleeing a dog) and cases that lacked a "reasonably clear" determination of death after dog bite injury are not included in our fatality statistical data. Deaths involving fatal non-bite injury (struck by dog death) or death due to untreated severe dog bites (sepsis) may be added to our data at a future time.

Struck by dog deaths - fatal non-bite injury