TRUMP ANNOUNCES ‘PRO-LIFE COALITION’, SUPPORTS MAKING HYDE AMENDMENT PERMANENT
- September 16, 2016 -

TRUMP ANNOUNCES ‘PRO-LIFE COALITION’, SUPPORTS MAKING HYDE AMENDMENT PERMANENT

USA Today

"Donald Trump on Friday announced a new “pro-life coalition.” The president of the Susan B. Anthony List — a top national group opposing abortion — will head it."



" Marjorie Dannenfelser , who is head of the non profit organization that supports anti-abortion politicians, will be the national chairwoman of the coalition. Additional co-chairs will be announced later this month according to SBA List.

...

On Friday Trump reinforced his commitment to three anti-abortion platforms and announced he would also back making the Hyde Amendment permanent law, saying in a statement:

“ Hillary Clinton ’s unwavering commitment to advancing taxpayer-funded abortion on-demand stands in stark contrast to the commitments I’ve made to advance the rights of unborn children and their mothers when elected president. I am committed to: Nominating pro-life justices to the U.S. Supreme Court . Signing into law the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, which would end painful late-term abortions nationwide. Defunding Planned Parenthood as long as they continue to perform abortions and reallocating their funding to community health centers that provide comprehensive health care for women. Making the Hyde Amendment permanent law to protect taxpayers from having to pay for abortions.”

...

“Not only has Mr. Trump doubled down on his three existing commitments to the pro-life movement, he has gone a step further in pledging to protect the Hyde Amendment and the conscience rights of millions of pro-life taxpayers. For a candidate to make additional commitments during a general election is almost unheard of,” Dannenfelser said in a statement announcing the coalition. “The contrast could not be clearer between the two tickets, and I am proud to serve as National Chairwoman for Donald Trump’s Pro-Life Coalition".”

To read more, click on the link:

http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/onpolitics/2016/09/16/trump-marjorie-dannenfelser-anti-abortion-rights/90431388/