Private Adoption Agencies (TARE)
Use the following links to share this page through common social media websites. Use screen reader reading keys, as the Tab key may not work for all links. To share this page with a social media service not listed here, select the "Share" link to open a frame that lists additional options. In the input field, type search text to filter results. Use the down arrow key to read the list, as the Tab key does not work.

Foster and Adoption Agencies in Texas



click to find agencies that serve your part of Texas click to find agencies that serve your part of Texas

A child placing agency (CPA) is a private foster and/or adoption agency that works in partnership with the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS) to train foster and adoptive parents and find homes for children. If you foster or adopt a child in the conservatorship of DFPS, the agencies below can provide you with services at minimal costs.

To learn about requirements for becoming a verified foster parent or approved adoptive parent, read Texas Child Placing Agency Foster and Adoptive Parent Training Requirements, which provides details on each child placing agency and their unique requirements for licensure. If you need help finding a CPA that's right for you, contact Wendy Bagwell at (512) 438-2133.

Foster and adoption agency offices are located in most regions of Texas. Several of them provide services statewide.

Adoption Agencies

You may review each agency's regulatory history in Child Placing Agencies For Adoption.

Region 1 (Lubbock)

Region 2 (Abilene)

Region 3 (Arlington)

Region 4 (Tyler)

Region 5 (Beaumont)

Region 6 (Houston)

Region 7 (Austin)

Region 8 (San Antonio)

Region 9 (Midland)

Region 10 (El Paso)

Region 11 (Corpus Christi)

Statewide

Foster Agencies

Many of the adoption agencies listed above also provide foster care services. For a complete list of available foster agencies in your area, please visit Active Residential Child Care Contracts. You may search for a foster agency and review each agency's regulatory history in Child Placing Agencies For Foster Care.