​STATEMENT ON CLINTON FOUNDATION HONORING WIFE OF PALESTINIAN TERRORIST
- September 20, 2016 -

​STATEMENT ON CLINTON FOUNDATION HONORING WIFE OF PALESTINIAN TERRORIST

“Omar al-Hroub Was Convicted On Charges That He Was An Accomplice In A Deadly Bombing Attack In Hebron That Killed Israelis Walking Home From Friday Night Sabbath Prayers.” – Wall Street Journal



“Today’s report that the Clinton Foundation is feting the wife of a Palestinian man convicted of helping bomb innocent Israeli citizens is deeply disturbing, especially in the wake of this weekend’s attacks. The decision to honor the wife of a terrorist by Hillary Clinton’s foundation shows a complete lack of judgment and a callousness that should disqualify her from holding the presidency.” – Jason Miller, Senior Communications Advisor



Palestinian Teacher’s Speech At Clinton Event Draws GOP Criticism

By James V. Grimaldi

The Wall Street Journal

September 20, 2016

Click Here To Read



Hanan al-Hroub's husband served 10 years in Israeli prison in connection with 1980 bombing

A Palestinian teacher scheduled to speak at a Clinton Global Initiative dinner on Tuesday is attracting criticism from the Republican Party because the woman’s husband is a Palestinian official who was convicted of participating in a terror attack that killed six Israelis in 1980.

The Republican National Committee said featuring the teacher, Hanan al-Hroub, at the last Clinton Global Initiative event was insensitive particularly as New York law enforcement is investigating a New Jersey man for planting bombs in the region. Ms. al-Hroub’s husband, Omar, served 10 years in an Israeli prison for his role in the bombing.

“In the wake of this weekend’s attacks, granting a platform to the spouse of a terrorist bomb-maker just miles away from where explosives were detonated days ago is an insult to the victims and makes a mockery of the Clinton Foundation” said Raj Shah, deputy communications director of the Republican National Committee.

…

Omar al-Hroub was convicted on charges that he was an accomplice in a deadly bombing attack in Hebron that killed Israelis walking home from Friday night Sabbath prayers. According to an Associated Press account at the time, Omar al-Hroub was a chemist who provided chemicals needed for making the bombs.

Click Here To Read The Full Story