Police sergeant refused coffee at East Oakland cafe is head of Latino organization
OAKLAND — An Oakland police sergeant who was refused service when he tried to buy a cup of coffee at the Hasta Muerte cafe in the Fruitvale district is also the president of the county’s Latino Police Officer’s Association.

Sgt. Robert Trevino, a former homicide investigator, went into the Hasta Muerte cafe at 2701 Fruitvale Ave. on Feb. 16 and tried to order a cup of coffee. But he was declined service by a worker-owner because “we have a policy of asking police to leave for the physical and emotional safety of our customers and ourselves,” according to a post on the cafe’s social media account.

Trevino was the lead investigator in the deadly 2012 Oikos University mass shooting, where shooter One Goh killed seven people. He is currently a patrol sergeant who supervises a squad in the Fruitvale district and president of the Latino Police Officers Association of Alameda County.

The cafe’s post, on Feb. 22, shows a crossed-out Oakland police seal and badge with the words “Habla con tu vecinxs no con la policia.” or “Speak with your neighbors, not the police.” The cafe identifies as “Latinx” a gender-inclusive term for the word “Latino.”

“We know in our experience working on campaigns against police brutality that we are not alone saying that police presence compromises our feeling of physical and emotional safety,” the post reads.

The post says at the end that the cafe workers/owners “need the support of the actual community to keep this place safe, not police.”

The Oakland Police Officers Association sent a letter dated Feb. 20 to the cafe’s workers/owners asking to speak with them.

“Obviously, this is both a surprise and a matter of concern for all Oakland Police Officers,” wrote the association’s president Barry Donelan in the letter.

He asked the cafe to clarify its policy on not serving Oakland police and offered to speak to the cafe in person. It appears that so far, the business has not responded.

Related Articles Oakland cafe’s refusal to serve police draws attention The cafe, run by a five-member worker-owned cooperative, opened for business last November after a crowd-funding campaign and features a bookstore and conference room.

Its members continue to take stands rooted in their views of social justice, hosting film screenings and artwork and photo exhibits. At 5 p.m. Sunday, the cafe plans to host a gathering of #DefendJ20 campaign activists, including some arrested while protesting President Trump’s January 2017 inauguration in Washington, D.C.

Request for comment to the cafe were not immediately returned.

Harry Harris and George Kelly contributed to this report.