​FOLLOW THE MONEY: CLINTON CORRUPTION CASE STUDY: URANIUM ONE
- September 28, 2016 -

​FOLLOW THE MONEY: CLINTON CORRUPTION CASE STUDY: URANIUM ONE

Clinton Signed Off On A Deal Allowing Russia To Buy Into A Uranium Company After Accepting Millions Of Dollars In Donations To The Foundation And Paid Speeches From People Affiliated With The Company

In 2007 UrAsia Investors, Run By Ian Telfer, Took Control Of Uranium One :

In 2007, Guistra’s UrAsia Energy Ltd. Merged With Uranium One In A $3.5 Billion Deal. “In 2007, it merged with Uranium One, a South African company with assets in Africa and Australia, in what was described as a $3.5 billion transaction.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

In 2007, Guistra Sold His Stake In The Company, Which Was Estimated At $45 Million. “Through a spokeswoman, Mr. Giustra, whose personal stake in the deal was estimated at about $45 million, said he sold his stake in 2007.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

The Company Took The Uranium One Name, And Was Controlled By UrAsia Investors Including Ian Telfer Who Became Chairman Of Uranium One. “The new company, which kept the Uranium One name, was controlled by UrAsia investors including Ian Telfer, a Canadian who became chairman.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

By 2009 Uranium One Was In “Free-Fall” And Needed Help; Enter Russia :

By 2009, Uranium One’s Stock Was In “Free-Fall, Down 40 Percent.” “By June 2009, a little over a year after the star-studded evening in Toronto, Uranium One’s stock was in free-fall, down 40 percent.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

Rosatom Was Eyeing A Stake In Uranium One. “At the time, Russia was already eying a stake in Uranium One, Rosatom company documents show.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

Rosatom Is The Russian Atomic Energy Agency. “The article, in January 2013, detailed how the Russian atomic energy agency, Rosatom, had taken over a Canadian company with uranium-mining stakes stretching from Central Asia to the American West.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

Russia Wanted A Stake In The Uranium Mines Because Their Country “Lacks Sufficient Domestic Reserves To Meet Its Own Industry Needs.” “Rosatom officials say they were seeking to acquire mines around the world because Russia lacks sufficient domestic reserves to meet its own industry needs.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

“Uranium One Pressed The American Embassy In Kazakhstan” For “Written Confirmation That The Licenses Were Valid According To American Cables. “It was against this backdrop that the Vancouver-based Uranium One pressed the American Embassy in Kazakhstan, as well as Canadian diplomats, to take up its cause with Kazakh officials, according to the American cables. ‘We want more than a statement to the press,’ Paul Clarke, a Uranium One executive vice president, told the embassy’s energy officer on June 10, the officer reported in a cable. ‘That is simply chitchat.’ What the company needed, Mr. Clarke said, was official written confirmation that the licenses were valid.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

The American Embassy Reports To The Secretary Of State, And The Cable Was Copied To Clinton. “The American Embassy ultimately reported to the secretary of state, Mrs. Clinton. Though the Clarke cable was copied to her, it was given wide circulation, and it is unclear if she would have read it; the Clinton campaign did not address questions about the cable.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

“What Is Clear Is That The Embassy Acted, With The Cables Showing That The Energy Officer Met With Kazakh Officials To Discuss The Issue On June 10 And 11.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

Three Days After The Meetings Between The Energy Officer And Kazach Officials, Russia Completed A Deal For 17 Percent Of Uranium One. “Three days later, a wholly owned subsidiary of Rosatom completed a deal for 17 percent of Uranium One.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

In 2010 Russia Made An Offer For A Controlling 51 Percent Stake In Uranium One :

In 2010 When The Russians Wanted To Up Their Stake In Uranium One To 51 Percent, Giving Them A Controlling Stake, It Set Off “Alarm Bells” In America. “But it was the 2010 deal, giving the Russians a controlling 51 percent stake, that set off alarm bells.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

This “Generous Offer To Shareholders” Came Within A Year Of The 17 Percent Stake Deal. “And within a year, the Russian government substantially upped the ante, with a generous offer to shareholders that would give it a 51 percent controlling stake.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

As Secretary Of State, Clinton Had To Sign Off On The Deal Because Of Its National Security Implications :

Before Approval Of The 51% Russian Controlling Stake Of Uranium One, US Government Had To “Sign Off On The Deal.” “But first, Uranium One had to get the American government to sign off on the deal.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

The Power To Sign Off On These Deals Rests With “The Committee On Foreign Investment In The United States.” “When a company controlled by the Chinese government sought a 51 percent stake in a tiny Nevada gold mining operation in 2009, it set off a secretive review process in Washington, where officials raised concerns primarily about the mine’s proximity to a military installation, but also about the potential for minerals at the site, including uranium, to come under Chinese control. The officials killed the deal. Such is the power of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

Experts Say That “Russia’s Interest In Uranium One And Its American Uranium Reserves Seemed To Warrant Attention At The Highest Levels.” “Not all of the committee’s decisions are personally debated by the agency heads themselves; in less controversial cases, deputy or assistant secretaries may sign off. But experts and former committee members say Russia’s interest in Uranium One and its American uranium reserves seemed to warrant attention at the highest levels.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

Secretary Clinton Was On The Committee That Needed To Sign Off On The Deal. “Such is the power of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States. The committee comprises some of the most powerful members of the cabinet, including the attorney general, the secretaries of the Treasury, Defense, Homeland Security, Commerce and Energy, and the secretary of state.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

The Committee Has To Approve “Any Deal That Could Result In Foreign Control Of An American Business Or Asset Deemed Important To National Security.” “They are charged with reviewing any deal that could result in foreign control of an American business or asset deemed important to national security.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

The Uranium One Deal Was Important To National Security Because It “Concerned American Dependence On Foreign Uranium Sources.” “The national security issue at stake in the Uranium One deal was not primarily about nuclear weapons proliferation; the United States and Russia had for years cooperated on that front, with Russia sending enriched fuel from decommissioned warheads to be used in American nuclear power plants in return for raw uranium. Instead, it concerned American dependence on foreign uranium sources.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

“The Deal Made Rosatom One Of The World’s Largest Uranium Producers And Brought Mr. Putin Closer To His Goal Of Controlling Much Of The Global Uranium Supply Chain.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

“The Sale Gave The Russians Control Of One-Fifth Of All Uranium Production Capacity In The United States.” “Beyond mines in Kazakhstan that are among the most lucrative in the world, the sale gave the Russians control of one-fifth of all uranium production capacity in the United States.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

The “Ultimate Authority To Approve Or Reject The Russian Acquisition Rested With Cabinet Officials On The Foreign Investment Committee Including Mrs. Clinton…” “Still, the ultimate authority to approve or reject the Russian acquisition rested with the cabinet officials on the foreign investment committee, including Mrs. Clinton — whose husband was collecting millions in donations from people associated with Uranium One.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

The Clinton Foundation Accepted Millions Of Dollars From People Who Benefitted From Clinton’s Sign-Off On The Deal :

The New York Times Headline: “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company”(Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

This Approval Process Took Place While Bill Clinton “Was Collecting Millions In Donations From People Associated With Uranium One.” “Still, the ultimate authority to approve or reject the Russian acquisition rested with the cabinet officials on the foreign investment committee, including Mrs. Clinton — whose husband was collecting millions in donations from people associated with Uranium One.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

Uranium One’s Chariman Was Canadian Ian Telfer. “The new company, which kept the Uranium One name, was controlled by UrAsia investors including Ian Telfer, a Canadian who became chairman.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

In The 2010 Deal, The Russians Offered Shareholders Like Telfer A “Special Dividend” Meaning He Stood To Profit From The Deal. “With the Russians offering a special dividend, shareholders like Mr. Telfer stood to profit.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

Telfer’s Family Charity Donated Millions Of Dollars To The Clinton Foundation “During And After The Critical Time When The Foreign Investment Committee Was Reviewing His Deal With The Russians.” “But a review of tax records in Canada, where Mr. Telfer has a family charity called the Fernwood Foundation, shows that he donated millions of dollars more, during and after the critical time when the foreign investment committee was reviewing his deal with the Russians.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

In 2009, The Fernwood Foundation Donated $1 Million, The Same Year Uranium One “Appealed To The American Embassy To Help Keep Its Mines In Kazakhstan, $250,000 In 2010, The Year The Russians Sought Majority Control; As Well As $600,000 In 2011 And $500,000 In 2012.” “His donations through the Fernwood Foundation included $1 million reported in 2009, the year his company appealed to the American Embassy to help it keep its mines in Kazakhstan; $250,000 in 2010, the year the Russians sought majority control; as well as $600,000 in 2011 and $500,000 in 2012.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

NOTE: The Fernwood Foundation Donations Remain Undisclosed On The Clinton Foundation Website. (Clinton Foundation, Accessed 5/1/16)

Telfer’s “Undisclosed Donations Came In Addition To Between $1.3 Million And $5.6 Million In Contributions, Which Were Reported, From A Constellation Of People With Ties To Uranium One Or UrAsia.” The Company That Originally Acquired The Kazakh Mines. “Mr. Telfer’s undisclosed donations came in addition to between $1.3 million and $5.6 million in contributions, which were reported, from a constellation of people with ties to Uranium One or UrAsia, the company that originally acquired Uranium One’s most valuable asset: the Kazakh mines.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

“The Episode Underscores The Special Ethical Challenges Presented By The Clinton Foundation…” “But the episode underscores the special ethical challenges presented by the Clinton Foundation, headed by a former president who relied heavily on foreign cash to accumulate $250 million in assets even as his wife helped steer American foreign policy as secretary of state, presiding over decisions with the potential to benefit the foundation’s donors.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

In June 2010, Bill Clinton Was Paid $500,000 To Speak In Moscow At An Event Involving Uranium One :

“Amid This Influx Of Uranium One Connected Money” Flowing To The Foundation, Bill Clinton Spoke In Moscow In June 2010, The Same Month Russia “Struck Its Deal For A Majority Stake In Uranium One.” “Amid this influx of Uranium One-connected money, Mr. Clinton was invited to speak in Moscow in June 2010, the same month Rosatom struck its deal for a majority stake in Uranium One.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

Bill Clinton Was Paid $500,000, One Of His Highest Speaking Fees Ever, From “A Russian Investment Bank With Ties To The Kremlin…” “The $500,000 fee — among Mr. Clinton’s highest — was paid by Renaissance Capital, a Russian investment bank with ties to the Kremlin that has invited world leaders, including Tony Blair, the former British prime minister, to speak at its investor conferences.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

For His Appearance At The Renaissance Capital Investors Conference, Bill Clinton Received A Personal Thank-You Call From Vladimir Putin. “After the appearance, Mr. Clinton received a personal thank-you call from Vladimir Putin, then the Russian prime minister, the government news agency TASS reported.” (James Grimaldi and Rebecca Ballhaus, “Speaking Fees Meet Politics For Clintons,” The Wall Street Journal, 12/30/15)

At The Conference, Renaissance Capital Analysts “Talked Up Uranium One Stock” Giving It A “Buy” Rating And Claiming It Was The “Best Play” In The Uranium Markets. “Renaissance Capital analysts talked up Uranium One’s stock, assigning it a ‘buy’ rating and saying in a July 2010 research report that it was ‘the best play’ in the uranium markets.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)

The Deal Allowing Russia To Buy Into Uranium One Was Approved Between 2009 And 2013 :

The Russians Ended Up Assuming Control Of Uranium One Between 2009 And 2013. “As the Russians gradually assumed control of Uranium One in three separate transactions from 2009 to 2013, Canadian records show, a flow of cash made its way to the Clinton Foundation.” (Jo Becker and Mike McIntire, “Cash Flowed To Clinton Foundation As Russians Pressed For Control Of Uranium Company,” The New York Times, 4/23/15)