Passage of Affordable Care Act Was Open And Transparent. After Passage Of the Law, Proof That ACA Works
As Incoming Majority Leader McConnell Continues To Promise To Undo The ACA "Root And Branch", Democrats Point To Law's Early Successes

Just Last Week, CMS Reported That 2013 Health Care Cost Increases Were Lowest Ever Recorded

Senator Chris Murphy, Leader Of Senate Democrats' #ACAWorks Campaign: Claiming The Process Was Anything Less Than Completely Transparent Is Misleading And Political... Republicans Should Listen To The Public, Drop Their Crusade To Repeal The Affordable Care Act

WASHINGTON, DC - Today, as House Republicans continue to vow to repeal the Affordable Care Act and hold a hearing titled, "Examining ObamaCare Transparency Failures", Senate Democrats released data and key points refuting Republican claims and demonstrating the clear transparency of the process that led to the passage of the ACA. Today's hearing comes after the latest ACA enrollment numbers show a solid start in the first week of 2015's open enrollment period and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services' release of a new report showing that healthcare spending in the U.S. grew last year at the lowest rate ever recorded, in part due to the ACA. As more reports of the positive effects of the ACA are announced, Republicans, however, continue to promise a vote to repeal the law and strip away affordable coverage from millions of Americans and put insurance companies back in charge.

"Today's ludicrous hearing in the House of Representatives is just the latest example of Republicans doing whatever it takes to strip affordable health care from millions of people in Connecticut and across America who want and need it," said Senator Chris Murphy (D-Conn.) leader of the Senate Democrats' #ACAworks campaign. "The idea that the Affordable Care Act was drafted behind closed doors is false. Between the dozens of hours-long public meetings in the Senate HELP and Finance committees, as well as the countless hours House members spent debating the bill in the Energy & Commerce, Ways & Means, and Education & Labor committees, members of Congress actually spent a historically high amount of time on this legislation. Claiming the process was anything less than completely transparent is misleading and political. If Republicans want to improve health care in this country, they should listen to the public, drop their crusade to repeal the Affordable Care Act and instead work with Democrats to make it even better.

Contrary to Republican claims, the process that led to the passage of the Affordable Care Act was one of the most transparent in our nation's history. Below is a selection of points to refute many claims House Republicans are expected to make at today's hearing.

FACT: The ACA had a historic number of hours of debate and amendments during Committee development of the legislations.

The House process spanned three committees - Energy and Commerce, Ways and means, and Education and Labor - with dozens of hearings over many months.

Specifically, the House held 79 bipartisan hearings and markups on the health reform bill over the period of an entire year.

House members spent nearly 100 hours in hearings, heard from 181 witnesses from both sides of the aisle, considered 239 amendments (both Democratic and Republican), and accepted 121 amendments.

FACT: The Senate held dozens of public meetings and hearings in both the Finance and HELP Committees and accepted hundreds of Republican amendments.

The HELP Committee held 14 bipartisan roundtables, 13 bipartisan hearings, and 20 bipartisan walkthroughs on health reform.

The HELP Committee considered nearly 300 amendments and accepted more than 160 Republican amendments .

The Finance Committee held 17 roundtables, summits, and hearings on health reform. The Finance Committee also held 13 member meetings and walkthroughs and 38 meetings and negotiations for a total of 53 meetings on health reform. [Senate Finance Committee, 5/3/10 ]

The Finance Committee held a seven-day markup of the bill, the longest Finance Committee markup in 22 years, resulting in a bipartisan 14-to-9 vote to approve the bill. [Senate Finance Committee, 5/3/10 ]

The Finance Committee markup resulted in 41 amendments to revise the bill, including 18 by unanimous consent or without objection. [Senate Finance Committee, 10/13/09 ]

FACT: The financing of the ACA's coverage provisions was well known and debated.

When the bill came to the floor, the Senate spent 25 consecutive days in session on health reform, the second longest consecutive session in history. In total, the Senate spent more than 160 hours considering the health reform legislation.

The non-partisan Congressional Budget Office issued many reports on the Affordable Care Act's financing, clearly showing that revenue would be raised by the personal responsibility provision, also known at the individual mandate or free-rider penalty, in every case that it described the law's coverage provisions. [CBO, 12/10 ; The Washington Post, 9/24/14 ; ASPE, 9/24/14 ]