eCFR — Code of Federal Regulations
Find, review, and submit comments on Federal rules that are open for comment and published in the Federal Register using Regulations.gov.

Parallel Table of Authorities and Rules for the Code of Federal Regulations and the United States Code Text | PDF

Monthly Title and Part user viewing data for the e-CFR is available for download in CSV format .

The Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) annual edition is the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the departments and agencies of the Federal Government produced by the Office of the Federal Register (OFR) and the Government Publishing Office.

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations

Title 50: Wildlife and Fisheries

PART 23—CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES OF WILD FAUNA AND FLORA (CITES)

Contents

Subpart A—Introduction

Subpart B—Prohibitions, Exemptions, and Requirements

Subpart C—Application Procedures, Criteria, and Conditions

Subpart D—Factors Considered in Making Certain Findings

Subpart E—International Trade in Certain Specimens

Vicugna vicugna

Subpart F—Disposal of Confiscated Wildlife and Plants

Subpart G—CITES Administration

Subpart H—Lists of Species

Authority: Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (March 3, 1973), 27 U.S.T. 1087; and Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended, 16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.

Source: 72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—Introduction

§23.1 What are the purposes of these regulations and CITES?

(a) Treaty. The regulations in this part implement the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, also known as CITES, the Convention, the Treaty, or the Washington Convention, TIAS (Treaties and Other International Acts Series) 8249.

(b) Purpose. The aim of CITES is to regulate international trade in wildlife and plants, including parts, products, and derivatives, to ensure it is legal and does not threaten the survival of species in the wild. Parties, recognize that:

(1) Wildlife and plants are an irreplaceable part of the natural systems of the earth and must be protected for this and future generations.

(2) The value of wildlife and plants is ever-growing from the viewpoints of aesthetics, science, culture, recreation, and economics.

(3) Although countries should be the best protectors of their own wildlife and plants, international cooperation is essential to protect wildlife and plant species from over-exploitation through international trade.

(4) It is urgent that countries take appropriate measures to prevent illegal trade and ensure that any use of wildlife and plants is sustainable.

(c) National legislation. We, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), implement CITES through the Endangered Species Act (ESA).

§23.2 How do I decide if these regulations apply to my shipment or me?

If you are engaging in activities with specimens of CITES-listed species these regulations apply to you.

[79 FR 30419, May 27, 2014]

§23.3 What other wildlife and plant regulations may apply?

(a) You may need to comply with other regulations in this subchapter that require a permit or have additional restrictions. Many CITES species are also covered by one or more parts of this subchapter or title and have additional requirements:

(1) Part 15 (exotic birds).

(2) Part 16 (injurious wildlife).

(3) Parts 17 of this subchapter and 222, 223, and 224 of this title (endangered and threatened species).

(4) Parts 18 of this subchapter and 216 of this title (marine mammals).

(5) Part 20 (migratory bird hunting).

(6) Part 21 (migratory birds).

(7) Part 22 (bald and golden eagles).

(b) If you are applying for a permit, you must comply with the general permit procedures in part 13 of this subchapter. Definitions and a list of birds protected under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act can be found in part 10 of this subchapter.

(c) If you are importing (including introduction from the sea), exporting, or re-exporting wildlife or plants, you must comply with the regulations in part 14 of this subchapter for wildlife or part 24 of this subchapter for plants. Activities with plants are also regulated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) and Department of Homeland Security, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), in 7 CFR parts 319, 355, and 356.

(d) You may also need to comply with other Federal, State, tribal, or local requirements.

§23.4 What are Appendices I, II, and III?

Species are listed by the Parties in one of three Appendices to the Treaty (see subpart H of this part), each of which provides a different level of protection and is subject to different requirements. Parties regulate trade in specimens of Appendix-I, -II, and -III species and their parts, products, and derivatives through a system of permits and certificates (CITES documents). Such documents enable Parties to monitor the effects of the volume and type of trade to ensure trade is legal and not detrimental to the survival of the species.

(a) Appendix I includes species threatened with extinction that are or may be affected by trade. Trade in Appendix-I specimens may take place only in exceptional circumstances.

(b) Appendix II includes species that are not presently threatened with extinction, but may become so if their trade is not regulated. It also includes species that need to be regulated so that trade in certain other Appendix-I or -II species may be effectively controlled; these species are most commonly listed due to their similarity of appearance to other related CITES species.

(c) Appendix III includes species listed unilaterally by a range country to obtain international cooperation in controlling trade.

§23.5 How are the terms used in these regulations defined?

In addition to the definitions contained in part 10 of this subchapter, and unless the context otherwise requires, in this part:

Affected by trade means that either a species is known to be in trade and the trade has or may have a detrimental impact on the status of the species, or a species is suspected to be in trade or there is demonstrable potential international demand for the species that may be detrimental to the survival of the species in the wild.

Annotation means an official footnote to the listing of a species in the CITES Appendices. A reference annotation provides information that further explains the listing (such as “p.e.” for possibly extinct). A substantive annotation is an integral part of a species listing. It designates whether the listing includes or excludes a geographically separate population, subspecies, species, group of species, or higher taxon, and the types of specimens included in or excluded from the listing, such as certain parts, products, or derivatives. A substantive annotation may designate export quotas adopted by the CoP. For species transferred from Appendix I to II subject to an annotation relating to specified types of specimens, other types of specimens that are not specifically included in the annotation are treated as if they are Appendix-I specimens.

Appropriate and acceptable destination, when used in an Appendix-II listing annotation for the export of, or international trade in, live animals, means that the Management Authority of the importing country has certified, based on advice from the Scientific Authority of that country, that the proposed recipient is suitably equipped to house and care for the animal (see criteria in §23.65). Such certification must be provided before a CITES document is issued by the Management Authority of the exporting or re-exporting country.

Artificially propagated means a cultivated plant that meets the criteria in §23.64.

ATA carnet means a type of international customs document (see §23.50). ATA is a combination of the French and English words “Admission Temporaire/Temporary Admission.”

Bred for commercial purposes means any specimen of an Appendix-I wildlife species bred in captivity for commercial purposes. Any Appendix-I specimen that does not meet the definition of “bred for noncommercial purposes” is considered to be bred for commercial purposes.

Bred for noncommercial purposes means any specimen of an Appendix-I wildlife species bred in captivity for noncommercial purposes, where each donation, exchange, or loan of the specimen is noncommercial.

Bred in captivity means wildlife that is captive-bred and meets the criteria in §23.63.

Captive-bred means wildlife that is the offspring (first (F1) or subsequent generations) of parents that either mated or otherwise transferred egg and sperm under controlled conditions if reproduction is sexual, or of a parent that was maintained under controlled conditions when development of the offspring began if reproduction is asexual, but does not meet the bred-in-captivity criteria (see §23.63).

Certificate means a CITES document or CITES exemption document that identifies on its face the type of certificate it is, including re-export certificate, introduction-from-the-sea certificate, and certificate of origin.

CITES document or CITES exemption document means any certificate, permit, or other document issued by a Management Authority of a Party or a competent authority of a non-Party whose name and address is on file with the Secretariat to authorize the international movement of CITES specimens.

Commercial means related to an activity, including actual or intended import, export, re-export, sale, offer for sale, purchase, transfer, donation, exchange, or provision of a service, that is reasonably likely to result in economic use, gain, or benefit, including, but not limited to, profit (whether in cash or in kind).

Coral (dead) means pieces of stony coral that contain no living coral tissue and in which the structure of the corallites (skeletons of the individual polyps) is still intact and the specimens are therefore identifiable to the level of species or genus. See also §23.23(c)(13).

Coral fragments, including coral gravel and coral rubble, means loose pieces of broken finger-like stony coral between 2 and 30 mm measured in all directions that contain no living coral tissue and are not identifiable to the level of genus (see §23.92 for exemptions).

Coral (live) means pieces of stony coral that are alive and are therefore identifiable to the level of species or genus. See also §23.23(c)(13).

Coral rock means hard consolidated material greater than 30 mm measured in any direction that consists of pieces of stony coral that contain no living coral tissue and possibly also cemented sand, coralline algae, or other sedimentary rocks. Coral rock includes live rock and substrate, which are terms for pieces of coral rock to which are attached live specimens of other invertebrate species or coralline algae that are not listed in the CITES Appendices. See also §23.23(c)(13).

Coral sand means material that consists entirely or in part of finely crushed stony coral no larger than 2 mm measured in all directions that contains no living coral tissue and is not identifiable to the level of genus (see §23.92 for exemptions).

Coral (stony) means any coral in the orders Helioporacea, Milleporina, Scleractinia, Stolonifera, and Stylasterina.

Country of origin means the country where the wildlife or plant was taken from the wild or was born or propagated in a controlled environment, except in the case of a plant specimen that qualified for an exemption under the provisions of CITES, the country of origin is the country in which the specimen ceased to qualify for the exemption.

Cultivar means a horticulturally derived plant variety that: has been selected for a particular character or combination of characters; is distinct, uniform, and stable in these characters; and when propagated by appropriate means, retains these characters. The cultivar name and description must be formally published in order to be recognized under CITES.

Cultivated means a plant grown or tended by humans for human use. A cultivated plant can be treated as artificially propagated under CITES only if it meets the criteria in §23.64.

Export means to send, ship, or carry a specimen out of a country (for export from the United States, see part 14 of this subchapter).

Flasked means plant material obtained in vitro, in solid or liquid media, transported in sterile containers.

Household effect means a dead wildlife or plant specimen that is part of a household move and meets the criteria in §23.15.

Hybrid means any wildlife or plant that results from a cross of genetic material between two separate taxa when one or both are listed in Appendix I, II, or III. See §23.42 for plant hybrids and §23.43 for wildlife hybrids.

Import means to bring, ship, or carry a specimen into a country (for import into the United States, see part 14 of this subchapter).

International trade means the import, introduction from the sea, export, or re-export across jurisdictional or international boundaries for any purpose whether commercial or noncommercial.

In-transit shipment means the transshipment of any wildlife or plant through an intermediary country when the specimen remains under customs control and either the shipment meets the requirements of §23.22 or the sample collection covered by an ATA carnet meets the requirements of §23.50.

Introduction from the sea means transportation into a country of specimens of any species that were taken in the marine environment not under the jurisdiction of any country, i.e., taken in those marine areas beyond the areas subject to the sovereignty or sovereign rights of a country consistent with international law, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

ISO country code means the two-letter country code developed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) to represent the name of a country and its subdivisions.

Live rock see the definition for coral rock.

Management Authority means a governmental agency officially designated by, and under the supervision of, either a Party to implement CITES, or a non-Party to serve in the role of a Management Authority, including the issuance of CITES documents on behalf of that country.

Noncommercial means related to an activity that is not commercial. Noncommercial includes, but is not limited to, personal use.

Non-Party means a country that has not deposited an instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval, or accession to CITES with the Depositary Government (Switzerland), or a country that was a Party but subsequently notified the Depositary Government of its denunciation of CITES and the denunciation is in effect.

Offspring of first generation (F1) means a wildlife specimen produced in a controlled environment from parents at least one of which was conceived in or taken from the wild.

Offspring of second generation (F2) or subsequent generations means a wildlife specimen produced in a controlled environment from parents that were also produced in a controlled environment.

Parental stock means the original breeding or propagating specimens that produced the subsequent generations of captive or cultivated specimens.

Party means a country that has given its consent to be bound by the provisions of CITES by depositing an instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval, or accession with the Depositary Government (Switzerland), and for which such consent is in effect.

Permit means a CITES document that identifies on its face import permit or export permit.

Personal effect means a dead wildlife or plant specimen, including a tourist souvenir, that is worn as clothing or accessories or is contained in accompanying baggage and meets the criteria in §23.15.

Personal use means use that is not commercial and is for an individual's own consumption or enjoyment.

Precautionary measures means the actions taken that will be in the best interest of the conservation of the species when there is uncertainty about the status of a species or the impact of trade on the conservation of a species.

Pre-Convention means a specimen that was acquired (removed from the wild or born or propagated in a controlled environment) before the date the provisions of the Convention first applied to the species and that meets the criteria in §23.45, and any product (including a manufactured item) or derivative made from such specimen.

Primarily commercial purposes means an activity whose noncommercial aspects do not clearly predominate (see §23.62).

Propagule means a structure, such as a cutting, seed, or spore, which is capable of propagating a plant.

Ranched wildlife means specimens of animals reared in a controlled environment that were taken from the wild as eggs or juveniles where they would otherwise have had a very low probability of surviving to adulthood. See also §23.34.

Readily recognizable means any specimen that appears from a visual, physical, scientific, or forensic examination or test; an accompanying document, packaging, mark, or label; or any other circumstances to be a part, product, or derivative of any CITES wildlife or plant, unless such part, product, or derivative is specifically exempt from the provisions of CITES or this part.

Re-export means to send, ship, or carry out of a country any specimen previously imported into that country, whether or not the specimen has been altered since import.

Reservation means the action taken by a Party to inform the Secretariat that it is not bound by the effect of a specific listing (see §23.21).

Scientific Authority means a governmental or independent scientific institution or entity officially designated by either a Party to implement CITES, or a non-Party to serve the role of a Scientific Authority, including making scientific findings.

Secretariat means the entity designated by the Treaty to perform certain administrative functions (see §23.84).

Shipment means any CITES specimen in international trade whether for commercial or noncommercial use, including any personal item.

Species means any species, subspecies, hybrid, variety, cultivar, color or morphological variant, or geographically separate population of that species.

Specimen means any wildlife or plant, whether live or dead. This term includes any readily recognizable part, product, or derivative unless otherwise annotated in the Appendices.

Sustainable use means the use of a species in a manner and at a level that maintains wild populations at biologically viable levels for the long term. Such use involves a determination of the productive capacity of the species and its ecosystem to ensure that utilization does not exceed those capacities or the ability of the population to reproduce, maintain itself, and perform its role or function in its ecosystem.

Trade means the same as international trade.

Transit see the definition for in-transit shipment.

Traveling exhibition means a display of live or dead wildlife or plants for entertainment, educational, cultural, or other display purposes that is temporarily moving internationally.

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30419, May 27, 2014]

§23.6 What are the roles of the Management and Scientific Authorities?

Under Article IX of the Treaty, each Party must designate a Management and Scientific Authority to implement CITES for that country. If a non-Party wants to trade with a Party, it must also designate such Authorities. The names and addresses of these offices must be sent to the Secretariat to be included in the Directory. In the United States, different offices within the FWS have been designated the Scientific Authority and Management Authority, which for purposes of this section includes FWS Law Enforcement. When offices share activities, the Management Authority is responsible for dealing primarily with management and regulatory issues and the Scientific Authority is responsible for dealing primarily with scientific issues. The offices do the following:

Roles U.S.

Scientific Authority U.S. Management

Authority (a) Provide scientific advice and recommendations, including advice on biological findings for applications for certain CITES documents, registrations, and export program approvals. Evaluate the conservation status of species to determine if a species listing or change in a listing is warranted. Interpret listings and review nomenclatural issues. x (b) Review applications for CITES documents and issue or deny them based on findings required by CITES. x (c) Communicate with the Secretariat and other countries on scientific, administrative, and enforcement issues. x x (d) Ensure that export of Appendix-II specimens is at a level that maintains a species throughout its range at a level consistent with its role in the ecosystems in which it occurs and well above the level at which it might become eligible for inclusion in Appendix I. x (e) Monitor trade in all CITES species and produce annual reports on CITES trade. x (f) Collect the cancelled foreign export permit or re-export certificate and any corresponding import permit presented for import of any CITES specimen. Collect a copy of the validated U.S. export permit or re-export certificate presented for export or re-export of any CITES specimen. x (g) Produce biennial reports on legislative, regulatory, and administrative measures taken by the United States to enforce the provisions of CITES. x (h) Coordinate with State and tribal governments and other Federal agencies on CITES issues, such as the status of native species, development of policies, negotiating positions, and law enforcement activities. x x (i) Communicate with the scientific community, the public, and media about CITES issues. Conduct public meetings and publish notices to gather input from the public on the administration of CITES and the conservation and trade status of domestic and foreign species traded internationally. x x (j) Represent the United States at the meetings of the CoP, on committees (see subpart G of this part), and on CITES working groups. Consult with other countries on CITES issues and the conservation status of species. Prepare discussion papers and proposals for new or amended resolutions and species listings for consideration at the CoP. x x (k) Provide assistance to APHIS and CBP for the enforcement of CITES. Cooperate with enforcement officials to facilitate the exchange of information between enforcement bodies and for training purposes. x x (l) Provide financial and technical assistance to other governmental agencies and CITES officials of other countries. x x

§23.7 What office do I contact for CITES information?

Contact the following offices to receive information about CITES:

Type of information Office to contact (a) CITES administrative and management issues:

(1) CITES documents, including application forms and procedures; lists of registered scientific institutions and operations breeding Appendix-I wildlife for commercial purposes; and reservations

(2) Information on the CoP

(3) List of CITES species

(4) Names and addresses of other countries' Management and Scientific Authority offices

(5) Notifications, resolutions, and decisions

(6) Standing Committee documents and issues

(7) State and tribal export programs U.S. Management Authority, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Headquarters, MS: IA, 5275 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, VA 22041-3803, Toll Free: (800) 358-2104/permit questions, Tel: (703) 358-2095/other questions, Fax: (703) 358-2281/permits, Fax: (703) 358-2298/other issues, Email: managementauthority@fws.gov , Web site: http://www.fws.gov/international and http://www.fws.gov/permits. (b) Scientific issues:

(1) Animals and Plants Committees documents and issues

(2) Findings of non-detriment and suitability of facilities, and other scientific findings

(3) Listing of species in the Appendices and relevant resolutions

(4) Names and addresses of other countries' Scientific Authority offices and scientists involved with CITES-related issues

(5) Nomenclatural issues U.S. Scientific Authority, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Headquarters, MS: IA, 5275 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, VA 22041-3803, Tel: (703) 358-1708, Fax: (703) 358-2276, Email: scientificauthority@fws.gov , Web site: http://www.fws.gov/international. (c) Wildlife clearance procedures:

(1) CITES replacement tags

(2) Information about wildlife port office locations

(3) Information bulletins

(4) Inspection and clearance of wildlife shipments involving import, introduction from the sea, export, and re-export, and filing a Declaration of Importation or Exportation of Fish or Wildlife (Form 3-177)

(5) Validation, certification, or cancellation of CITES wildlife documents Law Enforcement, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Headquarters, MS: OLE, 5275 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, VA 22041-3803, Tel: (703) 358-1949, Fax: (703) 358-2271, Web site: http://www.fws.gov/le. (d) APHIS plant clearance procedures:

(1) Information about plant port office locations

(2) Inspection and clearance of plant shipments involving:

(i) Import and introduction from the sea of living plants

(ii) Export and re-export of living and nonliving plants

(3) Validation or cancellation of CITES plant documents for the type of shipments listed in paragraph (d)(2) of this section U.S. Department of Agriculture APHIS/PPQ, 4700 River Road, Riverdale, Maryland 20737-1236, Toll Free: (877) 770-5990/permit questions, Tel: (301) 734-8891/other CITES issues, Fax: (301) 734-5786/permit questions, Fax: (301) 734-5276/other CITES issues, Website: http://www.aphis.usda.gov/plant_health (e) CBP plant clearance procedures:

(1) Inspection and clearance of plant shipments involving:

(i) Import and introduction from the sea of nonliving plants

(ii) Import of living plants from Canada at designated border ports (7 CFR 319.37-14(b) and 50 CFR 24.12(d))

(2) Cancellation of CITES plant documents for the type of shipments listed in paragraph (e)(1) of this section Department of Homeland Security, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Office of Field Operations, Agriculture Programs and Liaison, 1300 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Room 2.5 B, Washington, DC 20229, Tel: (202) 344-3298, Fax: (202) 344-1442 (f) General information on CITES:

(1) CITES export quota information

(2) CITES' Guidelines for transport and preparation for shipment of live wild animals and plants

(3) Information about the Secretariat

(4) Names and addresses of other countries' Management and Scientific Authority offices

(5) Official documents, including resolutions, decisions, notifications, CoP documents, and committee documents

(6) Official list of CITES species and species database

(7) Text of the Convention CITES Secretariat, Website: http://www.cites.org

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30420, May 27, 2014; 79 FR 43966, July 29, 2014]

§23.8 What are the information collection requirements?

The Office of Management and Budget approved the information collection requirements for application forms and reports contained in this part and assigned OMB Control Number 1018-0093. We cannot collect or sponsor a collection of information and you are not required to provide information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number.

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30420, May 27, 2014]

§23.9 Incorporation by reference.

(a) Certain material is incorporated by reference into this part with the approval of the Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. You may inspect copies at the U.S. Management Authority, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Headquarters, MS. IA, 5275 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, VA 22041-3803, or at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this material at NARA, call 202-741-6030, or go to: http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/code_of_federal_regulations/ibr_locations.html.

(b) International Air Transport Association (IATA), 800 Place Victoria, P.O. Box 113, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H4Z 1M1, 1-800-716-6326, http://www.iata.org.

(1) Live Animals Regulations (LAR) 40th edition, effective October 1, 2013, into §§23.23, 23.26, and 23.56.

(2) Perishable Cargo Regulations (PCR) 13th edition, effective July 1, 2013, into §§23.23, 23.26, and 23.56.

[79 FR 30420, May 27, 2014, as amended at 79 FR 43967, July 29, 2014]

Subpart B—Prohibitions, Exemptions, and Requirements

§23.13 What is prohibited?

Except as provided in §23.92, it is unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to conduct any of the following activities unless they meet the requirements of this part:

(a) Import, export, re-export, or engage in international trade with any specimen of a species listed in Appendix I, II, or III of CITES.

(b) Introduce from the sea any specimen of a species listed in Appendix I or II of CITES.

(c) Possess any specimen of a species listed in Appendix I, II, or III of CITES imported, exported, re-exported, introduced from the sea, or traded contrary to the provisions of CITES, the ESA, or this part.

(d) Use any specimen of a species listed in Appendix I, II, or III of CITES for any purpose contrary to what is allowed under §23.55.

(e) Violate any other provisions of this part.

(f) Attempt to commit, solicit another to commit, or cause to be committed any of the activities described in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this section.

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30420, May 27, 2014]

§23.14 [Reserved]

§23.15 How may I travel internationally with my personal or household effects, including tourist souvenirs?

(a) Purpose. Article VII(3) of the Treaty recognizes a limited exemption for the international movement of personal and household effects.

(b) Stricter national measures. The exemption for personal and household effects does not apply if a country prohibits or restricts the import, export, or re-export of the item.

(1) You or your shipment must be accompanied by any document required by a country under its stricter national measures.

(2) In the United States, you must obtain any permission needed under other regulations in this subchapter (see §23.3).

(c) Required CITES documents. You must obtain a CITES document for personal or household effects and meet the requirements of this part if one of the following applies:

(1) The Management Authority of the importing, exporting, or re-exporting country requires a CITES document.

(2) You or your shipment does not meet all of the conditions for an exemption as provided in paragraphs (d) through (f) of this section.

(3) The personal or household effect for the following species exceeds the quantity indicated in paragraphs (c)(3)(i) through (vi) in the table below:

Major group Species (Appendix II only) Type of specimen Quantity1 Fishes (i) Acipenseriformes (sturgeon, including paddlefish) Sturgeon caviar (see §23.71) 125 gm Fishes (ii) Hippocampus spp. (seahorses) Dead specimens, parts, products (including manufactured items), and derivatives 4 Reptiles (iii) Crocodylia (alligators, caimans, crocodiles, gavial) Dead specimens, parts, products (including manufactured items), and derivatives 4 Molluscs (iv) Strombus gigas (queen conch) Shells 3 Molluscs (v) Tridacnidae (giant clams) Shells, each of which may be one intact shell or two matching halves 3 shells, total not exceeding 3 kg Plants (vi) Cactaceae (cacti) Rainsticks 3

(d) Personal effects. You do not need a CITES document to import, export, or re-export any legally acquired specimen of a CITES species to or from the United States if all of the following conditions are met:

(1) No live wildlife or plant (including eggs or non-exempt seeds) is included.

(2) No specimen from an Appendix-I species is included, except for certain worked African elephant ivory as provided in paragraph (f) of this section.

(3) The specimen and quantity of specimens are reasonably necessary or appropriate for the nature of your trip or stay and, if the type of specimen is one listed in paragraph (c)(3) of this section, the quantity does not exceed the quantity given in the table.

(4) You own and possess the specimen for personal use, including any specimen intended as a personal gift.

(5) You are either wearing the specimen as clothing or an accessory or taking it as part of your personal baggage, which is being carried by you or checked as baggage on the same plane, boat, vehicle, or train as you.

(6) The specimen was not mailed or shipped separately.

(e) Household effects. You do not need a CITES document to import, export, or re-export any legally acquired specimen of a CITES species that is part of a shipment of your household effects when moving your residence to or from the United States, if all of the following conditions are met:

(1) The provisions of paragraphs (d)(1) through (3) of this section are met.

(2) You own the specimen and are moving it for personal use.

(3) You import or export your household effects within 1 year of changing your residence from one country to another.

(4) The shipment, or shipments if you cannot move all of your household effects at one time, contains only specimens purchased, inherited, or otherwise acquired before you changed your residence.

(f) African elephant worked ivory. You may export or re-export from the United States worked African elephant (Loxodonta africana) ivory and then re-import it without a CITES document if all of the following conditions are met:

(1) The worked ivory is a personal or household effect that meets the requirements of paragraphs (c) through (e) of this section and you are a U.S. resident who owned the worked ivory before leaving the United States and intend to bring the item back to the United States.

(2) The ivory is pre-Convention (see §23.45). (The African elephant was first listed in CITES on February 26, 1976.)

(3) You may not sell or transfer the ivory while outside the United States.

(4) The ivory is substantially worked and is not raw. Raw ivory means an African elephant tusk, or any piece of tusk, the surface of which, polished or unpolished, is unaltered or minimally carved, including ivory mounted on a stand or part of a trophy.

(5) When you return, you are able to provide records, receipts, or other documents to show that the ivory is pre-Convention and that you owned and registered it before you left the United States. To register such an item you must obtain one of the following documents:

(i) U.S. CITES pre-Convention certificate.

(ii) FWS Declaration of Importation or Exportation of Fish or Wildlife (Form 3-177).

(iii) Customs and Border Protection Certificate of Registration for Personal Effects Taken Abroad (Form 4457).

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 73 FR 40986, July 17, 2008]

§23.16 What are the U.S. CITES requirements for urine, feces, and synthetically derived DNA?

(a) CITES documents. We do not require CITES documents to trade in urine, feces, or synthetically derived DNA.

(1) You must obtain any collection permit and CITES document required by the foreign country.

(2) If the foreign country requires you to have a U.S. CITES document for these kinds of samples, you must apply for a CITES document and meet the requirements of this part.

(b) Urine and feces. Except as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, we consider urine and feces to be wildlife byproducts, rather than parts, products, or derivatives, and exempt them from the requirements of CITES and this part.

(c) DNA. We differentiate between DNA directly extracted from blood and tissue and DNA synthetically derived as follows:

(1) A DNA sample directly derived from wildlife or plant tissue is regulated by CITES and this part.

(2) A DNA sample synthetically derived that does not contain any part of the original template is exempt from the requirements of CITES and this part.

§23.17 What are the requirements for CITES specimens traded internationally by diplomatic, consular, military, and other persons exempt from customs duties or inspections?

A specimen of a CITES species imported, introduced from the sea, exported, or re-exported by a person receiving duty-free or inspection exemption privileges under customs laws must meet the requirements of CITES and the regulations in this part.

§23.18 What CITES documents are required to export Appendix-I wildlife?

Answer the questions in the following decision tree to find the section in this part that applies to the type of CITES document you need to export Appendix-I wildlife. See §23.20(d) for CITES exemption documents or §23.92 for specimens that are exempt from the requirements of CITES and do not need CITES documents.

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30420, May 27, 2014]

§23.19 What CITES documents are required to export Appendix-I plants?

Answer the questions in the following decision tree to find the section in this part that applies to the type of CITES document you need to export Appendix-I plants. See §23.20(d) for CITES exemption documents or §23.92 for specimens that are exempt from the requirements of CITES and do not need CITES documents.

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30420, May 27, 2014]

§23.20 What CITES documents are required for international trade?

(a) Purpose. Articles III, IV, and V of the Treaty give the types of standard CITES documents that must accompany an Appendix-I, -II, or -III specimen in international trade. Articles VII and XIV recognize some exemptions and provide that a CITES document must accompany most exempt specimens.

(b) Stricter national measures. Before importing, introducing from the sea, exporting, or re-exporting a specimen, check with the Management Authorities of all countries concerned to obtain any documentation required under stricter national measures.

(c) CITES documents. Except as provided in the regulations in this part, you must have a valid CITES document to engage in international trade in any CITES specimen.

(d) CITES exemption documents. The following table lists the CITES exemption document that you must obtain before conducting a proposed activity with an exempt specimen (other than specimens exempted under §23.92). If one of the exemptions does not apply to the specimen, you must obtain a CITES document as provided in paragraph (e) of this section. The first column in the following table alphabetically lists the type of specimen or activity that may qualify for a CITES exemption document. The last column indicates the section of this part that contains information on the application procedures, provisions, criteria, and conditions specific to each CITES exemption document, as follows:

Type of specimen or activity Appendix CITES exemption document Section (1) Artificially propagated plant (see paragraph (d)(4) of this section for an Appendix-I plant propagated for commercial purposes) I, II, or III CITES document with source code “A”1 23.40 (2) Artificially propagated plant from a country that has provided copies of the certificates, stamps, and seals to the Secretariat II or III Phytosanitary certificate with CITES statement1 23.23(f) (3) Bred-in-captivity wildlife (see paragraph (d)(5) of this section for Appendix-I wildlife bred in captivity for commercial purposes) I, II, or III CITES document with source code “C”1 23.41 (4) Commercially propagated Appendix-I plant I CITES document with source code “D”1 23.47 (5) Commercially bred Appendix-I wildlife from a breeding operation registered with the CITES Secretariat I CITES document with source code “D”1 23.46 (6) Export of certain marine specimens protected under a pre-existing treaty, convention, or international agreement for that species II CITES document indicating that the specimen was taken in accordance with provisions of the applicable treaty, convention, or international agreement 23.36(e)

23.39(e) (7) Hybrid plants I, II, or III CITES document unless the specimen qualifies as an exempt plant hybrid 23.42 (8) Hybrid wildlife I, II, or III CITES document unless the specimen qualifies as an exempt wildlife hybrid 23.43 (9) In-transit shipment (see paragraph (d)(14) of this section for sample collections covered by an ATA carnet) I, II, or III CITES document designating importer and country of final destination 23.22 (10) Introduction from the sea under a pre-existing treaty, convention, or international agreement for that species II Document required by applicable treaty, convention, or international agreement, if appropriate 23.39(d) (11) Noncommercial loan, donation, or exchange of specimens between scientific institutions registered with the CITES Secretariat I, II, or III A label indicating CITES and the registration codes of both institutions and, in the United States, a CITES certificate of scientific exchange that registers the institution3 23.48 (12) Personally owned live wildlife for multiple cross-border movements I, II, or III CITES certificate of ownership2 23.44 (13) Pre-Convention specimen I, II, or III CITES document indicating pre-Convention status1 23.45 (14) Sample collection covered by an ATA carnet I4, II, or III CITES document indicating sample collection2 23.50 (15) Traveling exhibition I, II, or III CITES document indicating specimens qualify as pre-Convention, bred in captivity, or artificially propagated2 23.49

(e) Import permits, export permits, re-export certificates, and certificates of origin. Unless one of the exemptions under paragraph (d) of this section or §23.92 applies, you must obtain the following CITES documents before conducting the proposed activity:

Appendix Type of CITES document(s) required I Import permit (§23.35) and either an export permit (§23.36) or re-export certificate (§23.37) II Export permit (§23.36) or re-export certificate (§23.37) III Export permit (§23.36) if the specimen originated in a country that listed the species; certificate of origin (§23.38) if the specimen originated in a country other than the listing country, unless the listing annotation indicates otherwise; or re-export certificate for all re-exports (§23.37)

(f) Introduction-from-the-sea certificates. For introduction from the sea of Appendix-I or Appendix-II specimens, you must obtain an introduction-from-the-sea certificate before conducting the proposed activity, unless the exemption in paragraph (d)(10) of this section applies (see §23.39). The export of a specimen that was previously introduced from the sea will be treated as an export (see §23.36 for export, §23.36(e) and §23.39(e) for export of exempt specimens, or §23.37 for re-export). Although an Appendix-III specimen does not require a CITES document to be introduced from the sea, the subsequent international trade of the specimen would be considered an export. For export of an Appendix-III specimen that was introduced from the sea you must obtain an export permit (§23.36) if the export is from the country that listed the species in Appendix III, a certificate of origin (§23.38) if the export is from a country other than the listing country, or a re-export certificate for all re-exports (§23.37).

§23.21 What happens if a country enters a reservation for a species?

(a) Purpose. CITES is not subject to general reservations. Articles XV, XVI, and XXIII of the Treaty allow a Party to enter a specific reservation on a species listed in Appendix I, II, or III, or on parts, products, or derivatives of a species listed in Appendix III.

(b) General provision. A Party can enter a reservation in one of the following ways:

(1) A Party must provide written notification to the Depositary Government (Switzerland) on a specific new or amended listing in the Appendices within 90 days after the CoP that adopted the listing, or at any time for Appendix-III species.

(2) A country must provide written notification on a specific species listing when the country ratifies, accepts, approves, or accedes to CITES.

(c) Requesting the United States take a reservation. You may submit information relevant to the issue of whether the United States should take a reservation on a species listing to the U.S. Management Authority. The request must be submitted within 30 calendar days after the last day of the CoP where a new or amended listing of a species in Appendix I or II occurs, or at any time for a species (or its parts, products, or derivatives) listed in Appendix III.

(d) Required CITES documents. Except as provided in paragraph (d)(2) of this section, Parties treat a reserving Party as if it were a non-Party for trade in the species concerned (including parts, products, and derivatives, as appropriate). The following table indicates when CITES documents must accompany a shipment and which Appendix should appear on the face of the document:

If Then (1) The shipment is between a Party and a reserving Party, or the shipment is from a non-Party to a reserving Party and is in transit through a Party The shipment must be accompanied by a valid CITES document(s) (see §23.26) that indicates the CITES Appendix in which the species is listed. (2) The shipment is from a reserving Party to another reserving Party1 or non-Party and is in transit through a Party The shipment must be accompanied by a valid CITES document(s) (see §23.26) that indicates the CITES Appendix in which the species is listed.2 (3) The shipment is between a reserving Party and another reserving Party1 or non-Party and is not in transit through a Party No CITES document is required.2

(e) Reservations taken by countries. You may consult the CITES website or contact us (see §23.7) for a list of countries that have taken reservations and the species involved.

§23.22 What are the requirements for in-transit shipments?

(a) Purpose. Article VII(1) of the Treaty allows for a shipment to transit an intermediary country that is a Party before reaching its final destination without the need for the intermediary Party to issue CITES documents. To control any illegal trade, Parties are to inspect, to the extent possible under their national legislation, specimens in transit through their territory to verify the presence of valid documentation. See §23.50 for in-transit shipment of sample collections covered by an ATA carnet.

(b) Document requirements. An in-transit shipment does not require a CITES document from an intermediary country, but must be accompanied by all of the following documents:

(1) Unless the specimen qualifies for an exemption under §23.92, a valid original CITES document, or a copy of the valid original CITES document, that designates the name of the importer in the country of final destination and is issued by the Management Authority of the exporting or re-exporting country. A copy of a CITES document is subject to verification.

(2) For shipment of an Appendix-I specimen, a copy of a valid import permit that designates the name of the importer in the country of final destination, unless the CITES document in paragraph (b)(1) of this section is a CITES exemption document (see §23.20(d)).

(3) Transportation and routing documents that show the shipment has been consigned to the same importer and country of final destination as designated on the CITES document.

(c) Shipment requirements. An in-transit shipment, including items in an on-board store, must meet the following:

(1) When in an intermediary country, an in-transit shipment must stay only for the time needed to immediately transfer the specimen to the mode of transport used to continue to the final destination and remain under customs control. Other than during immediate transfer, the specimen may not be stored in a duty-free, bonded, or other kind of warehouse or a free trade zone.

(2) At any time during transit, an in-transit shipment must not be sold, manipulated, or split unless authorized by the Management Authority of the intermediary country for inspection or enforcement purposes.

(d) Reserving Party or non-Party. All the requirements of this section apply to shipments to or from a reserving Party or non-Party that are being transshipped through a Party. The CITES document must treat the specimen as listed in the Appendix as provided in §23.21(d).

(e) Specimen protected by other regulations. Shipment of a specimen that is also listed as a migratory bird (part 10 of this subchapter), injurious wildlife (part 16 of this subchapter), endangered or threatened species (parts 17 of this subchapter and 222-224 of this title), marine mammal (parts 18 of this subchapter and 216 of this title), or bald or golden eagle (part 22 of this subchapter), and is moving through the United States is considered an import, and cannot be treated as an in-transit shipment (see §23.3).

§23.23 What information is required on U.S. and foreign CITES documents?

(a) Purpose. Article VI of the Treaty provides standard information that must be on a permit and certificate issued under Articles III, IV, and V. To identify a false or invalid document, any CITES document, including a CITES exemption document issued under Article VII, must contain standardized information to allow a Party to verify that the specimen being shipped is the one listed on the document and that the trade is consistent with the provisions of the Treaty.

(b) CITES form. A CITES document issued by a Party must be issued in one or more of the three working languages of CITES (English, Spanish, or French). A CITES document from a non-Party may be in the form of a permit or certificate, letter, or any other form that clearly indicates the nature of the document and includes the information in paragraphs (c) through (e) of this section and the additional information in §23.25.

(c) Required information. Except for a phytosanitary certificate used as a CITES certificate for artificially propagated plants in paragraph (f) of this section, or a customs declaration label used to identify specimens being moved between registered scientific institutions (§23.48(e)(5)), a CITES document issued by a Party or non-Party must contain the information set out in this paragraph (listed alphabetically). Specific types of CITES documents must also contain the additional information identified in paragraph (e) of this section. A CITES document is valid only when it contains the following information:

Required information Description (1) Appendix The CITES Appendix in which the species, subspecies, or population is listed (see §23.21 when a Party has taken a reservation on a listing). For products that contain or consist of more than one CITES species, the Appendix in which each species is listed must be indicated on the CITES document. (2) Applicant's signature The applicant's signature if the CITES document includes a place for it. (3) Bill of lading, air waybill, or flight number As applicable for export or re-export: (i) by ocean or air cargo, the bill of lading or air waybill number or (ii) in accompanying baggage, the flight number, as recorded on the CITES document by the inspecting official at the port, if known at the time of validation or certification. (4) Dates Date of issue and date of expiration (“valid until” date on the standardized CITES form), which is midnight of the date on the CITES document. See §23.54 for the length of validity for different types of CITES documents. (5) Description of the specimen A complete description of the specimen, including whether live or the type of goods. The sex and age of a live specimen should be recorded, if possible. Such information must be in English, Spanish, or French on a CITES document from a Party. If a code is used to indicate the type of specimen, it must agree with the Guidelines for preparation and submission of CITES annual reports available from the CITES website or us (see §23.7). (6) Document number A unique control number. We use a unique 12-character number. The first two characters are the last two digits of the year of issuance, the next two are the two-letter ISO country code, followed by a six-digit serial number, and two digits or letters used for national informational purposes. (7) Humane transport of live specimens If the CITES document authorizes the export or re-export of live specimens, a statement that the document is valid only if the transport conditions comply with the International Air Transport Association Live Animals Regulations or the International Air Transport Association Perishable Cargo Regulations (incorporated by reference, see §23.9). A shipment containing live animals must comply with the requirements of the Live Animals Regulations (LAR). A shipment containing live plants must comply with the requirements for plants in the Perishable Cargo Regulations (PCR). (8) Identification of the specimen Any unique identification number or mark (such as a tag, band, ring, microchip, label, or serial number), including any mark required under these regulations or a CITES listing annotation. For a microchip, the microchip code, trademark of the transponder manufacturer and, where possible, the location of the microchip in the specimen. If a microchip is used, we may, if necessary, ask the importer, exporter, or re-exporter to have equipment on hand to read the microchip at the time of import, export, or re-export. (9) Management Authority The complete name and address of the issuing Management Authority as included in the CITES directory, which is available from the CITES website or us (see §23.7). (10) Name and address The complete name and address, including country, of the exporter and importer. (11) Purpose of transaction The purpose of the transaction identified either through a written description of the purpose of the transaction or by using one of the codes given in paragraph (d) of this section. The code is determined by the issuing Management Authority through information submitted with an application. This is not required for a certificate of origin. (12) Quantity The quantity of specimens authorized in the shipment and, if appropriate, the unit of measurement using the metric system. For products that contain or consist of more than one CITES species, the quantity of each species must be indicated on the CITES document.

(i) The unit of measurement should be appropriate to the type of specimen and agree with the Guidelines for the preparation and submission of CITES annual reports available from the CITES website or us (see §23.7). General descriptions such as “one case” or “one batch” are not acceptable.

(ii) Weight should be in kilograms. If weight is used, net weight (weight of the specimen alone) must be stated, not gross weight that includes the weight of the container or packaging.

(iii) Volume should be in cubic meters for logs and sawn wood and either square meters or cubic meters for veneer and plywood.

(iv) For re-export, if the type of good has not changed since being imported, the same unit of measurement as on the export permit must be used, except to change to units that are to be used in the CITES annual report. (13) Scientific name The scientific name of the species, including the subspecies when needed to determine the level of protection of the specimen under CITES. For products that contain or consist of more than one CITES species, the scientific name of each species must be indicated on the CITES document. Scientific names must be in the standard nomenclature as it appears in the CITES Appendices or the references adopted by the CoP. A list of current references is available from the CITES website or us (see §23.7). A CITES document may contain higher-taxon names in

(i) The CoP has agreed that the use of a higher-taxon name is acceptable for use on CITES documents.

(A) If the genus cannot be readily determined for coral rock, the scientific name to be used is the order Scleractinia.

(B) If the species cannot be determined for worked specimens of black coral, specimens may be identified at the genus level. If the genus cannot be determined for worked specimens of black coral, the scientific name to be used is the order Antipatharia. Raw black coral and live black coral must be identified to the level of species.

(C) Live and dead coral must be identified to the level of species except where the CoP has agreed that identification to genus is acceptable. A current list of coral taxa identifiable to genus is available from the CITES website or us (see §23.7).

(D) Re-export of worked skins or pieces of Tupinambis species that were imported before August 1, 2000, may indicate Tupinambis spp.

(ii) The issuing Party can show the use of a higher-taxon name is well justified and has communicated the justification to the Secretariat.

(iii) The item is a pre-Convention manufactured product containing a specimen that cannot be identified to the species level. (14) Seal or stamp The embossed seal or ink stamp of the issuing Management Authority. (15) Security stamp If a Party uses a security stamp, the stamp must be canceled by an authorized signature and a stamp or seal, preferably embossed. The number of the stamp must also be recorded on the CITES document. (16) Signature An original handwritten signature or signature stamp of a person authorized to sign CITES documents for the issuing Management Authority. The signature must be on file with the Secretariat. (17) Signature name The name of the person who signed the CITES document. (18) Source The source of the specimen. For products that contain or consist of more than one CITES species, the source code of each species must be indicated on the CITES document. For re-export, unless there is information to indicate otherwise, the source code on the CITES document used for import of the specimen must be used. See §23.24 for a list of codes. (19) Treaty name Either the full name or acronym of the Treaty, or the CITES logo. (20) Type of CITES document The type of CITES document (import, export, re-export, or other):

(i) If marked “other,” the CITES document must indicate the type of document, such as certificate for artificially propagated plants, certificate for wildlife bred in captivity, certificate of origin, certificate of ownership, introduction-from-the-sea certificate, pre-Convention certificate, sample collection covered by an ATA carnet, scientific exchange certificate, or traveling-exhibition certificate.

(ii) If multiple types are authorized on one CITES document, the type that applies to each specimen must be clearly indicated. (21) Validation or certification Except as provided for replacement (§23.52(f)) or retrospective (§23.53(f)) CITES documents, the actual quantity of specimens exported or re-exported:

(i) Using the same units of measurement as those on the CITES document.

(ii) Validated or certified by the stamp or seal and signature of the inspecting authority at the time of export or re-export.

(d) Purpose of transaction. If the purpose is not identified by a written description, the CITES document must contain one of the following codes:

Code Purpose of transaction B Breeding in captivity or artificial propagation E Education G Botanical garden H Hunting trophy L Law enforcement/judicial/forensic M Medical research (including biomedical research) N Reintroduction or introduction into the wild P Personal Q Circus and traveling exhibition S Scientific T Commercial Z Zoo

(e) Additional required information. The following describes the additional information that is required for specific types of documents (listed alphabetically):

Type of document Additional required information (1) Annex (such as an attached inventory, conditions, or continuation pages of a CITES document) The page number, document number, and date of issue on each page of an annex that is attached as an integral part of a CITES document. An authorized signature and ink stamp or seal, preferably embossed, of the Management Authority issuing the CITES document must also be included on each page of the annex. The CITES document must indicate an attached annex and the total number of pages. (2) Certificate of origin (see §23.38) A statement that the specimen originated in the country that issued the certificate. (3) Copy when used in place of the original CITES document (i) Information required in paragraph (e)(7) of this section when the document authorizes export or re-export.

(ii) A statement by the Management Authority on the face of the document authorizing the use of a copy when the document authorizes import. (4) Export permit for a registered commercial breeding operation or nursery for Appendix-I specimens (see §23.46) The registration number of the operation or nursery assigned by the Secretariat, and if the exporter is not the registered operation or nursery, the name of the registered operation or nursery. (5) Export permit with a quota Number of specimens, such as 500/1,000, that were:

(i) Exported thus far in the current year, including those covered by the current permit (such as 500), and

(ii) Included in the current annual quota (such as 1,000). (6) Import permit (Appendix-I specimen) (see §23.35) A certification that the specimen will not be used for primarily commercial purposes and, for a live specimen, that the recipient has suitable facilities and expertise to house and care for it. (7) Replacement CITES document (see §23.52) When a CITES document replaces an already issued CITES document that was lost, damaged, stolen, or accidentally destroyed:

(i) If a newly issued CITES document, indication it is a “replacement,” the number and date of issuance of the CITES document that was replaced, and reason for replacement.

(ii) If a copy of the original CITES document, indication it is a “replacement” and a “true copy of the original,” a new original signature of a person authorized to sign CITES documents for the issuing Management Authority, the date signed, and reason for replacement. (8) Partially completed documents (see §23.51) (i) A list of the blocks that must be completed by the permit holder.

(ii) If the list includes scientific names, an inventory of approved species must be included on the face of the CITES document or in an attached annex.

(iii) A signature of the permit holder, which acts as a certification that the information entered is true and accurate. (9) Pre-Convention document (see §23.45) (i) An indication on the face of the CITES document that the specimen is pre-Convention.

(ii) A date that shows the specimen was acquired before the date the Convention first applied to it. (10) Re-export certificate (see §23.37) (i) The country of origin, the export permit number, and the date of issue.

(ii) If previously re-exported, the country of last re-export, the re-export certificate number, and the date of issue.

(iii) If all or part of this information is not known, a justification must be given.

(iv) For products that contain or consist of more than one CITES species, the information in paragraphs (e)(10)(i) through (iii) of this section for each species must be indicated on the CITES document. (11) Retrospective CITES document (see §23.53) A clear statement that the CITES document is issued retrospectively and the reason for issuance. (12) Sample collection covered by an ATA carnet (see §23.50) (i) A statement that the document covers a sample collection and is invalid unless accompanied by a valid ATA carnet.

(ii) The number of the accompanying ATA carnet recorded by the Management Authority, customs, or other responsible CITES inspecting official.

(f) Phytosanitary certificate. A Party may use a phytosanitary certificate as a CITES document under the following conditions:

(1) The Party has provided copies of the certificate, stamps, and seals to the Secretariat.

(2) The certificate is used only when all the following conditions are met:

(i) The plants are being exported, not re-exported.

(ii) The plants are Appendix-II species, or are hybrids of one or more Appendix-I species or taxa that are not annotated to treat hybrids as Appendix-I specimens.

(iii) The plants were artificially propagated in the exporting country.

(3) The certificate contains the following information:

(i) The scientific name of the species, including the subspecies when needed to determine the level of protection of the specimen under CITES, using standard nomenclature as it appears in the CITES Appendices or the references adopted by the CoP.

(ii) The type (such as live plant or bulb) and quantity of the specimens authorized in the shipment.

(iii) A stamp, seal, or other specific indication stating that the specimen is artificially propagated (see §23.64).

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30420, May 27, 2014; 79 FR 32677, June 6, 2014]

§23.24 What code is used to show the source of the specimen?

The Management Authority must indicate on the CITES document the source of the specimen using one of the following codes, except the code “O” for pre-Convention, which may be used in conjunction with another code:

Source of specimen Code (a) Artificially propagated plant (see §23.40):

(1) An Appendix-II or -III artificially propagated specimen.

(2) An Appendix-I plant specimen artificially propagated for noncommercial purposes or certain Appendix-I hybrids (see §23.42) propagated for commercial purposes. A (b) Bred-in-captivity wildlife (see §23.41):

(1) An Appendix-II or -III specimen bred in captivity. (See paragraph (d)(1) of this section for wildlife that does not qualify as bred in captivity.)

(2) An Appendix-I specimen bred for noncommercial purposes. (See paragraph (c)(1) of this section for an Appendix-I specimen bred for commercial purposes.) C (c) Bred in captivity or artificially propagated for commercial purposes (see §§23.46 and 23.47):

(1) An Appendix-I wildlife specimen bred in captivity for commercial purposes at an operation registered with the Secretariat.

(2) An Appendix-I plant specimen artificially propagated for commercial purposes at a nursery that is registered with the Secretariat or a commercial propagating operation that meets the requirements of §23.47. D (d) Captive-bred wildlife (§23.36) :

(1) An Appendix-II or -III wildlife species that is captive-bred.

(2) An Appendix-I wildlife species that is one of the following:

(i) Captive-bred (see §23.5).

(ii) Bred for commercial purposes, but the commercial breeding operation is not registered with the Secretariat. F (e) Confiscated or seized specimen (see §23.78). I (f) Pre-Convention specimen (see §23.45) (code may be used in conjunction with another code). O (g) Ranched wildlife ( see §23.5 ). R (h) Source unknown (must be justified on the face of the CITES document). U (i) Specimen taken from the wild:

(1) For wildlife, this includes a specimen born in captivity from an egg collected from the wild or from wildlife that mated or exchanged genetic material in the wild.

(2) For a plant, it includes a specimen propagated from a propagule collected from a wild plant, except as provided in §23.64. W

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30423, May 27, 2014]

§23.25 What additional information is required on a non-Party CITES document?

(a) Purpose. Under Article X of the Treaty, a Party may accept a CITES document issued by a competent authority of a non-Party only if the document substantially conforms to the requirements of the Treaty.

(b) Additional certifications. In addition to the information in §23.23(c) through (e), a CITES document issued by a non-Party must contain the following certifications on the face of the document:

Activity by a non-Party Certification (1) Export (i) For Appendix-I and -II specimens, the Scientific Authority has advised that the export will not be detrimental to the survival of the species.

(ii) The Management Authority is satisfied that the specimen was legally acquired. (2) Import For Appendix-I specimens, the import will be for purposes that are not detrimental to the survival of the species.

§23.26 When is a U.S. or foreign CITES document valid?

(a) Purpose. Article VIII of the Treaty provides that Parties take appropriate measures to enforce the Convention to prevent illegal trafficking in wildlife and plants.

(b) Original CITES documents. A separate original or a true copy of a CITES document must be issued before the import, introduction from the sea, export, or re-export occurs, and the document must accompany each shipment. No copy may be used in place of an original except as provided in §23.23(e)(3) or when a shipment is in transit (see §23.22). Fax or electronic copies are not acceptable.

(c) Acceptance of CITES documents. We will accept a CITES document as valid for import, introduction from the sea, export, or re-export only if the document meets the requirements of this section, §§23.23 through 23.25, and the following conditions:

Key phrase Conditions for an acceptable CITES document (1) Altered or modified CITES document The CITES document has not been altered (including by rubbing or scratching out), added to, or modified in any way unless the change is validated on the document by the stamp and authorized signature of the issuing Management Authority, or if the document was issued as a partially completed document, the Management Authority lists on the face of the document which blocks must be completed by the permit holder. (2) Annual reports The Party issuing the CITES document has submitted annual reports and is not subject to any action under Article VIII paragraph 7(a) that would not allow trade in CITES species. (3) CITES document U.S. and foreign CITES documents must meet the general provisions and criteria in subparts C and E. (4) Conditions All conditions on the CITES document are met. (5) Convention implementation The Party issuing the CITES document is not subject to any action under Article VIII or Article XIII paragraph 3 that would not allow trade in the species. (6) Extension of validity The validity of a CITES document may not be extended except as provided in §23.73 for certain timber species. (7) Fraudulent CITES document or CITES document containing false information The CITES document is authentic and does not contain erroneous or misleading information. (8) Humane transport Live wildlife or plants were transported in compliance with the International Air Transport Association Live Animals Regulations (for animals) or the International Air Transport Association Perishable Cargo Regulations (for plants) (incorporated by reference, see §23.9). (9) Legal acquisition The Party or non-Party issuing the CITES document has made the required legal acquisition finding. (10) Management Authority and Scientific Authority The CITES document was issued by a Party or non-Party that has designated a Management Authority and Scientific Authority and has provided information on these authorities to the Secretariat. (11) Name of importer and exporter A CITES document is specific to the name on the face of the document and may not be transferred or assigned to another person. (12) Non-detriment The Party or non-Party issuing the CITES document has made the required non-detriment finding. (13) Phytosanitary certificate A phytosanitary certificate may be used to export artificially propagated plants only if the issuing Party has provided copies of the certificates, stamps, and seals to the Secretariat. (14) Quota For species with a quota on file with the Secretariat, the quantity exported from a country does not exceed the quota. (15) Registered commercial breeding operation for Appendix-I wildlife (i) The operation is included in the Secretariat's register.

(ii) Each specimen is specifically marked, and the mark is described on the CITES document. (16) Registered commercial nursery for Appendix-I plants The operation is included in the Secretariat's register. (17) Retrospective CITES documents A CITES document was not issued retrospectively except as provided in §23.53. (18) Shipment contents The contents of the shipment match the description of specimens provided on the CITES document, including the units and species. A shipment cannot contain more or different specimens or species than certified or validated on the CITES document at the time of export or re-export; the quantity of specimens validated or certified may be less, but not more, than the quantity stated at the time of issuance. (19) Wild-collected specimen A wild-collected specimen (indicated on the CITES document with a source code of “W”) is not coming from a country that is outside the range of the species, unless we have information indicating that the species has been established in the wild in that country through accidental introduction or other means.

(d) Verification of a CITES document. We may request verification of a CITES document from the Secretariat or a foreign Management Authority before deciding whether to accept it under some circumstances, including, but not limited to, the following:

(1) We receive reliable information that indicates the need for CITES document verification.

(2) We have reasonable grounds to believe that a CITES document is not valid or authentic because the species is being traded in a manner detrimental to the survival of the species or in violation of foreign wildlife or plant laws, or any applicable Management or Scientific Authority finding has not been made.

(3) The re-export certificate refers to an export permit that does not exist or is not valid.

(4) The CITES document includes a species for which the Secretariat has published an annotated quota.

(5) We have reasonable grounds to believe that the document is fraudulent, contains false information, or has unauthorized changes.

(6) We have reasonable grounds to believe that the specimen identified as bred in captivity or artificially propagated is a wild specimen, was produced from illegally acquired parental stock, or otherwise does not qualify for these exemptions.

(7) We know or have reasonable grounds to believe that an Appendix-I specimen was not bred at a facility registered with the CITES Secretariat and that the purpose of the import is commercial.

(8) The import of a specimen designated as bred in captivity or artificially propagated is from a non-Party. For an Appendix-I specimen, we must consult with the Secretariat.

(9) For a retrospectively issued CITES document, both the importing and exporting or re-exporting countries' Management Authorities have not agreed to the issuance of the document.

(10) For a replacement CITES document, we need clarification of the reason the document was issued.

(11) The export permit or re-export certificate does not contain validation or certification by an inspecting official at the time of export of the actual quantity exported or re-exported.

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30423, May 27, 2014]

§23.27 What CITES documents do I present at the port?

(a) Purpose. Article VIII of the Treaty provides that Parties establish an inspection process that takes place at a port of exit and entry. Inspecting officials must verify that valid CITES documents accompany shipments and take enforcement action when shipments do not comply with the Convention. Article VI, paragraph 6, of the Treaty requires that the Management Authority of the importing country cancel and retain the export permit or re-export certificate and any corresponding import permit presented. In the United States, for imports of CITES-listed plant specimens, CITES inspecting officials cancel and submit original CITES documents to the U.S. Management Authority.

(b) U.S. port requirements. In the United States, you must follow the clearance requirements for wildlife in part 14 of this subchapter and for plants in part 24 of this subchapter and 7 CFR parts 319, 352, and 355, and the specific requirement in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section.

(c) General validation or certification process. Officials in each exporting or re-exporting country inspect the shipment and validate or certify the CITES document. The table in this paragraph (c) provides information on:

(1) The types of original CITES documents you must present to be validated or certified by the inspecting official to export or re-export from a country.

(2) When you need to surrender a copy of the original CITES document to the inspecting official at the time of export or re-export.

(3) When you need to surrender the original CITES document to the inspecting official at the time of import or introduction from the sea.

Type of CITES document Present original for export or re-export validation or certification Surrender copy upon

export or re-export Surrender original upon

import or introductionfrom the sea Bred-in-captivity certificate Required Required Required Certificate for artificially propagated plants Required Required Required Certificate of origin Required Required Required Certificate of ownership Required Required Not required; submit copy Export permit Required Required Required Import permit Not required Required Required Introduction-from-the-sea certificate Not applicable Not applicable Required Multiple-use document Required1 Required Not required; submit copy Phytosanitary certificate Required Required Not required; submit copy Pre-Convention document Required Required Required Re-export certificate Required Required Required Registered Appendix-I commercial breeding operation, export permit Required Required Required Registered Appendix-I nursery, export permit Required Required Required Replacement document where a shipment has been made and is in a foreign country Not required Not required Required Replacement document where a shipment has not left the United States Required Required Required Retrospective document Not required Not required Required Sample collection covered by an ATA carnet, CITES document Required Required Not required; submit copy Traveling-exhibition certificate Required Required Not required; submit copy

(d) Customs declaration labels. The customs declaration label used to identify specimens being moved between registered scientific institutions (§23.48) must be affixed to the shipping container. The label does not require export or re-export validation or certification at the port.

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30424, May 27, 2014]

Subpart C—Application Procedures, Criteria, and Conditions

§23.32 How do I apply for a U.S. CITES document?

(a) To apply for a U.S. CITES document, you must complete a standard application form and submit it to the appropriate office shown on the top of the form.

(b) To determine the type of CITES document needed for your shipment, go to §§23.18 through 23.20 for further guidance.

(c) If a species is also regulated under another part of this subchapter (such as endangered or threatened species, see §23.3), the requirements of all parts must be met. You may submit a single application that contains all the information needed to meet the requirements of CITES and other applicable parts.

(d) You must also follow the general permit procedures in part 13 of this subchapter.

(e) You should review the criteria in all applicable regulations in this subchapter that apply to the type of permit you are seeking before completing the application form.

(f) We will review your application to assess whether it contains the information needed to make the required findings.

(1) Based on available information, we will decide if any of the exemptions apply and what type of CITES document you need.

(2) If we need additional information, we will contact you. If you do not provide the information within 45 calendar days, we will abandon your application. If your application is abandoned and you wish to apply for a permit at a later time, you must submit a new application.

§23.33 How is the decision made to issue or deny a request for a U.S. CITES document?

(a) Upon receiving a complete application, we will decide whether to issue a CITES document by considering:

(1) The general criteria in §13.21(b) of this subchapter and, if the species is protected under a separate law or treaty, criteria in any other applicable parts.

(2) The CITES issuance criteria provided in this subpart (see subpart D of this part for factors we consider in making certain findings).

(b) As needed, the U.S. Management Authority, including FWS Law Enforcement, will forward a copy of the application to the U.S. Scientific Authority; State, tribal, or other Federal government agencies; or other applicable experts. We may also query the Secretariat and foreign Management and Scientific Authorities for information to use in making the required findings.

(c) You must provide sufficient information to satisfy us that all criteria specific to the proposed activity are met before we can issue a CITES document.

(d) We will base our decision on whether to issue or deny the application on the best available information.

§23.34 What kinds of records may I use to show the origin of a specimen when I apply for a U.S. CITES document?

(a) When you apply for a U.S. CITES document, you will be asked to provide information on the origin of the specimen that will be covered by the CITES document.

(1) You need to provide sufficient information for us to determine if the issuance criteria in this part are met (see the sections in this subpart for each type of CITES document).

(2) We require less detailed information when the import, introduction from the sea, export, or re-export poses a low risk to a species in the wild and more detailed information when the proposed activity poses greater risk to a species in the wild (see Subpart D of this part for factors we consider in making certain findings).

(b) Information you may want to provide in a permit application includes, but is not limited to, the following:

Source of specimen Types of records (1) Captive-bred or cultivated1 (i) Records that identify the breeder or propagator of the specimens that have been identified by birth, hatch, or propagation date and for wildlife by sex, size, band number, or other mark, or for plants by size or other identifying feature:

(A) Signed and dated statement by the breeder or propagator that the specimen was bred or propagated under controlled conditions.

(B) Name and address of the breeder or propagator as shown by documents such as an International Species Information System (ISIS) record, veterinary certificate, or plant nursery license.

(ii) Records that document the breeding or propagating of specimens at the facility:

(A) Number of wildlife (by sex and age- or size-class) or plants at the facility.

(B) How long the facility has been breeding or propagating the species.

(C) Annual production and mortalities.

(D) Number of specimens sold or transferred annually.

(E) Number of specimens added from other sources annually.

(F) Transaction records with the date, species, quantity of specimens, and name and address of seller.

(G) Marking system, if applicable.

(H) Photographs or video of facility, including for wildlife any activities during nesting and production and rearing of young, and for plants, different stages of growth. (2) Confiscated or seized Copy of remission decision, legal settlement, or disposal action after forfeiture or abandonment, which demonstrates the applicant's legal possession. (3) Grown from exempt plant material Records that document how you obtained the exempt plant material, including the name and address of the person from whom you received the plant material. (4) Imported previously (i) A copy of the cancelled CITES document that accompanied the shipment into the United States.

(ii) For wildlife, copies of cleared Declarations for Importation or Exportation of Fish or Wildlife (Form 3-177) associated with each specimen. (5) Pre-Convention Records that show the specimen was acquired before the date the provisions of the Convention first applied to it, such as:

(i) Receipt or invoice.

(ii) Catalog, inventory list, photograph, or art book.

(iii) Statement from a qualified appraiser attesting to the age of a manufactured product.

(iv) CBP (formerly U.S. Customs Service) import documents.

(v) Phytosanitary certificate.

(vi) Veterinary document or breeding or propagation logs. (6) Ranched wildlife (i) Records, such as permits, licenses, and tags, that demonstrate that the specimen was legally removed from the wild under relevant Federal, tribal, State, or local wildlife conservation laws or regulations:

(A) If taken on private or tribal land, permission of the landowner if required under applicable law.

(B) If taken in a national, State, or local park, refuge or other protected area, permission from the applicable agency, if required.

(ii) Records that document the rearing of specimens at the facility:

(A) Number of specimens (by sex and age- or size-class) at the facility.

(B) How long the specimens were reared at the facility.

(C) Signed and dated statement by the owner or manager of the facility that the specimens were reared at the facility in a controlled environment.

(D) Marking system, if applicable.

(E) Photographs or video of the facility. (7) Sequential ownership or purchase (i) Records that specifically identify the specimen, give the name and address of the owner, and show the specimen's origin (pre-Convention, previously imported, wild-collected, or born or propagated in a controlled environment in the United States).

(ii) Records that document the history of all transfers in ownership (generally not required for pre-Convention specimens). (8) Unknown origin, for noncommercial purposes A complete description of the circumstances under which the specimen was acquired (where, when, and from whom the specimen was acquired), including efforts made to obtain information on the origin of the specimen. (9) Wild-collected Records, such as permits, licenses, and tags, that demonstrate the specimen or the parental stock was legally removed from the wild under relevant foreign, Federal, tribal, State, or local wildlife or plant conservation laws or regulations:

(i) If taken on private or tribal land, permission of the landowner if required under applicable law.

(ii) If taken in a national, State, or local park, refuge, or other protected area, permission from the applicable agency, if required.

(c) If you intend to engage in international trade with a CITES specimen in the future, you should keep sufficient records to establish your eligibility for a CITES document for as long as you possess the specimen, and if you sell, donate, or transfer ownership of the specimen, you should provide such records on the origin of the specimen to the new owner.

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30424, May 27, 2014]

§23.35 What are the requirements for an import permit?

(a) Purpose. Article III(3) of the Treaty sets out the conditions under which a Management Authority can issue an import permit.

(b) U.S. application forms. Complete the appropriate form for the proposed activity and submit it to the U.S. Management Authority:

Type of application for an import permit for an Appendix-I specimen Form no. (1) CITES:

Southern African Leopard, African Elephant, and Namibian Southern White Rhinoceros Sport-hunted Trophies

Appendix-I Plants

Appendix-I Wildlife

Appendix-I Biological Samples

3-200-19



3-200-35

3-200-37

3-200-29 (2) Endangered Species Act and CITES:

ESA Plants

ESA Sport-hunted Trophies

ESA Wildlife

3-200-36

3-200-20

3-200-37 (3) Marine Mammal Protection Act and CITES:

Marine Mammals

3-200-43 (4) Wild Bird Conservation Act and CITES:

Personal Pet Bird

Under an Approved Cooperative Breeding Program

Scientific Research or Zoological Breeding/Display

3-200-46

3-200-48

3-200-47

(c) Criteria. The criteria in this paragraph (c) apply to the issuance and acceptance of U.S. and foreign import permits. When applying for a U.S. import permit, you must provide sufficient information for us to find that your proposed activity meets all of the following criteria:

Criteria for an import permit for an Appendix-I specimen Section (1) The proposed import would be for purposes that are not detrimental to the survival of the species. 23.61 (2) The specimen will not be used for primarily commercial purposes. 23.62 (3) The recipients are suitably equipped to house and care for any live wildlife or plant to be imported. 23.65 (4) The scientific name of the species is the standard nomenclature in the CITES Appendices or the references adopted by the CoP. 23.23

(d) U.S. standard conditions. You must meet all of the provisions on use after import in §23.55 and the standard conditions in §23.56.

(e) Prior issuance of an import permit. For Appendix-I specimens, the Management Authority of the exporting country may:

(1) Issue an export permit for live or dead specimens or a re-export certificate for live specimens only after the Management Authority of the importing country has either issued an import permit or confirmed in writing that an import permit will be issued.

(2) Accept oral confirmation from the Management Authority of the importing country that an import permit will be issued in an emergency situation where the life or health of the specimen is threatened and no means of written communication is possible.

(3) Issue a re-export certificate for a dead specimen without confirmation that the import permit has been issued.

§23.36 What are the requirements for an export permit?

(a) Purposes. Articles III, IV, and V of the Treaty set out the conditions under which a Management Authority may issue an export permit for an Appendix-I, -II, or -III specimen. Article XIV sets out the conditions under which a Management Authority may issue a document for export of certain Appendix-II marine specimens protected under a pre-existing treaty, convention, or international agreement.

(b) U.S. application forms. Complete the appropriate form for the proposed activity and submit it to the U.S. Management Authority. Form 3-200-26 may also be submitted to FWS Law Enforcement at certain ports or regional offices:

Type of application for an export permit Form no. (1) CITES: American Ginseng 3-200-34 Appendix-I Plants Artificially Propagated for Commercial Purposes 3-200-33 Biological Specimens 3-200-29 Captive-born Raptors 3-200-25 Captive-born Wildlife (except raptors) 3-200-24 Caviar/Live Eggs/Meat of Paddlefish or Sturgeon, From an Aquaculture Facility 3-200-80 Caviar/Meat of Paddlefish or Sturgeon, Removed from the Wild 3-200-76 Export of Skins of Bobcat, Canada Lynx, River Otter, Brown Bear, Gray Wolf, and American Alligator Taken under an Approved State or Tribal Program 3-200-26 Master File for the Export of Live Animals Bred in Captivity 3-200-85 Personal Pets, One-time Export 3-200-46 Plants 3-200-32 Registration of a Native Species Production Facility 3-200-75 Single-use Permits under a Master File or an Annual Program File 3-200-74 Trophies by Hunters or Taxidermists 3-200-28 Wildlife, Removed from the Wild (Live Animals/Samples/Parts/Products) 3-200-27 (2) Endangered Species Act and CITES: ESA Plants 3-200-36 ESA Wildlife 3-200-37 (3) Marine Mammal Protection Act and CITES: Biological Samples 3-200-29 Live Captive-held Marine Mammals 3-200-53 Take from the Wild for Export 3-200-43

(c) Criteria. The criteria in this paragraph (c) apply to the issuance and acceptance of U.S. and foreign export permits except as provided for certain marine specimens in paragraph (d) of this section. When applying for a U.S. permit or certificate, you must provide sufficient information for us to find that your proposed activity meets all of the following criteria:

Criteria for an export permit Appendix of the specimen Section I II III (1) The wildlife or plant was legally acquired. Yes Yes Yes 23.60 (2) The proposed export would not be detrimental to the survival of the species. Yes Yes n/a 23.61 (3) An import permit has already been issued or the Management Authority of the importing country has confirmed that it will be issued. Yes n/a n/a 23.35 (4) The scientific name of the species is the standard nomenclature in the CITES Appendices or the references adopted by the CoP. Yes Yes Yes 23.23 (5) Live wildlife or plants will be prepared and shipped so as to minimize risk of injury, damage to health, or cruel treatment of the specimen. Yes Yes Yes 23.23 (6) The specimen originated in a country that listed the species. n/a n/a Yes 23.20 (7) For wildlife with the source code “W” or “F,” the export is for noncommercial purposes. (See §23.46 for the export of specimens that originated at a commercial breeding operation for Appendix-I wildlife that is registered with the Secretariat.) Yes n/a n/a -

(d) Export of certain exempt marine specimens. Article XIV(4) and (5) of the Treaty provide a limited exemption for Appendix-II marine species that are protected under another treaty, convention, or international agreement that was in force at the time CITES entered into force. When all of the following conditions are met, export of exempt Appendix-II marine wildlife or plants requires only that the shipment is accompanied by a document issued by the Management Authority of the exporting country indicating that the specimens were taken in accordance with the provisions of the other international treaty, convention, or agreement:

(1) The exporting country is a CITES Party and is a party to an international treaty, convention, or agreement that affords protection to the species and was in force on July 1, 1975.

(2) The ship that harvested the specimen is registered in the exporting country.

(3) The specimen was taken within waters under the jurisdiction of the exporting country or in the marine environment not under the jurisdiction of any country.

(4) The specimen was taken in accordance with the other international treaty, convention, or agreement, including any quotas.

(5) The shipment is accompanied by any official document required under the other international treaty, convention, or agreement or otherwise required by law.

(e) Export of exempt specimens from the United States. To export a specimen exempted under paragraph (d) of this section, you must obtain a CITES document from the U.S. Management Authority that indicates the specimen was taken in accordance with the provisions of another international treaty, convention, or agreement that was in force on July 1, 1975.

(f) U.S. application for export of exempt specimens. To apply for a CITES exemption document under paragraph (e) of this section, complete the appropriate form for your activity and submit it to the U.S. Management Authority.

(g) Criteria for certain exempt marine specimens. The criteria in this paragraph (g) apply to the issuance and acceptance of U.S. and foreign export documents. To obtain a U.S. CITES document for export of specimens exempted under paragraph (d) of this section you must provide sufficient information for us to find that your proposed export meets all of the following issuance criteria:

(1) The specimen was taken in accordance with the provisions of an applicable international treaty, convention, or agreement that was in force on July 1, 1975.

(2) The scientific name of the CITES species is in the standard nomenclature in the CITES Appendices or references adopted by the CoP (see §23.23).

(3) The ship that harvested the specimen is registered in the exporting country.

(4) The specimen was taken within waters under the jurisdiction of the exporting country or in the marine environment not under the jurisdiction of any country.

[72 FR 48448, Aug. 23, 2007, as amended at 79 FR 30424, May 27, 2014]

§23.37 What are the requirements for a re-export certificate?

(a) Purposes. Articles III, IV, and V of the Treaty set out the conditions under which a Management Authority may issue a re-export certificate for an Appendix-I, -II, or -III specimen.

(b) U.S. application forms. Complete the appropriate form for the proposed activity and submit it to the U.S. Management Authority. Form 3-200-73 may also be submitted to Law Enforcement at certain ports or regional offices:

Type of application for a re-export certificate Form no. (1) CITES:

Biological Specimens

Plants

Single-use Permits under a Master File or an Annual Program File

Trophies by Taxidermists

Wildlife

3-200-29

3-200-32

3-200-74

3-200-28

3-200-73 (2) Endangered Species Act and CITES:

ESA Plants

ESA Wildlife

3-200-36

3-200-37 (3) Marine Mammal Protection Act and CITES:

Biological Samples

Live Captive-held Marine Mammals

3-200-29

3-200-53

(c) Criteria. The criteria in this paragraph (c) apply to the issuance and acceptance of U.S. and foreign re-export certificates. When applying for a U.S. certificate, you must provide sufficient information for us to find that your proposed activity meets all of the following criteria:

Criteria for a re-export certificate Appendix of the specimen Section I II III (1) The wildlife or plant was legally acquired. Yes Yes Yes 23.60 (2) The scientific name of the species is the standard nomenclature in the CITES Appendices or the references adopted by the CoP. Yes Yes Yes 23.23 (3) For a live specimen, an import permit has already been issued or the Management Authority of the importing country has confirmed that it will be issued. This criterion does not apply to a specimen with the source code “D.” Yes n/a n/a 23.35 (4) Live wildlife or plants will be prepared and shipped so as to minimize risk of injury, damage to health, or cruel treatment of the specimen. Yes Yes Yes 23.23 (5) For re-export of a confiscated specimen, the proposed re-export would not be detrimental to the survival of the species. Yes Yes n/a 23.61 (6) For wildlife with the source code “W” or “F,” the re-export is for noncommercial purposes. Yes n/a n/a -

§23.38 What are the requirements for a certificate of origin?

(a) Purpose. Article V(3) of the Treaty requires that a shipment of Appendix-III specimens be accompanied by a certificate of origin when the shipment is not from a country that listed the species in Appendix III and is not a re-export.

(b) U.S. application forms. For a certificate of origin, complete one of the following forms and submit it to the U.S. Management Authority:

(1) Form 3-200-27 for wildlife removed from the wild.

(2) Form 3-200-24 for captive-born wildlife.

(3) Form 3-200-32 for plants.

(c) Criteria. The criteria in this paragraph (c) apply to the issuance and acceptance of U.S. and foreign certificates of origin. When applying for a U.S. certificate, you must provide sufficient information for us to find that your proposed activity meets all of the following criteria:

(1) The specimen originated in the country of export, which is not a country that listed the species in Appendix III. In the case of a listing that is annotated to cover only a certain population, no CITES document is required if the listed population does not occur in the country of export. For U.S. applicants, the country of origin must be the United States.

(2) The scientific name of the species is the standard nomenclature in the CITES Appendices or the references adopted by the CoP (see §23.23).

(3) Live wildlife or plants will be prepared and shipped so as to minimize risk of injury, damage to health, or cruel treatment of the specimen (see §23.23).

§23.39 What are the requirements for an introduction-from-the-sea certificate?

(a) Purpose. Articles III(5), IV(6), and IV(7) of the Treaty set out the conditions under which a Management Authority may issue an introduction-from-the-sea certificate.

(b) U.S. application form. Complete Form 3-200-31 and submit it to the U.S. Management Authority.

(c) Criteria. The criteri