U.S. Federal Bans on Asbestos
Banned products and uses

Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA): Banned Manufacture, Importation, Processing and Distribution in Commerce of Certain Asbestos-containing Products

Corrugated paper

Rollboard

Commercial paper

Specialty paper

Flooring felt

New commercial uses that begin after August 25, 1989

Under the Clean Air Act (CAA): Banned Asbestos-containing Uses

Asbestos pipe insulation and asbestos block insulation on facility components, such as boilers and hot water tanks, if the materials are either pre-formed (molded) and friable or wet-applied and friable after drying.

Spray-applied surfacing asbestos-containing materials

Spray-on application of materials containing more than 1% asbestos to buildings, structures, pipes, and conduits unless certain conditions specified under 40 CFR 61, Subpart M are met.

Top of Page

Under the Consumer Product Safety Act (Consumer Product Safety Commission): Banned Products

Asbestos in artificial fireplace embers and wall patching compounds

Top of Page

Examples of asbestos-containing products not banned

The manufacture, importation, processing and distribution in commerce of the following products, as well as some others not listed, are not banned. However, in June 2018 EPA took action by proposing a significant new use rule (SNUR) that would prohibit these uses. View the proposed SNUR.

Cement corrugated sheet

Cement flat sheet

Clothing

Pipeline wrap

Roofing felt

Vinyl floor tile

Cement shingle

Millboard

Cement pipe

Automatic transmission components

Clutch facings

Friction materials

Disk brake pads

Drum brake linings

Brake blocks

Gaskets

Non-roofing coatings

Roof coatings Top of Page

Regulatory history of asbestos bans

In addition to the regulatory actions listed above, asbestos is one of the first 10 chemicals EPA is reviewing under amended TSCA. The problem formulation document for asbestos issued in May 2018 focuses the scope of the risk evaluation on those exposure pathways associated with TSCA uses that are not subject to other regulatory regimes where exposures are effectively managed, such as the NESHAP, including current and prospective uses for which manufacture, processing, or distribution in commerce is intended, known or reasonably foreseen. EPA intends to finalize the risk evaluation by December 2019. If through its evaluation EPA determines that any of these conditions of use present unreasonable risks, EPA will take prompt action under the statute to address those risks.