China Is Making Trump's 2020 Reelection Flags Because Everything Is Farce
Irony, that ole threadbare rapscallion, is making another go of it this month, as photographers in China documented workers in the country's Anhui province manufacturing flags for Donald Trump's 2020 reelection campaign. While it is not confirmed that Trump's campaign ordered the flags, who else besides Sean Spicer is really that hype about the dude? Though the fabric harbingers of our continued collective doom are ready to ship out, their journey to your estranged uncle's front lawn may be hindered by tariffs Trump is threatening to place on China in his on-going trade war. One is tempted to label this poetic justice, but justice has put its out-of-office message up for the foreseeable future.

- Getty Images

The flags read "Trump 2020 — Keep America Great." So, the good news is that at some point in the next 18 months, America will get great and we will have to take a moment out of our beautiful, utopian lives to vote for that greatness to continue continuing greatly. We have that to look forward to. Mark it on your calendar. Greatness coming!

As far as sequels no one asked for go, this is fairly predictable. If Trump is really going to put us all through it again, he should at least work on more creative marketing. Might I suggest: America: Here We Go Again. Or Economic Anxiety: Gr8 of the Furious. Or a throwback: Die Hard with A Vengeance.

I'm just saying, if we're going to staring at these banners hanging from the back of a truck changing lanes without signaling, they might as well say Trump 2: Russian Boogaloo. Someone please go on Fox News and inform the President he needs to change his order.

While we wait for the results of that super secure communique, please enjoy this palate cleanser from another part of the Anhui region in China where a Peppa Pig and a Hello Kitty appeared in a rice field.

VCG Getty Images

Now, this is a team I can get behind. Pig/Kitty 2020!

Follow R. Eric Thomas on Twitter.