Crist plan would let schools raise tuition up to 15 percent
State universities would get to raise tuition by as much as 15 percent a year, under a proposal suggested Thursday by Gov. Charlie Crist that he hopes would create a world-class higher education system in Florida.

It's a reversal of Crist's initial opposition to tuition increases. At the end of the spring 2007 legislative session, the governor vetoed a 5 percent tuition increase for all state universities and called a proposal to allow some universities to charge even higher rates "doomed."

He later approved increasing tuition in the state by 6 percent as well as a plan that allowed high-research schools to raise tuition by as much as 15 percent.

Amid pressure from university presidents statewide and after looking at how Florida's public universities compare nationally, Crist wants to make it easier for all universities to generate more money. Tuition at Florida's public universities averages $3,808 per year for full-time students, compared to the national average of $6,585.

"Clearly we have some shortcomings in our university system that need to be improved," Dean Colson, Crist's higher education adviser, told the Board of Governors, the policy-making body for the state university system. "Our goal is to develop a first-class, nationally competitive university system."

Anyone who bought prepaid tuition contracts before July 1, 2007, can attend any state university without extra charges. But the popular Bright Futures scholarship only covers base tuition, not the differential. Assuming the state raises base tuition 6 percent, as it did this year, and Florida Atlantic University raises its rate an additional 9 percent, the charge for a full-time student at Florida Atlantic University with Bright Futures would be about $221. Students without Bright Futures would pay $369 more than they would have this year.

Sheila Feller, of Deerfield Beach, is concerned that Bright Futures no longer fully covers state tuition. Her son, Jacob, is graduating from Deerfield Beach High this spring and is considering several Florida universities.