Charlotte's Furniture store to close this year, owner says
CLOSE

Buy Photo Melissa O’Rourke, president of Charlotte’s at 5411 N. Mesa, announced Friday the family-owned store will close after 66 years later this year. (Photo: RUDY GUTIERREZ / EL PASO TIMES)Buy Photo

Charlotte's Furniture, a longtime retail fixture in West El Paso, will close later this year, its owner confirmed Friday.

Melissa O'Rourke said the furniture store at 5411 N. Mesa St. will close, but did not provide a specific date. A news release said the store would begin a "retirement sale" Aug. 23.

"It's been a wonderful lifetime experience," she said by phone Friday. "But I'm ready to do something else."

The store was originally opened in Central El Paso by O'Rourke's parents on Raynolds Street in 1951. O'Rourke said in 2004 that working at the store helped her cope with the death of her husband, former County Judge Patrick O'Rourke, who was killed in 2001 when a car struck his recumbent bicycle.

It's been a wonderful lifetime experience. But I'm ready to do something else. — Melissa O'Rourke

Melissa and Patrick O'Rourke's son is U.S. Rep. Beto O'Rourke, D-El Paso, who is campaigning to unseat Republican U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz in 2018.

On Friday, Melissa O'Rourke said her decision to close was not tied to her son's current Senate campaign.

"For me, it's my personal life," she said. "I'm just ready to call it."

Buy Photo Charlotte's Furniture is set to close later this year, the owner said. (Photo: Pablo Villa/El Paso Times)

Charlotte's received notoriety in 2010 when it agreed to plead guilty and pay a $250,000 fine in a federal case involving manipulation of financial records.

Charlotte's accepted cash payments from an unidentified customer, then altered records so the daily transactions were not reported to the Internal Revenue Service, according to a plea agreement between the business and the federal government.

Melissa O'Rourke said the matter was finalized years ago.

"That was all cleared up years ago," she said. "It has nothing to do with what we are here for today."

In an ad that will run in Sunday’s El Paso Times, Charlotte’s thanks its customers for their support.

While we are proud of our success and thankful for your devoted support, the time has come for other pursuits.

“Without you, that simply would not have been possible. While we are proud of our success and thankful for your devoted support, the time has come for other pursuits,” the ad states. “We are eager to visit with many of you in the coming months as we prepare to turn the page to the next chapter of our lives. We are grateful for your friendship, your patronage, and the trust you have placed in us.”

Pablo Villa may be reached at 546-6345; pvilla@elpasotimes.com; @pvilla50 on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://www.elpasotimes.com/story/news/local/el-paso/2017/08/04/charlottes-furniture-store-close-year-owner-says/540091001/