Property Insurance Bill Vetoed By Crist
Gov. Charlie Crist vetoed a sharply contested property insurance bill Wednesday, saying it could limit consumer choices, raise premiums and harm Florida's market for homeowner coverage.

Although the legislation (HB 1171) was called the "consumer choice" bill, it actually would have allowed about 40 of the largest property insurers to start charging virtually any price they want for policies with hurricane coverage, and to bypass regulations the state imposes on other companies.

"The bill actually gives the 'choice' to a select group of property insurance companies and allows them to decide who they are willing to sell a non-regulated policy," Crist wrote in a letter explaining his veto. "These select property insurance companies will be able to cherry-pick, or sell only to profitable policyholder[s] . . ."

Those backing the legislation had said it aimed to widen the array of policies with storm coverage by preventing some big, well-financed national companies from leaving the state or dropping Florida policies, and to bring other companies back.

Atop the list: the state's largest private property insurer, State Farm, which announced early this year it would pull out of Florida after regulators and an administrative law judge rejected its request to raise rates by up to 67 percent.

House Speaker Larry Cretul, R-Ocala, called the veto a disappointment.

"Florida has demonstrated that over-regulating the insurance industry can actually make things worse for consumers - not better. It seems reasonable to give homeowners as many choices as possible as they seek to insure their property," Cretul said in a statement.

The Florida Chamber of Commerce had backed the bill, saying it would preserve homeowners' ability to stay with national insurers. Some legislators fear that the state-subsidized Citizens Property Insurance Co., which has more windstorm policies than anyone else, is underfinanced and may not be strong enough to weather a major hurricane.