Trump State Park Fired. Trump Displeased.
David Goldman for The New York Times

Although he is known for his high-rises, resorts and golf courses, Donald J. Trump helped create a little-known state park in northern Westchester County, donating the land for public use in 2006.

Like many things, the park is named after him. It is called the Donald J. Trump State Park. It also happens to be on a list of 58 parks and historic sites the state plans to close because of budget cuts.

The plan, released Feb. 19, coupled with the fact that the state would save only the park’s $2,500 annual budget by closing it, has infuriated Mr. Trump.

“If they’re going to close it, I’ll take the land back,” said Mr. Trump, who donated the 436 acres on which the park sits to the state after his attempts to develop the parcels grew costly and frustrating.

“It’s too bad the parks department is doing this to the people and the state,” he said. “I gave that land for the purposes of a park, and I always believed that once a park is there, it would always be a park.”

Officials with the state’s Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation say the state will not be returning Mr. Trump’s land.

“This will be remaining parkland,” said a spokeswoman for the agency, Eileen Larrabee.

Mr. Trump stopped short of promising a lawsuit but did say he “might consider exploring the legal options” in regaining the property.

“This was very valuable property,” he said. “I gave it away at the height of the market.”

The parkland, mostly located in Yorktown, some 50 miles north of Manhattan, contrasts with any preconceptions about what a Trump state park might look like. There are no boardroom-style picnic tables, nor hiking trail signs trimmed in shiny gold. Usage is not restricted to the rich and famous.

The park is, rather, a decidedly un-Trumpian preserve of 436 acres of woods and wetlands, with footpaths, on two parcels along the Taconic State Parkway: the 282-acre Indian Hill section straddling the border of Westchester and Putnam Counties, and the 154-acre French Hill parcel in Yorktown. The park has no dedicated staff, and is lightly maintained by workers from the nearby Franklin D. Roosevelt State Park.

On a side note, signs for the park posted on local streets have tended to disappear over the years. It is unclear whether the takers wanted souvenirs or to sabotage the park.

Ms. Larrabee said it was still unclear whether officials would actually bar visitors from walking on the property or simply stop maintaining it.

She said that Mr. Trump did not give an endowment to improve the park.

In Yorktown, in 2002, Mr. Trump withdrew plans to build a $10 million private golf course on land that included significant portions of wetlands, after encountering strict environmental restrictions and permitting requirements. He blamed the Yorktown supervisor, Linda Cooper, for thwarting his plans, telling her in a letter that she had “done a terrible disservice” to her constituents.

In an interview on Wednesday, Ms. Cooper, who has since left office, said that Mr. Trump “just didn’t want to go through the rules.”

“He called me, at one point,” she recalled, “and said, ‘Linda, just let me build the golf course — I’m rich, you’ll like it.'”

Mr. Trump said at the time that the land, zoned for residential use, was worth roughly $100 million, and that he could have sold it to a developer.

He gave it to the public instead, at the suggestion of his children, Donald Jr. and Ivanka, because, he said, it was “the best thing to do.”