Civiqs
Why Poll Online?

Scientifically rigorous, sampling-based survey research is the best and most reliable way to learn about public opinion. Civiqs keeps up with Americans’ political attitudes with its large, national, online survey panel, and its custom-built polling service at civiqs.com.

The Internet is the predominant way that Americans communicate today. In 2000, only half of American adults were Internet users, and high-speed residential Internet access was nearly nonexistent. Americans who used the Internet were younger, wealthier, and better educated than those who did not. Nowadays, those differences have nearly vanished. Over 88% of all American adults are online, and 73% have home broadband connections. Another 12% use smartphones with e-mail and web access, even if they do not have high-speed connections at home. The number of cellular phone subscriptions per 100 Americans is greater than 120, and increasing.

“The Internet is the predominant way that Americans communicate today.”

At the same time, the use of landline telephones in U.S. households is collapsing. The rate at which Americans subscribe to landline service is nearly half of what it was in 2000. More than half of all U.S. households do not have any landline telephone service—and adults without landline telephones are disproportionately younger and people of color: populations that would be missed by landline-only surveys. For the first time, at the end of 2016, a majority of American adults were wireless-only.

These trends make it increasingly difficult to conduct polls by telephone alone. Relying on landline telephones to contact a representative sample of Americans is almost guaranteed to produce inaccurate survey results. Yet calling mobile phones adds significant costs and complexity to traditional telephone-based survey methods. Even when Americans can be reached on the telephone, fewer and fewer are choosing to participating in polls: response rates on telephone surveys have fallen from 36% in 1997 to less than 10% today. Response rates on mobile phones are even lower than on landlines. Polls using interactive voice response (IVR, sometimes referred to as “robo-polls”) have still lower response and completion rates, are restricted from calling mobile phones, and, in many states, are prohibited completely.

“The spread of Internet access and the proliferation of handheld mobile devices makes the Internet the future of polling.”

The spread of Internet access and the proliferation of handheld mobile devices makes the Internet the future of polling. Online polling methodologies have been studied extensively, and been found to generate accurate results when researchers follow a series of best practices in sampling, user experience, interview design, and statistical modeling. By polling online, surveys can be fielded at a speed and scale that would never be possible over the telephone. Methodologically sophisticated online surveys have many additional advantages:

Very high survey completion rates.

Response rates above what can be achieved by telephone.

Round-the-clock interviewing, so respondents can answer when it is most convenient.

No interviewer effects, as every survey is conducted in exactly the same way.

The ability to interview the same people repeatedly over time.

Easy integration of voter registration data for list-based sampling.

Voter file matching on survey responses.

As with any polling methodology, the quality of the research design and implementation determines how confident you can be in your data and results.