Ross Taylor

Ross Taylor joined Clemson as Assistant Athletic Director for Football Communications in 2018. He serves as the primary media contact for Clemson Football and Head Coach Dabo Swinney, and is responsible for developing media relations strategies, coordinating and scheduling media appearances, program record-keeping and more.

In Taylor’s first season at Clemson in 2018, he managed media efforts for a squad that won the program’s third national title en route to becoming major college football’s first 15-0 team since 1897. He guided media outreach through the team’s fourth consecutive ACC title and fourth straight College Football Playoff appearance, while helping promote five first-team All-Americans (including three consensus honors and a unanimous selection) and multiple national award winners, including honorees for the William V. Campbell Trophy, Ted Hendricks Award, Archie Griffin Award and multiple Coach of the Year selections. Following the season, Taylor and Clemson’s Sports Information staff were honored with the program’s sixth all-time selection to the FWAA Super 11, given annually to the departments and programs that exemplify excellent media relations.

Taylor joined Clemson after seven seasons with the Washington Redskins from 2011-18. The Redskins promoted Taylor to Director of Communications in 2015 after four years in various PR capacities for the team across the 2011-14 seasons. In his seven NFL seasons, Taylor helped promote 10 players to a total of 20 Pro Bowl selections and two offensive coordinators en route to eventual NFL head coaching positions. In addition, he was part of a select group chosen by the NFL to provide assistance on the league’s behalf during NFC Championship weeks five times.

Taylor first joined the Redskins as an intern in Summer 2010 before joining the team on a full-time basis in July 2011. His background includes internships as a staff writer with The Dallas Morning News and at the world headquarters of Fleishman-Hillard International Communications in St. Louis.

Taylor graduated magna cum laude from the School of Journalism at the University of Missouri in December 2010, earning a Bachelor’s of Journalism with an emphasis in convergence journalism in three-and-a-half years. In addition to completing assignments for multiple professional media organizations, Taylor served as the play-by-play voice of the Mizzou women’s volleyball team across the 2009-10 seasons. In his final semester, Taylor and a colleague launched KBIA Sports Extra, which was later integrated into the curriculum by convergence journalism faculty as the genesis of a new Multimedia Sports Reporting course.

Taylor is a native of Coppell, Texas.