Crist says he had no reason to suspect alleged swindler Rothstein of anything illegal
In his most detailed comments yet about $1.2 billion Ponzi scheme suspect Scott Rothstein, Gov. Charlie Crist said Thursday he had heard the rumors swirling about the mysterious source of Rothstein's sudden wealth but saw no reason to investigate him or refuse his big political contributions.



"Should we distance ourselves from people because there's a lot of talk? Is that a fair standard?" Crist said during a meeting with Sun Sentinel editors and reporters.



Images of the onetime political allies together are posted all over the Internet. Crist attended Rothstein's extravagant wedding at the Versace mansion on South Beach and the now disbarred and jailed Fort Lauderdale attorney helped throw a 52nd birthday party for Crist at the Breakers in Palm Beach.



A Sun Sentinel analysis of campaign contributions shows Rothstein, his legal associates and their families have donated at least $2.8 million to largely Republican political causes since 2006. The biggest beneficiaries were John McCain/Sarah Palin election committees, $847,400, and the Republican Party of Florida, $656,000.



Rothstein also championed Crist's bid to be McCain's running mate. Crist said Thursday he appreciated Rothstein's fundraising and support, but that Rothstein never asked for political favors or anything else in return.



"He wanted good government," Crist said. "That's what he told me."



While Crist spoke enthusiastically about his political accomplishments and current U.S. Senate bid Thursday, he clearly was less comfortable talking about his one-time friend and supporter who is now awaiting trial on federal charges of masterminding a large-scale criminal racket.



Crist said he did not recall how he first met Rothstein, but that it was four or five years ago. The two were in regular contact, taking each other's phone calls every six weeks or so, Crist said.



Crist appointed Rothstein to a committee that nominates judges for the state 4th District Court of Appeal. The governor said Thursday that Rothstein's political contributions played no role in that decision.



When asked whether it was a mistake not to have delved deeper into Rothstein's background and actions, Crist, a former Florida attorney general, replied, "I give people the benefit of the doubt. … Unless I have a reason to believe that somebody is doing something wrong, then I don't have a reason to believe they're doing something wrong.



"As I've said before, I don't have a crystal ball. If somebody's running a law firm, or running an IT business, or running a newspaper, and they seem relatively successful and have a lot of friends who want to try to help you, then who am I to judge, if there's no reason to judge?"



In one photograph of Crist and Rothstein together that hung in Rothstein's now-closed law office, the governor signed it, "Scott – you're amazing!" When asked what he so admired about Rothstein, Crist hesitated Thursday.



"Uh, he employed a lot of people, provided them an economic opportunity, is probably what I admired the most. Now as we all know, hindsight being 20/20, it wasn't done the right way," the governor said.



Crist explained his philosophy when it comes to political contributions this way: "I'm an honest guy. As far as I'm concerned, if people want to give to my campaign and help me, I'm grateful. If they ask something in return for it, they don't get it. And nobody does ask anything in return for it, not to me."



While the two socialized, they never traveled together, Crist said, adding that he didn't recall ever being a guest in Rothstein's skybox at Land Shark Stadium for a Miami Dolphins game. "We may have walked by one time," he said.



He said he did not think the relationship would hurt his Senate bid, although he acknowledged that many Crist-Rothstein photographs probably would be prominent in attack ads.



"That's fine. That's fair game. If people want to do it, they can try. I'll fight back and tell the truth. That's politics," the governor said.



In retrospect, Crist said, he realized Rothstein had sought to burnish his image through their relationship.



"Apparently it worked for a while, to a degree," Crist said. "There was a lot of people he touched and ingratiated himself to, but he never asked me for anything. I think he may have utilized it in order to appear significant in the community."



Crist said he had not spoken to Rothstein since the alleged Ponzi scheme blew up in October and the federal racketeering and fraud charges were leveled. One Sun Sentinel reporter asked, "He didn't call you up and say, 'Charlie, I'm in trouble, what can you do for me?'"



The governor gave a short laugh. "Negative," he said firmly.



Governor Crist at the Rothstein "White party" engagement party. (Stephan Maloman, Maloman Photographers)



Peter Franceschina can be reached at pfranceschina@sunsentinel.com or 954-459-2255