Clean and Healthy Environment – ClearPath Action Fund
Clean and Healthy Environment

Carlos is a steward of Florida’s natural resources

Carlos truly cares about protecting Florida’s environment, from the Everglades to fighting sea level rise. That’s why he won the John F Kennedy New Frontier award for his bipartisan leadership on climate change and sea level rise.

Carlos is sponsoring the Flood Protection Act to help fund infrastructure projects to reduce flooding, like the high tide flooding that’s become a regular occurrence around our coast.

Sea levels along South Florida are expected to rise about 15 inches above current levels by 2045. Just a one-foot increase in sea level is estimated to threaten up to $6.4 billion in taxable real estate in Miami-Dade County… I introduced the Flood Protection Act with my colleague, Representative Seth Moulton of Massachusetts. This bipartisan legislation will help our local communities build and adapt their coastal infrastructure to help manage against this serious threat.” – Carlos Curbelo

He fights on a daily basis for places like the Everglades, Biscayne National Parks and the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary. That’s why he’s championing a provision to allocate over $976 million toward Everglades restoration projects. The Everglades and surrounding estuaries are an important natural resource for Southern Florida and will be restored to a natural state, while providing a reliable water supply for Florida residents.

These projects are designed to capture freshwater, clean and redirect it back to the ecosystem to revitalize the Everglades and protect threatened and endangered plants and wildlife. This national treasure deserves to be properly tended to, and I am confident that this funding will make a positive impact in our communities and ecosystem.” – Carlos Curbelo

Representative Curbelo supported the 2016 Energy and Water Appropriations Bill. It included robust funding at $123 million for ongoing restoration projects in Everglades National Park. Protecting the Everglades, one of our country’s greatest natural treasures, is crucial to the environmental health of South Florida. And when the White House proposed oil drilling off the shores of Florida, Carlos pushed back.

The people of Florida and its leaders have made it clear over and over again: We do not want drilling near our shores, we do not want to put our beautiful beaches and environmental treasures at risk. We simply have too much to lose.” – Carlos Curbelo

Carlos’ support for clean energy will also protect Florida’s environment and reduce sea level rise for years and generations to come. He successfully pushed for tax credits to boost solar power in 2015 and carbon capture to reduce power plant pollution in 2018, And he puts his vote where his mouth is, voting to protect $1.6 billion funding to the Department of Energy for clean energy research and climate science. This important vote helps secure funding for research and development opportunities that will help invent a brighter future, with technologies to help Florida’s environment to thrive for many decades more.

Carlos has accomplished so much for South Florida and our local environment with his bipartisan approach. From the Everglades to our fisherman to flood protection to sea level rise, he is the clean energy champion Florida District 26 needs.