Gov. Charlie Crist declares emergency in South Florida
Gov. Charlie Crist proclaimed a state of emergency for Broward, Miami-Dade and Palm Beach counties Thursday, as the risk increased that oil from the Gulf of Mexico spill would reach the state's shores.

Crist cited reports that oil had been caught up in the loop current, which sweeps around the Florida peninsula, saying this created a "potential threat to additional counties bordering the Gulf and the Atlantic seaboard."

The extent of the threat to South Florida remains unclear. Jane Lubchenco, administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, said late Thursday afternoon that "only a very small amount" of oil had entered the loop current. But she was unable to quantify it, and she acknowledged that an unknown amount of oil remained under the surface.

BP acknowledged Thursday that the daily amount of oil pouring from the ocean floor was significantly more than the 210,000 gallons originally estimated. A live video feed of the leak posted online at the insistence of members of Congress shows what appears to be a large plume of oil and gas still spewing next to the tube that's carrying some of it to the surface.

"What you see are real-time images of a real-world disaster unfolding 5,000 feet below the surface of the Gulf," said U.S. Rep. Edward J. Markey, D-Mass. "These videos stand as a scalding, blistering indictment of BP's inattention to the scope and size of the greatest environmental catastrophe in the history of the United States."

After holding off shore for weeks, heavy crude began pouring into Louisiana's coastal wetlands, A young brown pelican was found dead, its neck and one wing matted with oil, at the Breton National Wildlife Refuge.

So far, no similar threat has emerged for Florida. But authorities are trying to gather more information to better gauge the threat. Lubchenco said the government was deploying additional ships and planes to assess the extent of the subsurface oil and the trajectory of the oil in the loop current.