The Mars Millennium Project
This is historical material, "frozen in time."

The web site is no longer updated and links to external web sites and some internal pages will not work.

The Mars Millennium Project





“Today we are challenging schoolchildren around the country to begin a very exciting journey a journey into the mind a journey into to the imagination a journey into the future.”

Daniel Goldin,

NASA Administrator

January 14, 1999

Take a Flight of the Imagination to Mars!

Encourage the young people of your community to set their sights on Mars! The Mars Millennium Project is challenging students across America to imagine establishing a village for 100 transplanted earthlings on the planet Mars in the year 2030.

First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton joined honorary chairman John Glenn, Secretary of Education Richard Riley, and Mars Pathfinder mission chief Donna Shirley in giving their enthusiastic support at the project “launch” in January 1999. Today, thousands of young people and educators are using the arts, sciences and humanities to discover what is important in their own communities, to decided what they would like to take with them to Mars, and to imagine a new life on the red planet.

A national website www.Mars2030.net connects student teams of “mission specialists” to a universe of resources that can help them develop and use new knowledge and skills. Teams have access to artists, scientists, engineers, architects – even astronauts – through on-line chats. Teams share their projects and ideas within an on-line Virtual Gallery, and communities are encouraged to make space available for teams to display their final projects. Additional resources and ideas for mounting local exhibits can be found on the Mars Millennium Project website, www.Mars2030.net. And registered submissions will be placed on a microchip for transfer to Mars on a future NASA mission!

Participation guides geared for use in classrooms from kindergarten through high school, libraries, museums, clubs and community centers, are downloadable from the website, or by calling, toll-free, 1-800-USA-LEARN. They include activity guides for teachers, student and project leaders, and tips for getting information and working with local professionals.

The Mars Millennium Project is sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education, the National Endowment for the Arts, NASA and its Jet Propulsion Lab, and the J. Paul Getty Trust in partnership with the White House Millennium Council. More than 100 national education, art, science, space and civic organizations, as well as many contributing corporate partners support this project.

Partner Sites

U.S. Department of Education

The National Endowment for the Arts

NASA – Jet Propulsion Laboratory

The J. Paul Getty Trust

How You Can Get Involved

This is a once-in-a-millennium opportunity to get students thinking about what makes their own communities work, as they imagine a living environment in space. For more information on how you can get involved in this exciting national initiative, please visit the Mars Millennium website at www.Mars2030.net, call (310) 274-8787 x 150, or e-mail mars@pvcla.com.

President and First Lady | Vice President and Mrs. Gore

Record of Progress | The Briefing Room

Gateway to Government | Contacting the White House | White House for Kids

White House History | White House Tours | Help

Privacy Statement

Help

Site Map

Graphic Version