Fewer people moving to Florida, census estimates show

Lack of jobs, housing bust and Great Recession kept people from moving

Low housing values in other states make it harder for would-be transplants to sell a house and move to Florida. Many baby boomers have put retirement plans on hold because their savings are depleted. And Florida's unemployment rate — among the nation's highest at 12 percent — has forced job seekers to look elsewhere.

The Florida numbers reflect declining mobility nationwide, as far fewer Americans move across state lines in the aftermath of the recession and housing crisis.

In the Orlando/Kissimmee area, the number of new residents who moved from another state plunged from 78,138 in 2005 to 62,872 in 2009.

Moves to Broward County from outside the state plunged from 46,338 in 2005 to 27,148 in 2009. In Palm Beach County , the number declined from 43,796 to 32,809.

Using the latest available data, census surveys estimate that only 461,088 people moved to Florida from another state in 2009. Nearly as many Floridians — 439,665 — moved to another state. That's roughly one-third fewer new residents compared with 2005, when 632,168 moved to Florida from another state.

A batch of hurricanes, a housing crisis, the Great Recession and the loss of a million jobs in the state have brought the stream of new arrivals to a trickle.

The rebranding reflects attempts to attract businesses and college graduates while reviving the stream of retirees and home buyers who once poured into Florida and nurtured economic growth.

WASHINGTON — Faced with a dramatic decline in the number of Americans moving to Florida, community boosters are promoting the Sunshine State as a cluster of research and technology, not just a balmy place to live.

"The economy is the culprit here," said William Frey, a demographer with the Brookings Institution, who said only 1.4 percent of Americans moved across state lines last year, the lowest rate since World War II.

"Once the economy picks up, it will help bring back the flow of residents and the labor force that is an essential part of Florida's industry," he predicted.

'Cool cities'

Frey and other demographers have noticed that young adults are attracted to urban areas such as Tampa, South Florida, Boston and San Francisco because they are considered "cool cities" buzzing with street life, cafes, concerts, art exhibits, major-league sports teams and partying. Florida cities add sand, sun and warmth.

"A lot of young people want to live in certain places because of things like cultural events and the marriage market. Then they look for some kind of job once they get there," said Emily Eisenhauer, a researcher at Florida International University who studies the labor market. "We have seen that in Miami. I know that's part of why I wanted to move here seven years ago."

"But with the loss of jobs," she said, "it's harder for the out-of-college cohort to come here."

The Great Recession and housing bust prompted Florida promoters to realize they could no longer rely on climate and low taxes to foster growth. And they decided that Florida's economic triad — agriculture, construction and tourism — is not enough to employ all those who want to come to the state.

"The Florida you knew three years ago is gone, and it's not coming back," said Bob Swindell, CEO of the Greater Fort Lauderdale Alliance, which tries to draw businesses to the region. "Our challenge is to create high-skilled jobs to accommodate people who want to move to Florida."

The strategy means going beyond "a retirement mentality of people coming to Florida for the quality of life," he said. "You also need employment opportunities."

High-tech clusters

For instance, the Alliance tells employers that by moving to South Florida they can tap a talent pool of high-skilled workers, including many who were laid off by Motorola in 2008. The idea is to retain residents while drawing new businesses and creating more jobs, stoking growth that lifts the entire economy.

Three technology companies — Research in Motion, Foxconn and General Dynamics — took advantage by setting up shop in Broward.

"This community really didn't have a reputation for research and development, especially in the wireless communications sector," Swindell said. "If you relocated your family down here, there was only one game in town: a signature operation like Motorola. But you didn't have a lot of options if, for whatever reason, that didn't work out. Now we've got a robust cluster."