BREAKING: Obama-Led U.N. Has Just Made It Official, U.S. To Immediately Pay Blacks “Reparations”
Political tyranny has set this great country ablaze since Barack Obama became our president eight years ago. We are now living in a country that refers to Black Lives Matter as a heroic group instead of our law enforcement officers.

That is the type of America Obama has created, and the United Nations has voted to make things much worse. At the behest of Obama’s actions, a United Nations panel in Geneva is now calling for the United States to pay African Americans reparations for slavery.

These so called “experts” are comprised of human rights lawyers that presented their findings about the link between the U.S.’s history of slavery and present injustices, such as the recent police shootings of African Americans to the United Nations Human Rights Council.

“In particular, the legacy of colonial history, enslavement, racial subordination and segregation, racial terrorism and racial inequality in the United States remains a serious challenge, as there has been no real commitment to reparations and to truth and reconciliation for people of African descent,” the report stated.

“Contemporary police killings and the trauma that they create are reminiscent of the past racial terror of lynching.”

The group argued that police shootings of African Americans during the past year have caused a “human rights crisis that is in urgent need of addressing and compared the recent shootings to the acts of lynchings by white supremacists in the late 1800’s.”

While this entire argument is absolutely insane, it gets much worse. Many proponents of this are demanding that the reparations should come in a variety of forms, such as “a formal apology, health initiatives, educational opportunities, psychological rehabilitation, technology transfer and financial support, and debt cancellation.”

This reads like a sick joke, but people still continue to miss the larger point. Black people today are not owed anything for what happened decades ago.

The problem with this line of thinking is that Obama has created a culture privilege. People want things given to them instead of earning it for themselves because of skin color.

In this quick video, Milo Yiannopoulos easily proves that blacks are the biggest problem when it comes to violence in general, not police or white people.

This is nothing more than another liberal agenda trying to promote one race over the other. For example, President Obama said:

I think the reason that the organizers used the phrase “black lives matter” was not because there is a specific problem that is happening in the African-American community that’s not happening in other communities. And that is a legitimate issue that we’ve got to address.

The reason this country is on the verge of a racial war is because we have a president stirring the pot like this. And now he is using the U.N. to promote his racial agendas inside the United States before he leaves office.

If this doesn’t infuriate you, nothing else will. In fact, if Obama somehow gets this passed, all white taxpayers will be forced to pay hundreds of millions in reparations because of something that happened decades ago.

This issue will remain after Obama leaves office. He has cronies and allies that will pick up his agendas and fight to pass them at the state and local levels.

We must continue to do everything we can and not allow liberal policies to take hold anywhere in our country. Our future is depending on President Trump.