Florida Gov. Rick Scott cites need for education funding to justify record use of line item veto.
Gov. Rick Scott has had an epiphany? He's now concerned about "education over special interests"?

The governor used those words this week to justify a record number of line-item vetoes that cut an already austere state spending plan by an additional $615 million. But we're not buying it.

The pledge rings hollow, and it should. Scott didn't seem all that concerned about public education when he submitted his initial budget. That version proposed cutting $3.3 billion in education spending and reducing state funding to public school students by $700 — in the name of allocating dollars for corporate tax reductions to assist job creation.

The budget plan Scott signed this week won't immediately lead to job creation. And it hasn't left educators feeling warm and fuzzy — nor should it.

The new budget will lead to the elimination of roughly 4,500 government jobs, including those held by teachers, administrators and support staff who work in the state's 67 school districts. Broward County, for example, is bracing for the loss of 1,400 teaching positions, and while the bulk of those jobs relied on federal stimulus dollars, there's no cavalry coming to the rescue from Tallahassee.

Incredibly, amid the slashing of programs for broad numbers of Floridians, state lawmakers still managed to lard the new budget with enough last-minute projects called "budget turkeys," an inappropriate commitment to special project appropriations for a state facing a $4 billion budget shortfall. Florida TaxWatch identified 105 suspect projects worth $202.9 million that somehow skirted the normal legislative process used to determine if request for tax dollars is worthy of state funding.

The governor used his line-item veto to rid almost 90 percent of those from the budget. We commend him for that.

But the governor's doing-it-for-the-children rationale is as unconvincing as it is lacking. Less than $100 million could conceivably be returned to education, which amounts to a drop in the bucket to the cuts to Florida's early education, public schools, state college and university programs.