CLF Releases New Ads Highlighting Amy McGrath’s Extreme, Liberal Agenda
New ads highlight how Amy McGrath’s extreme, liberal agenda would hurt Kentucky families

WASHINGTON – Congressional Leadership Fund (@CLFSuperPAC), the super PAC endorsed by House Republican leadership, today released three new ads in Kentucky’s 6thCongressional District. The ads will run in the Lexington media market.

One T.V. ad, “Hannah,” features a single mother explaining how the middle-class tax cut is helping her family and how Amy McGrath’s liberal agenda would increase taxes for hardworking Kentuckians. Another T.V. ad, “Safe,” features Kentucky mother Anna discussing McGrath’s backing by liberal extremists and why her support of open borders would put Kentucky families at risk.

The radio ad, “Elites,” highlights the liberal elites bankrolling Amy McGrath’s campaign and how McGrath would support them and Nancy Pelosi over Kentucky families.

“Amy McGrath is out-of-touch with Kentucky families,” said Michael Byerly, CLF spokesman. “McGrath’s extreme, liberal agenda would increase taxes and put Kentucky families at risk. Amy McGrath is wrong on taxes and wrong on illegal immigration – she can’t be trusted in Congress.”

These are CLF’s first television and radio ads in Kentucky’s 6th Congressional District. In addition to the ad campaign, CLF opened a field office in Kentucky’s 6th district. Each CLF field office is supported by a full-time staffer and hundreds of interns and volunteers who engage with voters on a daily basis through hyper-targeted phone banking and door-to-door canvassing.

Watch the ad, “Hannah,” here.



SCRIPT HANNAH THORNTON: I’m a single mom. It’s not always easy to juggle work with taking care of my daughter. But the middle-class tax cut has really helped. This year I’m going to save about fifteen hundred dollars. So I don’t understand why Amy McGrath opposed a tax cut for working moms… …but wants to fund more welfare for people who can work, but don’t. Amy McGrath’s liberal policies would hurt middle-class families.



Watch the ad, “Safe,” here.

SCRIPT ANNA ROBERTS-SMITH: As a mom, nothing is more important than keeping my family safe. That’s why I can’t support Amy McGrath. Amy McGrath is backed by liberal extremists… …who want to eliminate the law enforcement agency that enforces our immigration laws. McGrath’s support for open borders will make it easier for drugs and criminals to flow into our country… …Putting Kentucky families at risk. Amy McGrath is wrong on illegal immigration.