Ohio Student Suspended for NOT Participating in Walk Out ⋆ Conservative Firing Line
Jacob Shoemaker, a Senior at Hilliard Davidson High School in Ohio, didn’t want to take sides during the “National Walk Out Day.” He stayed in his classroom doing homework. So the school suspended him.

The “National Walkout Day’ was supposed to be in support of the victims of the Parkland Shooting. It was anything but that- it was an anti-gun protest for which many schools forced students to participate. Jacob stayed in the room.

Fox News reported,

Trending: You didn’t hear about this mass murder because guns weren’t involved

Jacob Shoemaker, a senior at Hilliard Davidson High School, said he didn’t want to take sides in the gun-control debate consuming the country. If he went outside for the walkout, he said, he would be supporting gun control. If he stayed in the common area of the school, he said, he would be seen as supporting gun violence and disrespecting the 17 lives lost in the Parkland, Fla. High school shooting the month before.

Jacob had met with the school’s principal on Tuesday, a day before the rally, for about an hour to find out what exactly the walkout was supporting. But he said the principal reportedly told him it was for the “students to express themselves.”

This left Jacob wondering if it was a memorial for the lives lost or a show of support for gun control.

Jacob sent a photo of his suspension to a friend, who posted it on Facebook. It went viral.

It was only a one day suspension, and the school told the parent they were “responsible for the student’s safety” and could not leave one student “unsupervised.” Because he was doing his homework instead of protesting. Sure. Will this suspension cause Jacob problems with graduation?

Some of the comments on the original post were hot, and justifiably so.

Kimberly wrote: “This is beyond ridiculous, the student was suspended from school for staying in the classroom and refusing to join other students outside to protest guns! My daughter stayed in her classroom along with most of her classmates…

I contacted the school and they are not allowed to comment on a student’s discplinary. For the idiots who cannot read the suspension is today and the student can return tomorrow. The incident occured on 3/14/2018.”

Neil wrote,

“THEY ARE SUSPENDING STUDENTS FOR REFUSING TO LEAVE THE CLASSROOM AND JOIN THE GUN PROTEST! WTH!”

According to the Fox article, both the school and the Shoemakers have received death threats and hate messages (you know, the classy response by fools on both sides).

We have received many posts just like this one, talking about how students were forced to participate in the walk out. Many refused to walk out, some without repercussions, others paid a price for refusing the anti-gun agenda.

Schools should not bring their politics to the classroom, but it appears that the vast majority of them already do.

H/T Uncle Sam’s Misguided Children

Related:

If you haven’t checked out and liked our Facebook page, please go here and do so. And be sure to check out our Conservative Firing Line’s MeWe group.

So if you appreciate the kind of hard-hitting Conservative news you probably won’t see anywhere else, please visit our Patreon page here and become a patron, and be sure to spread the word.