State Rep’s Aide Gets Fired Over Controversial Comments About Florida Shooting
Things are reaching a fever pitch in the office of Florida State Representative Shawn Harrison. His district secretary, Benjamin A. Kelly, sent an email saying that Parkland High School students speaking out against gun violence were actors.

In the aftermath of the Valentine’s Day school shooting, where alleged shooter Nikolas Cruz, 19, shot and killed 17 students and teachers, students David Hogg and Emma Gonzalez have been speaking out.

Unfortunately, Kelly referred to them as “crisis actors”, citing a right-wing conspiracy theory that the left hired the two to pose as students in an effort to sway voters to gun control.

Since the shootings, both Hogg and Gonzalez have spoken out vehemently on social media regarding efforts to prevent further mass shootings.

Naturally, as in every other mass shooting incident, the Parkland shooting is being politicized on both sides.

The conspiracy theories, which are unfounded, started with individuals on social media who pegged Hogg as a crisis actor—someone who travels to crises like Parkland to spread a specific political ideology. After the Sandy Hook elementary school shooting, similar theories were proposed.

While some of these social media posts are just rantings, other posts try to provide evidence to prove their point. In one post, the example given was Hogg conducting an interview with the Los Angeles CBS affiliate about a fight between a surfer and a lifeguard. Hogg happened to be at the beach and catch it on camera. Hogg said he lived in L.A. but moved to Florida.

To add to the mayhem, it turns out that Hogg’s dad is a retired FBI agent, and with facts (and rumors) swirling about the FBI’s mishandling by failing to bring Nikolas Cruz in earlier for questioning, the conspiracy theory gained more traction.

Amazingly, though, people like Kelly in the state legislature started perpetuating the conspiracy theories as well. Kelly even sent his theory to journalist Alex Leary, who asked Kelly for more concrete proof.

Harrison actually fired Kelly for his actions, tweeting, “I am appalled at and strongly denounce his [Kelly’s] comments about the Parkland students. I am sorry for any pain this has caused the grieving families of this tragedy.”

Harrison says he definitely doesn’t share Kelly’s opinion, and Kelly said he made a big mistake and said he meant no disrespect to the grieving families. Florida Senator Marco Rubio also had strong words, tweeting that Kelly’s claim that some of the students were actors “is the work of a disgusting group of idiots with no sense of decency,

Hogg has hit back hard on the conspiracy theorists and accusations by saying he is not an actor. While the 17-year-old Hogg is a student at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School and does work for the school’s TV station, Hogg angrily denies he is an actor. Hogg was instrumental in starting the #NeverAgain gun reform movement, and has spoken out against both politicians and the NRA regarding what he perceives as lax gun laws.

CNN reports that Hogg is a senior at the high school and desires to one day be a professional journalist, however, other information shows he graduated from a California school in 2015. He currently serves as a Teenlink reporter for the Florida Sun Sentinel newspaper.

He’s a student filmmaker and surfer, which explains the origin of the surfer story on CBS. Hogg has lived with his family in Florida for several years; the story is that he moved from L.A. in the middle of his freshman year and chose to attend Stoneman because of the TV production classes offered at the school.

Hogg was one of the first students to appear in a national interview. During the shooting incident, Hogg was in his environmental science class. He says the school had never conducted an active shooter drill.

Hogg says he hid in a closet during the shooting. He had an immediate inclination to tell the story, so he pulled out his phone and started conducting video interviews of fellow students.

Hogg says he wanted to show the nation exactly what was happening as bullets were flying through classrooms. Hogg said “students are dying trying to get an education.”

Hogg concluded that if he was going to die, he wanted to die telling a story that needed to be heard.

Armchair quarterbacks have criticized Hogg for appearing too calm in these videos, thus perpetuating the “actor” rumors. Behavioral experts point out that people react differently in crisis situations, depending on how close they are to danger. Hogg never encountered Cruz.