New Law Would Target ‘Economic Terrorism,’ Lawmaker Proposes Bill
The United States is one of the best places to live. You have rights that are given to you from the Constitution, you have the freedom to do what you want (within reason of course), and you have the ability to live in one of the strongest nations in the world.

At least it is supposed to be like that. Unfortunately there are people called liberals that want to completely destroy everything that the Constitution gives you. They want to take away your free speech because it might offend them. They want to take away your ability to have a gun because they don’t like it. And finally they want to make the country into a globalist area.

Despite the fact that the United States was founded with the Constitution being the document that gives people power, many liberals have decided that they don’t like that anymore. They are literally doing what they can to destroy any evidence of that.

The most prominent example would be the fact that after the election was held, in which Donald Trump was the winner, entitled liberals were so angry that they decided they would go out and protest the results. Yes they were protesting the results of a FAIR election, despite the fact that there was still three million illegal votes cast.

And what do the Democratic leaders have to say about all of this? They have kept their mouths shut on the entire thing. Despite all summer long of having the liberals and their friends in the media saying that Trump needs to talk to his supporters for their “damages” caused, they haven’t done that either.

But it isn’t just the fact that the Democratic leaders are staying silent on the whole issue. There have been numerous reports that these protesters are actually getting paid by George Soros in order to create enough of a disturbance that something would get done. What the liberals want to do is stop the transfer of power.

That way Trump wouldn’t be the person in charge of the entire country. It would still be underneath President Obama. But that is what the liberals want; instead there is a new bill that is coming out that is sure to make liberals everywhere cry.

A Republican lawmaker has just come up with the perfect solution to make sure that these protesters stop acting like entitled liberals. The bill in question would allow authorities to charge protesters with committing “economic terrorism.” Washington state Senator Doug Ericksen is the one that is responsible for proposing the measure.

“I respect the right to protest, but when it endangers people’s lives and property, it goes too far. Fear, intimidation, and vandalism are not a legitimate form of political expression. Those who employ it must be called to account. We are not just going after the people who commit these acts of terrorism. We are going after the people who fund them. Wealthy donors should not feel safe in disrupting middle-class jobs.”

The proposed bill, which is going to pass through considering that the Republicans control the House, the Senate, and the Presidency, would make protesting a class C felony if they create any sort of “economic disruption” or “jeopardize human life and property.”

It would also mean that people that have been discovered to be in violation of this would face up to five years in prison, or a $10,000 fine, or both. Not only that, but any group that organizes a protest that is considered disruptive would also be charged with “economic terrorism.”

That means that these precious snowflakes that think they can get away with causing damage because they’re upset would have to think twice. But the saddest part about this whole thing is the fact that it was forced to be created. That was because the liberals that were protesting have a difficult time being peaceful.

They honestly think that the best way to go about this whole thing is to make sure that they cause as much damage and destruction as possible. And their defense for it is to say that they have a right to protest. The last time I checked, protesting didn’t involve lighting trashcans on fire or smashing car windshields. That isn’t a protest; that’s a full-blown riot!

And this is what we have been seeing from the numerous protests that have been going on since the election. There are people doing whatever they can to cause as much damage and destruction as possible. And these people need to learn that they can’t get away with this any longer.

Of course the other sad part is that a vast majority of these protesters didn’t even vote in the election. They had a prime opportunity to make sure that their voices were heard and they completely ignored that. And now they decided that they want to have their voice heard by causing as much damage as possible.

But that wasn’t the worst thing that they did. There was a report on CNN that had one of the protesters promising actual DEATH just to make sure that they got what they wanted. Yes these people are so crazy that they want to have people killed just to make sure that they get what they want. It’s people like this that had the bill created in the first place.

Share this article with your friends and family to show that people that are going to be protesting and causing damage and mayhem where they go are about to get a rude wake up call. A bill is going to be passed, thanks to an all Republican Congress, which is going to make sure that these protesters face justice for causing destruction.

This is just a way to ensure that we are stronger as a country under Trump. The past eight years have taught children that it is okay to be whiny and complain about everything. That time has past. We no longer have to accept the Band-Aid generation that was seen underneath Obama. This is just the first step into making this country stronger and it is going to continue. We WILL Make America Great Again!