Seattle Police Confiscate First Firearm Under New “Mental Health” Law
In what many believe is the beginning of a Constitutional crisis, the Seattle Police Department confiscated a firearm from an individual.

The new “red flag” law, which has taken hold in other states already, allows the courts and police to take away guns from individuals they deem are dangerous.

A man living in the Belltown neighborhood of Seattle, Washington became the first individual in the state to have his firearm confiscated without any formal arrest or charges.

The Washington man has not been identified, but he was the first victim of the new protection orders allowing police to confiscate his firearm amid mental health concerns.

Neighbors complained that the man had been “staring” at people through storefront windows while wearing a holstered firearm.

Open carrying is legal in the area, so he was allowed to carry a firearm.

Other residents also complained that the man’s open carrying made them feel “uncomfortable” and “unsafe.”

“He was roaming the hallways with a .25 caliber automatic,” said Tony Montana, a man who lives in the same apartment complex as the alleged suspect.

“And it created a lot of fear obviously because I didn’t know if he was coming after me or gonna just start shooting the place up,” he added.

These lousy complaints from neighbors allowed police to use the newly passed state law to confiscate the man’s firearm because the man apparently stared at others.

Under the extreme risk protection orders — also referred to as “erpos” or “red flag laws” — police and courts are allowed to infringe on a person’s Second Amendment rights and take their firearm if they are deemed dangerous.

That means state government officials can now take guns away from an individual without even making an arrest.

This overreaching new law allows for dictatorial actions to confiscate weapons from citizens that are arbitrarily deemed guilty and/or dangerous without due process.

This scathing attempt by Democrats to infringe on citizens right to bear arms should concern all Americans.

Source: Conservative Institute