Marco Rubio frustrated by inaction after first year in U.S. Senate
After first year in Washington, Rubio frustrated by inaction

Florida's Republican senator looks to 2012 elections to resolve power struggle

Despite his frustrations, polls indicate that Rubio remains a popular figure in his home state who could exert considerable influence over the Republican campaigns of 2012. Even while fending off persistent questions about his prospects for higher office, Rubio provides a model for how to build a grass-roots campaign to win election in Florida.

Fed up with Congress, Florida's junior senator is looking to next year's elections to settle the partisan power struggle in Washington and pave the way for tax reform, job creation and Medicare reform.

His speech in August at the Reagan Library in California, as the guest of former first lady Nancy Reagan, was a picture-perfect moment that kindled intense speculation in political circles that he may become his party's next vice presidential nominee. Two months later, a news story called into question his personal story as the son of Cuban exiles.

"By and large, this has been a highly dysfunctional Congress, particularly in the Senate," said the 40-year-old Republican. "It seems like the entire year has just been one big staged event, trying to get political advantage in the next election. You look at the major issues facing this country, and few if any of them have been confronted."

"I can't think of a single real high point," Rubio said during an interview in his Senate office, talking a mile a minute while tapping his foot with nervous energy.

Florida's rising political star — full of expectations after a productive stint in the state Legislature and a come-from-behind victory in his 2010 U.S. Senate race — ends a bruising year in Washington with little sense of accomplishment and a dismal outlook.

Newt Gingrich, currently the Republican presidential front-runner, has adopted a similar strategy of building bridges to tea party groups and forming volunteer networks to try to win the Florida primary. Like Rubio, Gingrich has reached out to Hispanic voters in both English and Spanish.

"In his first year, Rubio enjoys somewhat solid approval ratings but has yet to distinguish himself on any policy fronts," said Fernand Amandi, managing partner of Bendixen & Amandi International, a consulting and polling firm in Miami that focuses on Hispanics. "Right now [his appeal] is more a reaction to him as a political phenomenon than anything he has accomplished as a U.S. senator."

Rubio has tried to soften the strident rhetoric used by many fellow Republicans on immigration issues, but he opposes attempts to provide a pathway to citizenship for illegal residents. He draws fervent support from fellow Cuban-Americans, but his ability to rally other Hispanics to the Republican cause nationwide has not really been tested.

"Conventional wisdom suggests that Rubio has great appeal to Hispanic voters and could be the Republicans' salvation," Amandi said. "The question remains whether he will continue to be seen as an asset instead of a liability as his record on Hispanic issues is put under the microscope."

Rubio's compelling personal narrative as the offspring of Cuban exiles was called into question when a Washington Post report accused him of misrepresenting his family history. The report noted that his parents arrived in this country before Fidel Castro's 1959 revolution and asserted that they came to the United States to improve their lot in life rather than flee communist oppression.

"It was not helpful to him," Amandi said. "In the worst-case scenario, he was embellishing. In the best-case scenario, he was not mindful of the seminal event in the lives of most Cuban-Americans, when their families came to this country before or after the Castro revolution."

Rubio acknowledged that he "got the dates wrong" but asserted that the precise chronology "was never fundamental to our story."

"My parents were exiles. They came to the United States in search of a better life, but they always hoped to return and planned to do so, and it became impossible," he said during the interview on Friday. "Nobody voted for me because they thought my parents came in 1959 instead of 1956."

A nonpartisan poll conducted by Quinnipiac University in November found that Rubio's popularity in Florida has been holding steady. About 49 percent of Floridians approved of his job performance and 29 percent disapproved — essentially unchanged from his ratings in September before the flap.

His allies in the tea party movement remain supportive, even while lashing out at the rest of Congress. He has gotten along on Capitol Hill without becoming a Beltway insider, they say.

"One thing that stands out was the effort by his office to communicate with the grass roots," said Tom Tillison of the Central Florida Tea Party Council. "They make an effort to ask our opinion. It's rare that you see that from any politician."