Fair Work Ombudsman
Minimum wages

Download the fact sheet:

Overview



A minimum wage is an employee’s base rate of pay for ordinary hours worked. It is generally dependent on the industrial instrument that applies to their employment. For example, a modern award or registered agreement.

Employers and employees cannot be paid less than their applicable minimum wage, even if they agree to it.

Back to top

Who determines minimum wages?

Every year, the Fair Work Commission’s (FWC) Expert Panel reviews the minimum wages received by employees in the national workplace relations system.

The review considers:

written submissions from interested organisations and individuals

consultations before the Expert Panel

research commissioned by the Expert Panel.

At the conclusion of this review, a national minimum wage order is made which will apply from the first full pay period on or after 1 July each year.

Back to top

What is a national minimum wage order?

A national minimum wage order outlines the minimum wage for award and agreement-free employees.

The national minimum wage order must set the following wages for award or agreement-free employees:

a national minimum wage

a special national minimum wage for: trainees, apprentices and junior employees employees to whom training arrangements apply employees with a disability

a casual loading.

For further information about the Annual Wage Review and the National Minimum Wage Order, see sections 285–299 of the Fair Work Act 2009.

Back to top

What is the current national minimum wage?

The national minimum wage is currently $18.93 per hour or $719.20 per 38 hour week (before tax).

Casual employees covered by the national minimum wage also get at least a 25% casual loading.

For award and agreement-free junior employees, the percentage scale in the Miscellaneous Award 2010 is applied to the national minimum wage.

Back to top

Employees covered by a modern award

Most employees in the national workplace system are covered by a modern award. These contain the minimum wage, as well as other terms and conditions, for employees in particular industries and occupations.

Some awards can have transitional arrangements as determined by the FWC. Employers and employees should check their relevant modern award(s) to determine if transitional arrangements apply.

Minimum wages under modern awards may include:

wages rates for adults, in some cases, at different rates according to experience and qualifications

wage rates for juniors, employees with a disability, and employees to whom training arrangements apply

casual loadings

piece rates.

For further information on modern awards, go to our Modern awards fact sheet. To find out the minimum wage under a modern award, you can use our Pay and Conditions Tool.

Back to top

Contact us



Fair Work Online: www.fairwork.gov.au

Fair Work Infoline: 13 13 94

Need language help?

Contact the Translating and Interpreting Service (TIS) on 13 14 50

Hearing & speech assistance

Call through the National Relay Service (NRS):

For TTY: 13 36 77. Ask for the Fair Work Infoline 13 13 94

Speak & Listen: 1300 555 727. Ask for the Fair Work Infoline 13 13 94

Want to save this information for later? If you might need to read this information again, save it for later so you can access it quickly and easily.

Did you find what you were looking for? Yes No Please note that comments aren’t monitored for personal information or workplace complaints. If you have a question or concern about your job, entitlements or obligations, please Contact Us. Thank you for your feedback.

Page reference No: 2398