Hurricane Harvey
This is the Hurricane Harvey resource page which contains information and cross-links to multiple pages of content.

For Survivors

To consolidate information, we moved the survivor resources and information to the Texas Hurricane Harvey page (DR-4332).

How can you Help

When disaster strikes, every little bit helps. To make the most of your contributions, please follow our guidelines to learn the most effective and safest ways to donate cash, goods, or time following a disaster.

To help people affected by the storm, visit @nvoad’s page for a listed of trusted organizations:

Cash is best. Financial contributions to recognized disaster relief organizations are the fastest, most flexible, and most effective method of donating. Organizations on the ground know what items and quantities are needed, often buy in bulk with discounts and, if possible, purchase through area businesses which supports economic recovery.

Financial contributions to recognized disaster relief organizations are the fastest, most flexible, and most effective method of donating. Organizations on the ground know what items and quantities are needed, often buy in bulk with discounts and, if possible, purchase through area businesses which supports economic recovery. Confirm donations needed. Critical needs change rapidly – confirm needed items BEFORE collecting; pack and label carefully; confirm delivery locations; arrange transportation. Unsolicited goods NOT needed burden local organizations’ ability to meet survivors’ confirmed needs, drawing away valuable volunteer labor, transportation, and warehouse space.

Critical needs change rapidly – confirm needed items BEFORE collecting; pack and label carefully; confirm delivery locations; arrange transportation. Unsolicited goods NOT needed burden local organizations’ ability to meet survivors’ confirmed needs, drawing away valuable volunteer labor, transportation, and warehouse space. Connect to volunteer. Trusted organizations operating in the affected area know where volunteers are needed, and can ensure appropriate volunteer safety, training, and housing.

Thank you for your interest in helping the survivors of Hurricane Harvey, there are other ways to help. When disaster strikes, America looks to FEMA to support survivors and first responders in communities all across the country. We are currently seeking talented and hard-working people to help support the response and recovery.

Industry Liaison Program

If you are seeking to do business with FEMA in support of a disaster recovery effort, please be aware that in accordance with the Robert T. Stafford Act, FEMA’s goal is to seek local companies within the disaster area for goods and services related to a specific disaster when practical and feasible. Visit the Industry Liaison Program section.

For Businesses

Business access to disasters is always a challenge particularly after life-saving evacuations that occurred during the incident. The NBEOC is here to assist businesses of all sizes to understand access and re-entry procedures.

National Flood Insurance Program

To consolidate information, we moved moved the flood insurance information to the Texas Hurricane Harvey page (DR-4332).

Social Media

For national media inquiries please contact FEMA-News-Desk@fema.dhs.gov, or the news desk at (202) 646-3272.

Social Media Accounts

Texas Emergency Management Offices

In anticipation of Hurricane Harvey making landfall in the Gulf Coast region, Governor Greg Abbott declared a State of Disaster for 30 Texas counties. Check your county's emergency management website for updates, evacuation routes, and other resources.

Louisiana Emergency Preparedness

In anticipation of Hurricane Harvey making landfall in the Gulf Coast region, Governor John Edwards declared a State of Emergency for the entire state of Louisiana.

Follow the Governor’s Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness on social media, and bookmark the state emergency website for updates: