American Children Will No Longer Learn The Tenets Of Islam Or Sharia Law
American Children Will No Longer Learn The Tenets Of Islam Or Sharia...

The Supreme Court of the United States ruled in favor of President Trump, Betsy DeVos and the Department of Education, who have petitioned the court to make America safer, starting with our children.

In a 5-3 decision, the high court decided that public schools in this country will NOT teach the tenets of Islam or Sharia law.

Students will learn about Islam in history, as they do about Christianity and all other religions, only as it pertains to the time period they are studying.

This is a major difference regarding the eight years of Obama’s presidency, when children were forced to learn about the “peaceful” religion of Islam so they would be more tolerant of terrorists.

The Volusia County Republican Party even accused Obama’s government for promoting Islam to public school children.

“The United States Department of Education has introduced an Islamic indoctrination program for the public schools, called ‘Access Islam,’” states the mass email sent by the party.

The email said that classroom instructions have students learning “the core duties of Muslims” and “what it means to proclaim faith or belief as a Muslim.”

“The program, written for Grades 5 – 12, has students learning verses from the Quran and Hadith. Students must not only learn the verses, but give the religious “meaning” of those verses and explain how they use them in their daily lives.” “The program also includes a video presentation on how to perform a Muslim prayer, use a prayer rug and wash prior to praying.” “Students are also shown a video of a Muslim who converted from Christianity and claims Islam “is the true worship of God.” The video instructs children to “submit yourself” to Allah.” “The Education Department offers no similar learning material for Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism or any other major world religion. Just Islam,” the email said.

What do you think about this? Share this on Facebook or Twitter SCROLL DOWN FOR MORE