Overview of Federal Efforts to Prepare for and Respond to Hurricane Maria
(Español) On August 25, 2017, FEMA’s National Response Coordination Center (NRCC) was fully activated to a Level I with all emergency support functions operational, including Department of Defense (DoD) liaisons in preparation for Hurricane Harvey. The NRCC remains at a Level I activation. Prior to the arrival of Hurricane Maria, federal personnel were already positioned on Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands in response to Hurricane Irma.

These personnel included federal coordinating officers and Incident Management Assistance Teams (IMATs) on both the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, and staff from FEMA’s Caribbean Area Division. Additional resources and personnel were strategically located out of the storm’s path, including ships from the Department of Defense. After the hurricane passed, those additional federal resources and personnel recommenced flowing in, as part of a unified federal response. The below is a summary of mobilization of resources and personnel:

Sunday, September 17 – Pre-Landfall

FEMA’s National Response Coordination Center (NRCC) remains fully activated with all emergency support functions operational, including Department of Defense (DoD) liaisons.FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

liaisons.FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies. FEMA has a Federal Coordinating Officer (FCO) and Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) co-located with the Governor on St. Croix, as well as liaisons on St. John and St. Thomas that will remain in place throughout the storm’s potential landfall.

and co-located with the Governor on St. Croix, as well as liaisons on St. John and St. Thomas that will remain in place throughout the storm’s potential landfall. FEMA has an FCO and Incident Management Assistance Team co-located with key staff from the Caribbean Area Division at the FEMA Distribution Center in Puerto Rico, who will remain in place throughout the storm’s potential landfall.

co-located with key staff from the Caribbean Area Division at the FEMA Distribution Center in Puerto Rico, who will remain in place throughout the storm’s potential landfall. DoD Civil Authority Information Support (CAIS) element assisting with communication and outreach support to communities in the U.S. Virgin Islands.

element assisting with communication and outreach support to communities in the U.S. Virgin Islands. The U.S. Army Area Support Medical Company and the U.S. Air Force Ground Surgical Team operating in St. Thomas are sheltering aboard the amphibious ship USS Kearsarge and will return to U.S. Virgin Islands after Hurricane Maria passes.

and the operating in St. Thomas are sheltering aboard the amphibious ship USS Kearsarge and will return to U.S. Virgin Islands after Hurricane Maria passes. The Department of Transportation, through the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) , is working on the relocation and protection of the mobile air traffic control tower at St. Thomas airport ahead of the storm.

, is working on the relocation and protection of the mobile air traffic control tower at St. Thomas airport ahead of the storm. The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) is prepositioning assets in Puerto Rico, including storm surge and rapid deployment gauges, to support water-level measurements and flood forecasting.

is prepositioning assets in Puerto Rico, including storm surge and rapid deployment gauges, to support water-level measurements and flood forecasting. FEMA temporarily repositions the remainder of the federal employees in the U.S. Virgin Islands in order to resume operations as quickly as possible, while also freeing shelter resources for island residents.

, including U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), personnel deployed to support Hurricane Irma response efforts will ride out the storm on the USS Kearsarge just off the coast of the islands. They will be ready to continue existing operations as soon as the storm passes.

Monday, September 18 – Pre-Landfall

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational.FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

President Donald J. Trump issues federal emergency declarations for the Territory of the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico in advance of Hurricane Maria’s landfall.

FEMA and federal personnel remain co-located with the Governor on St. Croix, as well as liaisons on St. John and St. Thomas that will remain in place. FEMA and federal personnel also remain in place and in close coordination with the Governor of Puerto Rico.

Two Type 1 FEMA Urban Search and Rescue (US&R) teams, two canine teams, one logistics package, and one Type 4 US&R team in Puerto Rico.

teams, two canine teams, one logistics package, and one Type 4 US&R team in Puerto Rico. FEMA’s efforts in the U.S. Virgin Islands include an increased push of commodities over the last several days to Virgin Islands Territorial Emergency Management Agency (VITEMA) points of distribution to ensure residents have extra food, water, and supplies ahead of the storm.

U.S. Virgin Islands has six open shelters, with additional shelters scheduled to open prior to the storm’s potential landfall.

Tuesday, September 19 – Storm Approaches Landfall in U.S. Virgin Islands

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational. FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

FEMA and federal personnel remain co-located with the Governor on St. Croix, as well as liaisons on St. John and St. Thomas that will remain in place. FEMA and federal personnel also remain in place and in close coordination with the Governor of Puerto Rico.

One Type 4 FEMA US&R team and one canine team to arrive in Puerto Rico.

team and one canine team to arrive in Puerto Rico. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) deploys one Disaster Medical Assistance Team to Puerto Rico.

Wednesday, September 20 – Storm Makes Landfall in Puerto Rico

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational. FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

President Donald J. Trump issues major disaster declarations for the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

FEMA and federal personnel remain co-located with the Governor on St. Croix, as well as liaisons on St. John and St. Thomas that will remain in place. FEMA and federal personnel also remain in place and in close coordination with the Governor of Puerto Rico.

HHS activates National Disaster Medical System Definitive Care Reimbursement Program , which reimburses medical facilities and hospitals for the medical care costs of patients medically evacuated following disasters.

activates , which reimburses medical facilities and hospitals for the medical care costs of patients medically evacuated following disasters. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms is coordinating airlift and deployment of four Quick Response Teams to San Juan post landfall to conduct forecasted security measures.

Thursday, September 21 – Post-Landfall

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational. FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

There are more than 3,500 federal staff on the ground in Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands supporting response and recovery operations from Hurricanes Maria and Irma.

Two FEMA US&R task forces and support resources are in Puerto Rico conducting reconnaissance and search and rescue. An additional team is on St. Croix conducting search and rescue and reconnaissance.

task forces and support resources are in Puerto Rico conducting reconnaissance and search and rescue. An additional team is on St. Croix conducting search and rescue and reconnaissance. Commodities in FEMA’s Puerto Rico Distribution Center include more than 274,000 meals, 25 generators, and more than 500 cots.

include more than 274,000 meals, 25 generators, and more than 500 cots. USACE completes a Blue Roof install on Cyril E. King Airport on St. Thomas. Additionally, USACE has 27 generators on hand in St. Thomas with additional commodities to be delivered when conditions permit.

completes a Blue Roof install on Cyril E. King Airport on St. Thomas. Additionally, USACE has 27 generators on hand in St. Thomas with additional commodities to be delivered when conditions permit. HHS declares a public health emergency in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Four additional DMATs will arrive in Puerto Rico on September 22.

declares a public health emergency in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Four additional DMATs will arrive in Puerto Rico on September 22. Vessels are loaded for U.S. Virgin Islands with 1.3million meals, 2 million liters water, 30 generators, 6,000 cots.

There are six U.S. Navy helicopters stationed and three Marine Osprey aircraft in the Caribbean.

helicopters stationed and three aircraft in the Caribbean. More than 700 National Guard are mobilized to Puerto Rico and more than 900 National Guard are mobilized to the U.S. Virgin Islands.

Western Area Power Administration, in coordination with Department of Energy , deploys an eight-member advance team in Puerto Rico.

, deploys an eight-member advance team in Puerto Rico. Department of Interior Office of Law Enforcement has 50 personnel in Puerto Rico.

Office of Law Enforcement has 50 personnel in Puerto Rico. Air support (MH-60s) and other assets from the amphibious ships USS Kearsage and USS Oak Hill begin performing search and rescue flights and aerial damage assessments over U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, and assist with restoration of damaged airfields.

Friday, September 22

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational. FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

There are more than 7,000 federal staff, including 280 FEMA staff, on the ground in Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands supporting response and recovery operations from Hurricanes Maria and Irma.

Four FEMA US&R teams and support resources are in Puerto Rico, and one US&R team is in U.S. Virgin Islands conducting reconnaissance and search and rescue. These task forces assist in the rescue of 65 individuals, searching 45 buildings. The U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) is conducting search and rescue operations in St. Croix, and in the surrounding waters.

and support resources are in Puerto Rico, and one is in U.S. Virgin Islands conducting reconnaissance and search and rescue. These task forces assist in the rescue of 65 individuals, searching 45 buildings. The is conducting search and rescue operations in St. Croix, and in the surrounding waters. National Guard Bureau (NGB) has 1,600 service members in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.

has 1,600 service members in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. Vessels loaded with commodities are arriving or awaiting port opening and clearance with an air bridge to deliver commodities to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

More than 70 Federal Law Enforcement Officers are in San Juan supporting search and rescue and medical teams. Three ATF Quick Response Teams (QRT) are arriving to join the four QRTs operating in San Juan.

are in San Juan supporting search and rescue and medical teams. Three are arriving to join the four QRTs operating in San Juan. USACE and other supporting agencies have completed several temporary power installs on Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, and completed nearly 100 inspections. Additional generator support is en route. USACE has 120 responders in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

and other supporting agencies have completed several temporary power installs on Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, and completed nearly 100 inspections. Additional generator support is en route. USACE has 120 responders in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The General Services Administration (GSA) is assessing 80 leased/owned properties.

is assessing 80 leased/owned properties. USS Kearsarge/26th Expeditionary Unit Amphibious Ready Group (MEU ARG) aircraft including helicopters and MV-22s, continue damage assessments over the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, and complete patient evacuation movements from St. Croix to nearby facilities.

Saturday, September 23

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational.FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

The Department of Transportation announces three airports are open for military and relief flights in Puerto Rico and two airports open for military and relief flights in the U.S. Virgin Islands.One port is open with restrictions in Puerto Rico and five ports are open with restrictions in the U.S. Virgin Islands.

announces three airports are open for military and relief flights in Puerto Rico and two airports open for military and relief flights in the U.S. Virgin Islands.One port is open with restrictions in Puerto Rico and five ports are open with restrictions in the U.S. Virgin Islands. Support for federal response continues from the amphibious ships USS Kearsage and USS Oak Hill including search and rescue flights, aerial damage assessments, logistics support and route clearance for U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.

and including search and rescue flights, aerial damage assessments, logistics support and route clearance for U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. There are six commercial barges transporting meals, water, generators, cots and other commodities to Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands.

The SS Wright is carrying 1.1 million meals and one million liters of water to the islands.

is carrying 1.1 million meals and one million liters of water to the islands. The Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) is transporting 124,000 gallons of diesel fuel to Puerto Rico, with arrival anticipated in the coming days.

is transporting 124,000 gallons of diesel fuel to Puerto Rico, with arrival anticipated in the coming days. There are 180 American Red Cross volunteers and staff in the Caribbean.

Sunday, September 24

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational. FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

Federal partners establish a fuel distribution site in San Juan for federal and local entities to support first responder and critical facility needs.

The port of San Juan re-opened for daylight operations and other ports are undergoing assessments. On St. Thomas, the ports of Crown Bay, Cruz Bay, East Gregerie Channel, Red Hook, and West Gregerie Channel are open with restrictions while other ports are being assessed. On St. Croix, the ports of Krause Lagoon and Limetree Bay are open with restrictions while other ports are being assessed.

The Department of Energy is coordinating with industry on mutual aid for Puerto Rico, and transported crews from New York Power Authority to support damage assessments.

is coordinating with industry on mutual aid for Puerto Rico, and transported crews from New York Power Authority to support damage assessments. Eight FEMA US&R task forces are stationed in the Caribbean.

task forces are stationed in the Caribbean. At the federal staging area in St. Croix, there are more than 43,000 liters of water and more than 20,000 meals available for distribution by territory officials.

USACE and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) continue to survey damaged channels and ports in Puerto Rico.

and the continue to survey damaged channels and ports in Puerto Rico. DoD CAISE re-inserted into the U.S. Virgin Islands to assist with communication and outreach support and DoD Area Support Medical Company re-inserted to U.S. Virgin Islands to assist with medical support needs.

re-inserted into the U.S. Virgin Islands to assist with communication and outreach support and re-inserted to U.S. Virgin Islands to assist with medical support needs. DoD assets from amphibious ships USS Kearsage and USS Oak Hill continue support for search and rescue flights, medical evacuation, aerial damage assessments, logistics support, port surveys and route clearance for U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.

Monday, September 25

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational. FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

There are more than 10,000 federal staff, including more than 700 FEMA personnel, on the ground in Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands supporting response and recovery operations from Hurricanes Maria and Irma.

Nine FEMA US&R task forces are stationed and conducting operations in the Caribbean. FEMA US&R task forces saved or assisted 516 individuals. The U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) is conducting search and rescue operations in St. Croix, and in the surrounding waters.

task forces are stationed and conducting operations in the Caribbean. FEMA US&R task forces saved or assisted 516 individuals. The is conducting search and rescue operations in St. Croix, and in the surrounding waters. Officials in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico establish points of distribution for survivors to get meals, water, and other commodities. The National Guard supports commodity distribution.

supports commodity distribution. Power is restored to Centro Medico Hospital in San Juan and San Pablo Hospital in Bayamon, Puerto Rico.

Fuel arrives for several hospitals in Puerto Rico running on generators: Ashford Presbyterian, Pavia Santurce, Pavia Hato Rey, San Francisco, and Clinica Metro Pavia. The Schneider Regional Medical Center mobile hospital in St. Thomas was re-established.

DLA , U.S. Northern Command , the U.S. Navy , and USCG , in coordination with the private sector, provide federal support for fuel transportation via air and sea logistical support.

, , the , and , in coordination with the private sector, provide federal support for fuel transportation via air and sea logistical support. FEMA , working in coordination with federal partners, provide more than 1.5 million meals, 1.1 million liters of water to the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico since Hurricane Maria’s landfall.

, working in coordination with federal partners, provide more than 1.5 million meals, 1.1 million liters of water to the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico since Hurricane Maria’s landfall. HHS and DoD conduct medical evacuations for more than 100 patients from the islands to the continental United States. Medical evacuations from the islands will continue. Additionally HHS medical teams are on the ground in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

and conduct medical evacuations for more than 100 patients from the islands to the continental United States. Medical evacuations from the islands will continue. Additionally HHS medical teams are on the ground in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. NGB has more than 4,300 Guard members on the ground in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands taking part in security and support operations. The Air National Guard is focused on transporting food, water, and communications capabilities as well as rapidly increasing airlift into affected areas.

has more than 4,300 Guard members on the ground in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands taking part in security and support operations. The is focused on transporting food, water, and communications capabilities as well as rapidly increasing airlift into affected areas. A Coast Guard mobile communications convoy is en route to Puerto Rico to help improve communications across the storm-impacted area. Coast Guard personnel continue to deliver critical FEMA relief supplies to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

mobile communications convoy is en route to Puerto Rico to help improve communications across the storm-impacted area. Coast Guard personnel continue to deliver critical FEMA relief supplies to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. DoD assets from the USS Kearsage and USS Oak Hill continue support for response efforts including search and rescue flights, medical evacuation, aerial damage assessments, logistics support, commodity lifts, port surveys, and hospital assessments with HHS for U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.

Tuesday, September 26

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational. FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

FEMA is delivering food and water to points of distribution and regional staging areas in Puerto Rico, St. Thomas, St. Croix, and St. John.

is delivering food and water to points of distribution and regional staging areas in Puerto Rico, St. Thomas, St. Croix, and St. John. American Red Cross (ARC) mobilizes to Puerto Rico 9,000 comfort kits and several thousand of tarps, flashlights, batteries, blankets, and hand sanitizer. To U.S. Virgin Islands, ARC will also send tens of thousands of bags of rice and beans with cots, blankets, comfort kits, tarps, trash bags, sponges, hand sanitizer, and insect repellent.

mobilizes to Puerto Rico 9,000 comfort kits and several thousand of tarps, flashlights, batteries, blankets, and hand sanitizer. To U.S. Virgin Islands, ARC will also send tens of thousands of bags of rice and beans with cots, blankets, comfort kits, tarps, trash bags, sponges, hand sanitizer, and insect repellent. Corporation for National and Community Service deploys two AmeriCorps to Puerto Rico and four Disaster response teams for Save the Children support.

deploys two AmeriCorps to Puerto Rico and four Disaster response teams for Save the Children support. Ten FEMA US&R task forces are stationed and conducting operations in Puerto Rico. FEMA US&R task forces have saved or assisted 557 individuals and five pets, while searching over 2,600 structures.

task forces are stationed and conducting operations in Puerto Rico. FEMA US&R task forces have saved or assisted 557 individuals and five pets, while searching over 2,600 structures. There are currently 32 points of distribution for commodities in Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands.

More than 180 Federal Law Enforcement Officers are in San Juan and the U.S. Virgin Islands supporting search and rescue, medical teams, and other federal responders.

In support of Hurricane Maria relief and reconstitution operations, the U.S. Government established temporary air traffic flow management procedures for flights into San Juan International Airport in Puerto Rico. Roosevelt Roads and Aguadilla Airports in Puerto Rico are open for military and relief flights during daylight.

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) operations personnel are onsite in St. Thomas to evaluate, fix, and install FAA equipment, in support of air traffic control operations.

operations personnel are onsite in St. Thomas to evaluate, fix, and install FAA equipment, in support of air traffic control operations. USCG identifies eight ports with some restrictions in Puerto Rico, and nine open in U.S. Virgin Islands with restrictions. USCG reports the ports of Guayanilla, Salinas, and Tallaboa are fully open, and the ports of San Juan, Fajardo, Culebra, Guayama, and Vieques are open with restrictions in Puerto Rico. The ports of Crown Bay, Charlotte Amalie, East Gregerie Channel, West Gregerie Channel, and Redhook Bay on St. Thomas, the ports of Krause Lagoon, Limetree Bay, and Frederiksted on St. Croix, and the port of Cruz Bay on St. John are open with restrictions. Other ports are undergoing assessments.

identifies eight ports with some restrictions in Puerto Rico, and nine open in U.S. Virgin Islands with restrictions. reports the ports of Guayanilla, Salinas, and Tallaboa are fully open, and the ports of San Juan, Fajardo, Culebra, Guayama, and Vieques are open with restrictions in Puerto Rico. The ports of Crown Bay, Charlotte Amalie, East Gregerie Channel, West Gregerie Channel, and Redhook Bay on St. Thomas, the ports of Krause Lagoon, Limetree Bay, and Frederiksted on St. Croix, and the port of Cruz Bay on St. John are open with restrictions. Other ports are undergoing assessments. 14 DoD flights arrived September 25 to deliver water and meals, helicopters, communications equipment, additional security forces, and communications and contingency response units for Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

flights arrived September 25 to deliver water and meals, helicopters, communications equipment, additional security forces, and communications and contingency response units for Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. USACE coordinates transportation of more than 300 FEMA or DLA generators from across the U.S. to meet anticipated requirements in the islands. In Puerto Rico, the team completes 27 of 32 requested temporary power assessments of critical facilities. In the U.S. Virgin Islands, USACE completed 90 of 131 requested temporary power assessments of critical facilities and began generator installations.

coordinates transportation of more than 300 or generators from across the U.S. to meet anticipated requirements in the islands. In Puerto Rico, the team completes 27 of 32 requested temporary power assessments of critical facilities. In the U.S. Virgin Islands, completed 90 of 131 requested temporary power assessments of critical facilities and began generator installations. DoD assets from the USS Kearsage and USS Oak Hill continue support for response efforts including logistics support, route clearance, port restoration, and hospital assessments with HHS for U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.

Wednesday, September 27

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational. FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

DoD expands its response, and sustainment forces to augment those already on the ground to support the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and FEMA.

expands its response, and sustainment forces to augment those already on the ground to support the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and FEMA. FEMA and its federal partners continue 24-hour operations to reach inaccessible areas of Puerto Rico to reach survivors, provide fuel to hospitals, and re-open.

FEMA US&R task forces have saved or assisted 841 individuals and five pets, while searching over 2,600 structures. FEMA US&R is also conducting operational assessments of hospitals in Puerto Rico.

task forces have saved or assisted 841 individuals and five pets, while searching over 2,600 structures. FEMA US&R is also conducting operational assessments of hospitals in Puerto Rico. U.S. Customs and Border Protection has ten members providing security to two FEMA ships.

has ten members providing security to two FEMA ships. DoD CAIS is assisting with communication and outreach support to communities in Puerto Rico.

is assisting with communication and outreach support to communities in Puerto Rico. Half of the dialysis centers in Puerto Rico are open and accessible for patients.

USACE is conducting assessments and planning for power grid restoration in Puerto Rico, and addressing the 1.4 million cubic yards of debris across the U.S. Virgin Islands.

is conducting assessments and planning for power grid restoration in Puerto Rico, and addressing the 1.4 million cubic yards of debris across the U.S. Virgin Islands. In Puerto Rico, fuel is delivered to 19 hospitals for power generators. Fuel continues to be delivered to hospitals and other locations around Puerto Rico.

The U.S. Virgin Islands Water and Power Authority drinking water system is back online, and other drinking water systems on the islands are top priority for receiving generators.

drinking water system is back online, and other drinking water systems on the islands are top priority for receiving generators. 17 chainsaw teams (34 individuals) and one Incident Management Team (IMT) (23 individuals) from the Department of Agriculture United States Forest Service arrive in Puerto Rico to conduct emergency road clearance and manage logistics.

United States Forest Service arrive in Puerto Rico to conduct emergency road clearance and manage logistics. To bolster the delivery of fuel throughout Puerto Rico, 100 delivery trucks were dispatched by the DLA.

Thursday, September 28

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational.FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

FAA reports Luis Munoz Marin International Airport (SJU) accommodated 25 commercial flights and processed 5,000 ticketed passengers.

reports Luis Munoz Marin International Airport (SJU) accommodated 25 commercial flights and processed 5,000 ticketed passengers. Two generators are installed at Concordia Fresh Water Pump Station and the Herbert Grigg Shelter.

Recovery efforts are now supporting more than a dozen commercial passenger flights per day at SJU in San Juan, Puerto Rico.

The Concordia potable water pump station is online in St. Croix.

FEMA search and rescue teams have accessed 90 percent of Puerto Rico, conducting search and rescue operations and helping to assess hospitals.

All municipalities in Puerto Rico have been reached by FEMA US&R , the Department of Health and Human Services , Commonwealth officials, and/or the National Guard .

, the , Commonwealth officials, and/or the . Additional National Disaster Medical System staff arrive to support hospital assessments and medical needs of these in Puerto Rico.

Friday, September 29

FEMA’s NRCC is fully activated with all emergency support functions operational.FEMA holds daily video-teleconference with leadership across various departments and agencies.

There are more than 10,000 federal staff representing 36 departments and agencies, including more than 800 FEMA personnel on the ground in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands engaged in response and recovery operations from hurricanes Maria and Irma.

The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) made $40 million available to the PR Highways and Transportation Authority (PHRTA) for emergency relief work to impacted roads.

made $40 million available to the PR Highways and Transportation Authority (PHRTA) for emergency relief work to impacted roads. In Puerto Rico, 56 of 68 hospitals are partially operational, and one hospital is fully operational.

FAA reports SJU begins international commercial service with two flights.

reports SJU begins international commercial service with two flights. The U.S. Postal Service (USPS) has limited handout mail service available today at 49 locations in Puerto Rico, which represents 43 percent of all post offices on the island. 41 of these locations are also able to provide postal retail services. Limited handout mail service, along with limited retail service, begins today in St. Croix. Limited mail service continues in St. Thomas. On St. John, limited mail service continues with no retail services available.

Saturday, September 30, 2017

USACE and other supporting agencies are completing several temporary power installs on Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands and completed more than 160 inspections and more than 250 assessments have been requested for facilities.

and other supporting agencies are completing several temporary power installs on Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands and completed more than 160 inspections and more than 250 assessments have been requested for facilities. Seven U.S. Northern Command vessels are scheduled to arrive in Puerto Rico between September 30 and Oct. 5 delivering 3.5 million liters of water, 5.5 million meals, four generators and 11,500 rolls of sheeting.

vessels are scheduled to arrive in Puerto Rico between September 30 and Oct. 5 delivering 3.5 million liters of water, 5.5 million meals, four generators and 11,500 rolls of sheeting. ARC has more than 600 volunteers on the ground in Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands distributing ready-to-eat meals and water.

has more than 600 volunteers on the ground in Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands distributing ready-to-eat meals and water. HHS medical teams have seen more than 245 patients at the emergency and trauma center in San Juan, Puerto Rico.

Sunday, October 1, 2017

U.S. Northern Command is conducting 11 flights to transport approximately 310,000 meals, 150,000 liters of water, generators, tarps, additional sustainment units, and leading components of aviation command and control.

is conducting 11 flights to transport approximately 310,000 meals, 150,000 liters of water, generators, tarps, additional sustainment units, and leading components of aviation command and control. ARC is distributing more than 34,000 relief items to survivors in U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, such as comfort kits, clean up kits and other bulk items, and has provided more than 2,800 mental health and health services to people in need.

is distributing more than 34,000 relief items to survivors in U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, such as comfort kits, clean up kits and other bulk items, and has provided more than 2,800 mental health and health services to people in need. NGB is conducting a mission to deliver 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel to San Juan Capestrano Hospital to continue providing care to patients. NGB has also provided 22 personnel to assist local police department to secure gas stations. Over 4,000 NGB service members from 21 states are now supporting Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

is conducting a mission to deliver 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel to San Juan Capestrano Hospital to continue providing care to patients. NGB has also provided 22 personnel to assist local police department to secure gas stations. Over 4,000 NGB service members from 21 states are now supporting Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. HHS medical teams are providing support at medical facilities in Puerto Rico that are partially operational. HHS medical personnel have seen more than 200 patients at these new locations and at Centro Medico, an emergency and trauma center in San Juan where HHS staff have been providing medical support for the past six days. HHS is deploying five Federal Medical Stations which can be used to support medical services at hospitals.

medical teams are providing support at medical facilities in Puerto Rico that are partially operational. HHS medical personnel have seen more than 200 patients at these new locations and at Centro Medico, an emergency and trauma center in San Juan where HHS staff have been providing medical support for the past six days. HHS is deploying five Federal Medical Stations which can be used to support medical services at hospitals. HHS , DoD , and Veteran Affairs partners are transporting almost 100 dialysis patients to Atlanta, today. These patients had been evacuated from St. Thomas to Miami after Hurricane Irma.

, , and partners are transporting almost 100 dialysis patients to Atlanta, today. These patients had been evacuated from St. Thomas to Miami after Hurricane Irma. EPA is continuing to coordinate with the U.S. Virgin Island government on results of drinking water sampling and to ensure disinfection measures are taken where needed. EPA now has 28 personnel on site in the U.S. Virgin Island. In St. Croix, EPA personnel have sampled 59 public drinking water systems for contamination. EPA continues to disinfect the water sources but there are continuing concerns about running out of bleach.

is continuing to coordinate with the U.S. Virgin Island government on results of drinking water sampling and to ensure disinfection measures are taken where needed. EPA now has 28 personnel on site in the U.S. Virgin Island. In St. Croix, EPA personnel have sampled 59 public drinking water systems for contamination. EPA continues to disinfect the water sources but there are continuing concerns about running out of bleach. The National Protection and Programs Directorate ( NPPD ) reported as of Sept. 30, that 13 percent of Puerto Rico and 30 percent of U.S. Virgin Islands cell sites are operational. Communications carriers on Puerto Rico are coordinating efforts to keep those cell sites and towers on-line. ESF-2 (Communications) is delivering 100 satellite phones to support essential response personnel supporting communications restoration efforts.

) reported as of Sept. 30, that 13 percent of Puerto Rico and 30 percent of U.S. Virgin Islands cell sites are operational. Communications carriers on Puerto Rico are coordinating efforts to keep those cell sites and towers on-line. ESF-2 (Communications) is delivering 100 satellite phones to support essential response personnel supporting communications restoration efforts. U.S. Northern Command conducted 11 flights to transport approximately 310,000 meals, 150,000 liters of water, generators, tarps, additional sustainment units, and leading components of aviation command and control.

conducted 11 flights to transport approximately 310,000 meals, 150,000 liters of water, generators, tarps, additional sustainment units, and leading components of aviation command and control. ARC is distributing more than 34,000 relief items to survivors in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, such as comfort kits, clean up kits and other bulk items, and has provided more than 2,800 mental health and health services to people in need.

is distributing more than 34,000 relief items to survivors in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, such as comfort kits, clean up kits and other bulk items, and has provided more than 2,800 mental health and health services to people in need. NGB is conducting a mission to deliver 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel to San Juan Capestrano Hospital to continue providing care to patients. NGB also provided 22 personnel to assist local police department to secure gas stations. Over 4,000 NGB service members from 21 states are now supporting Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

is conducting a mission to deliver 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel to San Juan Capestrano Hospital to continue providing care to patients. NGB also provided 22 personnel to assist local police department to secure gas stations. Over 4,000 NGB service members from 21 states are now supporting Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. HHS medical teams are providing support at seven medical facilities in Puerto Rico that are partially operational. HHS medical personnel have seen more than 290 patients, to date, at these new locations and at Centro Medico, an emergency and trauma center in San Juan where HHS staff have been providing medical support for the past six days.

medical teams are providing support at seven medical facilities in Puerto Rico that are partially operational. HHS medical personnel have seen more than 290 patients, to date, at these new locations and at Centro Medico, an emergency and trauma center in San Juan where HHS staff have been providing medical support for the past six days. HHS , DoD , and Veteran Affairs partners are transporting almost 100 dialysis patients to Atlanta today. These patients had been evacuated from St. Thomas to Miami after Hurricane Irma.

, , and partners are transporting almost 100 dialysis patients to Atlanta today. These patients had been evacuated from St. Thomas to Miami after Hurricane Irma. EPA continues to coordinate with the U.S. Virgin Island government on results of drinking water sampling and to ensure disinfection measures are taken where needed. EPA now has 28 personnel on site in the U.S. Virgin Island. In St. Croix, EPA personnel sampled 59 public drinking water systems for contamination. EPA continues to disinfect the water sources.

Monday, October 02, 2017

FEMA Administrator Brock Long visits Puerto Rico for the third time to meet with Governor Rossello and the unified interagency command and assess the progress being made.

Puerto Rico NGB armories continue to act as additional Points of Distribution (PODS) for food and water for a total of 23 points of distribution sites in Puerto Rico.

armories continue to act as additional Points of Distribution (PODS) for food and water for a total of 23 points of distribution sites in Puerto Rico. Medical teams have seen more than 336 patients, to date, at seven medical facilities in Puerto Rico. HHS continues to provide behavioral health assistance through the Disaster Distress Helpline at (800) 985-5990. The helpline has answered 6,275 calls from people affected by hurricanes.

U.S. Northern Command has 11 scheduled flights to aid in the transportation of approximately 230,000 meals, 136,000 liters of water, and additional sandbags for the Guajataca Dam.

has 11 scheduled flights to aid in the transportation of approximately 230,000 meals, 136,000 liters of water, and additional sandbags for the Guajataca Dam. U.S. Postal Service (USPS) mail service is continuing today across Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands as mail is transported and processed across the islands. Some operations may be limited depending on facility damage. Customers are being asked to use recipients’ regular mailing addresses as USPS continues to restore service across the Caribbean.

mail service is continuing today across Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands as mail is transported and processed across the islands. Some operations may be limited depending on facility damage. Customers are being asked to use recipients’ regular mailing addresses as USPS continues to restore service across the Caribbean. The USACE continue to clear debris from the U.S. Virgin Islands roadways. They are continuing debris clearance for Puerto Rico roadways, with 33 kilometers or 20 miles of assigned roads cleared, to date.

continue to clear debris from the U.S. Virgin Islands roadways. They are continuing debris clearance for Puerto Rico roadways, with 33 kilometers or 20 miles of assigned roads cleared, to date. The Government Services Administration (GSA) is sourcing more than 200 vehicles for federal agencies’ use on the islands.

ARC distributed more than 211,000 relief items to survivors in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, such as comfort kits, clean up kits and other bulk items, and has provided more than 5,800 mental health and health services to people in need.

DOE emergency responders on Puerto Rico continue to assist in damage assessments, restoration efforts and the stabilization of critical infrastructure. The government of Puerto Rico estimates that power has been restored to at an estimated 5.4 percent of customers in Puerto Rico, now that the airport and marine terminals have been reenergized.

Tuesday, October 03, 2017

President Donald J. Trump, along with First Lady Melania Trump visited Puerto Rico today to meet with survivors, Governor Rossello and the unified interagency command to assess the progress that is being made.

To date, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has 129 Disaster Emergency Medical Personnel System (DEMPS) volunteers in Puerto Rico supporting veterans and VA requirements. Today, 35 DEMPS volunteers travelled to Puerto Rico in support of the HHS Federal Medical Station mission.

(VA) has 129 Disaster Emergency Medical Personnel System (DEMPS) volunteers in Puerto Rico supporting veterans and VA requirements. Today, 35 DEMPS volunteers travelled to Puerto Rico in support of the HHS Federal Medical Station mission. HHS medical teams have seen more than 425 patients in Puerto Rico and more than 100 patients in the U.S. Virgin Islands.

medical teams have seen more than 425 patients in Puerto Rico and more than 100 patients in the U.S. Virgin Islands. The FAA continues efforts to support five major airports that include: Rafael Hernandez Airport, Aguadilla (BQN), Mercedita Airport, Ponce (PSE), Jose Aponte de la Torre Airport/Roosevelt Roads (RVR), Fernando Luis Ribes Dominicci Airport, San Juan (SIG), and Cyril E. King International, St. Thomas (STT) with no restrictions. All other airports on Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands are open with restrictions and, at a minimum, are accepting military, emergency, and relief flights with St. Croix also accepting air carriers with less than 35 passengers. All air traffic management facilities have be restored to normal operation and San Juan airport is now receiving 50% commercial power and has working air conditioning.

Wednesday, October 4

The Pennsylvania NGB is utilizing rotary wing assets to place 900 super sandbags in the Guajataca Dam spillway, stabilizing the infrastructure that has continued to erode with recent rainfall.

is utilizing rotary wing assets to place 900 super sandbags in the Guajataca Dam spillway, stabilizing the infrastructure that has continued to erode with recent rainfall. According to the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA), an estimated 49 percent of Puerto Rico has potable water restored. EPA continues to strategize with FEMA, USACE, Puerto Rico Environmental Quality Board, Puerto Rico Solid Waste Management Authority, and private contractors on the management of hazardous and household wastes and the establishment of regional debris collection and processing centers.

continues to strategize with FEMA, USACE, Puerto Rico Environmental Quality Board, Puerto Rico Solid Waste Management Authority, and private contractors on the management of hazardous and household wastes and the establishment of regional debris collection and processing centers. DOE emergency responders on Puerto Rico are assisting in damage assessments, restoration efforts and the stabilization of critical infrastructure. The government of Puerto Rico estimates that power is restored to at least 8.6 percent of customers in Puerto Rico now that the airport and marine terminals have been reenergized.

emergency responders on Puerto Rico are assisting in damage assessments, restoration efforts and the stabilization of critical infrastructure. The government of Puerto Rico estimates that power is restored to at least 8.6 percent of customers in Puerto Rico now that the airport and marine terminals have been reenergized. The U.S. Naval Ship (USNS) Comfort, a medical vessel, arrived in Puerto Rico with 800 medical personnel and support staff yesterday. The USNS Comfort medical care capabilities include general practice, family medicine and pediatrics—capable of serving 200 patients per day.

Thursday, October 05, 2017

The Department of Veterans Affairs has opened all facilities with the exception of Ponce Outpatient Clinic, Ponce Veterans Center and the St. Thomas Veterans Center. The Caribbean VA Healthcare System, Regional Benefits Office, and National Cemetery continue to restore service to Veterans. Reports show 2,562 Veterans received healthcare services, five veterans interred at our national cemetery, and 4,500 meals provided to employees, veterans, and families.

has opened all facilities with the exception of Ponce Outpatient Clinic, Ponce Veterans Center and the St. Thomas Veterans Center. The Caribbean VA Healthcare System, Regional Benefits Office, and National Cemetery continue to restore service to Veterans. Reports show 2,562 Veterans received healthcare services, five veterans interred at our national cemetery, and 4,500 meals provided to employees, veterans, and families. ARC distributed more than 381,000 relief items to survivors in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, such as comfort kits, clean up kits and other bulk items, and has provided more than 7,700 mental health and health services to people in need.

distributed more than 381,000 relief items to survivors in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, such as comfort kits, clean up kits and other bulk items, and has provided more than 7,700 mental health and health services to people in need. The USPS reports that all incoming mail service is available to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, with the exception of the shipments of live animals. When it is safe to do so, 131 offices are providing outgoing mail distribution with 99 offices attempting delivery.

reports that all incoming mail service is available to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, with the exception of the shipments of live animals. When it is safe to do so, 131 offices are providing outgoing mail distribution with 99 offices attempting delivery. The National Park Service has begun distribution of supplies from the NPS Motor Vessel (M/V) Fort Jefferson docked at Christiansted.

has begun distribution of supplies from the NPS Motor Vessel (M/V) Fort Jefferson docked at Christiansted. The Federal Communications Commission is monitoring the status of communications networks in the areas affected by Hurricane Maria and coordinating with communications providers and federal government partners to support restoration. The FCC will provide up to $76.9 million to help restore communications networks in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

is monitoring the status of communications networks in the areas affected by Hurricane Maria and coordinating with communications providers and federal government partners to support restoration. The FCC will provide up to $76.9 million to help restore communications networks in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. U.S. Northern Command is aiding in the transportation of 191,000 gallons of fuel, 572,000 meals, 1.6 million liters of water, and clearing 65 miles of roads. There are approximately 6,000 active duty service members supporting the response located in Puerto Rico.

is aiding in the transportation of 191,000 gallons of fuel, 572,000 meals, 1.6 million liters of water, and clearing 65 miles of roads. There are approximately 6,000 active duty service members supporting the response located in Puerto Rico. Social Security Administration checks are being delivered daily to San Juan, Puerto Rico, where beneficiaries can pick them up at all 120 post offices.

checks are being delivered daily to San Juan, Puerto Rico, where beneficiaries can pick them up at all 120 post offices. DOE emergency responders on Puerto Rico continue to assist in damage assessments, restoration efforts and the stabilization of critical infrastructure.

Friday, October 06, 2017

DOE emergency responders on Puerto Rico are assisting in damage assessments, restoration efforts and the stabilization of critical infrastructure. Power is restored to at least 10.7 percent of customers in Puerto Rico now that the airport and marine terminals have been reenergized. Approximately 10.5% of customers on St. Thomas have been restored. Critical facilities, including the airports and hospitals have been restored on both St. Thomas and St. Croix.

emergency responders on Puerto Rico are assisting in damage assessments, restoration efforts and the stabilization of critical infrastructure. Power is restored to at least 10.7 percent of customers in Puerto Rico now that the airport and marine terminals have been reenergized. Approximately 10.5% of customers on St. Thomas have been restored. Critical facilities, including the airports and hospitals have been restored on both St. Thomas and St. Croix. Social Security Administration offices in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands remain closed indefinitely. SSA continues to assess when they might be able to open a small number of offices for basic services. Social Security benefit payments are now being delivered daily to Puerto Rico. All 120 post offices are open on a shortened daily schedule of 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m., with a few open until 4:00 p.m. The post office will hold our checks for 45 days.

offices in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands remain closed indefinitely. SSA continues to assess when they might be able to open a small number of offices for basic services. Social Security benefit payments are now being delivered daily to Puerto Rico. All 120 post offices are open on a shortened daily schedule of 9:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m., with a few open until 4:00 p.m. The post office will hold our checks for 45 days. is opening all facilities with exception of the St. Thomas Vet Center. The Damage Assessment Team (DAT) travels to St. Croix today to assess the damage of VA facilities.

medical teams have seen more than 1,000 patients in Puerto Rico. HHS teams are also working with federal and territorial partners to make contact with elder care facilities to ensure their needs are being met. In a partnership with DOD, HHS is working with private sector health care systems on sustainment strategies while electricity is being restored. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has confirmed that 99 percent of dialysis patients are receiving regular treatment.

The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) continues to work with public transportation providers in Puerto Rico to assess their current transportation capabilities and recovery needs, and will work with FEMA on any potential mission assignments. As of Oct. 3, FTA is awarding $8.4 million in critical formula funding to Puerto Rico to support their transit systems on the island.

continues to work with public transportation providers in Puerto Rico to assess their current transportation capabilities and recovery needs, and will work with FEMA on any potential mission assignments. As of Oct. 3, FTA is awarding $8.4 million in critical formula funding to Puerto Rico to support their transit systems on the island. With all 17 priority dam inspections complete, the Pennsylvania NGB is scheduled to utilize heavy-lift helicopters to place 900 super sandbags in and around the Guajataca Dam spillway on Saturday, working with the Army Corps of Engineers to stabilize the dam.

is scheduled to utilize heavy-lift helicopters to place 900 super sandbags in and around the Guajataca Dam spillway on Saturday, working with the Army Corps of Engineers to stabilize the dam. Veteran Affairs staff traveled to Vieques, an island off Puerto Rico’s coast to assist a veteran in need. The veteran was transported to the San Juan VA Medical Center to recieve medical care. An important part of VA’s emergency response efforts is to reach out to veterans of high-risk populations.

staff traveled to Vieques, an island off Puerto Rico’s coast to assist a veteran in need. The veteran was transported to the San Juan VA Medical Center to recieve medical care. An important part of VA’s emergency response efforts is to reach out to veterans of high-risk populations. The U.S. Geological Survey with assistance from other agencies is installing a second camera and enhanced satellite networking at the Lago Guajataca Dam for enhanced monitoring of the dam’s condition with live video feed.

with assistance from other agencies is installing a second camera and enhanced satellite networking at the Lago Guajataca Dam for enhanced monitoring of the dam’s condition with live video feed. National Park Service personnel are coordinating plans to secure museum collections located at St. Croix and St. John totaling more than 200,000 artifacts that will be transferring to the National Capital Region.

Saturday, October 07, 2017

Law enforcement and force protection are supporting responder accountability for U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico operations, providing a security presence throughout the islands to enable restoration activities. In addition to providing assistance to the federal and Puerto Rican law enforcement partners with safety and security efforts, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosive Miami Field Division is cutting downed trees at homes and near businesses that could become safety hazards, and getting much needed resources to partners while they're out helping the communities.

Miami Field Division is cutting downed trees at homes and near businesses that could become safety hazards, and getting much needed resources to partners while they're out helping the communities. The U.S. Geological Survey have repaired 30 water monitoring gauges in Puerto Rico.

have repaired 30 water monitoring gauges in Puerto Rico. The National Protection and Programs Directorate continues to support carriers with establishing short-term communication capabilities, such as temporary cell sites, maintaining generators supporting cell tower sites and facilitating satellite phone capabilities to local officials. Telecommunications service has been restored to approximately 58% of customers in Puerto Rico.

continues to support carriers with establishing short-term communication capabilities, such as temporary cell sites, maintaining generators supporting cell tower sites and facilitating satellite phone capabilities to local officials. Telecommunications service has been restored to approximately 58% of customers in Puerto Rico. Emergency responders on Puerto Rico are assisting in damage assessments, restoration efforts and the stabilization of critical infrastructure. Power is restored to at least 11.7 percent of customers in Puerto Rico now that the airport and marine terminals have been reenergized. Approximately 14.4 percent of customers on St. Thomas have been restored and 12 percent on St. Croix. Critical facilities, including the airports and hospitals have been restored on both St. Thomas and St. Croix.

NGB has more than 6,000 Guard members on the ground in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands taking part in security and support operations. The Air National Guard is focused on commodity distribution, security, communications, and route clearance in Puerto Rico.

Sunday, October 08, 2017

The National Guard continues to work to restore infrastructure to Puerto Rico, with additional telecommunications equipment having recently arrived for commercial restoration efforts and 343 generators being delivered for additional reinstatement of electrical power.

continues to work to restore infrastructure to Puerto Rico, with additional telecommunications equipment having recently arrived for commercial restoration efforts and 343 generators being delivered for additional reinstatement of electrical power. More than 680 ARC volunteers are on the ground in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The ARC has completed more than 11,300 mental health and health contacts.

volunteers are on the ground in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The ARC has completed more than 11,300 mental health and health contacts. The U.S. Geological Survey has 188 total sensors in Puerto Rico measuring stream flows, lake elevations, water quality, and precipitation.

has 188 total sensors in Puerto Rico measuring stream flows, lake elevations, water quality, and precipitation. U.S. Northern Command conducted 23 flights to transport approximately 1.5 million meals, 3 million liters of water, 44,000 gallons of fuel, generators, tarps, additional sustainment units, and leading components of aviation command and control.

conducted 23 flights to transport approximately 1.5 million meals, 3 million liters of water, 44,000 gallons of fuel, generators, tarps, additional sustainment units, and leading components of aviation command and control. The USNS Comfort has treated 78 patients ranging from six months to 89 years in age, providing acute medical care.

Comfort has treated 78 patients ranging from six months to 89 years in age, providing acute medical care. The 26th Marine Expeditionary Unit (MEU) is currently conducting central route clearance today in order to open up roadways into the interior of Puerto Rico. Additionally, the 26th MEU, along with Marine aviation units, continues to support operations today at the Guajataca Dam to assist the USACE’s efforts for repairing the dam.

Tuesday, October 10, 2017

HHS and DoD personnel are staffing mobile medical facilities in St. Croix and St. Thomas to provide care where hospitals will be closed for long periods of time due to hurricane damage. HHS is replenishing the more than 500 personnel deployed to the U.S. Virgins Islands and Puerto Rico to provide life-saving care, help stabilize health care systems and restore services to meet residents' needs with a focus on services for patients with chronic health conditions. HHS medical teams have seen more than 1,000 patients in Puerto Rico.

and personnel are staffing mobile medical facilities in St. Croix and St. Thomas to provide care where hospitals will be closed for long periods of time due to hurricane damage. HHS is replenishing the more than 500 personnel deployed to the U.S. Virgins Islands and Puerto Rico to provide life-saving care, help stabilize health care systems and restore services to meet residents' needs with a focus on services for patients with chronic health conditions. HHS medical teams have seen more than 1,000 patients in Puerto Rico. The USPS has 20 post offices in Puerto Rico open to provide limited mail distribution and some residential delivery, and full shifts were worked in mail processing, moving more and more mail into the region. Despite widespread lack of internet connectivity and limited power, 88 post offices in Puerto Rico can provide some retail services.

has 20 post offices in Puerto Rico open to provide limited mail distribution and some residential delivery, and full shifts were worked in mail processing, moving more and more mail into the region. Despite widespread lack of internet connectivity and limited power, 88 post offices in Puerto Rico can provide some retail services. There are currently 128 Department of Interior personnel supporting FEMA and interagency response and recovery missions.

personnel supporting FEMA and interagency response and recovery missions. USGS personnel, with USACE and the National Weather Service, in Puerto Rico are retrieving sensors and flagging high-level water marks, while performing remote analysis of imagery to identify significant landslide impacts. A total of 37 surface water, groundwater, and precipitation gages have been repaired.

personnel, with USACE and the National Weather Service, in Puerto Rico are retrieving sensors and flagging high-level water marks, while performing remote analysis of imagery to identify significant landslide impacts. A total of 37 surface water, groundwater, and precipitation gages have been repaired. The USACE have completed more than 220 generator assessments, installing 53 in critical facilities in Puerto Rico. USACE has placed an order for materials that include more than 50 thousand poles, which are a mixture of concrete, galvanized steel and wood, and 6,500 miles or 10,300 kilometers of cable that will be used for power transmission and distribution. In the U.S. Virgin Islands, more than 170 assessment inspections have been completed, installing 53 generators to date. To meet the U.S. Virgin Islands’ Governor’s school opening priorities, assessments and generator identifications have been completed, with eight generators scheduled to be installed in schools. In Puerto Rico, the USACE has identified temporary debris disposal sites and preparations for removal to the sites are beginning. In the U.S. Virgin Islands, debris disposal is starting in St. John, today. Crews from the Jacksonville Energy Authority and New York Power Authority are continuing to work with PREPA to restore power. Power is restored to at least 16 percent of customers in Puerto Rico, and the airport, marine terminal, and several hospitals are operating on grid power.

have completed more than 220 generator assessments, installing 53 in critical facilities in Puerto Rico. USACE has placed an order for materials that include more than 50 thousand poles, which are a mixture of concrete, galvanized steel and wood, and 6,500 miles or 10,300 kilometers of cable that will be used for power transmission and distribution. In the U.S. Virgin Islands, more than 170 assessment inspections have been completed, installing 53 generators to date. To meet the U.S. Virgin Islands’ Governor’s school opening priorities, assessments and generator identifications have been completed, with eight generators scheduled to be installed in schools. In Puerto Rico, the has identified temporary debris disposal sites and preparations for removal to the sites are beginning. In the U.S. Virgin Islands, debris disposal is starting in St. John, today. Crews from the Jacksonville Energy Authority and New York Power Authority are continuing to work with PREPA to restore power. Power is restored to at least 16 percent of customers in Puerto Rico, and the airport, marine terminal, and several hospitals are operating on grid power. The DoD deployed two medical supports units with 25 beds and surgical capabilities. Additionally, the Joint Force Land Component Command Surgeon General continues to implement a ground ambulance common operating picture with the Puerto Rico Department of Health and HHS to identify available assets, requirements, and potential gaps.

Wednesday, October 11, 2017

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) determined much of Puerto Rico wastewater infrastructure (sewage treatment plants, pipes, and pumps) is severely damaged due to recent hurricanes or is not functioning due to loss of power. Raw sewage release into waterways, including coastal waters, streams, and rivers will continue in some areas until repairs can be made and/or power is restored.

(EPA) determined much of Puerto Rico wastewater infrastructure (sewage treatment plants, pipes, and pumps) is severely damaged due to recent hurricanes or is not functioning due to loss of power. Raw sewage release into waterways, including coastal waters, streams, and rivers will continue in some areas until repairs can be made and/or power is restored. The Department of Energy (DOE), in collaboration with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, sent more personnel along with crews from Jacksonville Energy Authority and New York Power Authority work with PREPA to restore power in Puerto Rico. As a result, 10.6 percent of Puerto Rico’s electricity customers have restored power, despite recent setbacks with San Juan transmission infrastructure failures. The airport, marine terminal, and several hospitals are now operating on grid power. On the U.S. Virgin Islands, 25 personnel from DOE’s Western Area Power Administration (WAPA), along with 75 personnel from Haughland Energy, continue power restoration efforts. In addition, off-island crews from BBC Electric Services of Missouri and the Northeast Public Power Association (NEPPA) will integrate into these activities, bringing 275 linemen and electricians, equipment, and supplies to the restoration capability.

(DOE), in collaboration with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, sent more personnel along with crews from Jacksonville Energy Authority and New York Power Authority work with PREPA to restore power in Puerto Rico. As a result, 10.6 percent of Puerto Rico’s electricity customers have restored power, despite recent setbacks with San Juan transmission infrastructure failures. The airport, marine terminal, and several hospitals are now operating on grid power. On the U.S. Virgin Islands, 25 personnel from DOE’s Western Area Power Administration (WAPA), along with 75 personnel from Haughland Energy, continue power restoration efforts. In addition, off-island crews from BBC Electric Services of Missouri and the Northeast Public Power Association (NEPPA) will integrate into these activities, bringing 275 linemen and electricians, equipment, and supplies to the restoration capability. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) continues to provide medical care for residents of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. More than 500 medical professionals and support staff have seen over 2,000 patients. The HHS continues to care for 250 dialysis and critical care patients evacuated to the mainland prior to the storms. The HHS activated the Emergency Prescription Assistance Program, which allows uninsured patients in Puerto Rico to get a 30-day refill of medications needed to protect health.

(HHS) continues to provide medical care for residents of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. More than 500 medical professionals and support staff have seen over 2,000 patients. The HHS continues to care for 250 dialysis and critical care patients evacuated to the mainland prior to the storms. The HHS activated the Emergency Prescription Assistance Program, which allows uninsured patients in Puerto Rico to get a 30-day refill of medications needed to protect health. The Department of the Interior (DOI) has nearly 450 personnel supporting federal response and recovery missions. The DOI U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is assessing and cleaning up wildlife refuges in Puerto Rico and expect to begin assessments at the Vieques National Wildlife Refuge today. The DOI U.S. Geological Survey, in coordination with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and National Weather Service, continues to assess and repair stream gages in coordination with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 57 percent of the surface water, groundwater, and precipitation gages that were knocked offline have been repaired.

(DOI) has nearly 450 personnel supporting federal response and recovery missions. The DOI U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is assessing and cleaning up wildlife refuges in Puerto Rico and expect to begin assessments at the Vieques National Wildlife Refuge today. The DOI U.S. Geological Survey, in coordination with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and National Weather Service, continues to assess and repair stream gages in coordination with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 57 percent of the surface water, groundwater, and precipitation gages that were knocked offline have been repaired. The Department of the Treasury continues to assess well-being of its employees in the impact zone and closed facilities affected. Treasury is coordinating with federal partners to enable delivery of cash and checks to Puerto Ricans. Treasury assists with preparation and priority restoration of financial institution operations, and continues to mitigate impact on financial systems. Finally, the Internal Revenue Service provided guidance regarding tax relief available to survivors of the recent storms.

continues to assess well-being of its employees in the impact zone and closed facilities affected. Treasury is coordinating with federal partners to enable delivery of cash and checks to Puerto Ricans. Treasury assists with preparation and priority restoration of financial institution operations, and continues to mitigate impact on financial systems. Finally, the Internal Revenue Service provided guidance regarding tax relief available to survivors of the recent storms. The National Guard Bureau sent 5,500 Guardsmen to Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands in order to establish effective communications, augment local law enforcement, restore electrical power and provide medical assistance to survivors in need. Utilizing heavy-lift helicopters, the Pennsylvania National Guard has been and will continue to place a total of 1,300 super sandbags in and around the Guajataca Dam spillway to ensure its stabilization.

sent 5,500 Guardsmen to Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands in order to establish effective communications, augment local law enforcement, restore electrical power and provide medical assistance to survivors in need. Utilizing heavy-lift helicopters, the Pennsylvania National Guard has been and will continue to place a total of 1,300 super sandbags in and around the Guajataca Dam spillway to ensure its stabilization. All U.S. Postal Service (USPS) offices are open in Puerto Rico for retail services in addition to mail pickup and delivery during their regular hours with the exceptions of a few offices. The USPS also explores supplemental workforce opportunity to provide both operational and postal employee family humanitarian support focused in Puerto Rico.

(USPS) offices are open in Puerto Rico for retail services in addition to mail pickup and delivery during their regular hours with the exceptions of a few offices. The USPS also explores supplemental workforce opportunity to provide both operational and postal employee family humanitarian support focused in Puerto Rico. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers continues to support power restoration, roof installations, and debris management and clearance. USACE has installed 63 generators in Puerto Rico, with additional 32 installations underway; and 54 generators, in total, with 15 more in progress, in the U.S. Virgin Islands. USACE recently awarded its first contract for provision of a 50 MW generator needed to repair and restore the Puerto Rico power grid. USACE has begun identification of temporary disposal sites for the estimated 7.3 million cubic yards of debris in Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands

Friday, October 13, 2017

The Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS) deployed 75 AmeriCorps members to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands to support Hurricane Maria response efforts. This includes expertly-trained crews from the agency’s elite AmeriCorps Disaster Response Team who supports the creation of a volunteer and donations management system, joining muck-and-gut operations, and providing blue-roof tarping and debris clearing services. Additionally, CNCS has placed four AmeriCorps teams to serving beside FEMA Corps supporting logistics and disaster survivor assistance.

(CNCS) deployed 75 AmeriCorps members to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands to support Hurricane Maria response efforts. This includes expertly-trained crews from the agency’s elite AmeriCorps Disaster Response Team who supports the creation of a volunteer and donations management system, joining muck-and-gut operations, and providing blue-roof tarping and debris clearing services. Additionally, CNCS has placed four AmeriCorps teams to serving beside FEMA Corps supporting logistics and disaster survivor assistance. The Department of Energy (DOE) emergency responders on in Puerto Rico assist with damage assessments, restoration efforts, and the stabilization of critical infrastructure. DOE is working with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to send more personnel and equipment and supplies to Puerto Rico. The Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority estimates a minimum of 9 percent power restoration to its customers. Crews from the Jacksonville Energy Authority (JEA) and the New York Power Authority are at work on the island, and crews from the Kissimmee Utility Authority are on the way. On U.S. Virgin Islands, 25 Western Area Power Administration (WAPA) personnel continue power restoration efforts in St. Thomas. In addition to WAPA, three companies – Haugland Energy, BBC Electric Services of Missouri, and the Northeast Public Power Association – provided 260 linemen and electricians, along with equipment and supplies.

(DOE) emergency responders on in Puerto Rico assist with damage assessments, restoration efforts, and the stabilization of critical infrastructure. DOE is working with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to send more personnel and equipment and supplies to Puerto Rico. The Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority estimates a minimum of 9 percent power restoration to its customers. Crews from the Jacksonville Energy Authority (JEA) and the New York Power Authority are at work on the island, and crews from the Kissimmee Utility Authority are on the way. On U.S. Virgin Islands, 25 Western Area Power Administration (WAPA) personnel continue power restoration efforts in St. Thomas. In addition to WAPA, three companies – Haugland Energy, BBC Electric Services of Missouri, and the Northeast Public Power Association – provided 260 linemen and electricians, along with equipment and supplies. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has more than 600 medical professionals and support personnel deployed to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. They have provided medical treatment to over 4,300 patients needing care after Hurricanes Irma and Maria. Since activating the Emergency Prescription Assistance Program, which helps uninsured patients affected by Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico get 30-day supplies of needed medications, over 360 prescriptions have been filled. The presence of HHS Centers for Disease Control and Prevention teams throughout the Caribbean provide critical visibility of survivor needs and shortfalls. The CDC will also distribute a single-page informational flyer, in English and Spanish, to 51,000 residences in USVI early next week.

(HHS) has more than 600 medical professionals and support personnel deployed to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. They have provided medical treatment to over 4,300 patients needing care after Hurricanes Irma and Maria. Since activating the Emergency Prescription Assistance Program, which helps uninsured patients affected by Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico get 30-day supplies of needed medications, over 360 prescriptions have been filled. The presence of HHS Centers for Disease Control and Prevention teams throughout the Caribbean provide critical visibility of survivor needs and shortfalls. The CDC will also distribute a single-page informational flyer, in English and Spanish, to 51,000 residences in USVI early next week. A Department of the Interior (DOI) leadership team, led by Assistant Secretary for Insular Areas, conducted a visit to coordinate Department’s on-the-ground support to the U.S. Virgin Islands. They met with USVI Governor, senators, FEMA, and other federal interagency leadership. DOI partnered with FEMA to select a National Park Service building to serve survivors as a Disaster Recovery Center. The site is a readily accessible facility or mobile office where survivors may go for information about FEMA programs or other disaster assistance programs, and to ask questions related to their cases. 215 personnel deployed throughout the Caribbean, augmenting the 239 DOI personnel that remain at their home stations in Puerto Rico or the U.S. Virgin Islands.

(DOI) leadership team, led by Assistant Secretary for Insular Areas, conducted a visit to coordinate Department’s on-the-ground support to the U.S. Virgin Islands. They met with USVI Governor, senators, FEMA, and other federal interagency leadership. DOI partnered with FEMA to select a National Park Service building to serve survivors as a Disaster Recovery Center. The site is a readily accessible facility or mobile office where survivors may go for information about FEMA programs or other disaster assistance programs, and to ask questions related to their cases. 215 personnel deployed throughout the Caribbean, augmenting the 239 DOI personnel that remain at their home stations in Puerto Rico or the U.S. Virgin Islands. The Department of the Treasury continues to coordinate with federal partners to enable deliveries of cash and checks to Puerto Rico. The Department has activated the Financial and Banking Information Infrastructure Committee (FBIIC) communications protocols to monitor key financial sector infrastructure. Treasury also assists with preparation and priority restoration of financial institution operations, and continues working to mitigate any impact on the financial system. Treasury is working closely with all of the stakeholders involved, including the Office of Management and Budget, Congress, the Puerto Rican government, and the Oversight Board to understand and appropriately address territorial government financial issues emerging from the hurricanes. Finally, the IRS has provided taxpayers with guidance regarding tax relief available to victims of the recent storms.

continues to coordinate with federal partners to enable deliveries of cash and checks to Puerto Rico. The Department has activated the Financial and Banking Information Infrastructure Committee (FBIIC) communications protocols to monitor key financial sector infrastructure. Treasury also assists with preparation and priority restoration of financial institution operations, and continues working to mitigate any impact on the financial system. Treasury is working closely with all of the stakeholders involved, including the Office of Management and Budget, Congress, the Puerto Rican government, and the Oversight Board to understand and appropriately address territorial government financial issues emerging from the hurricanes. Finally, the IRS has provided taxpayers with guidance regarding tax relief available to victims of the recent storms. National Guard Bureau : In Puerto Rico, Guard capacity increases as more supporting states become available. Puerto Rico Army National Guard forces, along with out-of-state EMAC units, continue route clearance and fuel station security, logistical staging areas, and hospitals, as well as supporting ground movement of commodities to several communities. CH-47 “Chinooks” crews continue to reinforce Guajataca Dam, where potable water production has increased to 435,000 gallons. National Guard Aviation missions provide vital supply delivery to remote areas still isolated by debris. There are currently 15 DOD flights scheduled to deliver Humvees, medical supplies, personnel, equipment, water, MREs (meals ready to eat) and a Joint Incident Site Communication Capability (JISCC) from the West Virginia National Guard.

: In Puerto Rico, Guard capacity increases as more supporting states become available. Puerto Rico Army National Guard forces, along with out-of-state EMAC units, continue route clearance and fuel station security, logistical staging areas, and hospitals, as well as supporting ground movement of commodities to several communities. CH-47 “Chinooks” crews continue to reinforce Guajataca Dam, where potable water production has increased to 435,000 gallons. National Guard Aviation missions provide vital supply delivery to remote areas still isolated by debris. There are currently 15 DOD flights scheduled to deliver Humvees, medical supplies, personnel, equipment, water, MREs (meals ready to eat) and a Joint Incident Site Communication Capability (JISCC) from the West Virginia National Guard. All Social Security Administration offices remain closed, however, the SSA has a plan to open three offices in San Juan, San Patricio, and Caguas on Monday, October 16. SSA also plans to open two Hearing offices (Mayaguez and San Juan) on Monday. Managers reached out to contact employees and most expected to make it into work. These opening are situation-dependent, given communications, power, and transportation instability.

offices remain closed, however, the SSA has a plan to open three offices in San Juan, San Patricio, and Caguas on Monday, October 16. SSA also plans to open two Hearing offices (Mayaguez and San Juan) on Monday. Managers reached out to contact employees and most expected to make it into work. These opening are situation-dependent, given communications, power, and transportation instability. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers completed more than 270 generator inspections, installing 82 in critical facilities in Puerto Rico, with 28 generator installations in progress. Similarly, in U.S. Virgin Island, USACE completed 190 inspections. 65 generators have been installed, and 16 installations are in progress. Additionally, in Puerto Rico, USACE deployed Temporary Roofing Management Cells performs critical assessments requested by FEMA. USACE estimates that 60,000 roofs are damaged, and has collected more than 2,400 Rights of Entry. Expansion of operations to seven municipalities is being planned. USACE estimates 13,000 roofs are damaged across the islands (7,000 in St. Thomas; 1,000 in St. John; 5,000 in St. Croix). More than 400 temporary roofs have been installed.

completed more than 270 generator inspections, installing 82 in critical facilities in Puerto Rico, with 28 generator installations in progress. Similarly, in U.S. Virgin Island, USACE completed 190 inspections. 65 generators have been installed, and 16 installations are in progress. Additionally, in Puerto Rico, USACE deployed Temporary Roofing Management Cells performs critical assessments requested by FEMA. USACE estimates that 60,000 roofs are damaged, and has collected more than 2,400 Rights of Entry. Expansion of operations to seven municipalities is being planned. USACE estimates 13,000 roofs are damaged across the islands (7,000 in St. Thomas; 1,000 in St. John; 5,000 in St. Croix). More than 400 temporary roofs have been installed. The U.S. Postal Service reports all incoming mail to Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands is available. Customers receive mail by picking it up at Post Offices or through limited delivery throughout the islands.

reports all incoming mail to Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands is available. Customers receive mail by picking it up at Post Offices or through limited delivery throughout the islands. The American Red Cross (ARC) deployed nearly 670 American Red Cross (ARC) disaster responders to Puerto Rico and the USVI with over 70 on the way to assist with recovery after Hurricanes Irma and Maria. The Red Cross distributed more than 646,000 relief items which include comfort kits, clean up kits and other bulk items and have had over 13,000 mental health and health contacts.

Saturday, October 14, 2017

The American Red Cross (ARC) opened five shelters in the U.S. Virgin Islands hosting 324 survivors last night. In Puerto Rico, 108 shelters hosted more than 5,000 survivors last night. All locations are providing food, bulk -item and clean-up kit distribution.

(ARC) opened five shelters in the U.S. Virgin Islands hosting 324 survivors last night. In Puerto Rico, 108 shelters hosted more than 5,000 survivors last night. All locations are providing food, bulk -item and clean-up kit distribution. The Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS) deployed more than 100 AmeriCorps members to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands to support Hurricane Maria response efforts. This includes expertly trained crews from the agency’s elite AmeriCorps Disaster Response Team, which supports the creation of a volunteer and donations management system, joining muck-and-gut operations, and providing blue-roof tarping and debris clearing services.

(CNCS) deployed more than 100 AmeriCorps members to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands to support Hurricane Maria response efforts. This includes expertly trained crews from the agency’s elite AmeriCorps Disaster Response Team, which supports the creation of a volunteer and donations management system, joining muck-and-gut operations, and providing blue-roof tarping and debris clearing services. Department of Defense U.S. Northern Command (USNORTHCOM) deployed more than 8,100 active duty service members as well as 72 active duty helicopters. Naval and Marine engineers are currently removing debris, and restoring primary and secondary roads around Ponce, Adjunta, Jayuya and Villelba. More than 36,000 gallons of water were distributed -- an increase of 12,000 gallons from the previous day.

(USNORTHCOM) deployed more than 8,100 active duty service members as well as 72 active duty helicopters. Naval and Marine engineers are currently removing debris, and restoring primary and secondary roads around Ponce, Adjunta, Jayuya and Villelba. More than 36,000 gallons of water were distributed -- an increase of 12,000 gallons from the previous day. The National Guard Bureau deployed more than 5,500 guardsmen to restore communication, and electrical power as well as to provide medical assistance and to support local law enforcement. The Guard has installed 82 generators, increased potable water production to 435,000 gallons from the Guajataca Dam, and opened 860 gas stations out of 1,100.

deployed more than 5,500 guardsmen to restore communication, and electrical power as well as to provide medical assistance and to support local law enforcement. The Guard has installed 82 generators, increased potable water production to 435,000 gallons from the Guajataca Dam, and opened 860 gas stations out of 1,100. The Department of Energy (DOE) emergency responders in Puerto Rico are assisting with damage assessments, restoration efforts, and the stabilization of critical infrastructure in coordination with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Crews from the Jacksonville Energy Authority (JEA) and the New York Power Authority are at work on the island, and crews from the Kissimmee Utility Authority are on the way. Forty personnel from the Northeast Public Power Association arrived on St. Thomas and the DOE estimates that 14.4 percent of power has been restored on St. Thomas and 12 percent on St. Croix.

(DOE) emergency responders in Puerto Rico are assisting with damage assessments, restoration efforts, and the stabilization of critical infrastructure in coordination with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Crews from the Jacksonville Energy Authority (JEA) and the New York Power Authority are at work on the island, and crews from the Kissimmee Utility Authority are on the way. Forty personnel from the Northeast Public Power Association arrived on St. Thomas and the DOE estimates that 14.4 percent of power has been restored on St. Thomas and 12 percent on St. Croix. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) focuses its efforts to support major life safety and life-sustaining missions in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. It has provided medical treatment to more than 4,800 patients at a dozen locations in Puerto Rico and more than 1,300 patients in the U.S. Virgin Islands. The HHS is supports US Virgin Islands dialysis patients evacuated to Atlanta, Ga.

(HHS) focuses its efforts to support major life safety and life-sustaining missions in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. It has provided medical treatment to more than 4,800 patients at a dozen locations in Puerto Rico and more than 1,300 patients in the U.S. Virgin Islands. The HHS is supports US Virgin Islands dialysis patients evacuated to Atlanta, Ga. The Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) the Health Communications Support Team provided key information messages to five U.S. Virgin Island radio stations in both English and Spanish. These messages covered food and water safety, mosquito bite prevention, mental health assistance, CO2 poisoning prevention, and safe clean-up measures. The HCST cleared eight flyers thru the Puerto Rico Department of Health and Governor's offices. They also developed and three-week media coverage plan with the PRDOH.

(CDC) the Health Communications Support Team provided key information messages to five U.S. Virgin Island radio stations in both English and Spanish. These messages covered food and water safety, mosquito bite prevention, mental health assistance, CO2 poisoning prevention, and safe clean-up measures. The HCST cleared eight flyers thru the Puerto Rico Department of Health and Governor's offices. They also developed and three-week media coverage plan with the PRDOH. The Department of the Homeland Security (DHS) National Protection and Programs directorate ended fueling mission for carriers and emergency generators in Puerto Rico because all carriers have contracted out their fueling needs and no longer require Federal assistance. In the U.S. Virgin Islands operations continue supporting Land Mobile Radio systems. The NCC issued a satellite phone to the USVI Public Services Commissioner to help facilitate better recovery coordination.

(DHS) National Protection and Programs directorate ended fueling mission for carriers and emergency generators in Puerto Rico because all carriers have contracted out their fueling needs and no longer require Federal assistance. In the U.S. Virgin Islands operations continue supporting Land Mobile Radio systems. The NCC issued a satellite phone to the USVI Public Services Commissioner to help facilitate better recovery coordination. The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) announced Secretary Ben Carson's visit to Puerto Rico is cancelled and will be re-scheduled to a later date.

(HUD) announced Secretary Ben Carson's visit to Puerto Rico is cancelled and will be re-scheduled to a later date. The Department of the Interior (DOI) deployed 34 additional personnel to support operations in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The DOI established a DOI liaison position the FEMA Puerto Rico Joint Field Office to support interagency coordination between FEMA and DOI bureaus and offices. The Assistant Secretary for Insular Areas met with the Puerto Rico National Park Service and assessed damages to the San Juan National Historical Site.

Sunday, October 15, 2017

The Department of Defense uses both ground and air assets to deliver supplies central regions of Puerto Rico. To date, DOD distributed more than 7.8 Million meals were delivered and 6.4 Million liters of water; it transported 271 generators. U.S. Northern Command (USNORTHCOM) deployed more than 8,100 active duty service-members as well as 72 active duty helicopters . The Joint Forces Land Component Command delivered more than 214,000 bottles of water and purified and distributed more than 11,500 gallons of water. They delivered more than 66,000 meals, as well.

uses both ground and air assets to deliver supplies central regions of Puerto Rico. To date, DOD distributed more than 7.8 Million meals were delivered and 6.4 Million liters of water; it transported 271 generators. (USNORTHCOM) deployed more than 8,100 active duty service-members as well as 72 active duty helicopters . The Joint Forces Land Component Command delivered more than 214,000 bottles of water and purified and distributed more than 11,500 gallons of water. They delivered more than 66,000 meals, as well. The Department of Energy (DOE) emergency responders in Puerto Rico assist with damage assessments, restoration efforts, and the stabilization of critical infrastructure in coordination with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. To date, Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority reports power restoration is 15 percent (at a minimum) as well as the energization of 21 percent of transmission lines and 33 percent of substations. The DOE estimates that 15.6 percent power restoration on St. Thomas and 12 percent on St. Croix.

(DOE) emergency responders in Puerto Rico assist with damage assessments, restoration efforts, and the stabilization of critical infrastructure in coordination with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. To date, Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority reports power restoration is 15 percent (at a minimum) as well as the energization of 21 percent of transmission lines and 33 percent of substations. The DOE estimates that 15.6 percent power restoration on St. Thomas and 12 percent on St. Croix. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) focuses its efforts to support major life-saving and life-sustaining missions in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. They have provided medical treatment to more than 6,100 patients at a dozen locations in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. HHS is also evacuated 400 critical care and dialysis patients, and created two medical shelters in Puerto Rico.

(HHS) focuses its efforts to support major life-saving and life-sustaining missions in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. They have provided medical treatment to more than 6,100 patients at a dozen locations in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. HHS is also evacuated 400 critical care and dialysis patients, and created two medical shelters in Puerto Rico. The National Guard Bureau deployed more than 5,500 guardsmen to restore communication, and electrical power as well as providing medical assistance and supporting local law enforcement. Engineers with 448th Engineers completed route clearance of PR371 and PR372. The Colorado National Guard's Disaster Relief Mobile Kitchen arrived as well as 15 Guardsmen from the Maryland National Guard. The Maryland Guardsmen will purify water and transport clean water to distribution points island-wide.

Timeline Graphic - Part 1 (September 17 - September 30) | (Full size image)

Timeline Graphic - Part 2 (October 1 - October 14) | (Full size image)

Timeline Graphic - Part 3 (October 15 - October 23) | (Full size image)