Condom Snorting Challenge: Why You Should Not Inhale Condoms
When is using a condom a bad idea? When you are trying to snort it up your nose and pull it out through your mouth. If you ask, "why would anyone ever do that," then you obviously haven't heard of the "Condom Snorting Challenge."

This is what you would do if you wanted to participate in this "Challenge" and demonstrate to everyone that you have absolutely no proper judgment. You would unwrap a new condom (because a used condom would be even worse) inhale it up one nostril and then try to pull it out through your pharynx and mouth, all the while filming it to then post the video on YouTube or some other social media platform.

This "Condom Challenge" is actually not new and has been around for a number of years, because stupidity doesn't go away that easily. Back in 2013, Alex Alvarez wrote for ABC News about how a YouTube video uploaded in June 2007 showed the act and how the Challenge may have gotten more attention when YouTuber "Savannah Strong" posted on April 8, 2013, a video of her snorting a condom to the tune of Taylor Swift's "22."

In case you are wondering what it looks like, here's a Tweet with a picture:

Doesn't that look wonderful? If you want to see what it looks like in action, a number of videos (such as this one) pop up on YouTube when you search for "condom snorting" but beware they may make you wince.

Gee, what could go wrong when inhaling an object made of latex rubber and covered in lubricant and spermicide? Well, first of all, here's the list of things that you should be snorting up you nose:

Air

The only possible addition to this list would be medications like nasal sprays, but only when your doctor recommends them and there is a true medical indication. Otherwise, anything else that goes up your nose can damage the sensitive inner lining of your nose, cause an allergic reaction, or result in an infection. I've already written for Forbes about the dangers of snorting chocolate and similar concerns apply to most other substances.

Now, imagine stuffing up your nose something that is larger than your nostril opening and designed not to break. That would be as foolish as, well, trying to inhale a condom. The condom could easily get stuck in your nose or your throat, blocking your breathing or causing you to choke.

But that's not all. Take a look at a case report published in 2004 in the Indian Journal of Chest Diseases and Allied Sciences entitled "Accidental condom inhalation," which distinguishes it from deliberate condom inhalation, which is basically the "Condom Snorting Challenge." The case report detailed the tribulations of a 27-year-old woman who performed oral sex on a man wearing a condom. The condom went down her trachea and into her lungs, blocked one of her airways, and resulted in pneumonia and a collapse of the right upper lobe of her lung. That would qualify as a bad oral sex experience.

Then there's the case report in the Journal of Medical Case Reports of a 26-year old woman who accidentally swallowed a condom (again, with the emphasis on the word accidentally) during oral sex and then subsequently developed appendicitis because a fragment of the condom lodged inside her appendix. While this does not necessarily mean that you should panic if you accidentally swallow a condom (because you may just eventually poop it out), it does strongly suggest that you should not deliberately inhale or swallow a condom.

Even if you manage to successfully pull the condom out through your mouth, inhaling a condom up your nose would be very uncomfortable and potentially quite painful. Would it really be worth all that just to get more likes and views?

Apparently enough teens still think it's worthwhile, to the point that educators are now visiting San Antonio, Texas-area schools to discuss drug, alcohol, and condom-snorting prevention, as Darian Trotter for NBC News 4 San Antonio reported. Welcome to 2018. Who knew that teens would need to be told not to use condoms?