The Flashpoint No One Is Talking About: The Black Sea
The recent decision of the international tribunal regarding China’s expansive claims in the South China Sea, and the certainty of continued confrontation in the region, which I wrote about last week, brings to mind another strategic body of water in which tensions are high and great potential exists for military conflict, but to which very few are paying attention: the Black Sea.

The Black Sea has long played a key military and economic role for the nations on its periphery, is rich in resources, and has historically been the scene of geopolitical conflict due to its strategic importance, an importance that the confrontation between Russia and the West is once again highlighting. Since Russia has occupied Crimea, it has been working assiduously to strengthen its ability to project power throughout the Black Sea region, with considerable success. Russia’s Black Sea neighbors, in turn, have increasingly been cooperating in naval maneuvers and port visits, and discussions of joint defense production, in an effort to strengthen their ability to resist Russia and to not cede complete control of the Black Sea to Moscow.

Romania is concerned with the security of its energy platforms in the Black Sea, as well as about its ability to ensure freedom of access to the mouth of the Danube River – the ability to control access to the Danube has strategic importance, among other reasons, due to the river’s role as a key transportation and trade route that runs through virtually the whole of central Europe. Georgia, which occupies a strategic position at a historically important geographical and cultural crossroads, needs the Black Sea to be a friendly space because of the access it provides to Europe. Russian control would serve to isolate Georgia from its new Western partners and make it more vulnerable to Russian pressure. As far as Ukraine goes, Russia's strategic gain in terms of occupation of the Crimea is obviously Ukraine's loss. Ukraine's access to the Black Sea is economically and strategically vital, and from Russia's position in Crimea it has the ability to interdict the major Ukrainian access points to the Black Sea provided by the Dniester and the Dniepr Rivers.

Russia, for its part, for hundreds of years has seen control of the Black Sea to be vital to Russian security, and control of Crimea, in turn, to be key to command of the Black Sea. Crimea first became a center of Russian naval power in the 18th century after Czarist Russia defeated the Ottoman Empire in a series of wars, and was taken over from the Ottomans by Catherine the Great late in the 18th century. Control of and access to the Black Sea was a contributing factor to the Crimean War in the mid 19th century. One of the key reasons Russia lost the war to an alliance of Britain, France and an internally rotting Ottoman Empire (which loss included a nearly year long siege of Russian forces in Sevastopol, adding to Russian sensitivity about Sevastopol) was that it was unable to control the Black Sea, which was dominated by Russia’s opponents.

Upon losing the war, Russia suffered the consequence of losing the ability to station naval warships in the Black Sea altogether – a strategic nightmare that was one of the factors driving Russian fears when political debates in Kiev in recent years broached the topic of not renewing the Russian lease of its base in Sevastopol, and an important factor behind Putin’s decision to annex the peninsula once the Maidan protests resulted in the loss of the Kremlin’s ally in Kiev.

Control of Crimea and the Black Sea gives Russian the upper hand in the whole of the region around the Black Sea, as well, including in its centuries old geopolitical rivalry with Turkey. In addition to Sevastopol’s defensive value, Moscow also sees the warm water naval base as critical to Russia’s ability to project naval power globally, and is planning to use its position there to expand its naval presence, and thus Russian influence, in the Mediterranean, the Atlantic and the Persian Gulf. Without Crimea, Russia’s global stature is diminished. With it, it has a strong base for geopolitical power projection.

Russia’s determination to control the Black Sea, therefore, has deep historical roots and an understandable strategic rationale. Russia’s argument that its behavior is defensive in nature, however, is less easy to agree with. And the pattern of Russian aggressiveness over the past few years, and in particular the dramatic expansion of Russian military power in the Black Sea, has made the other Black Sea littoral states increasingly nervous.

Within two months of annexing Crimea, Russia announced a plan to rebuild its naval force in Sevastopol and has significantly bolstered it in the past two plus years with additional surface and subsurface combatants, all of which will be capable of employing long-range cruise missiles and/or supersonic anti-ship missiles, scheduled to be delivered at various points within the next 1-4 years. From its new seat in Crimea, Russia now has coverage over the whole of the Black Sea with a potent combination of supersonic anti-ship missiles having a range of 600 km, advanced warplanes and surface and subsurface combatants armed with cruise and anti-ship missiles. Additionally, it is strengthening its A2/AD capabilities by the placement in Crimea next month of its newest surface-to-air missile system, the S-400, and the planned deployment next year of new Podsolnukh (“Sunflower”) radar installations, which Moscow touts as being able to spot the F-35 stealth fighter.

Three Admiral Grigorovich-class frigates are due to be added to the fleet later this year, which will provided needed larger ships to a fleet populated mostly by smaller ships.

The capabilities of the Russian navy lag far behind that of the U.S. Navy, and the Russian navy is highly unlikely to ever again reach the level of strength and capability it enjoyed during the latter part of the Soviet era, but it does nevertheless have the ability to seriously challenge American and NATO freedom of action in the Black Sea and to shape the behavior of the American and allied navies by raising the costs of confrontation. And although the Russian surface combatants in the Black Sea to date are relatively small (a weakness the addition of the frigates is meant to help address), even Russia’s small corvettes pack a much stronger punch than the corvettes of other navies, being able to employ new, long-range, precision-guided Kalibr cruise missiles that are usually found on larger ships.

Late last year Russia demonstrated this capability when it launched cruise missiles from its corvettes in strikes on targets in Syria, a demonstration of its new capabilities aimed at impressing the West and its neighbors around the Black Sea as much as striking anti-Assad forces in Syria. And the Russian submarine force, which Moscow is planning to bolster significantly over the next couple of years, also constitutes a serious threat to the ability of the U.S. and partner navies to operate.

Russia’s attempt to dominate the region and block the United States navy from cooperating with the navies of littoral states worried about Russian control of the Sea has led to Russia undertaking actions that seek to dissuade American ships operating there, such as dangerous passes by Russian warplanes over U.S. navy ships and other intimidation attempts. When a U.S. Navy destroyer, the USS Porter, transited the Bosphorus Straits and entered the Black Sea last month in order to conduct joint exercises with littoral partner navies, a Russian Foreign Ministry official threatened “retaliatory measures.” One Russian military analyst, a member of the Advisory Council of the Russian Military-Industrial Commission, asserted that the ship had entered the Black Sea as part of “preparations for combat employment of the country’s military forces," illustrating just how deeply engrained is the paranoia within Russia.

Russia’s aggressive behavior seems calculated to signal that Russia is willing to risk conflict, and that unless the United States and NATO are likewise willing to risk it, they should back down. Sounds similar to Chinese behavior in the South China Sea, doesn’t it?

In May, Turkish strongman Recep Erdogan warned that Russia is turning the Black Sea into “a Russian lake” with very little opposition from Turkey’s NATO partners, and has urged the United States and NATO to make a greater effort to contest control of the Sea. Russia immediately responded to Erdogan’s warning by itself counter-warning that the Black Sea “will never be NATO’s lake”.

Various proposals related to a coordinated NATO response to Russia have been put forward, including Romania’s recent proposal that NATO create a permanent Black Sea fleet, but no decisions were made. Given the anemic naval forces of all the littoral states with the exception of Turkey, a NATO force in the Black Sea would have had to depend upon stronger NATO partners such as Turkey, the United States and western European states to provide the bulk of the naval firepower.

Bulgaria opposed Romania’s proposal, due in large part to intense pressure placed on it by Moscow, illustrating the leverage Russia retains due to energy supplies, as well as Russia’s continued ability to intimidate its neighbors in general.

Regional cooperation that seeks to balance the threat from Russia is accelerating, however, regardless of NATO, and regional navies are realizing the need to bolster their own naval strength and to cooperate more deeply among themselves. Turkey and Ukraine, as one example, have announced plans to begin joint defense production.

Turkey has been among the most active in cooperating with the fellow littoral navies in a show of resolve not to cede control of the Black Sea to Russia. This past spring, for example, Turkish ships visited every littoral state with the exception of Russia. One of the central reasons Putin has done all he can to pressure Erdogan to take a more pliable stance vis-à-vis Russia is that Russia’s position in the Black Sea would be immeasurably strengthened were Russo-Turkish distrust and hostility lessened, and were Moscow to be able to neutralize Turkey and its control of the Bosphorus Straits.

To this end, Putin has been working on Turkey since approximately 2004, tasking Alexander Dugin with the mission of cultivating elements within the Turkish military and government bureaucracy that are pro-Eurasianist and pro-Russian. Although Russo-Turkish relations have been highly conflicted for the past couple of years, Russia’s strategy of wielding both carrot and stick, and the active measures it has been undertaking inside Turkey in a concerted attempt to give the domestic political advantage to pro-Russian forces and to shift Turkey’s geopolitical orientation, has born fruit of late.

Much attention has been given, and for good reason, to the leverage Ankara has over Washington due to the Incirlik air base, and over Europe due to the Turkish role in the refugee crisis. However, the strategic importance of the Black Sea, Russia’s intention to control it and the surrounding region, and the need to constrain the growth of a disruptive Russian influence in the Mediterranean, add to the need for both Europe and the United States to maintain cooperative relations with Turkey.

Russia is well aware of this, which is why it is doing all that it can at this point to woo Turkey away from NATO and the United States. Moscow’s interest in the recent failed coup in Turkey, and in developments in the coup’s aftermath, will ensure that Russia pulls out all of the stops in an effort to shift Turkey’s alignment. The tipping point at which Turkey finds itself right now gives Russia the greatest opportunity it has had in recent memory to do so. And Moscow is not wasting the opportunity. Immediately after the coup, Dugin called for a Russo-Turkish alliance that would expel the United States and NATO from the Back Sea, and see Turkey depart NATO.

Ceding control of the Black Sea to Moscow would have negative strategic consequences far beyond the issue of military advantage in the Black Sea itself, and the lack of a comprehensive strategy toward Russia (and such a strategy has been lacking since the end of the Cold War) on the part of the United States and NATO has given Vladimir Putin room to maneuver that he otherwise would not have had. As a recent RAND study has noted, while NATO and U.S. rhetoric has been strong, corresponding plans of action that would effectively counter Russian attempts to subvert and destabilize NATO members and non-NATO partner states along Russia’s periphery have not been developed. Recent history has shown that Vladimir Putin will take whatever advantage the West cedes to him. It is important that the West does not continue to allow him the advantage in the Black Sea.