Time’s Up
GOD’S mercy is not everlasting. That is why there is death and hell.

Californians will vote Yes on Proposition 8 to establish marriage between a man and woman or they will go down for their wickedness. In November voters all over the United States should demand that its political leaders reconfirm that the United State is a GOD fearing country or it will move closer to becoming a Third World Country. GOD will bring this country to its knees via natural disasters that will turn into financial disasters.

From the presidential to local candidates, every politician who stands with and for gay marriage must be defeated in November. And then Americans must make it clear that the president and governors who nominate gay sympathizers to judgeships will be defeated in the next election.

Christians alone could put an end to gay marriage in California , but it lacks Christian leadership. Roger Mahony, a cardinal in the Catholic Church secretly supports gays and Protestant ministers have joined the bandwagon.

Fifty years ago sin was sin and everyone knew what it was. People who sinned admitted it even if they continue to live a sinful life. Today, men dare to put themselves above GOD and declare that they (judges) are going to change the rules. Gays have stated that there is nothing Americans can do about. Let’s prove them wrong.

Rev. Brenda Lee was the only clergy to appear in the Daily Pilot protesting same sex marriages on June 17th at the Santa Ana Court House. Where were the other 200 + ministers/priests of Orange County ?

Ms. K. Moody stated that Pastor Chuck Swindoll had been outspoken on the gay issue and left California because of death threats. A secretary confirmed that he was threatened and that bulletproof glass was placed in his office, but there was no real threat. Pastor John Hagee confirmed that he travels with heavy security. People of Faith trust GOD and some of they are martyred. This goes with the job.

On what grounds does Rev. Lee speak for GOD?

Her credentials out weigh that of Benedict XVI and every other Christian, or religious leader in the world. They have not heard the VOICE of GOD and they do not have the gift of prophecy or healing. None are willing to meet her face to face and call upon the name of GOD, as of the days of old because they know that she ranks with John the Baptist and Saint Peter.

By the GRACE OF GOD elderly people with a Black Catholic priestess have united GOD’S CHURCH and there is nothing anyone can do about it. There has not been a Catholic, or Protestant leader who has co-celebrated MASSES in Catholic, Baptist, Episcopal, Presbytrian, C.M.E., A.M.E. Churches . Rev. Lee has ministered to Jews in Israel and Muslims in California . Her congregations in nursing homes include Mormons, Catholics, Protestants and others in five states. These events are recorded in photos (not edited with Photoshop) and documents.

In 1974 Father Michael Delae officiated at her wedding at Saint Peter Claver in front of Protestant and Catholic guests. Her husband was not a Christian. Father Paul Maloney washed her feet at Santa Susanna in Rome . Father Jude Herlihy recognized her as a pastor and signed her application to work with the Billy Graham Crusade in Los Angeles as a pastor and counselor. Rabbi Haim Asa attested to fact that she processed into St. Mary’s Church and that she represented St. Mary’s and St. Juliana Church in the Fullerton Ministeral Association.

Documentation shows that Rev. Lee requested permission to study to become a priest in 1998. Bishop Norman McFarland denied the request. She started a seven-year program with Bible Study Fellowship (BSF) in 1999. She was asked to leave by leaders of the program. “You know more that the instructors.” This statement was made because she insisted that JESUS was a Black Jew when the subject came up.

Epnot a priestess, one should ask them to come up with such an impressive record that has not been falsified. She will not deny the manifestations of GOD to receive a degree, money or a position.

The Catholic Church cannot dismiss facts. In 2007 they issued the most damaging evident against themselves when they falsified Rev. Brenda Lee’s church records. They issued a certificate claiming that she was baptized at St. Mary’s Church in Fullerton , California in 1989 and that she received the Sacrament of Confirmation in 1988.

The Catholic Church keeps meticulous records unless errors serve their purpose.

Rev. Lee was baptized in 1957 by Rev. Sapp at Union Baptist Church (now Union Baptist Missionary Church ) in Savannah , Georgia at the age of 7. She has worked 50 +years for GOD with no monetary compensation.

Ms. Betty Slater and Rev. Lee were the first Blacks to sing in the choir at Maple White Baptist Church in the 1960’s.

Rev. James Crafter of Evergreen Baptist Church was the first minister in Macon to allow the Catholic priestess in his pulpit.

Rev. James Goosby of First Baptist Church and Pastor Dr. Timothy French of Beulah Baptist Church have allowed her to be a co-celebrant at COMMUNION; she preached her first sermon inside a church at Grant Chapel- Pastor Marlene Gilbert in 2007. With gratitude, Rev Lee acknowledges Rev. David Clark of the Presbytrian Church of Dundee Scotland who accepted her in his pulpit as a Catholic priestess without reservation.

By using the elderly and a weak female (Rev. Lee) to united HIS CHURCH none can boast. Ministers were needed to complete the unification and throughout the world they have stepped outside the box and made history without fanfare or forethought. A New Era has begun in GOD’S CHURCH. Who could have orchestrated these events?

John Paul I, Father Michael Delae, Father Paul Maloney and Father Jude Herlihy have inspired her to die for GOD if necessary.

To her parents, Mrs. Agnes Slater and the Late James B. Slater, Ms. Betty Slater, Hills, and Hillicia Lee and a host of relatives and friends whom have been lifetime supporters she thanks them.

Last but not least, to her friend, and publisher Mr. Herbert Dennard who has risked everything to bring Maconites the truth on today’s religious news and the Georgia Informer staff she wishes them GOD’ SPEED and prays that Maconites will prove that they are worthy of them.

Happy 26th Anniversary to the Georgia Informer!