Vaccine Delivery
Country Programs and Partnerships A nurse in Accra, Ghana, prepares a vaccine that protects against multiple diseases. Ultimately, all of our vaccine-related work depends on strong delivery systems within countries. We therefore invest in partners whose programs strengthen and provide support for country immunization systems. Our partners include civil society organizations, the World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF, and the GAVI Alliance. One of our most important collaborations is with the GAVI Alliance, a global public-private partnership of scientists, health experts, government leaders, businesses, and philanthropic organizations whose goal is to save children’s lives and improve health through increased access to immunization in 73 of the world’s poorest countries. GAVI provides funding to buy vaccines for, and provide technical support to, countries with the greatest needs. Since 1999, the foundation has committed US$2.5 billion to GAVI. A child receiving a vaccination in Silte, Ethiopia. GAVI is helping countries introduce an array of vaccines, including vaccines against pneumococcal disease and rotavirus, the main causes of pneumonia and severe diarrhea, respectively. These are among the leading causes of child deaths in developing countries. GAVI also supports pilot projects to plan for the introduction of the HPV vaccine, which helps protect against cervical cancer, a leading cause of cancer-related mortality among women in developing countries. In addition to our commitments to GAVI, we make direct investments with partners in India, Nigeria, and Ethiopia, which together account for a significant proportion of the world’s unvaccinated and undervaccinated children and where we have strong relationships with governments and a wide range of other investments. Our efforts to support polio eradication are an integral part of our country-based approach in the remaining polio-endemic countries— Nigeria, Pakistan, and Afghanistan—as well as in countries that have experienced polio outbreaks.

Immunization Systems Health workers at a launch event for the MenAfriVac meningitis vaccine in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. (Photo © PATH / Gabriel Bienczycki) We work to strengthen country immunization systems by supporting the collection, analysis, and use of high-quality vaccine-related data, improving the measurement and evaluation of vaccination efforts, and developing new diagnostic tools to help health workers assess population immunity to disease. Another priority is strengthening vaccine-related supply chains and logistics. We support the development of new ways to help countries improve the storage, transportation, and distribution of vaccines. This is particularly crucial as countries prepare to deliver a greater volume of vaccines to a greater number of people. Many vaccines are temperature-sensitive and require special storage, transport, and handling to ensure that they maintain their potency. Workers at the Serum Institute of India, a major producer of affordable vaccines used in the developing world. In the area of routine immunization, we advocate for stronger, fully financed systems to deliver routine vaccines along with well-planned and well-run education campaigns. One example of how we work to strengthen immunization systems is in Bihar, India’s most densely populated state. We are building on successful efforts in Bihar to increase immunization coverage and are supporting programs to test and evaluate innovations such as technologies for vaccine registration, tracking, and mapping. We are also investing in new ways to generate demand for and awareness of immunizations among healthcare providers and families.

Vaccine Introduction and Market Dynamics To get the most promising new vaccines to the people who need them, we participate in innovative partnerships that span the continuum from discovery to development to delivery. For example, we supported a major partnership between PATH, WHO, the Serum Institute of India, and African governments to develop an affordable vaccine to prevent meningitis A. MenAfriVac is the first vaccine designed specifically for use in Africa, and within a year of its introduction it led to a dramatic drop in meningitis A infections. Promising vaccines to prevent malaria and dengue are currently in late-stage development and could have a major impact in the fight against those diseases. The first infant in India to receive a pentavalent vaccine introduced by the GAVI Alliance. (Photo © GAVI Alliance) We also invest in research and development to improve existing vaccines. Improvements include the use of new adjuvants that strengthen immune response and could reduce the amount of antigen needed per dose, thereby lowering the cost of immunizations. Other improvements reduce the number of doses required and make vaccines easier to administer. We also support research to simplify vaccine delivery through innovations such as needle-free delivery systems and heat-stabilized vaccines that don’t require refrigeration. Along with supply and demand, price is a critical element in the successful launch and sustainable use of any new vaccine. Without a clear idea of the demand for a vaccine and how it might be delivered, manufacturers have little incentive to invest in product development and manufacturing. We are addressing this challenge by working with private industry on innovative, market-based financing mechanisms to ensure that vaccines are developed at the lowest possible cost.