Curbelo & Deutch Host Historic Meeting of Bipartisan Climate Solutions Caucus Wednesday
Washington, D.C.—On Wednesday, April 20th, 2016 at 9am, Representatives Carlos Curbelo (FL-26) Ted Deutch (FL-21) will host the first session of the bipartisan Climate Solutions Caucus, a historic meeting of Democrats and Republicans gathering to discuss climate issues.



"The Bipartisan Climate Solutions Caucus is the first of its kind, and we anticipate the meeting held on Wednesday will feature a constructive dialogue that will lead to building consensus for responsible energy policies in the future,” said Rep. Curbelo. “I am proud to take a leadership role for this historic event, and I am confident that this bi-partisan group of legislators will propose common sense solutions that Members of both parties will be able to support. From rising sea levels to ocean acidification, it is evident that South Florida is at the frontline of climate change. The clock is ticking and the time to act is now. I commend my fellow Co-Chair, Rep. Ted Deutch, for his dedication to this issue as well as the other members of the caucus for their support. Our work together will illustrate that we need to prepare for sea level rise and advocate for clean energy solutions that are market-driven.”

“This is an historic moment – Republicans and Democrats coming together to discuss climate issues,” said Rep. Deutch. “We are going to need all hands on deck to address climate change - Republicans and Democrats, traditional and renewable energy companies, scientists and interest groups. It's quite significant that an oil company is enthusiastically attending our meeting to discuss its plan for diversifying into renewable energy sources. From urban flooding during high tides to beach erosion to saltwater intrusion into our fresh water supply, climate change is a real and active threat, and the effects of climate change are already affecting the lives of millions of South Floridians and our country, regardless of political ideology. I want to thank my colleague and fellow Floridian Congressman Curbelo for his key role in forming this bipartisan caucus.”

During this meeting, the Director of International Affairs for Statoil will cover how the company is refocusing on cleaner and renewable sources of energy, and the New Zealand Minister for Climate Change Issues will discuss how a high-risk country is responding to the effects of climate change.

The current members of the Climate Solutions Caucus are Reps. Deutch, Curbelo, Gibson, Lowenthal, Ros-Lehtinen, Murphy (FL), Costello, Boyle, Fitzpatrick, and Delaney.