Police arrest Rashida Tlaib and Abdul El-Sayed at union rally
CLOSE Rashida Tlaib and Abdul El-Sayed arrested at rally in Detroit, Tuesday, October 2, 2018. Detroit Free Press

Buy Photo Congressional candidate Rashida Tlaib joins 'Fight For $15' and striking McDonalds employees, as she is arrested in front of McDonalds on Woodward Avenue on Tuesday, Oct. 2, 2018 during a protest. (Photo: Mandi Wright, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

Two Democratic politicians were among those arrested on Tuesday morning at a "Fight for $15" protest for higher wages and union rights on Woodward Avenue.

Workers from local McDonald's franchises, the airport and hospitals joined the lawmakers for a march down Woodward Avenue then gathered outside the McDonald's on Woodward not far from Wayne State University. Several protesters briefly blocked the street before moving onto the sidewalk at police commands, while others moved to set up a table on the street.

A small group of protesters, including congressional candidate Rashida Tlaib and former candidate for governor Abdul El-Sayed, remained seated at the table. They were arrested by Detroit and Wayne State police, alongside 16 others, for disorderly conduct.

"I ask all of you to demand to union organize — that's the most American thing you can do today," Tlaib told the crowd before the arrests began.

Buy Photo Abdul El-Sayed is escorted by police in handcuffs as he is arrested while protesting with members of 'Fight For $15' and striking McDonalds employees in front of McDonalds on Woodward Avenue Tuesday, Oct. 2, 2018. (Photo: Mandi Wright, Detroit Free Press)

Read more:

Jones' decision to fill Conyers' seat could hinge on ethics panel ruling

Amazon raises minimum wage to $15 for all workers, including Michigan

Brittany Williamson, 24, who has worked at various Detroit McDonald's for more than three years, also was arrested. Williamson works two to three fast-food jobs at a time to make ends meet.

Workers need more security and protection when emergencies or other circumstances roll around, she said.

"If we had a union, it would really save us a lot of trouble," Williamson said.

The protest followed one Tuesday morning in Flint where eight people were injured after being struck by a pickup as they marched outside another fast-food restaurant. Flint Police Chief Tim Johnson said he doesn’t believe the crash was intentional and that the driver “seemed pretty shaken up” afterward.

Both protests were organized by Fight for $15, a national movement seeking to increase the minimum wage to $15 an hour for fast food, child care, airlines and other workers. The group also wants the right to start unions or join existing ones.

Walkouts are planned in Milwaukee on Wednesday and Chicago on Thursday. On Thursday, higher education workers are expected to join fast-food workers in a protest in Miami.

“I don’t know about you all, but something happens to the soul when you say ‘shut it down,’ ” Tlaib, 42, told the crowd in Detroit. “Because you don’t deserve anything less than better worker conditions, to not having to live in poverty. You deserve $15. These corporations are making billions off of our backs. Don’t you ever think that you’re not allowed to ask for more.”

She and 17 other protesters were later handcuffed or zip-tied and led away by police to a waiting bus for processing at a detention center. They were expected to be ticketed later Tuesday and released, according to Deputy Police Chief Elvin Barren. They each face a misdemeanor disorderly conduct charge.

Democrat Gretchen Whitmer, who’s battling Republican Attorney General Bill Schuette for governor, took part in the Flint protest. She wasn’t injured in the predawn crash and a post on her Twitter account says she’s “incredibly sad that so many people were hurt.”

The Flint protesters had been walking along the street in the dark when some were struck. Johnson said the driver “acted like he didn’t see them.”

The injuries were not considered life-threatening.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: https://www.freep.com/story/news/politics/2018/10/02/rashida-tlaib-abdul-el-sayed-arrested/1499703002/