Dress Code
​​​​​​​

Educationally Appropriate Dress and Grooming

Any apparel, hair style, cosmetic or jewelry, even if not specifically mentioned below, which creates a safety concern, draws undue attention to the wearer, or tends to distract from the educational process is prohibited unless addressed elsewhere in this regulation.

Additionally, the following items are specifically prohibited:

Headwear, other than hats or caps, will not be allowed at school. Hats and/or caps must be removed in the classroom, cafeteria, or offices and worn in the appropriate manner. Baseball caps must be worn with bills facing forward.

Sunglasses are not to be worn in the classrooms, offices or other school facilities (unless prescribed by a physician.)

Shoes must be worn on campus and at school functions. All shoes must have heel coverage or straps. Flip-flops or backless shoes are not acceptable. Shoes with wheels, shoes with high heels or wedge heels (exceeding 1" at the back or the ball of the foot), combat boots, or shoes with steel toes are also not acceptable for school.

Underwear-type sleeveless shirts, tube tops, halter tops, spaghetti straps, sagging or bagging pants, pants that do not fit at the waist, any clothing that is more than one size larger than wearers size, or radically altered or frayed clothing are not acceptable.

Any see-through clothing, clothing that reveals a bare midriff or chest, or clothes that expose the body in a sexually suggestive manner shall not be worn.

Dresses, skirts, and shorts are acceptable as long as they are no more than 4 inches above the knee. Shorts are to be hemmed and not form fitting. Bike shorts (spandex) and form-fitting shorts are not acceptable.

Attire which may be used as a weapon may not be worn, including but not limited to steel toe boots, chains, items with spikes or studs, and other items deemed inappropriate by the principal or vice principal.

Fashion that draws undue attention to the wearer and detracts from the educational environment are not acceptable. This includes exotic clothing, body piercing, etc.

Grooming and personal decorations must be age-appropriate, non-distracting, and safe. Facial make-up, including lip-gloss, and artificial fingernails may not be worn. Earrings must be stud-type with no dangling parts or hoops. Earrings may be worn only on the earlobe and are limited to one earring per earlobe.

Body piercing (eyebrows, nose, lips, tongue, navel) is not acceptable. Tattoos are not to be worn or displayed.