Fundraiser by Brian Kolfage : We The People BUILT the Wall!
Our first wall segment is complete just outside of El Paso Texas! We are now working on segment #2. Please keep donating we the people will provide border security for our citizens since Democrats are failing to protect our communities from the flow of illegal drugs and criminals.The first wall we built is GROUND ZERO for illegal drugs, migrants and human sex slaves coming across, as you can see in the video. Your generous donations had a direct impact where the US Army Corps of Engineers said it was "Impossible to Build" and we were informed it would take roughly 2 years and $40 Million to complete had it been contracted out to the government to build. We completed it in a matter of days and for a FRACTION of the cost, literally moved a mountain to get it built and up a sharp incline at 31% grade. Proving once again "We The People" can unite in a time of crisis to get the job done!The one thing I've learned after losing three limbs in war is that, and just as so many said "you can't do that" or "building the wall privately is impossible" our team just proved them all wrong! It's now up to We The People to ensure that we protect this nation for future generations.In this small section of border US Border Patrol public affairs office stated that over 1000 people cross each day on average, and over $200k-$300k worth of illegal drugs enter America. This is a vital smuggling route for the most ruthless cartel, the Juarez Cartel. Who murdered thousands of innocent civilians and journalist and trafficked sex slaves across our border. WE ARE STOPPING THEM NOW!￼￼￼--------------------------------------------------------My name is Brian Kolfage and I'm a triple-amputee war veteran. I take the security of the American people very seriously which is how I find myself building wall on the southern border. If you are sick and tired of watching politicians in both parties obstructing President Trump's plan to build a wall on our southern border, then you've come to the right place. We The People are coming together to start building segments of Border wall wall on private property and the best part is, we're going to do it for a fraction of what it costs the government.To help me got the job done I've attracted a team of brilliant and accomplished Americans that includes Former White House Chief Strategist Steve Bannon and Kris Kobach who many people think will be President Trump's next choice to head the Department of Homeland Security (which oversees the Border Wall). It's an impressive group who I'm proud to be working with everyday to start getting your wall built. Even the New York Times had to report that President Trump gave our project his blessing.Doubters have been trying to convince the American people who want a wall and helped us come this far, that they'll never get the protection along the border that we promised. However, their efforts have failed once again. While they were trying to prevent our progress, we were several steps ahead of them in our extensive preparations to build the wall.You may have seen misleading stories that GoFundMe kicked us off their platform and refunded everyone's money. It's not true which is why you can still click to donate right here on this GoFundMe page. The total amount raised represents the total amount we've raised in pledges and contributions on GoFundMe and from off-platform sources like checks and transfers. ￼￼￼In a word, more. We are still calculating the cost of building on every piece of land that a private landowner would allow us to build your wall on and other land we could potentially acquire or build on. We currently have the resources to begin building several segments that will stretch across several miles of the border but our goal is to keep fighting until the ENTIRE border is secure. If we have to raise billions to get the job done, that's what we're going to do.One of the most rewarding parts of leading this project has been getting to know the Angel Families who have lost loved-ones at the hands of illegal aliens who had no business being here in the first place. Their stories are heart wrenching and they serve as potent reminder of what's at stake. It's time to put a stop to the open border carnage.If you are still debating whether or not to donate, I encourage you to watch this video below of We Build The Wall Board members and Angel Families Steve Ronnebeck and Mary Ann Mendoza.￼￼￼