Fundraiser by Jenny Sweeney : Help Baby Dakota and His Parents
Please help baby Dakota and his parents with medical bills!



"I don't know how I can do this without Bobby here to help!" The tears soaking Cristy's face were not the first she'd cried since her baby boy's complicated delivery on December 11th. She had been induced four days prior to his birth and struggled through 53 hours of labor. By the time he began to crown, not even Cristy's determination could overcome her exhaustion. The doctor told her to stop pushing.



We don't know why the doctor didn't elect to perform a c-section earlier on. We don't know if her decision to use suction during the final moments of Dakota's birth was a wise one. What we know is that immediately after delivery, he began suffering one seizure after another.



The small-town North Dakota hospital wasn't equipped to care for the newborn, so they life-flighted him to a hospital in the state's capital of Bismarck. His worried dad and even his exhausted mom left the hospital immediately and drove to Bismarck to be with their baby boy.



A neurologist discovered Dakota's skull was fractured and bleeding in the brain was soon detected. The doctors have since learned that the bleeding is coming from a place deeper in the brain than initially thought.



The good news amidst all of this heartache is that Dakota is showing himself to be a fighter! Today, instead of receiving sustenance through a feeding tube as he has been since birth, Dakota nursed (and nursed and nursed...!). This was the first time his mom was able to hold him.



The road ahead to health is long. It would help so much if his parents could stay together in Bismarck until Dakota can come home with them. That means time off work, the added expense of staying in a town far from home and family support--not to mention the cost of medical care and the life flight, which goes far above and beyond what their medical insurance provides.



Any financial help you can give this sweet, young family would be a tremendous blessing. As we learn more about Dakota's health, we will update this site, so you can keep Dakota, Cristy and Bobby in your thoughts and prayers.



Thank you,

Jenny Sweeney (Dakota's great-aunt), along with the rest of his family

Help spread the word! Share Tweet 215 shares on Facebook shares on Facebook