Fight to the Finish: Canadians in the Second World War, 1944-1945
I’ve just finished the second of Tim Cook ’s books on the role of Canadians in World War II. This review covers both volumes “The Necessary War: 1939–1943” and Fight to the Finish: Canadians in the Second World War, 1944-1945 Thru these books, I’ve gained a new appreciation of the part the Canadian fighters played. I had read on the Nazis, the holocaust, the Resistance, the generals and the politicians who called the shot but not on the soldiers who actually won the war. Some movies— “Memphis Belle” and “Saving Private Ryan” come to mind—have given me an inkling of what it was like at the front but those films always show us very circumscribed events. They do not begin to tell us what it must have been like to risk your life for years on end and see your friends blown to smithereens beside you. And none of these movies or books ever presents us the Canadian point of view.Last fall, my spouse and I went to the International Festival of Authors in Toronto. Tim Cook was on the panel of one of the presentations we attended. After the show, there was a singing session and Daniel bought the first book of the series “The Necessary War”. He finished it, wanted to continue on to the next one and told me that I would like it. I’m glad he did. These two books are necessary reading for all Canadians. I realized how little I knew about the Second World War. I could have told you some major events and could have made an attempt at sorting them in chronological order, but the result would have been a poor skeleton on which most of the bones would have been missing. These books filled the gap. Now I can say on which front the Canadians have battled and when. The author does a very good job by both showing us the big picture and by giving us the small details to remind us that the war was fought by human beings.The first book covers at length the Battle for the Atlantic. I had heard anecdotal stories of U-boat creeping up the St-Lawrence but knew nothing about the building of the Canadian fleet, the sacrifice of our navy to ensure a safe passage to cargo ships resupplying England and the lives lost in the cold Atlantic by both our marine (1,990) and the Merchant Navy (1,629).I remembered that Canadian had fought in Italy but I always saw that front as a comedy almost with the Italian playing the buffoons. I didn’t understand how the German defended every kilometre of land. I was as ignorant as Lady Astor (the first woman to sit as an MP in the British House of Common), who suggested that the soldiers who were in Italy had dodged their duty by not fighting in Normandy; I had never heard of our victory at Ortona and didn’t know that 5,399 Canadians were killed and 19,486 wounded during the Italian campaign.Everybody knows—or should know—that D-Day was on June 6, 1944, but very few people understand that the battle for Normandy lasted 77 days.And who, among civilians, have heard about the Battle of the Scheldt where the Canadian fought in Netherlands to open the port of Antwerp and free the starving Dutch to whom they are heroes to this day.Tim Cook, a military historian at the Canadian War Museum, combines amazing research with quotes taken from letters written by the soldiers at the front. With this book he gives a voice to those young men whose voice was silenced forever. He shows respect by always naming them in full, giving their rank and the unit in which they serve. He is a one man cheering section for the Canadian who fought bravely to preserve our liberty and rid the world of evil. He is never neutral but is overtly on the side of the sailors, the bomber crew and the infantrymen to whom we owe everything.His book doesn’t end with the peace treaty but follows the veterans thru the present time, regretting that not more has been done to remember their huge sacrifice. He is visibly angry about the poor treatment of the First Nations soldiers who were not informed of the many options open to them and on how the merchant seamen were cheated.These books left me with many regrets; that they were published too late for most veterans to read them; that I have been ungrateful all to the soldiers who, by their sacrifice, allowed me to lead a peaceful and safe life in a free country. To quote Major A. J. Hamilton, who served with the Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders, “...we worry whether our children are taught the price for the freedom they take for granted. “ I not forget and pay my dues by visiting Ottawa’s war museum this year.