Military Appreciation

Over the past 18 years, Golden Corral is proud of the U.S. military members who defend our country and our rights, and we honor them every year with a special thank you dinner at our Military Appreciation Night. As of 2018, we have served over 5.4 million free meals to our active duty and retired military heroes. But our commitment does not stop there. Over the past 18 years, Golden Corral restaurants and their guests together have raised over $15 million dollars for Disabled American Veterans.

Military Appreciation Night FAQs

Q: What is the date for 2019?

A: Military Appreciation Night will be held on Monday, November 11th.

Q: Who is eligible for the free “thank you” dinner?

A: Any person who has served in the US Military (retirees, veterans, active duty, National Guard or Reserves).

Q: Why does Golden Corral provide this dinner?

A: Our Corporation is very proud of the men and women who are serving and who have served, and we are honored to offer this special night to congratulate them in person.

Q: Can I bring my family?

A: We know that spouses, children, mothers and fathers deserve a heart-felt thank you, too, for their own personal sacrifices here at home. Family and friends are welcome to come join the celebration for our military heroes; however, the free ‘thank you’ dinner is for the person who served. Other guests will pay the regular dinner menu pricing.

Q: Can I have a rain check for another night?

A: There are no rain checks for Military Appreciation Night. We hope you can arrange your schedule to join us.

Q: Can I have my free “thank you” meal as a take-out meal?

A: There are no take-out meals associated with this dinner as most veterans feel that this is a great opportunity to renew old friendships, make new friends, and simply enjoy the evening as Golden Corral’s special guest.

Q: How many meals has Golden Corral served over the past 17 years?

A: Golden Corral restaurants have served nearly 5.4 million free ‘thank you’ meals to our heroes in the military over the past 17 years.

Q: How much has Golden Corral donated to the Disabled American Veterans over the past 17 years?

A: Golden Corral restaurants and their guests have donated over $14 million dollars to the Disabled American Veterans organization in the past 17 years.