Patent US20140335527 - Systems and methods for mobile device analysis of nucleic acids and proteins
RELATED APPLICATION(S)

[0001] This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 61/790,354, filed on Mar. 15, 2013. The entire teachings of the above application(s) are incorporated herein by reference.

BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION

[0002] Detection and analysis of genetic material of a biological organism can be employed for pathogen identification, genotyping, biomarker identification, personalized medicine, companion diagnostics, drug monitoring, and pharmacogenetics. The identity of a species in a biological sample can be ascertained by comparing the nucleic acid present in the sample to the nucleic acid in a known reference sample. Before making this comparison, however, the nucleic acids must be extracted from the sample, amplified, and then detected. Typically, the extraction, amplification, and detection steps take place over the course of hours, days, or weeks in a laboratory or a hospital. For example, amplification usually involves the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as described U.S. Pat. Nos. 4,683,202 and 4,683,195. To amplify the nucleic acids using conventional PCR, the nucleic acids must be repeatedly heated and cooled in the presence of enzymes, nucleotides, primers, and buffers.

[0003] The existing methods and devices for extraction, amplification, and detection of nucleic acids are not typically robust enough to be performed in a mobile setting outside a specialized lab infrastructure. Extraction and amplification alone takes hours if not days, depending on the type of organism, the length of the nucleic acid strand, and the number of cycles. In addition, commercially available devices and methods require skilled labor, running water, and electricity. Furthermore, the temperature, pH, and buffer ingredients must be tightly controlled. Contaminants can inhibit or interfere with the nucleic acid polymerase enzymes used in replication, reducing the efficiency and fidelity of the amplification process. Similar restrictions apply to conventional techniques for extracting and detecting nucleic acids. Therefore, the need exists for a compact, robust, rapid and easy-to-use device and method for detecting and identifying nucleic acids.

SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

[0004] The present invention relates to a system and method for rapid analysis, quantification, and identification of nucleic acids or proteins.

[0005] The present invention provides a portable or mobile or point-of-care (POC) system for extracting, optionally amplifying, and detecting nucleic acids or proteins using a compact integrated chip in combination with a portable system or mobile device for analyzing detected signals, and comparing and distributing the results via a wireless network. Swappable modules may be used for one or more of extraction, amplification and detection.

[0006] The present invention possesses a number of advantages. The present invention is faster, cheaper, and more precise than existing methods for detecting and analyzing nucleic acids or, in some embodiments, proteins. Unlike conventional methods, which take hours to weeks to characterize or analyze even large samples, the present invention typically produces measurements in under an hour, or under half an hour, for example, in minutes. The present invention is sensitive enough to detect nucleic acids extracted from a sample that contains a few cells (see Exemplification). Unlike the standard diagnostic devices and methods which require bench top equipment in a laboratory or a clinic, highly trained technicians, electricity, water, and, often, refrigeration of samples and reagents, the present invention can be implemented in a portable or mobile device employing an optionally disposable compact integrated chip. Results may be distributed via one or more communications networks such as a wireless network and/or the Internet. The system of the present invention does not require skilled labor, and can work outside of hospital or lab infrastructure. The system of the present invention is robust to various environmental variables and can function at wide range of pH, temperatures, and, optionally, without refrigeration.

[0007] The present invention can be employed to detect and distinguish nucleic acid molecules or proteins from a single biological organism or other source or a plurality of organisms or sources. Not only can the present invention detect and analyze an unknown nucleic acid but the methodology is sensitive enough to distinguish between species within a genus, or to distinguish point mutations and/or biomarker sequences and/or disease susceptibility alleles. In the embodiments of the present invention that employ disposable integrated chips, there is also a significant cost cutting effect when compared to the cost of the existing diagnostic assays.

[0008] Furthermore, in the embodiments of the present invention that employ a non-thermal nucleic acid amplification processes disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 7,494,791 (the entire disclosure of which is hereby incorporated herein by reference), error rates of less than about 1×10−7 errors/base pair or better (e.g., less than 10−10 errors/base pair) can be achieved. Even with “difficult sequences” (a sequence on which a polymerase enzyme has the tendency to slip, make errors, or stop working; examples of difficult sequences include repeating sequences, poly-A sequences, GC-rich sequences, trinucleotide repeat sequences, etc.) error rates of less than 1×10−3 errors/base pair or better (e.g., less than 10−6 errors/base pair) can be achieved. The disclosed non-thermal nucleic acid amplification methods can be used to amplify sequences of up to 20,000 base pairs long, employing reagents that can survive more than 100 cycles of nucleic acid replication. Other isothermal methods of amplification may be used, for example a Loop Mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP) technique, such as those set forth in T. Notomi, et al., Nucleic Acids Research, 28, e63 (2000)); a Helicase-Dependent Amplification (HDA) technique, such as those set forth in Vincent M, Xu Y, Kong H. (2004), “Helicase-dependent isothermal DNA amplification,” EMBO Rep 5 (8): 795-800; a Strand Displacement Amplification (SDA) technique, such as those set forth in G. T. Walker, et. al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 392-396 (1992); the entire teachings of all of which references are hereby incorporated herein by reference. Bridge, rolling circle and any other methods of amplification (thermal or isothermal) may be used.

[0009] In one embodiment according to the invention, there is provided a system for rapid analysis of biological samples. The system comprises a mobile device that receives at least one integrated chip. The mobile device processes the integrated chip to analyze a biological sample loaded thereon. The mobile device and the integrated chip together are configured to perform at least one of manipulation and control of a molecule or a fluidic system on the integrated chip. The mobile device and integrated chip together are configured to precision control at least one parameter that governs at least one of a plurality of steps of the analysis of the biological sample to within plus or minus 10%, plus or minus 1%, plus or minus 0.1%, plus or minus 0.01%, plus or minus 0.001% or plus or minus 0.0001%.

[0010] In another embodiment according to the invention, there is provided a system for rapid analysis of biological samples. The system comprises a portable control assembly that receives at least one compact integrated chip. The integrated chip comprises an extraction module; optionally a nucleic acid amplification module, in fluid communication with the extraction module; and a biological sample detection module, in fluid communication with the nucleic acid amplification module or extraction module. The portable control assembly processes the integrated chip to analyze a biological sample loaded thereon by employing: an extraction control module; a nucleic acid amplification control module operably connected to the extraction control module; and a biological sample detection control module operably connected with the nucleic acid amplification module and the extraction module.

[0011] In another embodiment according to the invention, there is provided a system for rapid analysis of biological samples. The system comprises a portable control assembly that receives at least one compact integrated chip. The integrated chip comprises an injection port for loading a biological sample and, optionally, one or more reagents, onto the integrated chip; an extraction module; a nucleic acid amplification module, in fluid communication with the extraction module; and a detection module, in fluid communication with the nucleic acid amplification module. The portable assembly comprises an extraction control module, comprising a magnetic particles capturing means for capturing magnetic particles introduced into the biological sample loaded onto the integrated chip; a nucleic acid amplification control module operably connected to the extraction control module, said nucleic acid amplification means comprising a thermoelectric heating means for heating/cooling the nucleic acid amplification module of the integrated chip; and a detection control module operably connected with the nucleic acid amplification module and the nucleic acid extraction module. The detection control module comprises a fluorescence detection means for detecting nucleic acids or proteins; and a capillary electrophoresis (CE) control means operably connected to the fluorescence detection means, said CE control means further including a high voltage control unit for applying voltage across the nucleic acid detection module of the integrated chip, said voltage being sufficient for effecting separation of nucleic acids or proteins; and a fluid pressure generating means for moving the biological sample and/or nucleic acids through the integrated chip.

[0012] In another embodiment according to the invention, there is provided a method for rapid analysis of biological samples. The method comprises (1) providing at least one integrated chip, said integrated chip comprising: a nucleic acid extraction module; a nucleic acid amplification module, in fluid communication with the nucleic extraction module; and a nucleic acid detection module, in fluid communication with the nucleic acid amplification module, (2) loading the at least one biological sample onto the at least one integrated chip; (3) operably connecting a portable control assembly with at least one integrated chip, said portable control assembly comprising: a nucleic acid extraction control module; a nucleic acid amplification control module operably connected to the nucleic acid extraction control module; and a nucleic acid detection control module operably connected with the nucleic acid amplification module and the nucleic acid extraction module; and (4) activating the portable control assembly to effect extraction, amplification and detection of nucleic acid from the biological sample loaded onto said integrated chip.

[0013] In another embodiment according to the invention, there is provided a method for rapid analysis of biological samples. The method comprises (1) providing at least one integrated chip, said integrated chip comprising: a protein extraction module; and a protein detection module, in fluid communication with the protein extraction module, (2) loading the at least one biological sample onto the at least one integrated chip; (3) operably connecting a portable control assembly with at least one integrated chip, said portable control assembly comprising a protein extraction control module; and a protein detection control module operably connected with the protein extraction module; and (4) activating the portable control assembly to effect extraction and detection of protein from the biological sample loaded onto said integrated chip.

[0014] In another embodiment according to the invention, there is provided an integrated chip for rapid sequential extraction, amplification and separation of nucleic acid in a biological sample. The integrated chip comprises a housing having integrated therein microfluidic channels in sequential fluid communication with a nucleic acid extraction module, a nucleic acid amplification module and a nucleic acid separation module; at least one sample inlet port for injecting biological samples and reagents in fluid communication with the nucleic acid extraction module; wherein the nucleic acid extraction module comprises at least one extraction chamber for extracting nucleic acids from the biological samples, said extraction chamber connected to the sample inlet port by at least one sample transport channel; wherein the nucleic acid amplification module comprises at least one amplification chamber for amplifying nucleic acids, said nucleic acid amplification chamber connected to the extraction chamber by at least one nucleic acid transport channel; and wherein the nucleic acid separation module comprises at least one detection channel for separating and detecting the nucleic acids, said detection channel connected to the nucleic acid amplification chamber by at least one amplification product transport channel.

[0015] Embodiments can perform protein separation such as by electrophoresis.

[0016] Further related systems and methods are provided.

BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS [0017] The foregoing will be apparent from the following more particular description of example embodiments of the invention, as illustrated in the accompanying drawings in which like reference characters refer to the same parts throughout the different views. The drawings are not necessarily to scale, emphasis instead being placed upon illustrating embodiments of the present invention. [0018] FIG. 1 illustrates one embodiment of a portable assay or mobile system with a compact integrated chip for detecting and analyzing nucleic acids. [0019] FIG. 1A illustrates an embodiment of a modular design of a portable assay system in communication with a genomic database. [0020] FIG. 2 is an illustration of an embodiment of a modular design of the system and device of the present invention. [0021] FIG. 2A illustrates an embodiment of a modular design of an extraction control module. [0022] FIG. 2B illustrates an embodiment of a modular design of an amplification control module. [0023] FIG. 3 is an illustrative example of a flow chart of a method for detecting and analyzing nucleic acids. [0024] FIG. 4 is an illustration of an embodiment of a compact integrated chip that can be used with the device and method of the present invention. [0025] FIG. 5 illustrates exemplary passive plugs for controlling fluid flow on an integrated chip. [0026] FIGS. 6A and 6B illustrate an exemplary electromagnetically controllable valve and a method for controlling fluid flow through the integrated chip employed by the present invention. [0027] FIGS. 7A and 7B illustrate an exemplary method for controlling fluid flow to and from on-chip wells. [0028] FIGS. 8A-8C illustrate an exemplary arrangement of the channels and methods of injecting a sample into the channels employed for capillary electrophoresis by an embodiment of the present invention. [0029] FIG. 9A illustrates an embodiment of a modular design of an fluorescence detection control module. [0030] FIG. 9B illustrates an exemplary system and method for detecting fluorescence signals generated in the nucleic acid detection module of the integrated chip. [0031] FIG. 10 is a flow chart that illustrates the utility of the present application in various applications. [0032] FIG. 11 illustrates a hardware module for use with compact integrated chips in accordance with embodiments of the present invention. [0033] FIG. 12 illustrates a Peltier heating device for use with the hardware module of FIG. 11 . [0034] FIG. 13 illustrates a detection system for use with a compact integrated chip. [0035] FIG. 14 illustrates a hardware system for use with compact integrated chips in accordance with embodiments of the present invention. [0036] FIGS. 15A and 15B illustrate different views of a microfluidic valve of a compact integrated chip based on an inflatable encapsulated elastic membrane. [0037] FIGS. 16A-16F illustrate different views of a microfluidic valve assembly of a compact integrated chip based on inflatable encapsulated elastic membranes. [0038] FIGS. 17A , 17B, 17C, and 17D show the results of the on-chip DNA purification and amplification. [0039] FIG. 18 is a depiction of an agarose gel-based electrophoresis verifying of the size of the resulting PCR product. [0040] FIGS. 19A , 19B, 19C, and 19D show the results of the on-chip DNA purification and amplification. [0041] FIG. 20 is a depiction of an agarose gel-based electrophoresis verifying of the size of the resulting PCR product.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION

[0042] A description of example embodiments of the invention follows.

[0043] As used herein, the term “fluid” refers to both a gas or a liquid.

[0044] As used herein, the term “microfluidic” refers to a device and/or methods operating at or with relating to volumes of fluids from 0.1-100 μL, and preferably between 1 and 10 μL.

[0045] As used herein, the term “fluidic system” means a system flowing fluid, for example flowing fluid in at least one channel, at least one chamber, at least one well and/or at least one port, each of which may be microfluidic.

[0046] As used herein, “nucleic acid” refers to a macromolecule composed of chains (a polymer or an oligomer) of monomeric nucleotide. The most common nucleic acids are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). It is further understood that the present invention can be used to detect and identify samples containing artificial nucleic acids such as peptide nucleic acid (PNA), morpholine, locked nucleic acid (LNA), glycol nucleic acid (GNA) and threose nucleic acid (TNA), among others. In various embodiments of the present invention, nucleic acids can be derived from a variety of sources such as bacteria, virus, humans, and animals, as well as sources such as plants and fungi, among others. The source can be a pathogen. Alternatively, the source can be a synthetic organism. Nucleic acids can be genomic, extrachromosomal or synthetic. Where the term “DNA” is used herein, one of ordinary skill in the art will appreciate that the methods and devices described herein can be applied to other nucleic acids, for example, RNA or those mentioned above. In addition, the terms “nucleic acid,” “polynucleotide,” and “oligonucleotide” are used herein to include a polymeric form of nucleotides of any length, including, but not limited to, ribonucleotides or deoxyribonucleotides. There is no intended distinction in length between these terms. Further, these terms refer only to the primary structure of the molecule. Thus, in certain embodiments these terms can include triple-, double- and single-stranded DNA, as well as triple-, double- and single-stranded RNA. They also include modifications, such as by methylation and/or by capping, and unmodified forms of the polynucleotide. More particularly, the terms “nucleic acid,” “polynucleotide,” and “oligonucleotide,” include polydeoxyribonucleotides (containing 2-deoxy-D-ribose), polyribonucleotides (containing D-ribose), any other type of polynucleotide which is an N- or C-glycoside of a purine or pyrimidine base, and other polymers containing nonnucleotidic backbones, for example, polyamide (e.g., peptide nucleic acids (PNAs)) and polymorpholino (commercially available from Anti-Virals, Inc., Corvallis, Oreg., U.S.A., as Neugene) polymers, and other synthetic sequence-specific nucleic acid polymers providing that the polymers contain nucleobases in a configuration which allows for base pairing and base stacking, such as is found in DNA and RNA.

[0047] As used herein, a “protein” is a biological molecule consisting of one or more chains of amino acids. Proteins differ from one another primarily in their sequence of amino acids, which is dictated by the nucleotide sequence of the encoding gene. A peptide is a single linear polymer chain of two or more amino acids bonded together by peptide bonds between the carboxyl and amino groups of adjacent amino acid residues; multiple peptides in a chain can be referred to as a polypeptide. Proteins can be made of one or more polypeptides. Shortly after or even during synthesis, the residues in a protein are often chemically modified by posttranslational modification, which alters the physical and chemical properties, folding, stability, activity, and ultimately, the function of the proteins. Sometimes proteins have non-peptide groups attached, which can be called prosthetic groups or cofactors.

[0048] As used herein, a “biological sample” includes a sample of any material that contains nucleic acids and/or proteins that can be extracted, analyzed and detected. Preferably, the material is in liquid or gaseous form, or can be dissolved or suspended in a liquid or gas, or can be liquefied or turned into a gaseous form, or otherwise prepared for analysis by the device and method of the present invention. Solid samples like stool or soil samples could be placed in water and then loaded onto the chip, for example. Aerosol biological samples may be used. The “biological sample” may be, or may be part of, a tissue sample, a biofluid sample, an environmental sample or another type of sample. Preferably, the biological sample is derived from a biological fluid, such as but not limited to blood, saliva, semen, urine, amniotic fluid, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, vitreous fluid, gastric fluid, nasopharyngeal aspirate and/or lymph. The biological sample can also be a material or fluid that is contaminated with a nucleic acid and/or protein source. The biological sample can be a tissue sample, a water sample, an air sample, a food sample or a crop sample. Preferably, a biological sample analysis detects any one or more of water-born pathogen, air-born pathogen, food-born pathogen or crop-born pathogen.

[0049] As used herein, the term “biological analysis” refers to the implementation of biochemical assays in which samples such as cells, nucleic acid, proteins or other biological molecules are used as starting material to extract information for the purposes of diagnosis, species identification, distinguish point mutations and/or disease susceptibility alleles, qualitative analysis, quantitative analysis (e.g., to ascertain viral load), and for other purposes taught herein. An example of an application of this technology is pathogen detection by extracting genetic information from cells. As used herein, the “steps” of a “biological analysis” refers to the steps of extraction, optionally amplification, and detection.

General Description

[0050] As one skilled in the art will appreciate, the present invention can include a hardware portion, a software portion and/or a combination of software and hardware portions. In one embodiment, the present invention is a portable processing means that interfaces with a compact integrated chip to, in one embodiment, extract, amplify, and detect nucleic acids in a biological sample according to computer-useable instructions embodied on a computer-readable medium, or in another embodiment to separate proteins such as by electrophoresis. The system may use swappable modules, as discussed further below in connection with FIG. 2 .

[0051] As used herein, the term “compact” refers to a microfluidic device layout design that minimizes space used by the fluid channels, chambers, wells and ports, as discussed below, such as achieved, for example, by a microfluidic device layout. In one embodiment, the use of intersecting fluid channels and shared wells exemplifies a compact design. As used herein, the term “integrated” refers to a microfluidic device layout design in which fluid channels, chambers, wells and ports used for various purposes are assembled on/in the same microfluidic device. For example, the embodiment of the chip shown in FIG. 4 comprises nucleic acid extraction chambers used for nucleic acid extraction, nucleic acid amplification chambers, used for nucleic acid amplification, and detection channels used for separating and detecting nucleic acids. Although the chambers and channels discussed in the preceding sentence are specified in the plural, it should be appreciated that they could be “at least one” such chamber or channel. In addition, it should be appreciated that as used herein, one or more “modules” may share a common chamber, for example one or more of an extraction, amplification and detection modules may share one or more common chambers. As used herein, the term “portable” refers to a system or device or mobile device that can be easily carried or conveyed by hand by a person. As used herein, the term “mobile device” refers to a small portable device, typically having a display screen with touch input and/or a miniature keyboard and weighing less than about 10 kg, including for example a smart phone, tablet, laptop or other portable medical device.

[0052] The system can store the indications pertaining to the detected nucleic acid in the computer-readable medium or cloud and compare those indications to records stored in genomic databases, which may be stored in the computer-readable medium or in a remote location. In alternative embodiments, the information pertaining to a reference standard is stored in a computer-readable memory disposed within the system. In yet another embodiment, a nucleic acid standard is included in an integrated chip that can be employed with the system of the present invention.

[0053] The processor means may comprise, for example, a minicomputer, a microcomputer, a UNIX machine, a personal computer such as one with an Intel processor or similar device, microprocessor or other appropriate computer. It also usually comprises conventional computer components (not shown) such as a motherboard, a central processing unit (CPU), random access memory (RAM), disk drives, and peripherals such as a keyboard and a display. The RAM stores an operating system such as Windows CE or other operating system and appropriate software for processing signals pertaining to detected nucleic acids or proteins.

[0054] Portions of embodiments of the present invention described herein can be implemented using one or more computer systems. For example, the embodiments may be implemented using hardware, software or a combination thereof. When implemented in software, the software code can be stored on any form of non-transient computer-readable medium and loaded and executed on any suitable processor or collection of processors, whether provided in a single computer or distributed among multiple computers.

[0055] Further, it should be appreciated that a computer may be embodied in any of a number of forms, such as a laptop computer, a tablet computer, or a computer embedded in a device not generally regarded as a computer but with suitable processing capabilities, including a Personal Digital Assistant (PDA), a smart phone or any other suitable portable or mobile electronic device.

[0056] Also, a computer may have one or more input and output devices. These devices can be used, among other things, to present a user interface. Examples of output devices that can be used to provide a user interface include printers or display screens for visual presentation of output and speakers or other sound generating devices for audible presentation of output. Examples of input devices that can be used for a user interface include keyboards, and pointing devices, such as mice, touch pads, and digitizing tablets. As another example, a computer may receive input information through speech recognition or in other audible format.

[0057] Such computers may be interconnected by one or more networks in any suitable form, including as a local area network or a wide area network, such as an enterprise network or the Internet, Such networks may be based on any suitable technology and may operate according to any suitable protocol and may include wireless networks, wired networks or fiber optic networks.

[0058] Also, the various methods or processes outlined herein may be coded as software that is executable on one or more processors that employ any one of a variety of operating systems or platforms. Additionally, such software may be written using any of a number of suitable programming languages and/or programming or scripting tools, and also may be compiled as executable machine language code or intermediate code that is executed on a framework or virtual machine.

[0059] In this respect, at least a portion of the invention may be embodied as a computer readable medium (or multiple computer readable media) (e.g., a computer memory, one or more floppy discs, compact discs, optical discs, magnetic tapes, flash memories, circuit configurations in Field Programmable Gate Arrays or other semiconductor devices, or other tangible computer storage medium) encoded with one or more programs that, when executed on one or more computers or other processors, perform methods that implement the various embodiments of the invention discussed above. The computer readable medium or media can be transportable, such that the program or programs stored thereon can be loaded onto one or more different computers or other processors to implement various aspects of the present invention as discussed above.

[0060] In this respect, it should be appreciated that one implementation of the above-described embodiments comprises at least one computer-readable medium encoded with a computer program (e.g., a plurality of instructions), which, when executed on a processor, performs some or all of the above-discussed functions of these embodiments. As used herein, the term “computer-readable medium” encompasses only a non-transient computer-readable medium that can be considered to be a machine or a manufacture (i.e., article of manufacture). A computer-readable medium may be, for example, a tangible medium on which computer-readable information may be encoded or stored, a storage medium on which computer-readable information may be encoded or stored, and/or a non-transitory medium on which computer-readable information may be encoded or stored. Other non-exhaustive examples of computer-readable media include a computer memory (e.g., a ROM, a RAM, a flash memory, or other type of computer memory), a magnetic disc or tape, an optical disc, and/or other types of computer-readable media that can be considered to be a machine or a manufacture.

[0061] The terms “program” or “software” are used herein in a generic sense to refer to any type of computer code or set of computer-executable instructions that can be employed to program a computer or other processor to implement various aspects of the present invention as discussed above. Additionally, it should be appreciated that according to one aspect of this embodiment, one or more computer programs that when executed perform methods of the present invention need not reside on a single computer or processor, but may be distributed in a modular fashion amongst a number of different computers or processors to implement various aspects of the present invention.

[0062] Computer-executable instructions may be in many forms, such as program modules, executed by one or more computers or other devices. Generally, program modules include routines, programs, objects, components, data structures, etc. that perform particular tasks or implement particular abstract data types. Typically the functionality of the program modules may be combined or distributed as desired in various embodiments.

[0063] In one embodiment, the portable assay system 10 is about the size of a mobile wireless device, as shown in FIG. 1 . The user interfaces with the portable assay system 10 using a display means 12 (e.g., a liquid crystal display) and an input means 14 (e.g., a keyboard). To use the portable assay system 10, the user places a sample 22 on an integrated chip 20 (described in greater detail below), then inserts the integrated chip 20 into a slot 16 in the system itself.

[0064] Once the user loads the integrated chip 20, the portable assay system 10 extracts, amplifies, and detects nucleic acids in the sample 22 using methods described below, or depending upon other modules used such as electrophoresis. A microprocessor (not shown) processes the detected signal, which may be presented to the user via the display means 12 and transmitted to other users via a communication means 18. The communication means 18 may be used to transmit and receive modulated data signals pertaining to the biological sample 22.

[0065] The term “modulated data signal” refers to a propagated signal that has one or more of its characteristics set or changed to encode information in the signal. An exemplary modulated data signal includes a carrier wave or other transport mechanism. Communications media include any information-delivery media. By way of example but not limitation, communication media include: wired media, such as a wired network or direct-wired connection, and wireless media such as acoustic, infrared, radio, microwave, spread-spectrum, and other wireless-media technologies.

[0066] The present invention can include a genomic database for storing a plurality of genomic profiles or target biomarker sequences. In one embodiment, the present invention can include a signal profile of a single reference sample. The device of the present invention can also connect to a remotely located genomic database, such as those maintained by the National Institutes of Health, Center for Disease Control, etc. Such connection would facilitate tracking and coordinating responses to outbreaks of disease at widely dispersed analysis sites. Exemplary analysis sites include hospitals, border crossings, refugee camps, farms, quarantine zones, disaster sites, homeless shelters, nursing homes, meat-packing plants, and food processing centers. Those skilled in the art will appreciate still other analysis sites to which the present invention is applicable.

[0067] The present invention need not connect directly to genomic databases, although it may if need be. In other embodiments, the device can connect to genomic databases through various networks, public or private, such as Local-Area Networks (LANs), Wide-Area Networks (WANs), or the Internet. In one embodiment, genomic databases are accessible across a public network such as the Internet. Data is communicated in a secure means, such as via Secure Socket Layer (SSL) or secure copy.

[0068] In the embodiment shown in FIG. 1A , the portable assay system 10 communicates with a genomic database 5 via an internet connection 1 and a server 3. A processing means 15 in the portable assay system 10 transmits and receives data held in a memory 17 to and from the genomic database 5 using communication means 18, which may be an antenna, ethernet connection, or other suitable means for communicating. The processing means 15 controls the collection and processing of DNA data using the extraction, amplification, and detection modules 40, 50, 60. The processing means 15 stores the collected data in the memory 17 and presents it to the user via display means 12; it receives commands and queries from the user via an input means 12.

[0069] In some versions of the invention, the device is mobile, or POC and optionally hand-held.

Extraction-Amplification-Detection Modules

[0070] The portable assay system 10 ( FIG. 1 ) uses a combination of modules to extract, amplify, and detect nucleic acids from the sample 22 ( FIG. 1 ). The entire process, including any data processing 70 of the detected signal, typically takes under 20 minutes, as shown in FIG. 3 , and may take under 60 minutes, under 30 minutes, under 20 minutes, under 10 minutes, under 5 minutes or under 1 minute.

[0071] Each of the modules may comprise one of various implementations and combinations, as shown in FIG. 2 .

[0072] Biological sample 22 ( FIG. 1 ) is loaded onto integrated chip 20 ( FIG. 1 and FIG. 4 ). The loading of the biological sample can be accomplished manually, through sample inlet port 100 ( FIG. 4 ) or through an automated loading means within the portable system 10. For example, the inlet port 100 can be loaded with a manually or automatically operated loading device, such as a pipette. Alternatively, in embodiments destined for field use, the inlet port 100 can be loaded directly with a swab or a pricked finger by pressing the pricked finger onto inlet port 100. Capillary action causes blood to flow from the prick to into the inlet port 100.

[0073] Nucleic acids are extracted in the nucleic acid extraction module 25 of the integrated chip 20 ( FIG. 4 ) under the control of the nucleic acid extraction control module 40 ( FIGS. 2 and 3 ). For example, and referring to FIG. 2 , a nucleic acid extraction control module 40 can comprise any of the suitable means for implementing the methods listed below or any other suitable means for extracting nucleic acids from biological samples: chemical extraction (WO 2005/05073691), ultrasonication (WO 1999/9933559), mechanical shearing, including microfabricated protrusions disposed on the integrated chip (U.S. Pat. No. 5,635,358 and WO 2006/06029387), thermal means of disrupting cell membranes (see, e.g. WO 2005/05011967), electroporation, including means for applying variable voltage to biological sample loaded onto the integrated chip, said voltage sufficient to disrupt cells in the biological sample (U.S. Pat. App. Pub. No. US 2004/6783647), silica beads, optionally having a nucleic acid probe attached thereto, optionally, covalently (WO 2005/05073691 and WO 2003/03104774), or magnetic beads having a nucleic acid probe attached thereto, optionally, covalently (U.S. Pat. App. Pub. No. US 2002/6344326). All of the references listed above are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety. Preferably, in the embodiment in which magnetic beads are used, a magnetic particle capturing means, such as a magnet, is included in the nucleic acid extraction module 40.

[0074] In one embodiment, magnetic beads can have a nucleic acid probe attached thereto, optionally, covalently. In this embodiment, a small electromagnet may be used to control the magnetic beads in the extraction module. Magnetic beads that can be employed are any of the commercially available magnetic beads nucleic acid purification kits available from such vendors as Agencourt Bioscience, Cosmo Bio Co., Ltd. Invitek GmbH, Polysciences, Inc., Roche Applied Science, B-Bridge International, Dynal Biotech, Novagen, or Promega. The use of magnetic beads for DNA purification is described, for example in Caldarelli-Stefano et al., “Use of magnetic beads for tissue DNA extraction and IS6110 Mycobacterium tuberculosis PCR”, Mol. Pathol. 1999 June; 52(3): 158-160.

[0075] As shown in FIG. 2A , the extraction control module 40 can include a control unit 250, a power source 252, and an electromagnet 254. Upon instruction from the extraction control module 40, the control unit 250 applies power from the power source 252 to the electromagnet 254, applying a magnetic field (not shown) to the extraction module 25. This causes magnetic beads (not shown) in the extraction module 25 to cluster along the interior wall of the extraction chamber (not shown) in the extraction module 25. The control unit 250 releases the magnetic beads by deactivating the power source 252, which causes the electromagnet 254 to stop applying the magnetic field.

[0076] The extracted nucleic acids can be amplified within the nucleic acid amplification module 27 of the integrated chip 20 ( FIG. 4 ) under the control of the nucleic acid amplification control module 50 ( FIGS. 2 and 3 ). Amplification can be accomplished using any suitable amplification technique, including conventional PCR techniques disclosed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 4,683,202 and 4,683,195, both of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety. The nucleic acids may also be amplified using isothermal techniques, such as the technique taught in U.S. Pat. No. 7,494,791, incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

[0077] In some embodiments, nucleic acid amplification includes reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).

[0078] Referring to FIG. 2 , the nucleic acid amplification control module 50 can comprise any of a suitable means for implementing nucleic acid amplification (i.e. increase in the number of nucleic acid template copies). Amplification can be either linear or exponential. In one embodiment, module 50 includes a means for well-based nucleic acid amplification. As shown in FIG. 2B , such means can include a thermoelectric heating means 201 for heating/cooling a nucleic acid amplification module 27 of the integrated chip 20. Examples of the thermoelectric heating means 201 for heating/cooling of the nucleic acid amplification module of the integrated chip include Peltier devices (WO 1998/9850147, incorporated herein by reference in its entirety) and thin-films-based devices. In other embodiments, the means for heating the nucleic acid amplification module of the integrated chip (see FIG. 4 , element 25) can include infrared heating means (WO 1996/9641864, incorporated herein by reference in its entirety) or microwave radiation heating means.

[0079] As shown in FIG. 2B , the thermoelectric heating means 201 can include a heating/cooling element 203, a temperature sensor 205, a processing unit 207, a power control unit 209, and a power source 211. Upon instruction from the amplification control module 50, the processing unit 207 initiates heating/cooling by directing the power control unit 209 to supply power from the power source 211 to the heating/cooling element 203. The processing unit 207 monitors the temperature of the heating/controlling element 203 by means of a temperature sensor 205 and adjusts its instructions to the power control unit 209 as needed to maintain the desired temperature for the amplification module 27.

[0080] In another embodiment, the module 50 (see FIGS. 2 and 3 ) includes a means for fluid-based nucleic acid amplification (see, e.g. U.S. Pat. No. 7,041,481 incorporated herein by reference in its entirety). Such means can include a fluid flow generating means for generating a flow of buffers through the nucleic acid amplification module of the integrated chip, said fluid flow generating means operably connected to a temperature controlling means for controlling the temperature of the nucleic acid amplification module of the integrated chip.

[0081] In other embodiments, the module 50 (see FIGS. 2 and 3 ) includes a means for a real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) control means for effecting nucleic acid amplification (see, e.g., U.S. Pat. No. 7,315,376, incorporated herein by reference in its entirety).

[0082] In other embodiments, the module 50 (see FIGS. 2 and 3 ) comprises a means for applying controlled tension to nucleic acid strands within the nucleic acid amplification module of the integrated chip (see FIG. 4 , element 25). Detailed description of such means is provided in U.S. Pat. No. 7,494,791, incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

[0083] As used herein, the term “tension”, when used in the context of nucleic acid amplification, processing and/or detection, refers to an alternative to thermal cycling or thermal denaturation of double-stranded nucleic acid or to a non-thermally driven process of nucleic acid amplification or denaturation or annealing or primer extension. Application of “tension” to nucleic acids is a result of applying a physical force, other than derived solely from thermal energy, to nucleic acid strands. Tension can be “precision controlled” (as defined elsewhere herein), and/or adjustably controlled and/or variable.

[0084] The precision controlled tension can be mechanical tension, hydrodynamic tension, electromagnetic tension or a combination thereof. Furthermore, in some embodiments, the means for applying controlled tension to the nucleic acid strands are configured to operate isothermally. As used herein in the context of nucleic acid amplification, processing and detection, the term “isothermal” refers to a method of nucleic acid amplification in which no thermal cycling is necessary, and, preferably, a process of amplification all steps of which can be performed at substantially the same temperature.

[0085] The embodiments that employ the means for controlled tension to nucleic acid strands within the nucleic acid amplification module of the integrated chip (see FIG. 4 , element 25) have important advantages over the means for conventional (thermocycling methods) of nucleic acid amplification. These advantages include superior accuracy in general, and when amplifying “difficult” sequences (e.g., GC-rich sequences) in particular, length of amplified sequences, reaction yield, and reaction speed (overall time of the amplification reaction). Other important advantages include higher amplification efficiency and ability to improve fidelity of amplification, for example by inducing proofreading exonuclease activity through use of tension (see teachings of U.S. Pat. No. 7,494,791, the entire teachings of which are incorporated herein by reference).

[0086] The embodiments employing means for applying controlled tension to nucleic acid strands include a mechanism for applying a variable and controlled amount of tension to the nucleic acid molecules retained within the nucleic acid amplification module of the integrated chip (see FIG. 4 , element 25). Such a mechanism can comprise a first surface and a second surface with means for anchoring nucleic acid molecules thereon, wherein said first and second surfaces are configured for moving relative to each other. Alternatively, such a mechanism can comprise at least one surface with means for anchoring nucleic acid molecules thereon, the device further comprising a mechanism for providing a controlled and variable fluid flow over said nucleic acid molecules. In yet another embodiment, such a mechanism can comprise at least one surface with means for anchoring nucleic acid molecules thereon further comprises passages for fluid flow distributed between the means for anchoring said nucleic acid molecules. In other embodiments, such a mechanism can comprise mechanism for providing a controlled and variable fluid flow over said nucleic acid molecules configured to create a velocity gradient in laminar fluid flow. Alternatively, such a mechanism can comprise fluid flow channels configured to provide a velocity gradient in laminar fluid flow, a stagnation point within a fluid flow, counter propagating fluid flows, or a combination of these. In other embodiments, such a mechanism can comprise an array of optical, electrical, or magnetic manipulators (e.g., optical tweezers, individually controllable magnetic beads, etc.) configured to manipulate particles bound to the nucleic acid molecules. The means for retention of nucleic acids within the nucleic acid amplification module of the integrated chip (see FIG. 4 , element 25) can include activatable primers comprising complexing groups for immobilizing extension products obtained during nucleic acid amplification. Alternatively, nucleic acid polymerases can be immobilized or otherwise retained on the surface of the integrated chip 20.

[0087] The amplified nucleic acids are detected in the nucleic acid detection module 29 of the integrated chip 20 ( FIG. 4 ) under the control of the nucleic acid detection control module 60 ( FIGS. 2 and 3 ).

[0088] In various embodiments, module 60 can comprise a fluorescence or electro-optic detection means 950 for detecting nucleic acids as shown in FIG. 9A . The fluorescence detection means 950 can include an emitter 952 such as a light-emitting diode and/or a laser diode, a data acquisition device 954 such as a photodetector, photo-multiplier tube (PMT) or a charge-couple device (CCD), and a processing unit 956 for storing and processing the acquired data. In one embodiment, the emitter 952 excites the sample with emitted radiation 960 to produce a fluorescence signal 962 sensed by the data acquisition device 954. In the embodiment shown in FIG. 9A , the emitted radiation 960 illuminates the detection module 29 in a transmission geometry, although it should be understood that reflection and other geometries may be used as well. The data acquisition device 954 transduces the fluorescence signal 962 into a modulated data signal 958 that the processing unit 956 detects and records.

[0089] The amplified nucleic acids may be separated and detected using capillary electrophoresis as disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6,261,431, incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. In some embodiments, module 60 can comprise a capillary electrophoresis (CE) control means for effecting separation of nucleic acids, said CE control means operably connected to the fluorescence detection means. The CE control means can further include a high voltage control unit for applying voltage across the nucleic acid detection module 60 of the integrated chip 20, said voltage being sufficient for effecting separation of nucleic acids.

[0090] Referring to FIG. 4 , in one embodiment, CE is performed in detection channels 112, which can be filled with an appropriate buffer and, optionally, pre-filled with a sieving matrix such as agarose, hydroxypropyl cellulose, or polyacrylamide, among others. In certain embodiments, the end user can fill the detection channels 112 ( FIG. 4 ) with a sieving matrix at a point of use.

[0091] In alternative embodiments, the nucleic acid detection control module 60 further comprises a hybridization microarray such as GeneChip® microarrays, available from Affimetrix, Santa Clara, Calif.

[0092] In one embodiment, the nucleic acid detection control module 60 comprises an electrochemical means for detecting nucleic acids. An example of an electrochemical means for detecting nucleic acids is provided in U.S. Pat. App. Pub. US 2008/0081329, incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. Briefly, such means implement a method for determining the presence or absence of a target substrate in a test sample. The means include an electrode having a conductive surface, and a probe that is bound to the conductive surface and is capable of binding to a target substrate. The conductive-surface bound probe is contacted with the test sample to form a surface-bound target complex. The surface-bound target complex further comprises a first redox complex. The surface-bound probe or the surface-bound target complex, if present, are contacted with a fluid medium comprising a second redox complex, wherein one of the first or the second redox complex is a redox transition metal complex that is capable of undergoing an oxidation-reduction reaction and the other of the first or the second redox complex is a redox-catalyst complex that is capable of catalyzing the oxidation-reduction reaction of the redox transition metal complex. The redox transition metal complex does not undergo any significant amount of oxidation-reduction reaction in the absence of the redox-catalyst complex. The oxidation-reduction reaction of the redox transition metal complex that is catalyzed by the redox-catalyst complex is detected.

[0093] In another embodiment, the nucleic acid detection control module 60 comprises an impedance-measuring means for detecting nucleic acids. An example of an impedance-measuring means for detecting nucleic acids is described, for example, in U.S. Pat. No. 7,169,556, incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. Briefly, the method comprises contacting a nucleic acid having a first portion and a second portion with a substrate having oligonucleotides attached thereto, the oligonucleotides being located between a pair of electrodes, the oligonucleotides having a sequence complementary to a first portion of the sequence of said nucleic acid, the contacting taking place under conditions effective to allow hybridization of the oligonucleotides on the substrate with said nucleic acid. After hybridization of a nucleic acid and an oligonucleotide has occurred, the nucleic acid bound to the substrate is contacted with a first type of conductive particles (e.g., metal beads), the conductive particles being made of a material which can conduct electricity, the conductive particles having one or more types of oligonucleotides attached thereto, at least one of the types of oligonucleotides having a sequence complementary to a second portion of the sequence of said nucleic acid, the contacting taking place under conditions effective to allow hybridization of the oligonucleotides on the conductive particles with the nucleic acid so as to form a test substrate having conductive particles complexed thereto. After the second hybridization has occurred, the test substrate is contacted with an aqueous salt solution having a salt concentration effective to sufficiently dehybridize and remove non-specifically bound conductive particles. Hybridization/dehybridization results in a detectable change in impedance between the electrodes resulting from the presence of specifically bound conductive particles.

[0094] In accordance with an embodiment of the invention, any one of many different possible techniques for extraction, amplification and detection may be used in combination; or indeed one or more of extraction, amplification and detection may be omitted altogether from the combination of extraction, amplification and detection. For example, in the modular system of FIG. 2 , any one of the possible types of modules shown under extraction module 40 may be used for extraction, or another type of extraction module; and such extraction module(s) 40 may be used in combination with any one of the possible types of modules shown under amplification module 50, or another type of amplification module; and further, such extraction module(s) 40 and amplification module(s) 50 may be used in combination with any one of the possible type of modules shown under detection module 60, or another type of detection module. Depending on the target to be detected, different combinations of such modules may be used. First, a biological sample such as blood, saliva, etc., may be used as the biological sample to be analyzed; or a solid sample (e.g. a stool sample), or an aerosol sample, may be used. In the extraction module 40, the target nucleic acid or protein is separated from the rest of the biological sample. Amplification may then occur in the amplification module 50. In another case, if the target is a protein, then it may be passed directly to the detection module 60, such as a capillary electrophoresis module, or any of the other detection modules shown in FIG. 2 , or another type of detection module, including, for example, a melting curve analysis module, a chemi-luminescence module, a quantum dot module, a module using nanoparticles such as gold nanoparticles, or a detection module based on the use of radiation. In another case, if the initial biological sample to be analyzed is a nucleic acid, then the extraction module 40 may not need to be used, and the sample can be sent directly to the detection module 60. For the amplification module 50, in addition to the types of modules shown in FIG. 2 , other possible modules to be used are a Loop Mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP) module, a Helicase-Dependent Amplification (HDA) module, a SDA (Strand Displacement Amplification) module or a bridge amplification module. A LAMP technique may be used such as those set forth in T. Notomi, et al., Nucleic Acids Research, 28, e63 (2000)); an HDA technique may be used such as those set forth in Vincent M, Xu Y, Kong H. (2004), “Helicase-dependent isothermal DNA amplification,” EMBO Rep 5 (8): 795-800; an SDA technique may be used such as those set forth in G. T. Walker, et. al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 392-396 (1992); the entire contents of all of which references are hereby incorporated herein by reference. In one particular embodiment, the portable assay system 10 comprises an extraction control module 40 configured to use magnetic beads for extraction of nucleic acids, an amplification control module 50 that uses thermocycling PCR methods employing a Peltier device, and a detection control module 60 that uses capillary electrophoresis and fluorescent signal detection to separate and detect nucleic acids.

[0095] In accordance with an embodiment of the invention, different integrated chips may be able to be analyzed by a single mobile device, with each of the different possible integrated chips implementing a different functionality that is recognized and performed by the single mobile device. For example, one chip may be used for analyzing nucleic acids, and another chip may be used in the same mobile device for analyzing proteins.

[0096] A diagram of a typical flow of material and data through the system of the present invention, such as the modular system depicted in FIG. 2 , is shown in FIG. 3 . The extraction, amplification, and detection modules 40, 50, 60 typically run for about 4 minutes each, compared to hours to weeks using conventional techniques. In embodiments according to the invention, the detection may occur in less than 2 hours, less than 1 hour, less than 30 minutes, less than 1 minute or less than 1 second from commencing analysis of the sample. In an embodiment, the integrated chip 20 that houses the extraction, amplification, and detection modules 40, 50, 60 typically weighs about 35 g, whereas the application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) used to process the detected signal weighs about 25 g, bringing the total cartridge weight to about 60 g. The modules are located on the integrated chip and controlled by corresponding control modules (not shown) in the portable assay system 10.

[0097] Likewise, a Peltier device or thin film heater can be used to heat and cool the nucleic acid amplification chamber 108 ( FIG. 4 ), while a thermocouple monitors the temperature of the chamber 108. The capillary electrophoresis process may be controlled by a detection control module that controls the strength and persistence of an electric field applied across the channels used for capillary electrophoresis.

[0098] In some embodiments, the system 10 ( FIG. 1 ) can include a fluid pressure generating means for moving a biological sample and/or nucleic acids through the integrated chip. Fluid pressure can be generated by peristaltic pumps, piston pumps or any other suitable means. Alternatively, pressure may be applied to the microfluidic channels in the chip by means of a hand-pumped syringe coupled to an appropriate inlet port, e.g., sample inlet port 100, reagent addition port 108, sample well 120, buffer well 116, or buffer waste well 114 ( FIG. 4 ).

[0099] Means for controlling valves (such as valves shown in more detail in FIGS. 7 and 8A and 8B and discussed below) can be incorporated into the system 10 ( FIG. 1 ). The valves control the flow of fluid between the different modules and along the various transport channels. Any number of valve technologies may used, including passive plug valves, mechanically actuated valves, electromagnetically actuated valves, ferrofluidic valves, pneumatic valves, or any other suitable valves.

[0100] In some embodiments, the system 10 ( FIG. 1 ) comprises a data processing means for storing, classifying, quantifying and transferring data acquired by analyzing the biological sample. The data processing means can include a means for wireless data transfer.

[0101] In certain embodiments, the signal intensity versus time may be analyzed to give an indication of the types and quantities of the nucleic acid species present in the biological sample 22 ( FIG. 1 ). For example, plotting the detected signal against a signal produced by a reference sample allows the user to determine whether or not pathogens present in the reference sample are present in the sample under test, as identical pathogens will produce signal peaks at the same moment in time (given the same analysis conditions). The data processing means further include a viral load computing means for computing viral loads (e.g., by integrating an area under a curve indicating the fluorescence signal as a function of time).

[0102] In other embodiments, the system 10 further comprises a data displaying means for outputting data.

[0103] The portable assay system 10 interfaces with the integrated chip 20 through electrical, thermal, and mechanical interfaces. Clamps and/or catches hold the chip in place with sufficient steadiness to ensure that vibrations do not cause electrodes, detectors (such as photodetectors), or heater to become misaligned. A heater (and optionally a cooling element like an inkjet cooler) (not shown) positioned under, above or on the amplification control module 40 heats and/or cools certain sections of the chip, as described below. Similarly, electrodes positioned near the detection control module 60 can be used to control the separation and flow of fluid through the chip, as described below. Because the chip 20 is transparent, electromagnetic beams, such as infrared or electromagnetic beams for heating or optical beams for interrogating fluorescent tags, can be used to probe wells, chambers, and channels in the chip 20.

Integrated Chip

[0104] While the description below refers to specific embodiments of the integrated chip 20 ( FIG. 1 and FIG. 4 ), it is understood that other chip designs can be employed with the portable assembly system 10 ( FIG. 1 ) of the present invention.

[0105] In one embodiment, the present invention is a compact integrated chip for use with a system for rapid analysis of biological samples.

[0106] The integrated chip 20 may be formed of glass, any plastic with good optical properties including but not limited to, Polyethylene, Polypropylene, Poly(Urethane-Imide), poly(tetrafluoroethylene), polycarbonate, Cyclic Olefin Copolymer (COC), polyamides, Cyclic Olefin Polymer (COP), poly(methyl methacrylate), polyacrylamide, polystyrene, PMMA, or any other suitable material or combination of materials.

[0107] The integrated chip comprises at least one sample inlet port for injecting biological samples and reagents; a nucleic acid extraction module, comprising at least one extraction chamber for extracting nucleic acids from the biological samples, said extraction chamber connected to the sample inlet port by at least one sample transport channel; a nucleic acid amplification module, comprising at least one amplification chamber for amplifying nucleic acids, said nucleic acid amplification chamber connected to the extraction chamber by at least one nucleic acid transport channel; and a nucleic acid detection module, comprising at least one detection channel for separating and detecting the nucleic acids, said detection channel connected to nucleic acid amplification chamber by at least one amplification product transport channel. Preferably, the at least one sample inlet port, the at least one extraction chamber, the at least one amplification chamber, and the at least one detection channel are arranged to minimize the utilization of space. As discussed above in connection with FIG. 2 , swappable modules may be used.

[0108] Preferably, the nucleic acid amplification module further includes at least one reagent addition port in fluid communication with at least one nucleic acid transport channel. In certain embodiments, the nucleic acid detection module further comprises at least one sample well in fluid communication with at least one amplification product transport channel. In some embodiments, the nucleic acid detection module further comprises at least one sample waste well in fluid communication with at least one detection channel; a buffer waste well in fluid communication with at least one detection channel; and a buffer well in fluid communication with at least one detection channel. Preferably, the integrated chip of the present invention comprises at least two sample inlet ports; at least two nucleic acid extraction chambers, each said nucleic acid extraction chamber connected to one of the at least two sample inlet ports by a respective sample transport channel; at least two nucleic acid amplification chambers, each said nucleic acid amplification chamber connected to one of the at least two extraction chambers by a respective nucleic acid transport channel; and at least two detection channels, each said detection channel connected to a respective nucleic acid amplification chamber by a respective amplification product transport channel.

[0109] In embodiments, at least two detection channels intersect. In one embodiment, shown in FIG. 4 , detection channels 112 intersect at right angles. It is understood that any angle of intersection can be selected, depending on the general shape of the integrated chip 20, the number of detection channels, and the desired layout of the integrated chip. It is preferable that the layout be compact. Referring to FIG. 4 , the intersection of the detection channels 112 provides an advantage of a compact design in that the sample waste wells 118 and buffer well 116 can be shared by several (or all) detection channels 112. Additionally, the embodiment in which a user loads detection channels 112 with a molecular sieve, intersecting detection channels 112 at buffer well 116 offers an advantage of loading all detection channels simultaneously.

[0110] The integrated chip can further comprise at least two reagent addition ports, each said reagent addition port in fluid communication with a respective nucleic acid transport channel; at least two sample wells, each said sample well in fluid communication with a respective amplification product transport channel. Preferably, at least two sample wells are configured for use for addition and/or disposal of additional reagents.

[0111] In certain embodiments, the integrated chip further comprises at least one sample waste well, each said at least one sample waste well connected with at least two detection channels by at least two sample waste channels. Preferably, at least one sample waste well is configured for use for addition and/or disposal of additional reagents.

[0112] In other embodiments, the integrated chip further comprises at least one buffer waste well, each said buffer waste well in fluid communication with at least two detection channels; and a buffer well in fluid communication with at least two detection channel. Preferably, at least one buffer waste well and the buffer well are configured for use for addition and/or disposal of additional reagents.

[0113] In one embodiment, the buffer well is disposed at the point of intersection of at least two detection channels, and wherein the buffer well is in fluid communication with said intersecting detection channels.

[0114] Preferably, wherein each sample waste channel connects to the detection channel downstream from the at least one amplification product transport channel, thereby effectively increasing the cross-section of the intersection of the at least one amplification product transport channel and the at least one amplification product transport channel (see FIGS. 8A-8C and the description below). As used herein, the term “downstream” is defined as the direction in which the nucleic acids travel through the detection channel during separation.

[0115] In some embodiments, the integrated chip further including microfabricated protrusions (posts) disposed in at least one nucleic acid extraction chamber and/or in at least one sample transport channel. As discussed earlier, microfabricated protrusions disposed on the integrated chip can be used for mechanical shearing of cells in the biological sample, as described, for example, in U.S. Pat. No. 5,635,358 and WO 2006/06029387, incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

[0116] The integrated chip can further be provided with at least two electrodes for applying voltage across the at least one detection channel. In other embodiments, the integrated chip can include additional electrical contacts for providing power and/or control signals to electrically-actuated mechanism that can be disposed within the integrated chip.

[0117] In one aspect, the present invention is a novel valve assembly as shown in FIG. 5 and FIGS. 6A and 6B , and as described below in greater details. Thus, in one embodiment, the present invention is a valve assembly in a microfluidic device.

[0118] In one embodiment, the valve assembly comprises a microfluidic channel for transporting fluid, said microfluidic channel formed between a top surface and a bottom surface and having a longitudinal axis; a valving port in the top surface for receiving a passive plug; and a passive plug configured for insertion into the valving port. Preferably, the portion of the bottom surface opposite the valving port has uniform depth along longitudinal axis. This arrangement simplifies the manufacturing process of the integrated chip by eliminating or reducing the stringency for alignment of the parts.

[0119] In another embodiment, the valve assembly comprises a transport channel for transporting fluid; a ferrofluidic channel intersecting said transport channel; a first ferrofluidic reservoir and a second ferrofluidic reservoir, said first and second ferrofluidic reservoirs connected by the ferrofluidic channel; ferrofluid in either one or both ferrofluidic reservoirs; and a permanent magnet or an electromagnet for filling the ferrofluidic channel with the ferrofluid. Ferrofluids are typically colloidal mixtures comprising magnetic particles suspended in a liquid and further having a detergent/surfactant admixed to the liquid to prevent the particles from clumping together. (See also Berger, et al. (July 1999). “Preparation and properties of an aqueous ferrofluid”. Journal of Chemical Education 76 (7): pp. 943-948), incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.) Any commercially available ferrofluids can be used, such as, for example, ferrofluid available from Ferrotec Corporation, Bedford, N.H.

[0120] In yet another embodiment, and now referring to FIGS. 7A and 7B , the present invention is a valve assembly in a microfluidic device, comprising: a reservoir; an inflow transport channels for transporting fluid having an output end connected to the reservoir; a first and a second outflow channels for transporting fluid, each having an input end connected to the reservoir; ferrofluid disposed in the reservoir; and a magnet for controlling the position of the ferrofluid in the reservoir. During the operation of the valve assembly of FIGS. 7A and 7B , the ferrofluid within the reservoir is positioned to close either the output end of the inflow channel; or the input end of the first outflow channel, but not the input end of the second outflow channel; or the input end of the second channel, but not the input end of the first outflow channel; or neither the output end of the inflow channel, nor the input ends of the first and the second outflow channels.

[0121] In the embodiment shown in FIG. 4 , the integrated chip 20 comprises eight sample regions 130, each of which comprises a nucleic acid extraction module 25, a nucleic acid amplification module 27, and a nucleic acid detection module 29. The chip may be made of glass, acrylic, or any other suitable material. Typically, the chip is about the size of a thick credit card. In one embodiment, the chip has a length from 1 to 4″, a width from 1 to 4″; preferably, integrated chip 20 is about 2″ wide by 4″ long.

[0122] Each sample region 130 includes one sample inlet port 100, one extraction chamber 104, one amplification chamber 108 and one detection channel 112. It is understood that for each biological sample, there is a separate and discernable pathway from a respective sample inlet port to a respective extraction chamber, further to a respective amplification chamber and then to a respective detection channel. Thus, cross-contamination of sample is avoided and sample integrity is ensured. However, there are common wells (e.g. sample waste wells 118 and buffer wells 112) that are shared by several sample regions. This sharing reduces space required for the integrated chip layout and also reduces waste of material.

[0123] It will be understood that the chip may be configured with any number of sample regions (for example, 1, 12, 24, 256, 386 or 512), provided that the size of a sample region 130 is sufficient to extract, amplify, and detect nucleic acids. The sample regions 130 can be used to analyze multiple different samples for the same target biomarker sequence or pathogen, one sample for multiple different pathogens or biomarkers, or any suitable permutation or combination of samples and pathogens or biomarkers, providing suitable references are available.

[0124] The biological sample 22 (see FIG. 1 ), reagents used for extraction, amplification, and detection travel between different wells and reaction chambers through microfluidic transport channels 102, as shown in FIG. 4 . In a particular embodiment, the transport channels 102 have a cross section of 10-1000 μm×10-1000 μm, and preferably of 200×100 μm, and are of sufficient size to accommodate a flow of the magnetic beads used in an embodiment of the extraction process. In one embodiment, ports and wells such as sample inlet ports 100, reagent inlet/outlet ports 108, buffer waste wells 114, buffer well 116, sample waste wells 118, and sample wells 120 are 0.5-10.0 mm in diameter, and preferably 0.9-5.0 mm in diameter, with depths determined by the thickness of the integrated chip 20. Nucleic acid amplification chambers 108, are generally 0.1-30.0 mm in diameter, and preferably 10.0 mm in diameter, and 10 μm to 19.0 mm deep, and preferably 0.5 mm deep. Nucleic acid extraction chambers 104 can be 1-25 mm long and 1-30 mm wide, more preferably 15 mm long and 10 mm wide. Nucleic acid detection modules 29 of the integrated chip 20 that use capillary electrophoresis typically have detection channels 112 that have cross sections of 10-200×10-200 μm, more preferably 50×10 μm.

[0125] Fluid flow through the channels, ports, wells, and chambers is controlled by a combination of valves and propulsions means, which may be a hand-pumped syringe coupled to the sample inlet port 100. Other propulsion means such as peristaltic pumps or piston pumps can also be used. The propulsion means propel fluids through channels and chamber unless a closed valve blocks the fluid flow. Valves may use any one of a number of technologies, including technologies such as manually actuated plugs, mechanically actuated plugs, electromagnetically actuated plugs, ferrofluidic valves, pneumatic valves, or any other suitable technology.

[0126] For example, FIG. 5 shows a valve assembly 152 comprising a passive plug valve 150, valve port 151, and a transport channel 102 formed by a top surface 160 and a bottom surface 161. The passive plug valve 150 can be inserted into valve port 151 to control fluid flow into a nucleic acid amplification chamber 108 via the transport channel 102. The valve 150 may be inserted manually or it may be mechanically actuated. In one embodiment, the inlet sample well 100, reagent inlet/outlet port 106, sample waste well 118, sample well 120, buffer waste well 114, and buffer well 116 may act as valve ports 151 for receiving passive plug valves 150.

[0127] FIGS. 6A and 6B show an alternative method of controlling fluid flow using ferrofluidic valves 600. Ferrofluids are typically colloidal mixtures comprising magnetic particles suspended in a liquid and further having a detergent/surfactant admixed to the liquid to prevent the particles from clumping together. (See also Berger, et al. (July 1999). “Preparation and properties of an aqueous ferrofluid”. Journal of Chemical Education 76 (7): pp. 943-948, incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.) Any commercially available ferrofluids can be used, such as, for example, ferrofluid available from Ferrotec Corporation, Bedford, N.H. In-line ferrofluidic valves 600 comprise a ferrofluid channel 601 disposed across a transport channel 102. One end of the ferrofluid channel 601 ends in a ferrofluid reservoir 604 filled with ferrofluid 602, and the other end ends in a dump reservoir 606. In an “open” condition, the ferrofluid 602 remains in the ferrofluid reservoir 604, allowing fluid to flow through the transport channel 102 in a fluid flow direction 608, as shown in FIG. 6A . Placing a magnet 610 near the dump reservoir 606 draws the ferrofluid 602 through the ferrofluid channel 601, blocking the transport channel 102, as shown in FIG. 6B .

[0128] FIGS. 7A and 7B show how ferrofluid valves 600 may be used to control fluid flow into and out of multiport chambers and wells. In an embodiment shown in FIGS. 7A and 7B , fluid inters well 702 through inlet 704. A small amount of ferrofluid 602 rests inside a well 702. In a position in which both outlets 706 a and 706 b are open, the ferrofluid 602 rests in a stable position inside the well 702, as shown in FIG. 7A . The well 702 shown in FIGS. 7A and 7B has one inlet port 702 and two outlets ports 706 a, 706 b; in other embodiments, the well 702 may have plural inlet and output ports 704, 706.

[0129] Fluid enters the well 702 through an inlet 704. Fluid can exit the well 702 through either outlet port 706 a or outlet port 706 b, depending on the position of the ferrofluid 602. As shown in FIG. 7B , the ferrofluid 602 can be positioned to block an outlet 706 a using a magnet 610, leaving another outlet 706 b open for fluid egress. Similarly, outlet 706 b cab be blocked, while outlet 706 a is open. It is also understood that the inlet 704 can also be blocked. It is also understood that the direction of fluid flow can be reversed. In one embodiment, different fluids can enter well 702 through outlets 706 a and 706 b, while inlet 704 can serve as a fluid egress port.

[0130] Referring again the embodiment shown in FIG. 4 , in one embodiment of the invention, the user loads magnetic beads coated with streptavidin (e.g., Applied Biosystems FMAT® Streptavidin Beads, 6-8 micron) into a sample region 130. The magnetic beads may be moved along a microfluidic transport channel 102 to a nucleic acid extraction chamber 104 under pressure from a syringe pump or any other suitable fluid pressure generating means. Alternatively, the magnetic beads may already be loaded in the extraction chamber 104. Next, the user loads the biological sample 22 into a sample region 130 through the sample inlet port 100. Once the biological sample 22 is loaded, it travels via the same transport channel 102 from the sample inlet port 100 to the extraction chamber 104. The magnetic beads (not shown) attach themselves via the streptavidin coating to the nucleic acids in the biological sample 22. Once the attachment process is complete, applying a magnetic field to the extraction chamber causes the magnetic beads (and the attached nucleic acids) to move in the direction of the magnetic field, extracting the nucleic acids from the biological sample 22.

[0131] The user completes the extraction process by flushing the extraction chamber 104 with a wash (not shown) injected through the sample inlet port. The wash flows through the extraction chamber 104 to a reagent inlet/outlet port 106, from which the user extracts the wash products. The user may repeat the wash cycle until the extracted nucleic acid is sufficiently free of contamination to be amplified and detected.

[0132] Once the extracted nucleic acid is free of contaminants, it is forced (e.g., by applying pressure from a syringe or a pump) downstream into a nucleic acid amplification chamber 108, which the user then loads with reagents via the reagent inlet/outlet port 106. The user then isolates the amplification chamber by closing the appropriate valves before initiating amplification by conventional amplification techniques. A thermoelectric heater (not shown) may be used to heat and cool the reagents in the amplification chamber 108. In one embodiment, reagents include primers, a DNA polymerase (such as Taq polymerase), deoxynucleotide triphosphates, buffer solution, and divalent cations.

[0133] Once the nucleic acid is sufficiently amplified, the valves isolating the amplification chamber 108 are opened and the amplified nucleic acids are flushed into a sample well 120, which is connected to a detection channel 112 via a transport channel 102 as shown in FIG. 8A .

[0134] In one embodiment, capillary electrophoresis is used to detect and identify nucleic acids present in the biological sample 22. Capillary electrophoresis involves running an electric current through an electrolyte, such as an aqueous buffer solution, mixed with the sample under test in a short (on the order of 50 μm long) channel such as the detection channel 112. The current causes the sample to migrate down the detection channel 112; however, the compounds separate as they migrate because their migration speeds depend on their molecular weights, the current, and the channel size, among other variables.

[0135] In one embodiment, the user adds electrolyte solution and, optionally, sieving matrix, to the detection channel 112 through a buffer well 116 (also shown in FIG. 4 ). In embodiments in which buffer well 116 is connected to multiple detection channels 116, such as shown in FIG. 4 , simultaneous loading of all detection channels is achieved. Once the buffer well 116 is full, an electric field 130 applied to electrodes situated on or near the sample well 120 and the sample waste well 118 causes the amplified nucleic acid 23 to migrate from the sample well 120 to the sample waste 118 by way of a detection channel 112, as shown in FIG. 8B . Typically, the electric field 130 as about 400 V. The extracted nucleic acids accumulate in an accumulation region 113 situated in detection channel 112 between the intersection points of the transport channels 102 that connect the sample well 120 and sample waste well 118 to the detection channel 112. Waste from the sample well 120 continues on to the sample waste well 118.

[0136] FIG. 8C shows how applying an electric field 131 from the buffer well 116 to a buffer waste well 114 across the detection channel 112 causes the amplified nucleic acid 23 sample to separate into species 140 according to molecular weight. Typically, the strong electric field 131 as about 6 kV. As amplicons from different target biomarker sequences or different pathogens have different molecular weights, the different biomarkers or pathogens travel down the detection channel 112 at different speeds. An unknown species can be identified by comparing its speed to the speed of a known reference (not shown) in the same detection channel 114 or an identical detection 112 under the same strong electric field 131.

[0137] FIG. 9B illustrates the operation of an exemplary capillary electrophoresis detection control module 60. As described above, an electric field 131 draws the species 140 down the detection channel 112 towards the buffer waste well 114. As the species 140 travel down the detection channel 112, they pass through a measurement region 1005 one at a time, where they are interrogated by a laser beam 1004 or LED or other light source to produce a signal that may be interpreted to give an indication of the target biomarker sequence or pathogen type and quantify the corresponding load.

[0138] In an embodiment, the fluorescence signal 1010 is produced by illuminating the separated load 140 with a laser beam 1004 or LED or other light source of the appropriate frequency. A laser 1002 generates the laser beam 1004, which may be directed to the measurement region using a mirror 1006. Alternatively, the laser beam 1004 may be focused onto the sample with a lens. The beam may also be generated by light-emitting diode or other light source instead of a laser and it may or may not be coupled via fiberoptic cable. It will be understood that a variety of optical arrangements may be used to interrogate the species 140.

[0139] The laser beam 1004 excites the separated load 140 to produce a fluorescent beam 1010, which is separated from the laser beam 1004 with a dichroic beamsplitter 1007. In an embodiment, a detector 1012 produces a photocurrent (not shown) in response to the intensity of the fluorescent beam 1010. The photocurrent may be fed to a processor 1014, which may be used to analyze the detected fluorescent beam 1010. For example, the analysis might comprise comparing the detected signal to the reference signal trace 1021 from a known reference sample on an output signal graph 1020, where matching peaks in the traces indicate the presence of identical biomarker sequences or pathogens. Integrating the areas under the peaks gives an indication of the relative amounts of biomarkers or pathogen (i.e., the viral load) present in each sample. In embodiments, software correlates the output signal graph 1020 with the reference signal trace 1021 using standard correlation techniques to yield an output suitable for interpretation by a user.

Lab-on-a-Chip for Nucleic Acid or Protein Detection

[0140] Embodiments of the present invention include an integrated chip capable of performing the above mentioned biological assay in a single device, also referred to as an integrated microfluidic chip or lab-on-a-chip. The integrated chip is designed to sequentially perform the following three processes: (1) extraction from biological cells; (2) sequence specific nucleic acid amplification by PCR; and (3) size separation of amplified DNA by capillary electrophoresis combined with fluorescence detection of separated DNA.

[0141] It will be appreciated that a similar integrated microfluidic chip or lab-on-a-chip to that discussed in the present section may be used for protein detection, with appropriate modification of the techniques for use with protein detection. For example, in detection of a protein, one embodiment may use only an extraction module and a detection module without using amplification. Further, in some embodiments, only a detection module may be used.

[0142] In one embodiment, the invention set forth herein is an integrated chip for rapid extraction, amplification and separation of nucleic acid in a biological sample. The invention also comprises a hardware system that receives at least one integrated chip. The integrated chip is a microfluidic device that includes microfluidic channels in sequential fluid communication with functional modules: a nucleic acid extraction module, a nucleic acid amplification module and a nucleic acid separation module.

[0143] In one embodiment, a biological sample of interest is loaded onto the integrated chip and the nucleic acid is extracted from the biological sample within the extraction module. For example, the biological sample includes cells, and the cellular DNA is extracted from the cells. The extraction process, preferably, employs nucleic acid precipitation using magnetic beads. The extracted nucleic acid is then transported by fluid pressure into the nucleic acid amplification module, where the nucleic acid is amplified using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Preferably, the PCR employs thermal cycling. The amplified nucleic acid products are then transported by fluid pressure into the nucleic acid separation module, where the nucleic acids are separated and detected by employing capillary electrophoresis. Preferably, fluorescently nucleic acid primers are used and the nucleic acid products are detected using fluorescent detection. The three sequential processes described above occur within the same integrated chip.

[0144] The sequential process of extraction, amplification, separation/detection is controlled by a hardware system that includes a nucleic acid control module, a nucleic acid amplification control module, and a nucleic acid detection control module. Preferably, these modules respectively control: (1) application of magnet for the precipitation of the magnetic beads-attached nucleic acids, (2) thermal cycling during the PCR amplification of the extracted nucleic acids, and (3) electrophoretic separation and fluorescent-assisted detection of the nucleic acids.

[0145] With reference to FIG. 10 , the present invention, in various embodiments, enables advances in health care and other industries. The integrated chip and the hardware system of the present invention, described in details below, can be used for analysis of biological samples in biodefense, environmental testing, testing for food-born pathogens, in medical services, in organ transplantation, in life science research, in industrial applications, in agriculture, in forensic testing, in veterinary medicine, and in biomedical testing in public health applications, including public emergencies.

Compact Integrated Chip Design

[0146] Returning to FIG. 4 , that figure is an illustration of an integrated microfluidic chip 20 according to embodiments of the present invention having eight sample regions 130, each having an extraction module 25, an amplification module 27, and a separation module 29. In the integrated chip 20, the above processes are accomplished in enclosed chambers, open wells, and interconnecting channels, a combination of which constitutes a microfluidic chip. In this integrated chip 20, a multiplexed design to accommodate analysis of multiple samples is achieved by an architecture where each sample has an independent fluidic path in a separate sample region 130 from input to final detection, without any cross-contamination possibility. Each sample region 130 includes one sample inlet port 100, one extraction chamber 104, one amplification chamber 108, and one detection channel 112. There are common wells (e.g., sample waste wells 118 and buffer wells 116) that are shared by several sample regions 130. This sharing of common wells reduces space required for the integrated chip layout and also reduces waste of materials and reagents, such as capillary electrophoresis running buffer.

[0147] In the specific embodiment shown in FIG. 4 , four sample input wells 100 (loading ports) are located on each extremity of the chip, hence accommodating eight samples. These wells 100 are then independently connected by channels 102 to a set of enclosed extraction chambers 104 designated for nucleic acid extraction. Each of these extraction chambers 104 is in turn connected to another set of open wells (reagent inlet/outlet ports 106) to enable fluidic flow-through across the extraction chamber 104, as required to implement the extraction assay. In preferred embodiments, fluid flow through the channels, ports, wells, and chambers is controlled by a combination of valves and propulsions means, described below. Suitable propulsion means include hand-pumped syringes coupled to the sample input wells 100, peristaltic pumps, or piston pumps.

[0148] The reagent inlet/outlet ports 106 are in turn connected to another set of enclosed amplification (PCR) chambers 108 designed for PCR amplification. Amplification chambers 108 are also connected to sample wells 120 on one side and the reagent inlet/outlet ports 106 (shared with respective extraction chambers 104) on the other side, again enabling fluid flow-through across the amplification chambers 108.

[0149] Finally, each of the fluidic paths is independently terminated to a set of individual separation/detection channels (CE channels) 112, in which electrophoresis separation is achieved prior to fluorescence detection towards the end of the CE channels 112. The electrophoresis module is once again uniquely designed to multiplex the injection and separation of all eight samples that were previously subjected to the extraction and amplification processes on-chip.

[0150] The wells 120 on the electrophoresis side of the PCR chambers 108 are open and are utilized as CE sample wells 120. Thus, each sample (or PCR product) has a separate CE sample well 120 leading from its respective PCR chamber 108. However, the buffer well 116 required for the CE assay is shared between samples (either all or between two adjacent sample paths) as shown in FIG. 4 . This multiplexed design also reduces the complexity of high-voltage wiring: by relying on a common buffer well 116, fewer electrodes are required to operate the system since one electrode can be shared by several channels. For example, a single high-voltage (preferably, greater than 6 kV) electrode can be used for all eight of the samples subjected to CE. The CE operation of the chip 20 ensures that the shared buffer well 116 does not pose a danger for cross-contamination of samples. The CE operation, including loading and unloading of wells 114, 116, 118, and 120, and application of electric fields is discussed in greater detail below with reference to FIGS. 4 and 8A-8C.

[0151] Typically, the chip 20 is about the size of a thick credit card. In one embodiment, the chip 20 has a length from 2.5 cm to 25 cm, a width from 2.5 cm to 15 cm, and a thickness from 0.1 mm to 10 mm; preferably, the integrated chip 20 is about 5 cm wide by 10 cm long by 2 mm thick. One of skill in the art will appreciate that size and design of a specific chip will be a matter of design preference.

[0152] In a preferred embodiment, the chip 20 feature dimensions are 10-200 μm by 10-200 μm (e.g., 50 μm by 20 μm) for detection (CE) channels 112, and 10-1000 μM by 10-1000 μm (e.g., 200 μm by 100 μm) for all other channels. It will be appreciated that for the channels through which the magnetic beads will flow, a channel dimension is selected to ensure the unobstructed flow of the magnetic beads. The detection (CE) channels 112 can be 10-120 mm long (for example, 80 mm) long. Larger detection CE channels 112 size require higher voltages for CE analysis. The sizes of the other channels, such as transport channels 102, as well as the channels connecting extraction chambers 104 and reagent inlet/outlet ports 106, reagent inlet/outlet ports 106 and amplification chambers 108, amplification chambers 108 and sample wells 120, sample wells 120 and detection channels 112, are not critical.

[0153] In preferred embodiments, the circular wells and chambers, such as the buffer wells 116, are 5-15 mm (for example, 10 mm) in diameter and 0.05-1 mm (for example, 0.5 mm) deep. Hexagonal chambers, such as the extraction chambers 104, may be 5-25 (for example, 15 mm) long (tapered edges) and 5-15 mm (for example, 10 mm) wide. This sort of hexagon design facilitates easy fluid flow in the extraction chambers 104, particularly because the process involves high volume fluid flow. Other embodiments can accommodate circular chambers that are 0.1-30 mm in diameter and 0.01-19 mm deep and hexagonal chambers that are 1-25 mm long (tapered edges) and 1-30 mm wide.

[0154] Preferred embodiments of the access wells and inlet ports, such as the inlet wells 100, are 0.9-5 mm in diameter, with depths determined by the thickness of the plastic used to make the chip 20. Alternative embodiments can accommodate access wells with diameters of 0.5-10 mm. Again, well depth is determined by the thickness of the plastic used, and is typically between 0.5-2 mm.

Compact Integrated Chip Fabrication

[0155] Embodiments of the microfluidic chips fabricated for the purpose and application described here are manufactured of plastic, polymers, or biodegradable polymers; hence these chips are cost efficient to produce and can be used as disposable devices. The disposable aspect thus ensures that issues such as carry-over contamination, a typical problem associated with reuse of biological processing tools, are minimized to the extent of elimination. These chips can also be manufactured with glass, silicon and other materials.

[0156] The fabrication process associated with the manufacturing of these chips involves microfabrication of structures in silicon (Si) or glass or aluminum (Al) or other such material to create a master with the desired microfluidic structures. This creates negative microfluidic structures on the microfabricated Si/glass device. The process then involves molding a rubber based mold on this microfabricated Si/glass device to form a positive mold. Hot embossing of the rubber mold on a plastic plaque forms the microfluidic structure identical to the initial Si/glass microfabricated device. In this process, the plastic plaque is heated and pressed onto the positive rubber mold, causing the plaque to become malleable. This malleability makes the plastic of the plaque conforms to the pattern on the rubber mold, forming a negative structure in the plastic plaque identical to the negative structure of the initial Si/glass microfabricated device. The plastic plaques having the negative structure embossed thereon are finally drilled and bonded to another unprocessed plastic plaque to form closed fluidic structures.

[0157] For the embossing and bonding, plastic materials such as Polyethelene, Polypropylene, Poly(Urethane-Imide), poly(tetrafluoroethylene), polycarbonate, polyimides, Cyclic Olefine Copolymer (COC) and Cyclic Olefine Polymer (COP), poly(methyl methacrylate), polyacrylamide, polystyrene, or other such materials, can be utilized depending on the customization that the particular application demands.

[0158] The above process of hot embossing to manufacture plastic microfluidic chips enables production of low cost devices suitable for disposable use. Furthermore, since plastic manufacturing is generally scalable in a non-linear cost ratio, it is also possible to greatly reduce the cost of production by batch processing these microfluidic devices. The manufactured plastic microfluidic chips can be used to perform biological assays as described below.

Modular Design

[0159] Referring to FIG. 4 , the chip 20 includes three modules, namely, the DNA extraction module 25, the PCR amplification module 27, and the electrophoresis separation module 29, involved in biological analysis or a diagnostic assay. In general, the entire process of extraction, amplification and separation occurs within the same chip, the sample being transported by fluid flow from one module to the next module.

[0160] This integrated process involves lysis of cells, magnetic bead binding to nucleic acid, resuspension/elusion of nucleic acid bound beads, amplification of the extracted nucleic acid and detection of the amplified nucleic acid. During the extraction process, the sample is incubated and washed to produce extracted DNA in an extraction chamber 104. In PCR amplification, which occur in a amplification module 27, extracted DNA is loaded into an amplification chamber 108 along with PCR master mix. The DNA and the PCR master mix are sealed in the amplification chamber 108, which is heated and cooled according to an appropriate thermal protocol. Once the protocol is complete, the amplified sample is transferred to a sample well 120 for subsequent separation and detection. Sieving matrix/gel, buffer, and optionally molecular size standards are loaded into the appropriate CE wells and buffer wells (wells 114, 116, 118, and 120), and a first electric field is applied, causing the sample to enter a detection (CE)