- THE JUDICIAL NOMINATION AND CONFIRMATION PROCESS
[Senate Hearing 107-463] [From the U.S. Government Printing Office] S. Hrg. 107-463 THE JUDICIAL NOMINATION AND CONFIRMATION PROCESS ======================================================================= HEARINGS before the SUBCOMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE OVERSIGHT AND THE COURTS of the COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY UNITED STATES SENATE ONE HUNDRED SEVENTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION __________ JUNE 26 AND SEPTEMBER 4, 2001 __________ Serial No. J-107-28 __________ Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 79-825 WASHINGTON : 2002 ____________________________________________________________________________ For Sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-0001 COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont, Chairman EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah JOSEPH R. BIDEN, Jr., Delaware STROM THURMOND, South Carolina HERBERT KOHL, Wisconsin CHARLES E. GRASSLEY, Iowa DIANNE FEINSTEIN, California ARLEN SPECTER, Pennsylvania RUSSELL D. FEINGOLD, Wisconsin JON KYL, Arizona CHARLES E. SCHUMER, New York MIKE DeWINE, Ohio RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama MARIA CANTWELL, Washington SAM BROWNBACK, Kansas JOHN EDWARDS, North Carolina MITCH McCONNELL, Kentucky Bruce A. Cohen, Majority Chief Counsel and Staff Director Sharon Prost, Minority Chief Counsel Makan Delrahim, Minority Staff Director ------ Subcommittee on Administrative Oversight and the Courts CHARLES E. SCHUMER, New York, Chairman PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts STROM THURMOND, South Carolina RUSSELL D. FEINGOLD, Wisconsin CHARLES E. GRASSLEY, Iowa RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois ARLEN SPECTER, Pennsylvania Benjamin Lawsky, Majority Chief Counsel Ed Haden, Minority Chief Counsel C O N T E N T S ---------- TUESDAY, JUNE 26, 2001 STATEMENTS OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS Page Brownback, Hon. Sam, a U.S. Senator from the State of Kansas..... 20 Durbin, Hon. Richard J., a U.S. Senator from the State of Illinois....................................................... 87 Feingold, Hon. Russell D., a U.S. Senator from the State of Wisconsin...................................................... 11 Grassley, Hon. Charles E., a U.S. Senator from the State of Iowa. 243 Hatch, Hon. Orrin G., a U.S. Senator from the State of Utah...... 29 Kennedy, Hon. Edward M., a U.S. Senator from the State of Massachusetts.................................................. 257 Kyl, Hon. Jon, a U.S. Senator from the State of Arizona.......... 13 McConnell, Hon. Mitch, a U.S. Senator from the State of Kentucky. 14 Schumer, Hon. Charles E., a U.S. Senator from the State of New York........................................................... 1 Sessions, Hon. Jeff, a U.S. Senator from the State of Alabama.... 4 Thurmond, Hon. Strom, a U.S. Senator from the State of South Carolina....................................................... 267 WITNESSES Bolick, Clint, Legislative Director, Institute for Justice, Washington, D.C................................................ 82 Cutler, Lloyd N., former White House Counsel, and Co-Chair, Constitution Project's Courts Initiative, Washington, D.C...... 22 Gray, C. Boyden, former White House Counsel, Washington, D.C..... 26 Greenberger, Marcia D., Co-President, National Women's Law Center, Washington, D.C........................................ 71 Presser, Stephen B., Raoul Berger Professor of Legal History, Northwestern University School of Law, Chicago, Illinois....... 49 Sunstein, Cass R., Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science, Chicago, Illinois......... 57 Tribe, Laurence H., Tyler Professor of Constitutional Law, Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts................... 39 Volokh, Eugene, Professor of Law, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California............................... 67 TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 4, 2001 STATEMENTS OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS Durbin, Hon. Richard J., a U.S. Senator from the State of Illinois....................................................... 149 Hatch, Hon. Orrin G., a U.S. Senator from the State of Utah...... 144 Kyl, Hon. Jon, a U.S. Senator from the State of Arizona.......... 157 McConnell, Hon. Mitch, a U.S. Senator from the State of Kentucky. 152 Schumer, Hon. Charles E., a U.S. Senator from the State of New York........................................................... 111 Sessions, Hon. Jeff, a U.S. Senator from the State of Alabama.... 114 Thurmond, Hon. Strom, a U.S. Senator from the State of South Carolina....................................................... 151 WITNESSES Kmiec, Douglas W., Dean and Professor of Law, Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.................................... 191 Levinson, Sanford, Professor of Law, University of Texas Law School, Austin, Texas.......................................... 162 Resnik, Judith, Professor of Law, Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut.................................................... 179 Rotunda, Ronald D., Professor of Law, University of Illinois College of Law, Champaign, Illinois............................ 169 Simon, Hon. Paul, former U.S. Senator from the State of Illinois. 134 Thompson, Hon. Fred, a U.S. Senator from the State of Tennessee.. 137 Tushnet, Mark, Professor of Law, Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C........................................ 198 ------ QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS Responses of Stephen B. Presser to questions submitted by Senator Thurmond....................................................... 218 Response of Cass R. Sunstein to a question submitted by Senator Sessions....................................................... 219 SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD American Center of Law and Justice, Washington, D.C., statement.. 219 BeVier, Professor of Law, University of Virginia Law School, Charlottsville, VA, statement.................................. 224 Boyle, Patrick, Detective, Philadelphia Police Department, Philadelphia, PA, statement.................................... 228 Califano, Joseph A., Jr., Washington Post, August 31, 2001, article........................................................ 229 Cass, Ronald A., Dean, Boston University School of Law, Boston, MA, statement.................................................. 230 Center for Judicial Accountability, Inc., White Plains, NY, statement...................................................... 235 Jipping, Thomas L., Director, Judicial Selection Monitoring Project, Free Congress Research & Education Foundation, Washington, D.C.: letter and attachment........................................ 244 article, Washington Times, June 26, 2001..................... 255 statement.................................................... 256 Litt, Robert S., former Assistant Attorney General, Criminal Division, Department of Justice, Washington, DC, statement..... 258 McGinnis, John O., Professor, Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law, New York, NY, statement........................................ 260 People for the American Way Foundation, Elliot M. Minchberg, General Counsel and Vice-President, July 3, 2001, letter....... 264 Pilon, Roger, Vice President for Legal Affairs, Cato Institute, September 4, 2001, National Review, article.................... 265 Strauss, Paul, Shadow U.S. Senator for the District of Columbia, statement...................................................... 266 Tulis, Jeffrey K., Associate Professor, Department of Government, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, June 22, 2001, letter......................................................... 268 Yalof, David Alistair, Department of Political Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, June 25, 2001, letter... 269 Young, Ernest A., Assistant Professor of Law, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, statement............................ 272 JUDICIAL NOMINATIONS 2001: SHOULD IDEOLOGY MATTER? ---------- TUESDAY, JUNE 26, 2001 U.S. Senate, Subcommittee on Administrative Oversight and the Courts, Committee on the Judiciary, Washington, DC. The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., in room SD-226, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Charles E. Schumer, Chairman of the Subcommittee, presiding. Present: Senators Schumer, Feingold, Durbin, Sessions, Hatch, Kyl, Brownback, and McConnell. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. CHARLES E. SCHUMER, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK Chairman Schumer. Good morning, everybody. The Subcommittee will come to order. I will make an opening statement, so will Senator Sessions and any other member who wishes to, and then we will go right into our panel. Today, for the first time in over a decade and for the first time during the Bush presidency, we are formally examining the judicial nominations process. This hearing is specifically focused on the vital question of what role ideology should play in the selection and confirmation of judges. Let me start by saying that it is our intention to hold a series of further hearings that will examine in detail several other important issues related to the judicial nominating process. At this point, we plan to hold at least three more hearings on the following issues: one, the proper role of the Senate in the judicial confirmation process. What does the Constitution mean by ``advise and consent,'' and historically how assertive has the Senate's role been? Two, what affirmative burdens should nominees bear in the confirmation process to qualify themselves for lifetime judicial appointments? The Senate process can be criticized for being a search for disqualifications. We will examine whether the burden should be shifted to the nominees to explain their qualifications and views to justify why they would be valuable additions to the bench. And, three, the significance of the Supreme Court's recent federalism decisions for the judicial selection process. Most Americans probably do not realize what these cases curtailing the powers of Congress mean for their everyday lives and futures. We will try to make these somewhat esoteric and often abstract decisions more real and more relevant for ordinary citizens. Today's hearing on ideology is a good place to start because it will touch upon all of these issues and serve as the beginning of the important dialog that we in the Senate should be having before we proceed much further with nomination hearings, and certainly before we embark on the consideration of Supreme Court nominees. First, I have read all the testimony submitted by our eight witnesses and I have to say it is just excellent. I would commend to every one of my colleagues who sit on this Subcommittee or not to read them. There is a diversity of opinion. It is all cross-cutting. It is not that all Democrats or liberals are on one side and all conservatives or Republicans on the other. Both sides of this issue, if it can be called two-sided, present alluring arguments and certainly underscore how difficult and how important the issue we are wrestling with today is. One thing is clear to me. The ideology of particular nominees often plays a significant role in the confirmation process. Unfortunately, knowing when and to what degree ideology should be a factor for the Senate is far more obscure. For whatever reason, possibly senatorial fears of being labeled partisan, legitimate considerations of ideological beliefs seem to have been driven underground. It is not that we don't consider ideology; it is just that we don't talk about it openly. Unfortunately, this unwillingness to openly examine ideology has sometimes led Senators who oppose a nominee to seek out non-ideological disqualifying factors, like small financial improprieties from long ago, to justify their opposition. This, in turn, has led to an escalating war of ``gotcha'' politics that, in my judgment, has warped the Senate's confirmation process and harmed the Senate's reputation. As many of you know, this was not always the Senate's practice. During the first 100 years of the Republic, one out of every four nominees to the Supreme Court was rejected by the Senate, many for clear ideological reasons. George Washington's appointment of John Rutledge to be Chief Justice and President Polk's nomination of George Woodward are two early examples of Senate rejection of nominees on purely ideological grounds. The power of the Senate in the nominations process, however, has been accordion-like, and from 1895 to 1967 only one Supreme Court nominee was defeated. Since 1968, ideological considerations have occasionally surfaced, most notably in the Republican opposition to the Fortas nomination to be Chief Justice and in Democratic opposition to the nomination of Robert Bork. But since the Bork fight in 1987, ideology, while still an important factor for the Senate, has primarily been considered sub rosa, fostering a search for a nominee's disqualifiers that are more personal and less substantive. It is high time we returned to a more open and rational consideration of ideology when we view nominees. Let's make our confirmation process more honest, more clear, and hopefully more legitimate in the eyes of the American people, and let's be fair to the nominees the President selects. If we do this, the knotty question we face is how dominant factor should a nominee's ideology be in the Senate's consideration. Historically, the role ideology played in past confirmations has varied, but it seems to me that several factors are relevant: first, the extent to which the President himself makes his initial selections on the basis of a particular ideology; second, the composition of the courts at the time of the nomination; and, third, the political climate of the day. The Eisenhower presidency is instructive and shows how these factors affect the Senate's confirmation process. First, Eisenhower's selection criteria were non-ideological. He brought the ABA into his selection process and sought candidates with, as he put it, ``solid common sense,'' eschewing candidates with extreme legal or philosophical views. Second, the balance of the courts was leftward in light of 20 years of Democratic appointments. In fact, when Eisenhower took office, 4 out of every 5 Federal judges were Democrats. Third, politically Eisenhower had a strong mandate, having been elected overwhelmingly by majorities in both 1952 and 1956. Thus, in a time when the courts had been filled with Democrats, a split Senate had little cause to ideologically oppose the non-political picks of an overwhelmingly popular Republican President. Today, the calculus is much different. President Bush campaigned on a pledge to appoint judges of a particular stripe, like Justices Scalia and Thomas. And the balance of the courts, especially the Supreme Court, leans to the right. Politically, the American people were divided in our recent national elections, sending a message of moderation and bipartisanship. This era, perhaps more than any other before, calls out for collaboration between the President and the Senate in judicial appointments. The ``advise'' in ``advise and consent'' should play a new and more prominent role. It also certainly justifies Senate opposition to judicial nominees whose views fall outside the mainstream and have been selected in an attempt to further tilt the courts in an ideological direction. Having one or even two Justices like Scalia and Thomas might be legitimate because it provides the Court with a particular view of constitutional jurisprudence. But having four or five or nine Justices like them would skew the Court, veering it far from the core values most Americans believe in. The Constitution instructs the Senate to first advise the President as to his choice of nominees and then to review and decide whether to confirm the President's picks. As the research of some of the witnesses we will hear today, Professors Tribe and Sunstein, has forcefully revealed, the debates of the Constitutional Convention suggest a fully shared authority between the President and the Senate as to the composition of the Supreme Court. Let me conclude by saying that I and many of my colleagues see the appointment of judges as the ultimate test of bipartisanship. In electing two branches of our Government, the country was split down the middle, leaving appointments to the third branch as perhaps the defining indicator of the political direction the country will take. The President, of course, can choose to exercise his nomination power however he sees fit. But if the President sends countless nominees who are of particular ideological caste, Democrats will likely exercise their constitutionally given power to deny confirmation so that such nominees do not reorient the direction of the Federal judiciary. But if the President does not grossly inject ideological politics into his selection criteria, neither will, nor should, the Senate. Today, we are going to hear from two former White House Counsels who spent years advising and recommending candidates for the Federal bench in both Republican and Democratic administrations. We will hear also from some of the brightest legal academics around who have dedicated their careers to studying judicial nominations and the way the Senate and President handle them. The issue we are discussing is not merely academic. As yesterday's decision showed, there are many 5-4 splits on the Court right now on fundamental issues of the day, including most importantly the extent of power held by the Court's coequal and democratically elected branches of Government. We therefore begin this important inquiry. There will be a range of discussion and opinion. As I say, when you read the different testimonies, each view is alluring. I have laid out mine because I believe we should bring everything above the table, and I am starting right now by saying where I come from, although I am open to be persuaded that I might be wrong. Let me thank in advance our distinguished witnesses. WE are very interested in hearing your testimony and engaging you on these issues. I also want to thank my colleague, Senator Sessions. I am going to turn to him for his opening statement, but first I want to thank him up front for making this a fully bipartisan hearing, with equal numbers of witnesses chosen by each side. He and his staff are a pleasure to work with, and I look forward to holding future hearings in the same bipartisan manner. Senator Sessions? STATEMENT OF HON. JEFF SESSIONS, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF ALABAMA Senator Sessions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do appreciate the opportunity to be here, and thank you for working with us to coordinate this hearing. I think you and your staff have been most gracious. We have an equal number of witnesses. You couldn't be fairer about that, and I hope that we can make some progress as we discuss these issues. Frankly, I hadn't heard that kind of talk about evaluating the judges so aggressively in the last 6 years. We do have an evenly divided Senate, but remember just a few years ago there were 55 Republicans and Clinton judges were moved forward on a steady pace. There were 377 confirmed and only one voted down. There were only 41 Clinton nominees left pending when he left office, and unconfirmed, I think a record far superior to that of when President Bush left office and he had a Democratic Senate. So I think there is a myth out there that somehow Clinton judges were mistreated. And building on that myth is an idea that now is the time for either a new standard or an open, aggressive assault on Bush judges. I think that would be a mistake. The constitutional process of confirming judicial nominees is one of our important duties in the Senate. I take it seriously. It is part of the advice and consent process. Article II, section 2, clause 2 of the Constitution provides that the President ``shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint...Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States...'' The President decides who to nominate and the Senate renders advice and decides who to confirm. Using those basic ground rules, Presidents and Senates have worked together for over 200 years to appoint a sufficient number of Federal judges to try the people's cases in Federal courts. President Reagan, with 6 years of a Senate of his own party, appointed a record 382 judges. President Clinton, with 6 years of a Senate of a party not his own, appointed the second greatest number, 377. While the President has traditionally been accorded great deference in selecting his nominees, the Senate is not a rubber stamp. Indeed, we have a duty to assess at least a nominee's integrity, qualifications, temperament, ability, and other factors that are important. Throughout my tenure in the Senate, I have been impressed with the manner in which the former Chairman of this committee, Senator Hatch, guided the judicial assessment process. He elevated the committee's judicial nominations hearings above partisan and personal attacks. He examined each nominee's integrity, qualifications, temperament, and approach to the law. While Senators sometimes disagreed on these issues, Senator Hatch is to be commended for not calling a series of nominations hearings at which panels of witnesses were called to attack Clinton nominees. If there was a personal issue, he handled it privately, thus saving the nominee and nominee's family much anguish. His fairness and gentlemanly demeanor were a credit to the Chair he held on this Committee and to the Senate as a whole. Certainly, treating nominees fairly was a goal of mine when I came to the Senate. I felt like the Senate could do a better job of being fair to nominees and respectful of nominees. If we disagreed with them, we inquired into the problems that we had a disagreement with or a concern, but it was not necessary to attack someone's integrity and character if you disagreed with them or questioned a ruling or a position or a writing they have taken in the past. So, today, we address the question of ``should ideology matter'' in the exercise of the Senate's advice and consent responsibilities. I am not sure what ``ideology'' means, but to answer this question I must first distinguish judicial philosophy, which describes a nominee's approach to the law, from result-oriented political ideology which describes a nominee's view of how he or she would like to win the case. In my view, the Senate may appropriately examine a nominee's judicial philosophy, and should do so, but should not assess a nominee on some results-oriented ideological or political basis to demand that they produce rulings that we might politically agree with. Does the nominee understand that his or her role as a judge is to follow the law, regardless of personal political opinion? Does he or she understand the role of precedent in interpreting the law? Can the nominee put aside political views, which may be appropriate as a legislator, executive or advocate, and interpret the law as it is written? Will the nominee keep his or her oath to uphold the Constitution, first and foremost? The Senate needs to know the answers to these important questions. Questions that would implicate a nominee's view on what the result of a particular case should be, however, should not be asked, in my view. This is important primarily because Federal judges are unelected. They are appointed and confirmed once, normally in a fairly routine manner, and then serve for life, unaccountable to the normal political process or to the people. Policy decisions, therefore, if we are to maintain our democracy, must be left in the hands of the political branch, those who are accountable to the people. Democracy is undermined in a most fundamental way if we assert that judges have the power to set public policy, because they are unaccountable to the American people. So this is a deep, fundamental question of great importance, it seems to me. The ultimate responsibility for legal results does not lie with the judge under our system, but with the people who elected their legislators. In our democracy, that is where the responsibility for making rules is supposed to lie, for this allows the people, if they are unsatisfied with the rules, to change them through the democratic process of electing new Federal and State legislators and through ratifying amendments to the Constitution. I have heard some talk about the need for moderate judges. Again, it is important to distinguish moderation in terms of deferring to policies embodied in the law from moderation seeking politically palatable results. On the one hand, Alexander Hamilton applauded the ``benefits of integrity and moderation of the judiciary,'' whether the results of decisions were ``disappoint[ing]'' or the cause of ``applause.'' On the other hand, he categorically rejected moderation in a judge's duty to follow the law, concluding that ``inflexible and uniform adherence to the rights of the Constitution, and of individuals [is] indispensable in the courts of justice. . .'' For example, in Brown v. Board of Education, the Supreme Court properly ruled that ``separate but equal'' public schools for the races violated the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment. The States were denying African-American students equal protection through the State education laws. The Court's ruling, however, did not evoke a moderate public response. Who knows what the polling data would have shown about that ruling? But in many instances, a hue and cry came from some of those who opposed the result. While this result may not have been moderate in a political poll sense, it was the proper course of legal action. In the exercise of its advice and consent responsibilities, the Senate's duty does not lie with public opinion polls, professors' theories, or interest groups. Instead, as Senators, we solemnly swear to ``support and defend the Constitution of the United States. . .so help [us] God.'' We should ensure to the best of our ability that judges do the same. Some may ask why judicial philosophy matters. Judicial philosophy matters because it determines whether results in real cases are consistent or not, whether you can count on the rules being followed every time. How many of you would want your right to free speech enforced only some of the time? How many would want your right to be free from unreasonable searches enforced only when a judge felt it would be politically popular to do so? How many would want your right not to be discriminated against by State schools based on your race enforced only if a judge liked you? In America, we want our rights protected every time. This is the only way we can be sure that our contracts will be enforced in our business dealings, that our neighborhoods will not be overrun with crime, and that our government officials will not abuse their power for their own advantage. The Founding Fathers believed that the best way to ensure that the laws are followed every time is to write the laws down and to have government officials who will follow them. We call this the rule of law. If the laws were unwritten, then judges and officials could make them up as they go. Our rights would depend on the whim of unelected judges. If the laws are written down, however, every judge and government official starts on the same page. This makes it more likely they will be consistent in their application of the laws to all the cases before them. Our rights depend on written laws in America. The people control what the laws say, and we must expect judges will enforce the laws as written. It is so basic. Activism was Senator Hatch's standard for whether or not a judge at the basic level should be confirmed. He defined that as a judge who was unwilling to follow the law. He wanted to know would a judge subject himself to the law. We confirmed overwhelmingly pro-choice judges. We confirmed many judges who opposed the death penalty. They were asked, will you enforce the law even if you do not agree with it? If they didn't say that they would, they would not have been confirmed. They said that they would and they were confirmed overwhelmingly. Only one judge was voted down in this last session. So activism is a standard that Senator Hatch set forth that is defensible. I am concerned about a word as vague as ``ideology.'' I am not sure what that would mean. I will just conclude and put the rest of my remarks in the record. Chairman Schumer. Without objection. Senator Sessions. The President and the Senate should work together. I believe, Mr. Chairman, that you will ask tough questions, and you have every right to. I believe that judges should be inquired of, but if they will follow the law, if they are men and women of good integrity, if they are men and women of proven accomplishment, if they have good judgment and can do the job in every respect, and have a proven record to that effect, I believe the President's nominees should be given great deference. I would be very concerned if we were to create a historical change here. After President Clinton's judges were given so much deference, really, and he was given so much support for those he nominated, it would be an unwise and dangerous thing for this Senate to now change the way we evaluate judges and begin to undermine the confidence that the American people have in law. My longtime concern about law in America has come about because some people seem to think that it is unascertainable, that judges can redefine words in ways that make them say anything they would like for them to say. This is a very dangerous and corroding philosophy. The American people believe words have meaning. They believe statutes bind judges and politicians and citizens. They believe they can be given meaning. We have afoot in America today a philosophy often in our law schools that suggests that words don't have objective meaning, that it is all politics, it is all power, and that truth is not ascertainable and law can't be consistently applied. I hope we don't nurture that in the way we approach the judicial nomination process. We need to call on people to follow the law, and I believe that they can, and I believe that when we do so the great protections and prosperity this Nation has enjoyed will continue. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [The prepared statement of Senator Sessions follows:] Statement of Hon. Jeff Sessions, a U.S. Senator from the State of Alabama Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank you and your staff for working with me and my staff in coordinating this hearing. You have been very gracious in allowing us to have an equal number of witnesses. We have been able to put the nation's interest first in the past, and I look forward to working with you on this Subcommittee and on full Committee to do the same in the future. The constitutional process of confirming federal judicial nominees is one of the Senate's most important duties. I take it very seriously. It involves a Senator's view of the advice and consent process, his or her respect for the rule of law, and his or her views on judicial activism. Advice and Consent Article II, Section 2, Clause 2 of the Constitution, provides that the President ``shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint . . . Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States . . . .'' The President decides who to nominate and the Senate renders advice and decides who to confirm. Using these basic ground rules, Presidents and Senates have worked together for over 200 years to appoint a sufficient number of federal judges to try the people's cases in federal courts. President Reagan, with six years of a Senate of his own party, appointed a record 382 Article III judges. President Clinton, with six years of a Senate of a party not his own, appointed the second greatest number of judges--377. I voted one down. While the President has traditionally been accorded great deference in selecting his nominees, the Senate is not a rubber stamp. Indeed, we have the duty to assess, at least, a nominee's integrity, qualifications, and temperament. Throughout my tenure in the Senate, I have been impressed with the manner in which the former Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, Senator Hatch, guided this assessment process. He elevated the debate in the Committee's judicial nominations hearings above partisan personal attacks. He examined each nominee's integrity, qualifications, temperament, and approach to the law. While Senators sometimes disagreed on these issues, Senator Hatch is to be commended for not calling a series of nominations hearings at which panels of witnesses were called to attack judicial nominees. If there was a personal issue, he handled it privately, thus saving the nominee and the nominee's family much anguish. His fairness and gentlemanly demeanor was a credit to the chair he held, this Committee, and the Senate as a whole. Today, we address the question of ``should ideology matter'' in the exercise of the Senate's advice and consent responsibilities. To answer this question, I must first distinguish judicial philosophy, which describes a nominee's approach to the law, from result-oriented political ideology, which describes a nominee's view of who he or she would like to win the case. In my view, the Senate may appropriately examine a nominee's judicial philosophy, but should not assess a nominee based on some result-oriented political ideology or his political views. Does the nominee understand that his or her role as a judge is to follow the law regardless of personal political opinion? Does he or she understand the role of precedent in interpreting the law? Can the nominee put aside political views, which may be appropriate as a legislator, executive, or advocate, and interpret the law as it is written? Will the nominee keep his or her oath to uphold the Constitution? The Senate needs to know the answers to these important questions. Questions that would implicate a nominee's view on what the result of a particular case should be, however, should not be asked. The ultimate responsibility for the legal results, however, does not lie with the judge, but with the people and their elected legislators. In our democracy, that is where the responsibility for making rules is supposed to lie. For this allows the people, if they are unsatisfied with the rules, to change them through the democratic process of electing new federal and state legislators and through ratifying amendments to the Constitution. I have heard some talk about the need for ``moderate'' judges. Again, it is important to distinguish moderation in terms of deferring to the policies embodied in the law from moderation in seeking politically palatable results. On the one hand, Alexander Hamilton applauded the ``benefits of integrity and moderation of the judiciary'' whether the results of decisions were ``disappoint[ing]'' or the cause of ``applause.'' \1\ On the other hand, he categorically rejected moderation in a judge's duty to follow the law, concluding that ``inflexible and uniform adherence to the rights of the Constitution, and of individuals, [is] indispensable in the courts of justice . . . .'' \2\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ THE FEDERALIST No. 78, at 470 (Alexander Hamilton) (Clinton Rossiter ed., 1961). \2\ Id. at 470-71. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- For example, in Brown v. Board of Education,\3\ the Supreme Court properly ruled that ``separate but equal'' public schools for the races violated the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment. The States were denying African American students equal protection through state education laws.\4\ The Court's ruling, however, did not evoke a moderate public response, but a hue and cry from some who opposed its result. While this result may not have been moderate in a ``political poll'' sense, it was the proper course of action because it followed the law. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \3\ 347 U.S. 483 (1954). \4\ See Robert Bork, THE TEMPTING of AMERICA 74-84 (1990) (supporting the judgment in Brown v. Board of Educ.). --------------------------------------------------------------------------- In the exercise of its advice and consent responsibilities, the Senate's duty does not lie with public opinion polls, professors' theories, or interest groups. Instead, as Senators, we solemnly swear to ``support and defend the Constitution of the United States. . .So help [us] God.'' \5\ We should ensure to the best of our ability that judges do the same. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \5\ ``I, A--, B, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I am about to enter: So help me God.'' 5 U.S.C. Sec. 3331 (1988); Senate Rule III. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- The Rule of Law Some may ask, ``Why do all these words like `judicial philosophy' and `moderation' matter? Isn't it the results in real cases that count?" Judicial philosophy does matter because it determines whether results in real cases are consistent or not--whether you can count on the rules being followed every time. How many of you, would want your right to free speech \6\ enforced only some of the time? How many would want your right to be free from unreasonable searches \7\ enforced only when a judge felt it would be politically popular to do so? How many would want your right to not be discriminated against by state schools based on your race\8\ enforced only if the judge liked you? --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \6\ U.S. Const. amend. I. \7\ U.S. Const. amend. IV. \8\ U.S. Const. Amend. XIV, Sec. 2. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- In America, we want our rights protected every time. This is the only way we can be sure that our contracts will be enforced in our business dealings, that our neighborhoods will not be overrun with criminals, and that our government officials will not abuse their power for their own advantage. The Founding Fathers believed that the best way to ensure that the laws are followed every time is to write the laws down and to have government officials who will follow them. We call this the rule of law. If the laws are unwritten, then judges and other government officials can make them up as they go along. Our rights would depend on the whims of judges--who are unelected. If the laws are written down, however, every judge and government official starts from the same page. This makes it more likely that they will be consistent in their application of the laws to all the cases before them. Our rights depend on the written laws and, in America, the people control what the laws say. Judicial Activism To ensure that federal judges will actually follow the written law, we give them life tenure and salary protection. It is less likely that judges can be pressured to vote for things that Congress likes, even if they violate the Constitution, because Congress cannot threaten their jobs. Moreover, we require judges who have a conflict of interest in a case to recuse themselves from that case. But there are other pressures that can influence a judge to not follow the written law--the judge's conscience, his or her desire for popularity, or his or her political views. Against these types of departures, salary protection, life tenure, and recusal requirements are of no help. The only safeguard we have is the President's and the Senate's examination of a potential judge's sense of duty to the law as written and as intended. If a nominee's record shows that he or she will not follow the law as written and intended, that nominee is a ``judicial activist''-- whether conservative or liberal. Indeed, if a judge does not follow the law as written and intended, he harms all of us in two important ways. First, it undermines our certainty in the protection of our rights. Will our contract to buy a house be enforced? Will criminals be let out of jail to sell drugs at schools? Will the government be allowed to take our property without just compensation? If the answers to these questions depend on the judge's personal opinion or political views, all of these rights are at risk. Second, if a judge rejects the democratic process that ratified that constitutional provision or enacted that statutory provision, that judge has nullified our votes. Instead of our elected officials making the rules, our unelected judges would be making the rules. Frankly, this is scary. Many have confused the issue of judicial activism by saying that it means a judge reaches a liberal result in a case or that it means a judge strikes a statute down. In my view, neither is correct. The dangerous sort of judicial activism occurs when a judge refuses to follow the law as written and intended regardless of whether the result is liberal or conservative, and regardless of whether the statute was struck down or upheld. This judicial activism--or failure to follow the law as written and intended--has real consequences to real people. Take, for example, Sergeant Patrick Boyle who saw a federal judge release thousands of prisoners in Philadelphia. The law gives a federal judge the power to interpret the law, not to assume the executive duties of a warden. Nonetheless, the judge released the prisoners and within 18 months they had committed hundreds of new crimes, including 79 murders.\9\ One of the murder victims was Sergeant Boyle's son. While the judge reached a liberal result in releasing the prisoners, it was judicial activism because she did not follow the law. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \9\ Judicial Activism Defining the Problem and its Impact: Hearings before the Subcomm. On the Constitution Federalism and Property Rights of the Senate Comm. on the Judiciary, 105th Cong., 47-48 (1997) (testimony of Patrick Boyle). --------------------------------------------------------------------------- And there was a judge in New York who refused to punish protestors who harassed patients at an abortion clinic.\10\ The F.A.C.E. Act requires that such harassment be punished. Nonetheless, the judge would not follow the law. Although I disagree with abortion, the F.A.C.E. Act prohibits such harassment and should have been enforced. While the judge reached a conservative result, it was judicial activism because he did not follow the law. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \10\ United States v. Lynch, 952 F. Supp. 167 (1997). --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Further, if Congress passed a law prohibiting public speeches that criticized Senators, the current Supreme Court should strike it down 9- 0. This would not be judicial activism, but would be in accord with the clear command of the Constitution that ``Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech.'' \11\ Indeed, upholding such a law despite the words of the Constitution would be activism whether liberal or conservative speech was silenced. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \11\ U.S. Const. amend. I. In contrast, in 1934, in Home Building & Loan Ass'n v. Blaisdell, the Supreme Court upheld a statute passed by a State legislature that abrogated mortgage contracts despite Article I, Section 10 of the Constitution which clearly provides that ``No State shall . . . pass any . . . Law impairing the Obligation of Contracts . . . .'' This was activism because the Court did not follow the clear command of the Constitution, but assumed the role of active policy- maker itself. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- As for me, I am not willing to trade reaching politically palatable results in a few cases for certain application of the same rules to the highest government official and the most humble citizen in all cases. I am not willing to trade some judge's view of political justice for that described on the face of the Supreme Court Building--``Equal Justice Under Law.'' Conclusion In my view, the President and the Senate should work together to appoint qualified, fair judges who will follow the law. Today, while the Senate leaders continue to negotiate the peripheral issues of whether controversial nominees will receive a floor vote or whether a blue slip will be public, I urge Chairman Leahy to join the other Democratic Chairmen of the Armed Services, Banking, Veteran Affairs, Indian Affairs, and Foreign Relations Committees in starting to move forward in a bipartisan manner to hold hearings on judicial nominees. We now have blue slips returned and American Bar Association ratings of qualified or well qualified for several nominees that await a hearing. I am hopeful that Chairman Leahy, who appreciates and respects the federal judiciary and the Senate, will move promptly to provide judicial nominees with fair hearings. Thank you, Chairman Schumer. I look forward to listening to the statements from the other Senators here today and to hearing from our distinguished witnesses. Chairman Schumer. Thank you, Senator Sessions. Senator Feingold? STATEMENT OF HON. RUSSELL D. FEINGOLD, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN Senator Feingold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I certainly commend you for calling this hearing on the Senate's role in the selection of the Federal judiciary, and particularly on the question of the role of ideology in the judicial selection and confirmation process. This, of course, is an extremely important topic for our committee, and I know that we all take our role in this process very seriously. I look forward to the testimony of the witnesses and appreciate their willingness to help us sort through some very difficult but absolutely crucial issues. Let me begin by noting, as I did earlier this year, my view that nominations to the Federal judiciary differ from nominations to the President's Cabinet. I believe that the Senate owes the President perhaps the most substantial deference in the selection of the Cabinet. This deference flows in large part from the language of the Constitution which imposes on the President the duty faithfully to execute the laws of the Nation. I believe these considerations do not apply with equal force in the selection of the Federal judiciary. While in the constitutional scheme Cabinet members and other executive branch officials work to carry out the will of the President, our Constitution intends that the Federal judiciary will act independently as a check and balance on the executive and legislative branches of the Government. An independent judiciary has been the hallmark of our constitutional system of checks and balances. The Founders knew well the writings of William Blackstone, who said in his Commentaries, ``In this distinct and separate existence of the judicial power consists one main preservative of the public liberty which cannot subsist long in any state unless the administration of common justice be in some degree separated both from the legislative and also from the executive branch.'' The Constitution confers on the President the power to submit judicial nominations to the Senate, but I don't think the President is entitled to pack the judiciary with highly ideological judges. And the President is not entitled to pack the judiciary with judges certain to support the President's views on virtually all issues, such as a woman's right to choose, affirmative action, federalism, and church/state relations. The Federal judiciary is fundamental to protecting and advancing the rights of citizens and the rule of law, which forms the foundation of our Nation's economic and social well- being. We on the Judiciary Committee have a responsibility to protect the independence of the judiciary. We serve that responsibility when we given a high level of scrutiny to judicial nominees. The distinguished chairman, Senator Schumer, has expressed three touchstones for his evaluation of judicial nominees: excellence, moderation, and diversity. I share his view, but would add at least two touchstones of my own--fairness and open-mindedness. In other words, I would stress the ability of the nominee to conduct himself or herself as a judge, as that term is usually understood by most Americans. Senator Sessions and I have served together on this Committee for 6 years, but we do see the recent past differently. I just saw a different picture, Senator. We get along well as colleagues, but I saw a very different series of events. I thought the Republican majority in the Senate badly mistreated President Clinton's judicial nominees. I, for one, believe that some Republicans essentially refused to recognize that President Clinton won reelection in 1996 and too often treated every year after that as an election year as they considered judicial nominations. I believe that the time has come to end this cycle of recrimination, if we can, but it is not up to the Senate, now under Democratic control, to unilaterally call a truce. The President must lead. I call on the President to act boldly and begin a new era of cooperation on judicial nominations. That means engaging in true and meaningful consultation with the Senate on his nominations, and I think it means recognizing the improper efforts of his party to block President Clinton's nominees by renominating those who received the most reprehensible treatment. If he does that, I think he will find a lot of Senators willing to follow his lead and it would be an historic step. If he does not, this Senator stands ready vigorously to exercise his right and responsibility to advise and consent on nominations. I shall resist efforts to pack the judiciary simply with idealogues, and I am certain in that regard, Mr. Chairman, I won't stand alone. Thank you. Chairman Schumer. Thank you, Senator Feingold. We have three members of the full committee, or two will soon be of the full committee, we hope, who are not members of the subcommittee, but this is an important hearing and I would recognize them for opening statements, just asking them to be a little mindful of the time since we have a vote at 11:30. STATEMENT OF HON. JON KYL, ARIZONA, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA Senator Kyl. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, as a member of the full Committee and almost the Chairman of this subcommittee, or now your ranking member, I appreciate the opportunity to be at this hearing. I kind of regret that I didn't take that assignment, but my colleague, Jeff Sessions, wanted it and he will do far better than I. In any event, I appreciate your courtesy in allowing us to make a brief opening statement. I find it interesting that the argument that a candidate's ideology should be a sufficient rationale for rejection is characterized as a bipartisan approach. I would think that bipartisanship would mean quite the opposite. Cooperation with the President on a bipartisan basis I don't think begins with a threat that we are going to reject your nominees, no matter how competent they might be, if we don't like their political ideology, as we interpret it to be. I think we should make no mistake that what is being suggested here is a significant departure from the way that nominees have traditionally been treated. Have there been exceptions? Quite assuredly so, but they prove the rule because they are exceptions to that general deference that has always been given to the President's nominees. From a bipartisan point of view, it concerns me because I do believe it puts us on a very dangerous path of confrontation and contention here within the Congress, as well as in our relationship with the President, and also, as Senator Sessions has said, creates a very bad precedent. I also found it interesting that the Chairman alluded to President Bush's campaign theme and frankly the reaction to that by his opponent, who made it clear that if President Bush were elected, he would be putting strict constructionists like Justice Thomas and Justice Scalia on the Supreme Court. That, of course, I think was a correct characterization of the tradition that a President does do that. A President has that right when he is elected, and he has been elected, by the way, even though it was a close election. President Bush is the President, and I think the Democrats who campaigned against him on the basis that he would try to appoint people that were consistent with his judicial philosophy were correct in saying that he would do that, that that would be the end result, because the Senate has always confirmed nominees more or less of the President elected, regardless of how close the election was. President Clinton, after all, never had a majority of the citizens of this country vote for him, but we gave significant deference to his nominees. I think that it is a difference between a judicial approach rather than a political ideology. If you question that, look only to Justice Scalia, one of President Bush's favorite Justices, as he said, who just recently reached a result consistent with his judicial philosophy that I was a little concerned about politically because it restricted the police's right to gather evidence about what was going on in someone's home. He very strictly construed the Fourth Amendment as, in his view, prohibiting the police activity to advance law enforcement in the Kyllo case. That is, I think, a good recognition of the difference between a judicial philosophy and political ideology. I will just conclude with this point. For us in the Senate, all political figures, to assume that we can, with blindfolds over our eyes, maintain a balance on the Court at any given time, I think, is sheer folly. Would any of us have wanted to retain the balance on the Court after the Dred Scott decision? That is not the way it works. I would defy my colleagues to define balance today. I just have three quick examples here. On a 5-4 decision in the Kyllo case, Scalia's majority was joined by Justices Souter, Thomas, Ginsburg and Breyer. Justice Stevens' dissenting decision was joined by Rehnquist, O'Connor and Kennedy. Now, that is an interesting balance. Is that the balance we want to preserve? If so, I defy my colleagues to figure out how to do that. Contrast that in the equal protection case, the so-called Nguyen v. INS case that Justice Kennedy wrote for the majority, and his majority was comprised of Rehnquist, Stevens, Scalia and Thomas. O'Connor wrote the dissent, joined by Ginsburg and Breyer. Well, that is an interesting balance. Is that the balance that we want to preserve here? Or the two flag-burning cases in which Justice Brennan's majority opinion--this was back in 1989--was joined by Marshall, Blackmun, Scalia and Kennedy, and Rehnquist, Scalia and White dissented. Now, that is an interesting balance. Should we preserve that balance? My point is that for us as political figures--and this is our milieu, politics--to try to translate our political views onto a Court's job and maintain balance by our confirmations, I think, is sheer folly. Instead, we should all revert to what has traditionally been our role, judging the competence of the candidate; the qualifications, including judicial temperament, the background; and also some look at judicial philosophy. We are going to have some differences of opinion on judicial philosophy, but at a minimum it should be to adhere to precedent, to try to interpret the Constitution as honestly and in conformance with the rule of law as possible, and to allow injection of political ideology into the process. So it seems to me that we are on a very slippery slope, Mr. Chairman, when we begin to assert that pure ideology is a basis for rejection of the President's nominees. Thank you. Chairman Schumer. Thank you, Senator Kyl. STATEMENT OF HON. MITCH MCCONNELL, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF KENTUCKY Senator McConnell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I first began to deal with the Senate's advise and consent role as a staffer here in 1969 and 1970 to a member of this Committee during the Haynesworth and Carswell nominations, and subsequently wrote the only law journal article I wrote as a young man on that subject after those contentious nominations were concluded. I believed then and believe now that the appropriate role of the Senate is largely as Senator Kyl suggested, which is to judge the competence and the integrity and the fitness of a judge to be on the bench. I dutifully returned, gagging occasionally, every single one of the blue slips I received during the Clinton years positively. My view then and my view now is that the President won the election, no matter what the margin, and is entitled for the most part to tilt the judiciary in the direction that he feels appropriate. As Chairman of what we have come to call around here the Gang of 5, the G-5 group, over the last two or 3 weeks I have been involved in the issue in a different way, which is to discuss the appropriateness of making blue slips public, something we should have d1 years ago, and establishing for this Congress, and for that matter forever, as far as I am concerned, if we can do it, that Supreme Court nominees will ultimately be voted on by the full Senate. That is the tradition going back to 1880 for Supreme Court nominees to be determined by the full Senate. Nowhere in the Constitution is it suggested that advise and consent means only the Senate Judiciary Committee. That is just a starting place. In fact, at the end the full Senate ought to make these determinations. What I fear is going on with the hearing today is trying to establish a new litmus test for the Senate that has not existed in the past. I don't understand why we are seeking to do that. As Senator Sessions pointed out, and I think Senator Kyl alluded to this as well, 377 of President Clinton's nominees were approved. During 75 percent of his term, there was a Republican Senate here. During President Reagan's years, during which he had during 75 percent of his tenure in office a sympathetic Senate, only a few more were confirmed, 382. So what I fear is going on here is an effort to establish a new standard under which nominees are judged and a litmus test is established that substantially is at variance with the majority of the American people. What appears to be happening-- and I hope this will not prove to be the case--is that some on the left are increasingly dedicated to shutting down the vibrant marketplace of ideas and replacing it with a monopoly of thought where the only commodity to be bought is a kind of liberal orthodoxy. Their reason is that the conservative views are not ``in the mainstream.'' Well, I can't see my chart over there, but I believe the first thing we have up is a six-point litmus test. What I fear is going on here is an effort to establish a litmus test where you have to support judicial activism, restrict First Amendment rights of political speech and association, oppose Second Amendment rights for law-abiding citizens, support partial-birth abortion, support racial preferences, and expand the Federal Government or, put another way, diminish the role of the States. Those are views that you have to espouse in order to be approved by this committee. Now, those are not the views out in middle America. The other chart that I have put up sort of illustrates where most of the country is. The States in red on the chart are commonly referred to as middle America. I would suggest that most of those folks are in the real mainstream, people in Kentucky and Kansas and Ohio. The odds are, if you are from those States, you will have middle American values. And if you do and you are nominated to the Federal bench, under what I think may be trying to be established here today and in the future, you may be unable to serve because your values are considered suspect or somehow outside the mainstream. Well, where is the mainstream, I ask you? Where is the mainstream? All across most of America, in most of the States, I think the mainstream would be quite different from what may be underway here today to establish as sort of acceptable views things that are far different from what most Americans hold. That is why the safest place to be and the sound place to be and the place where the Senate has been most of the history of our country is largely deferring to the President on the question of ideology and judging the competence and the integrity of the nominee. The President was elected, not the editorial board of the New York Times. And as astonishing as it may sound to some here, the editorial views of the New York Times are not mainstream values. Those are not the values of the vast majority of Americans. So I think we are going down, as Senator Kyl said, a slippery slope if we are trying to establish here the principle that this Committee should adopt the views of the New York Times editorial page, describe those as mainstream values, and anyone who doesn't hold them need not apply, and may actually die right here in this Committee and never even be considered by the full Senate of the United States. I doubt if the Founding Fathers were aware that there would be a Judiciary Committee. It probably never occurred to them. When they said ``advise and consent,'' I think they were talking about the full Senate. Certainly, the Founding Fathers did not envision that there would be a bunch of co-presidents here. They did, after all, give the power to nominate to the President. So, Mr. Chairman, I hope that that is not the ultimate goal of this hearing to establish values, if you will, that are far removed from mainstream America, and say that if you don't hold those values, you can't be on the Federal judiciary. I hope that is not the way we are headed. I thank you very much for the opportunity to make an opening statement. [The prepared statement of Senator McConnell follows.] Statement of Hon. Mitch McConnell, a U.S. Senator from the State of Kentucky Determining what is the exact role of the United States Senate in the confirmation process is an important question, and I thank the Chairman for convening this hearing to try to answer it. From press accounts I have read, I am very concerned, however, that some of my colleagues have a much more specific, and a much more disturbing, goal for this hearing. That goal is to establish that it is somehow constitutionally incumbent upon this body to disqualify otherwise well- qualified judicial nominees simply because they are not on the left of the political spectrum. Once my colleagues and their supporters on the far left believe they have established this premise, I fear they will then work to block all judicial nominees who do not fall on the ``correct'' side of the political spectrum, as they define it. This is a troubling proposition. It is one that does not bode well for the nomination process, nor for the rich intellectual tradition that has characterized our federal judiciary. One of the great traditions of our Republic has been the free exchange of thoughts, embodied in the metaphor of the ``market place of ideas,'' where speakers hawk their wares, bidding for the minds of men. Our judiciary has benefitted from what has been, up until now, our profound national commitment to diverse thought and rigorous debate. I cannot imagine how much poorer our legal tradition would be if it would have been deprived of the rich intellect of such different thinkers as Oliver Wendell Holmes, Hugo Black, William Brennan, and Antonin Scalia. But unfortunately it appears that some on the left are increasingly dedicated to shutting down this vibrant market place and replacing it with a monopoly of thought, where the only commodity to be bought is liberal orthodoxy. Their reason? That conservative views are not ``in the mainstream.'' Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry, but the values of middle America are most certainly in the mainstream, and arguably embody it. All these states in red-these states, commonly known as ``middle America"-are ``in the mainstream.'' [See Chart With Map] Kentuckians, for example, are ``in the main stream.'' So too are Kansans and Ohioans. Odds are, if you are from these states, you will have middle- American values. And if you do, and you are nominated to the federal bench, you most likely will be unable to serve, because those on the far left are crafting a new, six-point litmus test to bar you from the bench. [See Chart With Bullet-Points] Now, we are all familiar with litmus tests, but I'm afraid that some on the far left are taking it to new, disturbing levels. In their view, in order to serve as a federal judge, you must: Support Judicial Activism; Restrict First Amendment Rights of Political Speech and Association; Oppose Second Amendment Rights for Law-Abiding Citizens; Support Partial-Birth Abortion; Support Racial Preferences; and Expand the Federal Government by Diminishing the Role of the States Under their approach, if a nominee is tripped-up by any one of these hurdles, he is unfit to serve. His education will not matter. His experience will not matter. His achievements, both personal and professional, will not matter, nor will the fact that he may have overcome numerous adversities, suffered untold hardships, and even received the approval of the ABA. It will not matter if he has fought for his country, given to his community, or sacrificed for his family. Because he is not the person whom the editorial board of the New York Times would have picked to serve on the bench, he is barred from service. Over the years, people from time to time have objected to judicial nominees on the ground that their legal views were extreme. But until now, they have saved ``Borking'' for an unlucky few. Until now, they have not tried to convert the usage of ``Borking'' from an exception to the rule itself. They have not sought to disqualify an entire class of nominees from public service based on their philosophy. They have not essentially said, until now, that ``Prolifers need not apply.'' My colleagues, if we go down this road, we will have a meltdown in our nomination process. It will be mutuallyassured destruction that will cripple the federal judiciary. It is naive to think that such a dramatic escalation in partisanship will not, by necessity, be visited upon the next Democrat to occupy the White House. We therefore cannot allow ``advise and consent'' to become ``demand and dictate.'' The Constitution does not provide for 100--or even 51--co-Presidents. So I caution my colleagues to be judicious in their objections to the well- qualified Americans who will come before them. Voting for nominees of another philosophical stripe can be painful, but both sides have always done it. Most recently, I point to President Clinton's near-record number of 377 judicial nominees who were confirmed, even though Republicans controlled the Senate for 75% of his term. For eight long years I voted to confirm most of President Clinton's nominees, although there is no way I would have nominated most of these people if I were President because I disagreed with their judicial philosophy, sometimes vigorously so. But I did not wage some sort of jihad to stop them because, quite frankly, it was not appropriate for me to do so. Nor would it be appropriate now for my colleagues on the other side to bow to pressure from groups on the far left and wage an all-out war against well-qualified Americans who seek to serve their country. So, in closing, I would caution my colleagues to be mindful of the precedent they are setting, and to be wary of what they wish for. Thank you. [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9825.027 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9825.028 Chairman Schumer. Thank you, Senator McConnell, and we won't ask you to substitute the views of the Courier Journal for those of the New York Times in your statement. [Laughter.] Senator McConnell. They are indistinguishable. They simply rewrite them each day, one day later. [Laughter.] Chairman Schumer. The Senator from Kansas for a brief opening statement. STATEMENT OF HON. SAM BROWNBACK, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF KANSAS Senator Brownback. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for allowing me to participate during this reorganization period on the committee. I think a number of my colleagues have expressed a high degree of concern of getting into an ideological set of litmus tests here on considering judicial nominations, and I would support those concerns. I think those are proper, I think they are wise. I think they are the sort of philosophy and thought that we should consider over a long period of time, the impact of inserting ideology in the matter. I have always given the President, regardless of his political affiliation, a good deal of deference on his nominees, or her nominees in the future, to the Federal bench. However, I have heard some call for changes on this deference now because, while ideology has been discussed in the back rooms, now we should bring it out and openly bring it forward. I don't think we should be inserting ideology in these matters, ideology for a liberal litmus test or a conservative litmus test, going either way. I would just like to take, if I could, Mr. Chairman, a few minutes to discuss the number of past jurists that we have had who would not make the bench today if we went on an ideological test. Take, for example, Justice Hugo Black, a great liberal Justice, the architect of extending the Bill of Rights to the States. This Roosevelt appointee could not be confirmed under the new standard because he did not believe that the Constitution's test provided protection to contraception, and he did not believe that the Equal Protection Clause prohibited poll taxes for State elections. Let's look at Felix Frankfurter, a liberal intellectual who advocated validating New Deal legislation under the Commerce Clause. This Roosevelt appointee could not be confirmed under the new standard because he did not believe that the First Amendment prohibited schools from requiring students to salute the American flag. He did not believe that the Fourth Amendment required the exclusion of evidence seized by State police officers without a warrant. He did not agree that the Equal Protection Clause required reasonable apportionment among State voting districts. Justice Byron White, President Kennedy's appointee, a respected Yale Law graduate, could not hope for confirmation under the new standard. He did not believe that the Constitution included a right to an abortion. Justice Lewis Powell, a philosophically moderate president of the American Bar Association who worked to implement desegregation in Richmond's public schools, could not be confirmed under the new standard. He could not be confirmed because he believed that, while race could be considered in university admissions, racial quotas could not be used. Oliver Wendell Holmes, the great dissenter from the pre-New Deal Courts, couldn't be confirmed. He looked at use of substantive due process to strike down labor laws, and was an avid defender of the Free Speech Clause. He would have trouble. After all, he affirmed a State law providing for the sterilization of the mentally ill. Louis Brandeis, a great liberal craftsman, could be disqualified based on his views on federalism. He voted to strike down a Federal tax on child labor as invading the sovereignty of the States, and believed that the headlong drive for national power by the supporters of the New Deal threatened to destroy one of the great bulwarks of liberty, that being federalism. He later voted to strike down pieces of New Deal legislation as beyond Congress' commerce power and as an unconstitutional delegation of power. Finally, what about Earl Warren, the author of Brown v. Board of Education, a great decision in my hometown, and a champion of civil rights? He could have a tough confirmation battle under the new standards. After all, he took the reactionary position of not supporting extension of the First Amendment protection to flag-burning. If a Democrat President nominated such individuals, most of whom would be left of center, a Republican Senate would give them due deference, and I think it would be wise that they would. Likewise, if a Republican President nominated qualified nominees who were mostly right of center, I think a Democratic Senate should give them due deference as well. Yet, to some special interest groups, the above nominees would be too extreme. Perhaps the real extremism is being employed by those artfully using the terms ``balance'' and ``moderation'' to set the stage for ending deference to the President and excluding perfectly qualified nominees. Mr. Chairman, I make those comments and those examples because I think if you take any single nominee and you pick one thing, two things, maybe three things out, you can find an ideological reason that they should be excluded. I listed some of the great jurists of this country's history, and would we exclude all of those today from serving on the Court? I would hope not. But I think if we start going down this road of saying that ideology is the litmus test that we are measuring on, we have the opportunity of blocking some of the great people that could serve on the bench and I think that would be a wrong step for us to take. Thank you. Chairman Schumer. I thank the Senator, and thank all of my colleagues for statements. I would just say in reference to the Senator from Kansas, no one is saying that a single issue should block any judge. The question--and we are trying to explore this question, and I regret that some of my colleagues seem so defensive about an exploration of what has been a time-honored discussion--is whether their views on those issues or other issues should enter into the discussion as we evaluate them. But evaluation does not equal a litmus test, and in the past, at least, it seems to me that we have avoided even evaluation on those issues and it is a very open question as to whether that should continue. We will have some great witnesses, whom we will get to right now, to discuss that, and so let me thank them for their patience and for their being here. We have two gentlemen who have been extremely involved, of course, in the Presidential part of the selection of judges and Justices, and let me call on both of them. First, Lloyd Cutler is a partner and senior counsel in the Washington law firm of Wilmer, Cutler and Pickering. From 1979 to 1980 and in 1994, he served as counsel to Presidents Carter and Clinton. Mr. Cutler is a graduate of both Yale College and Yale Law School, and a founder and former co-chairman of the Lawyers Committee on Civil Rights under Law. He has also served as the co-chairman of the Committee on the Constitutional System, a member of the American Law Institute, and trustee of the Brookings Institution. He is testifying today in his capacity as a co-chair of the Constitution Project's bipartisan Courts Initiative. I want to thank Mr. Cutler for joining us. Immediately after him, we will hear from C. Boyden Gray. Mr. Gray is presently a partner in the Washington, D.C., law firm of Wilmer, Cutler and Pickering. Mr. Gray graduated from Harvard College magna cum laude, and first in his class from the University of North Carolina Law School, where he served as editor-in-chief of the UNC Law Review. Following graduation from law school, he clerked for Chief Justice Earl Warren of the U.S. Supreme Court for a year. He served as legal counsel to Vice President George Bush from 1981 to 1989. Mr Gray later served as counsel to President Bush from 1989 to 1993. I want to thank both of you for coming. Your entire statements will be inserted into the record. Mr. Cutler, you may proceed. STATEMENT OF LLOYD N. CUTLER, CO-CHAIR, CONSTITUTION PROJECT'S COURTS INITIATIVE, AND FORMER WHITE HOUSE COUNSEL, WASHINGTON, D.C. Mr. Cutler. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee. Since you referred to our law firm twice, I should note for the record that Boyden and I were law partners there before either of us became counsel to a President. In listening to the opening statements, I couldn't help noticing your differences on what I call ideology begin with how to pronounce it. You, Mr. Chairman, Senator Feingold and Senator Kyl all say ``ideology.'' Senator Sessions and I say ``ideology.'' It seems to be a question of ``you say tomato and I say tomato.'' Perhaps the best answer to it all is Potter Stewart's famous remark about pornography that he could not define it, but he knew it when he saw it. Perhaps that is equally fair about ideology. I have served on these two national committees that you referred to, one run by the Miller Center at the University of Virginia, in 1999, and the other run by the Century Foundation, and you have just referred to that as well. There conclusions on this issue of ideology are set forth in their reports, and I want to read only one extract from the Miller Center report which essentially agreed to in the later 1999 report of the Century Foundation. The Miller report: ``What is most important is the appointment of judges who are learned in the law, who are conscientious in their work ethic, and who possess what lawyers describe as `judicial temperament.' That term, difficult to define, essentially has to do with a personality that is evenhanded, unbiased, impartial, courteous yet firm, and dedicated to a process, not a result. The law will be fairly read and applied, irrespective of the judge's personal views as to its wisdom; where the judge is the finder of fact, the facts will be fairly found.'' ``As this Report recognizes, throughout our history the appointment process has been built on politics. . .The Commission believes it would be a tragic development if ideology became an increasingly important consideration in the future. To make ideology an issue in the confirmation process is to suggest that the legal process is and should be a political one. That is not only wrong as a matter of political science; it also serves to weaken public confidence in the courts. Just as candidates should put aside their partisan political views when appointed to the bench, so too should they put aside ideology. To retain either is to betray dedication to the process of impartial judging. Men and women qualified by training to be judges generally do not wish to and do not indulge in partisan or ideological approaches to their work. The rate exception should not be taken as the norm.'' Now, we recognized in both commissions, and I personally recognize that there is a very fine between ideology and other considerations. Is the candidate judicious? Is he fair and open-minded? Are his decisions prepared and presented in a way that is likely to be accepted as having those qualities by the general public? And is his personal conduct beyond reproach? All of these are legitimate questions for an administration nominating judges and for the Senate in deciding whether to confirm them. As many of you have noted, Senators can and do reject candidates on the ground that they are ideological, but they need to ask themselves is this within the ambit of appropriate advice and consent? That, of course, at least in my view, is up to the Senators themselves to decide in the first instance. But just like Presidents and members of the Department of Justice and White House Counsel, they should be careful to limit their interrogations as to a candidate's stance on issues about to reach the court. As I said, the same thing also applies to the President and the Department of Justice. Candidates should decline to reply when efforts are made to find out how they would decide a particular case. And most important--and this has been a recent tendency at least in my last experience as White House Counsel--interest groups should eschew--a real lawyer's word--personal attacks on candidates to defeat those they want to keep off the bench. There have been cases that I know about personally in which an interest group who wanted to block a particular candidate literally tried to find some dirt, something to do with sexual behavior or whatever, to spread against that candidate to keep him off the bench. What seems to be the saving grace in all of this is the so- called Good Behavior Clause, that judges should serve during their good behavior. Something happens to a judge when he is nominated, confirmed and put on the bench because of the Good Behavior Clause. He is no longer worried about will he get reappointed. He will often confound the President who appointed him, or even the Senators who voted in his favor. There is a famous story which I am sure the scholars will refer to about President Lincoln and Samuel P. Chase, who was then in the Lincoln Cabinet. This is, of course, the legal tender case in which the Court split evenly 4-4 on whether the Federal Government had the right to issue paper money as an emergency measure during the war. Lincoln wrote to a friend that ``we cannot ask the man how he would decide the case on reargument, and if he should answer us, we should despise him for it. Therefore, we must pick a candidate of whose views we are absolutely certain.'' And he went ahead and picked Secretary Chase, who had been a member of Lincoln's Cabinet and who had presented the legal tender bill to the Congress and had gotten it enacted. And in the outcome, Senator Chase, on rehearing, cast the deciding vote against the very statute he had helped to present. I see we are limited in time. Chairman Schumer. Please proceed. We will shut off the light. Mr. Cutler. Just one more quick point, and that is the point made by Professor Charles Black, who has been of our greatest students of the Supreme Court, and that is that the Court is the lynch pin of the whole constitutional system because it is the Court which validates most of the acts of the Executive and the Congress in a way that the public will accept, in a way that reassures the public. Of course, in the course of performing that duty, the Court occasionally, but only occasionally, knocks out a particular statute or a particular example of egregious Executive action. But its main function is to validate what the other two elected branches do, and to do it in a way that convinces the public that most of the actions of the Government are acceptable. The Court, as others have referred to--Senator Kyl, I think, about the Dred Scott case--has not always been the most popular institution in the country by far. The Dred Scott case itself, dealing with whether former slaves are really citizens within the meaning of the Fifth Amendment; the law invalidating the income tax--there are a number of other examples in which the Supreme Court was looked on as the defender of property rights, the upholder of the rights of the rich against those of the less fortunate. All of that changed with the Warren Court, my colleague Boyden Gray's distinguished Chief Justice for whom he served as law clerk. Ever since the days of the Warren Court, most members of the public have come to believe that the Court is the protector of the rights of all citizens, rich and poor. And that is the Court's most important function, and that function is less likely to be performed well by idealogues of the extreme left or the extreme right. It takes centrists to arrive at results which the general public will accept and feel reassured were confirmed by a dispassionate, law-abiding Court. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. [The prepared statement of Mr. Cutler follows:] Statement of Lloyd N. Cutler, Co-Chair, Constitution Project's Courts Initiative, and former White House Counsel, Washington, D.C. I have served on two national commissions dealing with how to improve the process of nominating and confirming federal judges. Both have taken up the ideological issues that are the subject of your hearing today. The first commission, created by The Miller Center of Public Affairs at the University of Virginia, filed its report in 1996. The second, created by the Century Foundation and called Citizens for Independent Courts, filed its report in 1999. My views on the role of ideology in the nominating and confirming process are set forth in these reports. They are incorporated in my statement. I will read a few key paragraphs from-each: First The Miller Center report in 1996: ``What is most important is the appointment of judges who are learned in the law, who are conscientious in their work ethic, and who possess what lawyers describe as ``judicial temperament.'' That term, difficult to define, essentially has to do with a personality that is evenhanded, unbiased, impartial, courteous yet firm, and dedicated to a process, not a result. The law will be fairly read and applied, irrespective of the judge's personal views as to its wisdom; where the judge is the finder of fact, the facts will be fairly found.'' ``As this Report recognizes, throughout our history the appointment process has been built on politics. The danger of purely political appointees lacking the necessary competence led Attorney General Brownell to introduce the American Bar Association's participation in the process. At that time--and for some years thereafter--relatively few persons in the Executive Branch and the Senate or its staff worked on judicial appointments, and rarely were any of them, even when lawyers, experienced in court practices and procedures. The ABA Committee was designed to fill that lack and insure, insofar as the political process permitted, the high quality of those selected.'' ``In addition to the growing number of appointments, the changing political process has had its impact on who the candidates for judicial office are and whether they will be nominated and confirmed. The increasingly ideological nature of political campaigns, the need for huge sums of money, the growth of dependence on contributions from various ideological groups, and the willingness of these groups to launch personal attacks on candidates they ideologically oppose, has the potential to affect the appointment process in unfortunate ways. Even putting aside the cases of Supreme Court nominees such as Robert Bork and Clarence Thomas, where this problem was obvious, there have been some signs of similar ideological controversy creeping into the process of nominating and confirming lower court candidates. While it appears that the present administration has been conscious of the problem and relatively successful in avoiding such ideological controversies, we have learned of occasional episodes where qualified candidates have refused to be considered or have withdrawn from fear of being ``Borked.'' The Commission believes that it would be a tragic development if ideology became an increasingly important consideration in the future. To make ideology an issue in the confirmation process is to suggest that the legal process is and should be a political one. That is not only wrong as a matter of political science; it also serves to weaken public confidence in the courts. Just as candidates should put aside their partisan political views when appointed to the bench, so too should they put aside ideology. To retain either is to betray dedication to the process of impartial judging. Men and women qualified by training and experience to be judges generally do not wish to and do not indulge in partisan or ideological approaches to their work. The rare exception should not be taken as the norm. In any case, it is our view that the important process of appointing federal judges need not be as difficult as it now seems. The ultimate question is simply whether or not potential candidates have the qualities of integrity, good judgment and experience to become judicial officers of the United States. Occasional mistakes will be made. But no amount of bureaucratic vetting or testing for ideology will achieve perfection, and too complex a process can do more harm than good.'' Second, the Century Foundation Report in 1999: Recommendations for Executive and Legislative Branch Reviewers on Ideology in Federal Judicial Selection 1. Candidates for judgeships should be committed to deciding cases based on the law and facts of particular cases, without the intrusion of any rigid ideological pre-commitments to certain results or approaches to the law. 2. Reviewers should investigate a candidate's experience, qualifications, temperament, character, and general views of the law and of the judicial role. Selecting a federal judge is not just a matter of picking a legal technician, for a person's judgments may well reflect one's broad values and commitments. 3. Reviewers must refrain from asking candidates for particular pre-commitments about unresolved cases or issues that may come before them as judges. 4. The limit on questions seeking pre-commitments should be applied by reviewers in a common-sense fashion. In particular, this limit should not be allowed to prevent a fully deliberative investigation into the backgrounds, qualifications, and judicial philosophies of candidates for judgeships. 5. The limit on questions seeking pre-commitments should be respected equally by the President and other executive branch reviewers as well as by senators and other legislative branch reviewers, despite differences in the roles played by the two branches in the appointment process. 6. The limit on questions seeking pre-commitments should apply with respect to candidates for courts at all levels of the federal judiciary. 7. Reviewers seeking to assess a candidate's views should exercise caution when evaluating a person's current or former clients, memberships, and writings or speeches. 8. The value of judicial independence is consistent with pursuing diversity on the federal bench. 9. The value of judicial independence is consistent with active involvement by bar associations in the selection process. Rather than read these extracts from the two reports, I will file them for the record. After making a few personal observations of my own, I will be pleased to answer your questions. Chairman Schumer. Thank you, Mr. Cutler. Mr. Gray? STATEMENT OF C. BOYDEN GRAY, FORMER WHITE HOUSE COUNSEL, WASHINGTON, D.C. Mr. Gray. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Even though Lloyd and I come from the same law firm, we didn't cook up this testimony together. I am happy to see that we are not that far apart on this issue, although on others we do, of course, differ. I would like to just summarize three points from my testimony quickly. I think it is entirely appropriate to ask questions about the general philosophy of a candidate in terms of how he views his role as a judge and the role of the judiciary, but I think it is very inappropriate to ask about specific cases or specific issues. I remember very vividly as though it were yesterday coming down to the Senate in the beginning of the first Bush administration, meeting with Senators Hatch and Thurmond. The meeting was called by the chairman, Senator Biden, and Senator Kennedy was there. And we were told in no uncertain terms that if they caught us asking any potential nominee any questions about specific cases that that nominee would be flatly rejected. We took that to heart, and I think that is reflected today in the Senate Committee questionnaire which asks, ``Has anyone involved in the process of selecting you as a judicial nominee discussed with you any specific case, legal issue, or question in a manner that could reasonably be interpreted as asking or seeking a commitment as to how you would rule on such a case, issue or question?'' I would add that this is a bipartisan approach, and remind the Committee of what Senator Kennedy said in 1981 in defending Justice O'Connor's refusal to answer questions on abortion. He said, ``It is offensive to suggest that a potential Justice of the Supreme Court must pass some presumed test of judicial philosophy.'' The reason why targeting such issues as federalism for potential reversal is precisely because it challenges the independence of the judiciary and the Supreme Court, which independence is the cornerstone of our constitutional system. The second point I want to make is that ideology or litmus tests have, in fact, never been the rule of application by the Senate. Many facts and numbers have been thrown out this morning by members of the committee. I won't belabor the point, but in the last 20 or so years the Senate has changed hands several times, and yet nominees have been approved at the clip of about 190 per 4-year term. In the Reagan-Bush period, the Senate was held by the Democrats for 6 of the 12 years and by Republicans in the other 6. I don't think there was any basic difference in how those nominees were treated by the Senate, and the same I think is true in the Clinton period, about 190 per 4-year term. Finally, party affiliation and perceived ideology--I question whether they are very good predictors of how judges will at the end of the day vote. Seven of the current members of the Supreme Court were appointed by Republicans. Yet, two of those seven are among the most liberal judges of the last period, and no one would say with certainty that they could have predicted how they would have voted, how their pattern of votes has emerged, at the time of their selection. One of the most famous examples of a nominee not going along with the program of the President who appointed him is Oliver Wendell Holmes. Their relationship was strained as a result. I think they remained friends until the end, but it was not something which President Roosevelt took a lot of joy in. The person for whom I clerked, the Chief Justice of the United States, Earl Warren, was viewed reputedly from the history books by President Eisenhower as a big mistake because he was thought to be so liberal. Yet, toward the end of his career he issued some opinions in areas of federalism which I think today would look conservative. His views on pornography, I think, today would be viewed as outright reactionary. The point is that I don't know how you apply a litmus test fairly without creating the perception, if not in fact the reality, of again threatening the very independence of the judiciary, which is such a central building block of our constitutional system. Thank you very much. [The prepared statement of Mr. Gray follows:] Statement of C. Boyden Gray, Former White House Counsel, Washington, D.C. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for this opportunity to appear today. If the goal of today's hearing is to answer the question, ``Should ideology matter?'' I can answer in one word: No. The only legitimate question on this subject--from the White House, the Senate, the Judiciary Committee, or an individual Senator--pertains to the proper Constitutional role of a federal judge. The question is very simple: ``What is the proper role of a federal judge, or of the federal judiciary?'' If the nominee's answer is ``to interpret and apply the law,'' or words to that effect, then you have a nominee who understands the limited role of a judge. If, on the other hand, a nominee views the judiciary as a vehicle for favoring particular interest groups or particular outcomes, then the nominee is unfit to be a judge and should consider running for legislative office instead. Historically, judicial nominees have not been asked about their views. There simply were no hearings on judicial nominees until 1925. Even then, the hearings were perfunctory affairs for decades. When Byron White was nominated to the Supreme Court in 1962, the Judiciary Committee asked him eight questions and the hearing lasted 15 minutes. In 1981, Senator Kennedy defended Sandra Day O'Connor's refusal to answer questions about her views on abortion. He said, ``It is offensive to suggest that a potential justice of the Supreme Court must pass some presumed test of judicial philosophy.'' As I said earlier, I think there is one legitimate test of judicial philosophy. But if the Senate--or the White House--asks overly specific questions, they threaten the independence of the federal judiciary by seeking advance commitments to rule certain ways in particular cases. In fact, the questionnaire that the Judiciary Committee sends to judicial nominees before its hearings makes clear that this is an unacceptable practice. The questionnaire asks, ``Has anyone involved in the process of selecting you as a judicial nominee discussed with you any specific case, legal issue or question in a manner that could reasonably be interpreted as asking or seeking a commitment as to how you would rule on such case, issue or question? If so, please explain fully.'' Very early in the first Bush administration, when I was White House Counsel, I met with Judiciary Committee Chairman Biden and Senators Kennedy, Hatch and Thurmond. Senators Biden and Kennedy made it very clear, with Senators Hatch and Thurmond nodding in agreement, that a nominee would not be confirmed if the White House were caught asking questions about specific issues or cases. Both Republicans and Democrats have been accused of using unfair, politically driven litmus tests in nominating or confirming judges. The criterion I have outlined is the closest thing to a proper litmus test because it only considers whether the nominee understands the proper Constitutional role of an unelected federal judge, which in turn indicates whether he or she understands the American system of self- government. In our democracy, decisions on major political issues should be made by the people and their elected representatives, not by unelected judges. This has been the prevailing and respectable point of view since our nation's founding. The alternative view--that judges can make decisions freely, without being constrained by the language of the Constitution or statutes--is an extreme position shared by almost no one. That's the view that should be described as extremist, because it lets judges do whatever they want, regardless of what the law says, and that should frighten Americans on both ends of the political spectrum. As Thomas Jefferson cautioned, if judges were allowed to interpret the law to be what they wish, the Constitution would be ``a mere thing of wax in the hands of the Judiciary, which they may twist and shape into any form they please.'' Some organizations and individuals have urged the Senate to just say no to judges nominated by a President of the other party. Before President George W. Bush was even inaugurated, before a single judge had been named or nominated, one group said it would fight so hard against his judicial nominees that ``it will be scorched earth. We won't give one lousy inch.'' That hasn't been the historical approach, and I urge you to reject this political warfare. It threatens judicial independence at its most vulnerable and fundamental core. During the twelve years of the Reagan-Bush er