Welcome to the GSB
FIND A COURSE FOR YOU Studying at the GSB is a career-making move. From our top-ranked MBA to our suite of executive education short courses, the GSB caters to leaders and managers at every stage of their learning journey. We listen to the market and develop courses that can help to get you future ready. Find the perfect course for your needs. OUR COURSES

The Business of Africa Africa is booming and the continent is hungry for skills, investment and wise leadership. As one of the leading business schools in the region, the GSB works hard to ensure that the work we do is actionable and relevant for our continent and that our students are engaged and ready to make a contribution to its sustainable development. EXPLORE

World Class Education If you want to study with the best, look no further. The GSB is recognised as a top performer globally. We are one of just three African business schools to have triple-crown accreditation with endorsements from three of the world's most stringent accreditation bodies. And our school is regularly voted as the top school on the continent by its peers in the Eduniversal Best Business Schools Worldwide ranking. OUR CREDENTIALS

The Business of Innovation & Entrepreneurship Innovation is the life blood of organisations and economies and the success of tomorrow's leaders will depend on their ability to manage change and drive innovation. At the GSB, we seek to provide a platform for students, academics and business professionals from around the world to collaborate and originate new ideas and develop new solutions to current and future challenges, particularly those facing us in Africa. OUR THINKING

For Organisations To be the best - you need to get the best out of your people. At the GSB, we understand that your training intervention needs to make a significant and relevant impact on your people's performance and move the bottom line. Our customisation team will help you to think through the challenges that you face in your unique context and design a solution that will pay dividends. OUR OFFERING

Upcoming Events An investment in knowledge pays the best dividends - according to Benjamin Franklin - and we at the GSB agree. That's why we regularly use our convening power to host distinguished speakers from across the spectrum at our events and roundtable discussions to foster debate around the things that matter in our country and the world. Our events are open to anyone who shares our love of knowledge and commitment to building a better future. OUR EVENTS