A-Positive Blood Type Diet: What to Eat and Avoid, Benefits and R
Healthline and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link on this page.

Overview The concept of blood type diets was originally put forth by the naturopathic physician Dr. Peter J. D’Adamo in his book, “Eat Right 4 Your Type.” He claims that differing blood types evolved at various points in our genetic history and that your blood type should determine what you eat and how you exercise. Blood type diets are a system of eating which categorize foods as beneficial, neutral, or harmful. It’s based on a person’s blood type and other factors. D’Adamo claims foods harmful to your blood type cause an agglutination reaction. This makes blood cells stick together, increasing the risk of disease. Read on to learn more about this diet and D’Adamo’s claims.

Eating foods based on blood type The blood type diet requires a regimen called compliance. This refers to eating “beneficials.” Beneficials are chosen for each blood type, based upon the lectins, or molecules, which the food contains. On this diet, people are defined as being “secretors” or “nonsecretors.” These terms refer to an individual’s ability to secrete blood type antigens into bodily fluids. What you eat is partly based upon your secretor status. This is why the diet is known as an individualized plan. Food ratios are also provided for each blood type group. These are further broken down into ratios specifically recommended for people of African, Caucasian, and Asian descent. Supplements are recommended for blood type diets, which are sold on D’Adamo’s website.

Theoretic origins of blood types According to Dr. D’Adamo, the A-positive blood type became prevalent during the early years of the agricultural age. He theorizes this is why people with this blood type can readily digest vegetables and carbohydrates, but have a difficult time digesting animal protein and fat. The A-positive blood type diet is primarily vegetarian. D’Adamo believes people with this blood type have less-than-robust immune systems and are prone to anxiety. His diet plan promises: weight loss

less disease

more energy

better digestion As with any diet, people may try this plan in order to lose weight or for other health benefits. Weight loss and lowered cholesterol have been reported by people who have tried this diet. However, there’s no evidence the theory underlying this diet caused these results. Like many other food plans, this plan stresses avoidance of: processed foods

foods high in sugar

simple carbohydrates These diet measures are known to benefit anyone’s health, regardless of blood type.

What to eat on the A-positive blood type diet D’Adamo recommends people on the A-positive blood type diet eat an organic, vegetarian, or almost-vegetarian food plan. Foods to eat include: soy protein, such as tofu

certain grains, such as spelt, hulled barley, and sprouted bread

walnuts, pumpkin seeds, and peanuts

olive oil

certain fruits, such as blueberries and elderberries

certain kinds of beans and legumes

certain vegetables, especially dark, leafy greens, such as kale, Swiss chard, and spinach

garlic and onions

cold-water fish, such as sardines and salmon

limited amounts of chicken and turkey

green tea

ginger The diet recommends eating protein at the start of the day. Canned sardines or a smoothie made with silken tofu and goat milk may be a good option. Limited amounts of animal protein, such as turkey and eggs, are allowed on this diet plan. They may be eaten for breakfast. Vegetables, fruits, and the allowed grains may be eaten at any meal.

What to avoid on the A-positive blood type diet The list of foods people with A-positive blood should avoid is extremely extensive. It includes, but isn’t limited to: beef

pork

lamb

cow’s milk

potatoes, yams, and sweet potatoes

certain vegetables, such as cabbage, eggplant, tomatoes, peppers, and mushrooms

lima beans

certain fruits, such as melons, oranges, strawberries, and mangos

poultry other than chicken and turkey, such as duck

venison

fish, such as bluefish, barracuda, haddock, herring, and catfish

some grains and grain products, such as wheat bran, multigrain bread, and durum wheat

refined sugar

refined carbohydrates, such as white flour and white bread

oils other than olive oil

artificial ingredients

most condiments

Does the blood type diet work? There’s no scientific evidence this diet works or that it alleviates any specific health conditions. Medical conditions which D’Adamo states are associated with this blood type include: cancer

diabetes

anxiety disorders

cardiovascular disease There has been research examining if blood types are at risk of developing certain conditions. A large 2012 study found non-O blood type groups, including type A blood, were associated with a higher risk of coronary heart disease. A 2015 study found the type A blood group had an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. More research is needed to understand why. One 2014 study found that adherence to the A-positive blood type diet might yield benefits, such as: reduced body mass index (BMI)

blood pressure

serum triglycerides

cholesterol However, these benefits weren’t seen to be influenced by, or associated with, study participants’ blood types.

What are the risks? While there are no specific health risks associated with this diet, it’s highly restrictive and hard to follow. It’s important that anyone striving to follow this eating plan makes sure they’re getting broad-based nutrition from a wide range of foods, including protein sources.