Libertarians stand by their Senate candidate
CLOSE

The Montana Libertarian Party (Photo: Montana Libertarian Party)

The Montana Libertarian Party says it continues to “fully support and endorse” its candidate for U.S. Senate in Tuesday’s election, even though he said last week after an anonymous “dark money” flier arose that he endorses a Republican.

The Libertarian Party said late Friday they have had members feel "betrayed" because they do not back candidates from other parties and that they still endorse Rick Breckenridge for Senate.

“We believe he is still Montana's best choice of the current candidates because he is a champion of freedom and limiting government while embracing cooperation and rational decision-making,” they said in a statement sent by party chair Francis Wendt. “He is neither a Trump acolyte like his Republican opponent, nor a promoter of fear and divisiveness to manipulate voters like his Democrat opponent.”

Breckenridge (Photo: Courtesy)

On Oct. 31, Breckenridge said he would endorse Rosendale after a mailer circulated that said if Rosendale were elected, it would lead to more government surveillance and that voters should cast votes for Breckenridge instead.

GOP officials said there were no names attached to the mailer, nor was it known how many were sent out. The lack of a name is a violation of state and federal election laws. Dark money is where the donor is not disclosed and the source of the money is unknown.

The campaign for incumbent Democratic Sen. Jon Tester said it had nothing to do with the mailer, “and Jon believes all campaign expenditures should be disclosed."

"We condemn this mailer and any other efforts like it. Period," it said.

Breckenridge said Monday that he and the Libertarian Party board had talked about the news release and his actions.

“We’ve had quite a few internal discussions because this is very unchartered ground and the board wishes I would have handled this differently,” he said, but added he thinks his statements “called into question” the influences of outside dark money in Montana.



“They are good people and they are honest people,” he said of his fellow Libertarians.

The Libertarians said they understood Breckenridge's anger with the flier.

“However, the MTLP cannot in good conscience agree with Breckenridge’s views about this election,” it said.

It encouraged voters to vote for the candidate they respect and want to represent them in Washington.

Also on Tuesday's ballot is Elinor Swanson in the U.S. House race and Roger Roots for clerk of the Montana Supreme Court. They also have several candidates running for state Senate and House seats.

Breckenridge said last week his decision would likely impact about 1 percent of the vote in Tuesday’s election and noted most people have probably voted already by absentee ballot.

"I am making a stand above and beyond my personal desires," he said.

The Libertarians said "the essence of libertarianism is freedom and individuality, and the party ascribes to promote the preferences of each individual voter."

"Montanans are fiercely independent, and polls show that more than 30 percent are nonpartisan," they said in their news release. "... The likely outcome of Breckenridge’s statements is that Libertarian and independent voters will either leave the Senate race blank, or simply not vote."

Breckenridge said he has taken a “lot of bashing and abuse over the dark money mailers.”

But he said he has also gotten calls from all over the country calling him a gentleman and thanking him for bringing attention to the issue.

And President Donald J. Trump even tweeted out a thank you to him.

Breckenridge said he mentioned that to his fellow Libertarians.

“We got $25 million of free publicity, let’s not squander it,” he said.

Reach Phil Drake at 406-422-0772 or pdrake@greatfallstribune.com.

To know more

For a list of Libertarian candidates, go to: https://www.mtlp.org/2018-candidates/

To read the whole news release, go to: https://bit.ly/2yW2o30

Read or Share this story: https://www.greatfallstribune.com/story/news/2018/11/05/montana-libertarians-stand-candidate/1893591002/