Healthy Boy Dies After Gardasil Injection
Joel Gomez was just 14 years old. Medical records show he was a healthy boy who made all his check-ups at his pediatrician’s office.

He had no pre-existing health issues.

He had no cardiac abnormalities, psychological disorders, substance abuse, or any other issues.

But, he had a vaccine the day before he died.

From the article:

“An expert hired by the family of a boy who died after his second Gardasil injection has testified that Gardasil likely caused the boy’s death. The case – Gomez versus USDOH: Petition No. 15-0160V1 – was filed by a California law firm for petitioners Adan Gomez and Raquel Ayon, on behalf of their deceased son Joel Gomez. The petition states, in part: “Joel Gomez received a Merck Gardasil vaccine on June 19, 2013 and again on August 19, 2013, and died in his sleep the following day on August 20, 2013. The death was caused in fact by receiving the Gardasil Vaccine. Gardasil did cause or contributed to a myocardial infarction in the decedent, and that the second dose of Gardasil finally caused a fatal hypotension in this case on the day of vaccination. There was no other plausible cause for the death of Joel Gomez. . .”

Sadly, Joel was another casualty of the Gardasil vaccine.

Joel was injected, in his left arm, on June 19, 2013 with his first dose of Gardasil (with no adverse reactions reported by the family or physician) and again on August 19, 2013, with a second dose of Gardasil. Then he went home, fell asleep, and died. He was found unresponsive in bed the following day, taken to the hospital, and pronounced dead.

How many more kids have to suffer, or even die before the United States says “enough”?

An autopsy done on August 23, by a medical examiner (ME) of Los Angeles, California revealed significant abnormal findings:

“…a long narrow band of dark reddish discoloration which is somewhat darker than the rest of the myocardium, extends over a length of 6 cm and has a width of 0.4 cm extending from the anterior base of the heart almost to the apex. ..this lesion is limited to the anterior free wall. Both lungs are extremely heavy. The lung parenchyma is dark-purple-red and completely soaked with edema fluid and blood. Microscopically, a localized lesion was found in the left ventricle of the heart.”

When Dr. Sin Hang Lee, MD (who the family hired) reviewed the autopsy findings, it was his opinion that the lesion of the heart was a healing myocardial infarct – a few weeks old- and was the result of the first Gardasil vaccination. He stated, “The HPV L1 gene DNA fragments bound to the aluminum adjuvant in Gardasil can cause sudden and unexpected surge of tumor necrosis factor-α and other cytokines. Some of these cytokines released from macrophages are potent myocardial depressants, capable of causing hypotension with low cardiac perfusions in certain genetically or physically predisposed individuals.” And this type of damage, according to Dr. Lee is practically unheard of. In fact, poor Joel’s heart actually presents as a textbook description of myocardial infarction- commonly observed in much older patients with a history of heart attack(s).

More from the article:

“A CDC study shows that among 12,424 reported adverse events following Gardasil® vaccination from June 1, 2006 through December 3 1, 2008, there were 32 deaths with a mean age of 18 years old, who died 2 to 405 days after the last Gardasil® injection. Medical records and autopsy reports on 20 of the 32 deaths were available for review and confirmed there were 4 unexplained deaths and 6 cardiac-related deaths.”

Again, how many more kids need to die? And how many Gardasil-vaccinated girls (or boys) have developed permanent myocardial damage, whether it’s called myocarditis or infarct?

Our hearts go out to all the parents and families who have had loved ones die or who have been seriously harmed by this vaccine, or any other. We look ahead with hope, to a day when this won’t happen anymore. And we can make it happen. All it takes is just one voice. Don’t be afraid to use yours.

XO- Erin

Source: Passive Agressive Raven