Robert Mueller’s Subpoena for Donald Trump’s Bank Records Is One More Step Over the President’s Red Line
Pinterest Photo Illustration / Getty

The special counsel is paying no attention to the limits that Donald Trump thinks exist.

While the guilty plea of former national-security adviser Michael Flynn indicates that Robert Mueller's Russia probe is drawing closer than ever to those in Donald Trump's family, the special counsel's office has also reportedly set its sights on the one thing in this world that the president cherishes even more: his money. According to Bloomberg, investigators have issued a subpoena to Deutsche Bank for documents related to its business relationship with the Trump family. And while the German lending giant, to which Trump owes some $300 million in connection with a bevy of poorly-understood real estate deals, of course wouldn't comment specifically on the matter, its statement—“Deutsche Bank always cooperates with investigating authorities in all countries”—would seem to indicate that Mueller is getting what he wants.

The institution's dealings with Trump have been under scrutiny for several months now, and not only in conjunction with any Russia-related storyline. As The New York Times noted earlier this year, Deutsche Bank is basically the only major financial institution that continues to do "sizable" business with Trump in the wake of his series of high-profile bankruptcies. Those deals represent about half of his outstanding debt, and over the summer, banking regulators were examining whether the loans might create problems for the bank in the event that Trump (again) fails to repay what he owes. Now, apparently, those accounts have drawn the interest of the special counsel's office.

The reason this development is more notable than any given document request issued by Mueller's team is that it represents one more step over the "red line" that Trump drew when discussing the investigation with the Times in July. During the interview, the president made clear his position that the matter is "about Russia," and that he would consider extracurricular inquiries into his personal finances or business transactions to be "a violation." When asked how he would respond if Mueller indeed ventured beyond the boundaries outlined by Trump, though, the president was ominously coy.

HABERMAN: Would you fire Mueller if he went outside of certain parameters of what his charge is?

SCHMIDT: What would you do?

TRUMP: I can’t, I can’t answer that question because I don’t think it’s going to happen.

Robert Mueller did not pay one lick of attention to Trump's "warning," and reportedly began looking into the president's business activities during the summer. The revelation that he has moved on to finances would appear to signal that those preliminary inquiries generated more questions than they managed to resolve.