Nyaope the drug also know as Whoonga's main ingredient is Heroin
Nyaope an illegal drug also known as Whoonga drug is a dangerous and highly addictive South African street drug . Nyaope is a fine powder that is usually combined with marijuana (dagga) and smoked, it can also be snorted or injected. Nyaope’s main ingredient is Heroin. It is not always clear what all of the ingredients of Nyaope are, the ingredients may vary from place to place. According to the South African Police Services Forensics drug abuse team in Pretoria, Nyaope is a Heroin based cocktail of drugs.

It means that the main ingredient is heroin and very addictive . To make heroin cheaper drug dealers add all kinds of drugs into the heroin to make the dealer more money from the drug trafficking. In Nyaope’s case, it ranges from ephedrine, cleaning chemicals, detergents, arsenic and many other similar products including psychiatric medications such as anti-depressants, depressants and anti-psychotics. This list can include antiretroviral drugs used for HIV positive people, though they have no effect at all except to bulk up the weight content. Each batch is different. There have been a few cases where rat poison, television tube powder, multiple sclerosis pills and antiretroviral medication have been found. This has been breaking news and incorrectly highlighted and promoted by the media.

Short-Term Effects

Nyaope or Whoonga substance abusing addicts experience clouded mental functioning, severe nausea and vomiting. ( possibly caused by the rat poison and other mixes in the heroin-based drug Awareness of pain in the Nyaope addict and Nyaope users can be suppressed. A pregnant woman can suffer spontaneous abortion with drug abuse of this kind. Cardiac (heart) is severely slowed down, sometimes to the point of death.

Long-Term Effects

Scarred and/or collapsed veins, bacterial infections of the blood vessels, heart valves, abscesses and other soft-tissue infections, liver and kidney disease. Lung complications may result. Sharing of needles or fluids may result in hepatitis, AIDS and other blood-borne virus diseases. It can even cause mental and psychotic breakdowns related to being hiv positive.

Withdrawal from Nayope is especially traumatic and includes insomnia, diarrhoea extreme stomach cramps, and vomiting.

The effects that we have just told you aremainly from heroin only and many of the effects of the mix of drain cleaner chemicals including antiretroviral drugs used in Nyaope is still unknown. But what you do need to know is that heroin alone is already highly addictive and it will destroy you, your life, your health, your dreams and your friends and family.

Immediate & Adverse effects of Nyaope or Whoonga

Reports indicate that a whoonga addict needs several doses a day, however, often users are typically too poor to afford the drug out of their legal income. The effects of whoonga characteristically wear off in 6 – 24 hours depending on the individual and health status and dependence-producing substances involved . There are unpleasant side-effects. These side effects include agonizing stomach cramps, back ache, sweating, chills, anxiety, restlessness, depression, nausea and diarrhoea

Why would anyone ever use Nyaope?

Unfortunately, people are uneducated about the dangers of drug use and when they are confronted many times they fall prey to empty promises of hope. There are many reasons why people take drugs but there is one reason that is the same for all.

People use drugs because they want to change something in their lives. With poor economics and the moral decay of society and the daily stresses, people are looking for fast ways to forget their problems. For a while, the drug seems to help. But eventually the drug for the Nyaope addict becomes the problem and one needs to take the drug just to feel normal, but that never works. There is a view that most of the abuse is in the cape town area but according to latest drug trafficking sources the whoonga drug and scourge of Nyaope is prevalent all over the country.

What is the solution to prevent the use of Nyaope?