Vaccine Injury Compensation Data
 Most Recent Data Report National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program Data Report (PDF - 315 KB) - updated June 1, 2019. Updated monthly, and includes the number of: petitions filed,

adjudications compensated and dismissed,

awards paid by type and amount,

claims by vaccine, and

adjudication categories by vaccine.

The United States has the safest, most effective vaccine supply in history. In the majority of cases, vaccines cause no side effects, however they can occur, as with any medication—but most are mild. Very rarely, people experience more serious side effects, like allergic reactions.

In those instances, the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) allows individuals to file a petition for compensation.

What does it mean to be awarded compensation?

Being awarded compensation for a petition does not necessarily mean that the vaccine caused the alleged injury. In fact:

Approximately 70% of all compensation awarded by the VICP comes as result of a negotiated settlement between the parties in which HHS has not concluded, based upon review of the evidence, that the alleged vaccine(s) caused the alleged injury.

Attorneys are eligible for reasonable attorneys’ fees, whether or not the petitioner is awarded compensation by the Court, if certain minimal requirements are met. In those circumstances, attorneys are paid by the VICP directly. By statute, attorneys may not charge any other fee, including a contingency fee, for his or her services in representing a petitioner in the VICP.

What reasons might a petition result in a negotiated settlement?

Consideration of prior U.S. Court of Federal Claims decisions, both parties decide to minimize risk of loss through settlement

A desire to minimize the time and expense of litigating a case

The desire to resolve a petition quickly

How many petitions have been awarded compensation?

According to the CDC, from 2006 to 2017 over 3.4 billion doses of covered vaccines were distributed in the U.S. For petitions filed in this time period, 6,314 petitions were adjudicated by the Court, and of those 4,328 were compensated. This means for every 1 million doses of vaccine that were distributed, approximately 1 individual was compensated.

Since 1988, over 20,728 petitions have been filed with the VICP. Over that 30-year time period, 17,923 petitions have been adjudicated, with 6,597 of those determined to be compensable, while 11,326 were dismissed. Total compensation paid over the life of the program is approximately $4.1 billion.