Anne Graham Lotz Says God Sends Terror Attacks Because Of Bathroom Rights And Evolution
Terror attacks such as 9/11 and the mass shooting in San Bernardino were allowed by God because of the gay rights movement and the acceptance of evolution, evangelist Anne Graham Lotz said.

"Our nation seems to be shaking its fist in God’s face and telling him to get out of our politics, get out of our schools, get out of our businesses, get out of our marketplace, get off the streets," Lotz told conservative radio host Steve Deace, according to audio posted online by Right Wing Watch. "It's just stunning to me the way we are basically abandoning God as a culture and as a nation."

When that happens, "God abandons us and he backs away and takes his hand of favor, blessings, His hand of protection away from us and he abandons us," she said.

"We're struggling with our own pride or self-sufficiency. I think that’s why God allows bad things to happen. I think that’s why he would allow 9/11 to happen, or the dreadful attack in San Bernardino, or some of these other places, to show us that we need him. We're desperate without him."

Lotz, the daughter of famed evangelist Billy Graham and leader of AnGeL Ministries in North Carolina, also complained about HB2, the state's transphobic law which bars transgender people from using the public restrooms that match the gender they identify with.

"There's silliness. There's craziness. There's most illogical rulings," she said. "The Justice Department is suing us for something that is just common sense. It's ludicrous, and to me it's evidence that God has backed away."

Lotz then claimed that God would protect Americans from everything, including terrorists and hurricanes, if they repent and pray. Conveniently, she's hawking a new book, "The Daniel Prayer," which claims to have a prayer that can "move heaven and change nations."

If people pray, she said, God will "begin to reveal the plots of our enemies and terrorists before they are carried out. Even the weather patterns, he can even control the weather patterns and protect us from the violent storms that are taking human life."

But Lotz also issued a dire warning, implying that God could send more terror -- or something worse.