Karnes County Residential Center
Facility Main Telephone Line: (830) 254-2500

Field Office Main Telephone Line: (210) 283-4750

Immigration Court For information about a matter before the immigration court, you may call 1-800-898-7180 to speak with them directly. Applications for relief from removal and other applications requested by the immigration judge must be filed directly with the immigration court. Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) For information about a matter before the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA), you may call (703) 605-1007 where you can obtain automated information or speak with a live representative during office hours. Click the link for a list of pro bono representatives nationwide who might be able to assist you. To Post a Delivery Bond Delivery bonds are posted when a person has been taken into ICE custody and placed into removal proceedings while in the United States. The person posting the bond must show proof of identity (valid Government-issued photo identification, passport, military ID, LPR card, driver’s license, etc.). This person (the obligor) is responsible for ensuring that the alien presents them self before an officer or representative of this agency whenever a request is made. Bonds for aliens detained by ICE may be posted at ICE ERO bond acceptance offices nationwide, Monday through Friday (except public holidays) between the hours of 9 a.m. and 3 p.m., local time. For a list of ICE ERO bond acceptance offices nearest you or for bond information, click here. You must have the last name of the detainee and alien registration number before calling. Acceptable forms of payment to post a bond are money orders, cashier’s checks or certified checks. For all bonds $10,000 and over, the only accepted method of payment is a single cashier or certified check. Payments must be made payable to “U.S. Department of Homeland Security” or “Immigration and Customs Enforcement.”

Friends and Family Visits Friends and Family may visit residents seven days a week from 8 a.m. until 8 p.m., including holidays. Residents are allotted one hour for visitation. More time may be authorized by the Facility Administrator for family members traveling significant distances dependent upon the number of visitors and staff availability. Adult visitors must present a valid, verifiable government-issued identification card to enter the facility. Minors who are visiting the facility must be accompanied by an adult guardian (18 years or older). Minors must not be left unaccompanied in the waiting room, visiting room or any other area. Attorney Visits Legal representatives of residents are authorized to visit their clients during the following hours: Attorneys and/or paralegals may visit residents seven days a week from 8 a.m. until 8 p.m., including holidays. A list of pro bono (free) legal organizations will be posted in all detainee housing units and other appropriate areas. This list shall be updated quarterly. If a detainee wishes to see a representative or paralegal from that organization, it is the detainee’s responsibility to contact them for an appointment. Consular Visits Consular officials may meet with their detained nationals at any time. It is requested that prior arrangements be made with the ICE Supervisory Deportation Officer to the extent possible, and that consular officials bring appropriate credentials when they come to the facility. The ICE Supervisory Deportation Officer for this facility can be reached at 830-254-2500. Clergy Visits Clergy may visit residents and must make prior arrangements with the Chaplain’s Office. Visiting Restrictions No firearms or weapons of any kind are permitted in the facility.

If visitors are or appear to be intoxicated, visitation will not be allowed.

All visitors are subject to search while in the facility.

Visitors are not allowed to pass or attempt to pass any items to detainees.

Visitors are not allowed to carry any items into the visitation area . Search Procedures (prior to or during all visitations) All individuals requesting admittance to the facility or the visitation area are subject to a pat-down search of their person, an inspection of their belongings, and a metal scan search. Individuals refusing to cooperate with a reasonable search will not be admitted. No firearms or weapons of any kind are permitted. No electronic devices (cell phones, pagers, radios, etc.) are permitted in the secure areas of this facility.

Letters sent to residents must include the last four digits of the detainee’s A-number (File Number), plus the sender’s name and address. To enhance the safety of the facility, all incoming mail is subject to screening for contraband. The mail is not read upon opening, only inspected by the delivering officer. Residents may send mail from the facility. Residents may seal their outgoing letters and place them in the provided receptacle. All incoming mail will be delivered to the resident, and outgoing mail will be routed to the proper postal office within 24 hours of receipt by facility staff. A mail pick-up and delivery schedule is posted in all housing units. Residents are allowed to purchase stamps for use. Generally, there is no limit to the amount of correspondence detainees may send at their own expense. Indigent residents (those who have no means of financial support and no funds in their facility account) will be provided postage allowance at government expense. When residents depart the facility or are transferred to another facility, only their legal mail will be forwarded to them. General correspondence will be endorsed "Return to Sender" and returned to the post office. If resident receive funds in the mail, they will be taken to the processing area for the money to be placed into their account. The processing officer will provide a receipt for all funds received. Residents are cautioned not to have cash sent to them in the mail. A resident may receive items that are determined to be of necessity for the sole purpose of travel or release from agency custody with approval of the ICE Deportation Officer. Before sending packages to detainees, Contact the Facility Administrator at: GEO – Karnes County Residential Center

409 FM 1144

Karnes City, Texas 78118 Note that residents being removed from the United States are allowed one small piece of luggage. If a resident does not have such baggage, such luggage can be sent/delivered after receiving approval from Supervisory Deportation Officer. Please be advised that for security reasons, no electronic devices (cell phones, electric razors, laptop computers, radios, etc.) will be accepted.

The Facility has a responsibility to protect the privacy and other rights of detainees and members of the staff. Therefore, interviews will be regulated to ensure the orderly and safe operation of the Facility. Ordinarily, live television or radio interviews will not be permitted in the facility. For media inquiries about ICE activities, operations, or policies, contact the ICE Office of Public Affairs (OPA) at (202) 732-4242 or email ICEMedia@ice.dhs.gov. Personal Interviews A news media representative who desires to conduct an interview with a detainee must apply in writing to the San Antonio Field Office, Office of Enforcement and Removal Operations, indicating familiarity with and agreement to comply with the rules and regulations of the facility as provided to that person by staff. Detainee Consent A resident has the right not to be interviewed, photographed, or recorded by the media. Before interviewing, photographing, or recording the voice of a detainee, a visiting representative of the media must obtain written permission from that individual.

All FOIA and Privacy Act requests must be submitted on form G-639 (Freedom of Information / Privacy Act Request) or in letter format. All requests must contain the original, notarized signature of the subject in question. Please complete the form G-639 thoroughly and if writing a letter, be sure to include the full name, any other names used, date of birth, place of birth, A-number of the alien you are seeking information about, as well as your full name, address, and telephone number, so that we may contact you if we have any questions. Mail your FOIA or Privacy Act request to: U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement

Freedom of Information Act Office

800 North Capitol Street, NW, Room 585

Washington, D.C. 20536

Phone – 1-866-633-1182

Email – ICE-FOIA@dhs.gov