Russia vetoes UN chemical weapon resolutions in Syria for the second time in 24 hours
Russia vetoed a UN resolution that would have extended an investigation into the use of chemical weapons in Syria for the second time in 24 hours.

It is third time the country has blocked the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) - a joint investigative body by the United Nations and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) - in a month.

Created in 2015, JIM is responsible for identifying who is responsible for chemical attacks in Syria.

The resolution was brought forward by Japan and would have extended JIM's mandate for 30 days. It was supported by 12 of the 15 council members with Bolivia joining Russia and China abstaining.

The veto also provides an indicator of the continuing decline of US and Russian relations as this is the first Russian veto on a US sponsored bill reflecting the deterioration in US and Russia’s relations.

Britain's UN Ambassador Matthew Rycroft told the council: "We will keep going, not only to bring justice to those who have suffered from the use of these despicable weapons, but also to deter those who might think of doing so in the future."

Russia claims that JIM is biased and has argued that major changes need to be made in order for it to continue while other countries remain adamant that JIM’s independence is paramount.

Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War







12 show all Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War





















1/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War A man crosses a street in Aleppo, December 12, 2009 Reuters

2/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War A vendor sits inside an antique shop in al-Jdeideh neighbourhood, in the Old City of Aleppo, December 12, 2009 Reuters

3/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War A view shows part of Aleppo's historic citadel, overlooking Aleppo city, Syria Reuters

4/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War A view shows part of Aleppo's historic citadel, Syria Reuters

5/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War Visitors walk inside Aleppo's Umayyad mosque, Syria Reuters

6/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War People walk inside the Khan al-Shounah market, in the Old City of Aleppo, Syria Reuters

7/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War A man walks past shops in al-Jdeideh neighbourhood, in the Old City of Aleppo, Syria Reuters

8/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War People walk along an alley in al-Jdeideh neighbourhood, in the Old City of Aleppo, Syria Reuters

9/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War Visitors tour Aleppo's historic citadel, Syria December 11, 2009 Reuters

10/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War A general view shows the Old City of Aleppo as seen from Aleppo's historic citadel, Syria December 11, 2009 Reuters

11/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War People walk near Aleppo's Bab al-Faraj Clock Tower, Syria October 6, 2010 Reuters

12/12 Aleppo before the Syrian Civil War A man stands inside Aleppo's historic citadel, overlooking Aleppo city, Syria December 11, 2009 Reuters

Russia's UN Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia retorted that the JIM for two years "has rubber-stamped baseless accusations against Syria," stressing that the failure to eradicate its "fundamental flaws" brought about its downfall.

He added: "What is taking place here is akin to a bad theatre production."

US Ambassador Nikki Haley told the council after the vote the veto "shows us that Russia has no interest in finding common ground with the rest of this council to save the JIM."

She added: "Russia will not agree to any mechanism that might shine a spotlight on the use of chemical weapons by its ally, the Syrian regime," she said. "It's as simple and sinful as that."