Fact Check: Social media falsely attributes quote to Sir Winston Churchill
BBC America published compilation of Churchill’s famous quotes and the viral quote is not mentioned in the list | Photo from REUTERS

Britain's iconic statesman Sir Winston Churchill would have never imagined something like social media. But more than five decades after his death, he has become its victim.

Many Facebook users have attributed the quote titled 'Caring What Others Think' to the great orator.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found that this quote has been falsely attributed to the former British prime minister. There are no historical records to make claims that Churchill had ever said this.

Full quote: "When you're 20, you care what everyone thinks, when you're 40 you stop caring what everyone thinks, when you're 60, you realise no one was ever thinking about you in the first place."

Screenshot of Google search for the viral quote

Facebook users such as Thinking People, Daily Nuggets, and AquadSoft posted this quote attributing it to Churchill along with his image.

Not only Facebook but this quote has also been used as wallpapers as one of the "inspirational quotes" by many on the internet.

We looked for the origin of this quote on the internet and found that there are several other websites, including Pinterest and Reddit who have used this particular quote but attributed it to "unknown".

During our search, we came across the website of Richard M Langworth, a senior fellow with the Hillsdale College Churchill Project. Langworth posted an article called "All the 'quotes' Winston Churchill never said (1)" on November 8, 2018, on the website.

Langworth mentioned this quote as one among many which have not been said by Churchill but attributed to "unknown".

This particular quote is also not found on the website of International Churchill Society.

Four years ago, BBC America published a compilation of Churchill's famous quotes. This viral quote is not mentioned in the list.

We couldn't find the original author of this viral quote. On the other hand, no historical record validates that Churchill had ever said this.

US fact-checking website Politifact had also reported about the same.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim “When you’re 20, you care what everyone thinks, when you’re 40 you stop caring what everyone thinks, when you’re 60, you realise no one was ever thinking about you in the first place” -- this quote has been attributed to Sir Winston Churchill. Conclusion This is not Churchill’s quote. The quote is originally attributed to “unknown”. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false