Wheeler Mission says at least 17 guests have overdosed on bath salts this week
CLOSE Crime Stoppers of Central Indiana allows Indianapolis residents to share anonymous tips with law enforcement. Here are a few things Crime Stoppers wants you to know before you call. Wochit

Buy Photo "Jesus Saves" in neon, is above the entrance at Wheeler Mission, which has been helping the homeless and those suffering from addiction in Indianapolis for 123 years. (Photo: Kelly Wilkinson/IndyStar)Buy Photo

Over the last two days, 27 people have overdosed on suspected bath salts in or around Wheeler Mission, including 17 who were guests at the downtown men's shelter.

Steve Kerr, Wheeler's chief development officer, said seven men overdosed inside the building, while another 10 overdosed directly outside the building. All are suspected to have taken bath salts that may have been laced with another drug, he said.

"Something we have never experienced before," Kerr said. "Sadly, it’s not uncommon to have an overdose in our facility — one, maybe two, a week — and (17) is a lot for us."

Kerr said several of the men refused treatment, but at least one of the men is on life support.

► Exploited: Who buys a child for sex? Otherwise ordinary men

► Amazon HQ2:Gay-rights groups say Amazon should avoid Indianapolis, 8 cities

► DNR:There is no record of 'coywolves' in Indiana. Here's what you're probably seeing.

Indianapolis Metropolitan Police officers have assisted Emergency Medical Services on 21 to 25 overdose calls in the area of Market and Delaware streets, according to a news release. Responders found patients to be catatonic or having delayed responses and were believed to be under the effect of "Flakka," or spice, police say.

The National Institute on Drug Abuse also identifies "Flakka" as the street name of synthetic cathinones.

Multiple area agencies began investigating the source of the drug, and police say investigators have made an arrest, but did not release additional information about that person.

"Bath salts" — not to be confused with Epsom salts or other bathing products — are synthetic cathinones, sometimes considered a cheap alternative to methamphetamine or cocaine, according to the National Institute on Drug Abuse.

NEWSLETTERS Get the News Alerts newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-888-357-7827. Delivery: Varies Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for News Alerts Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Chemically, synthetic cathinones are similar to MDMA and cocaine, and can cause paranoia, hallucinations, panic attacks and/or delirium, according to the NIDA.

They are considered a new psychoactive substance, a group of unregulated substances manufactured to mimic the effects of illegal drugs.

"It’s pretty nasty stuff," Kerr said.

Brian Van Bokkelen, public affairs manager for Indianapolis Emergency Medical Services, said responders are often called to overdoses in the area of Market and Delaware streets. The shelter is located at 520 E. Market Street.

"Generally speaking, it’s a high volume area," he said, "but in the last 24 hours we have seen a spike."

IEMS has deployed extra ambulances and manpower to the area in an attempt to meet the needs of those callers, Van Bokkelen said.

Indianapolis police say between 21 and 25 people at or near Wheeler Mission experienced overdoses within a short period of time, believed to be traced back to "Flakka" — spice — possibly laced with illegal drugs. Investigators have made an arrest, according to IMPD. (Photo: Provided by IMPD)

Wheeler Mission, which has a zero-tolerance policy on drugs and alcohol, Kerr said, has promoted six part-time staffers to full-time in an effort to increase monitoring inside the shelter.

"Staff is a little on edge, obviously, seeing what they’ve experienced in the last couple of days," he said. "Guests, I think, are also a little unnerved by this."

Kerr said he hopes the organization will be able to increase its partnership with IMPD and the Marion County Sheriff's Office to help decrease drug activity in and around the mission. Although drug use is sometimes common among guests, Kerr said this is the first — and hopefully last — time something of this magnitude happens.

"This is shocking," he said. "It's really taken us by surprise."

Call IndyStar reporter Holly Hays at (317) 444-6156. Follow her on Twitter: @hollyvhays.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/2E3EnuT