BREAKING: Hillary Clinton Killed During FBI Raid
The FBI showed up at the Clinton compound in Chappaqua, New York tonight with a warrant to search for hidden servers, Blackberries or other physical correspondence included in the case against her for emailing secrets about Benghazi and selling uranium to Russia. Clinton, shouting “get the hell out of my house or I’ll kill you,” was brought down by more than 103 rounds from 17 agents on the ground.

They all corroborated the story that she came at them with a shotgun, firing between sentences, when they had no choice but to put her down like a rabid dog. Special tactical agent on the scene, Art Tubolls, told Daily World update reporter in the field Sandy Batt:

“Clinton was one tough cookie, see?…She really knew how to evade prosecution like a champ. When it was time to go down she made she went down in a hail of gunfire so magnificent that no person could have survived, let alone felt the pain of death. Basically, while she thought she was dying a noble death for some ’cause,’ we looked at it like putting down a rabid animal.”

President Trump has said that he won’t attend Clinton’s funeral. Nor will Melania, who is still recovering from bruises sustained while doing things around the time she was seen laughing and enjoying herself with the Bushes and Obamas. Sarak Huckleberry Sanders said:

“The White House will send a proper dignitary for the former secretary and first lady’s funeral. They’re considering HUD Secretary Carson or maybe EPA Secretary Pruitt.”

Either would be honored guests at the funeral for the woman who sold her soul for politics. Let’s remember to send thoughts and prayers that she wasn’t elected President where she would have willingly destroyed the world with the other members of the Deep State, living far underground for decades to come.

Someday a computer-generated Hillary Clinton will lead these heathens to destroy God’s work on earth once and for all. We must resist by sending Joel Osteen all of our money. Hurry before it’s too late.