Operation “Summer of Chaos” exposed: Obama Admin, Soros, Black Lives Matter, plan to activate martial law before General Election revealed
10,000 bought and paid for BLM dissidents to create chaos at the Philadelphia Democratic National Convention in late July

(INTELLIHUB) — Black Lives Matter leader Deray McKesson had two of his email accounts hacked last Friday, along with his Twitter, according to reports.

Reports indicate that the perpetrators successfully hacked into several of McKesson’s accounts after posing as McKesson to a Verizon Wireless Tech Support operator in order to gain access and post a provocative Tweet which endorsed Donald J. Trump for the Presidential bid.

“At 10:31 a.m., an individual called Verizon posing as Mr. Mckesson and convinced a technician to change the unique SIM associated with the activist’s phone, allowing the hacker or hackers responsible to have his messages rerouted to a different device. The culprit then requested password reset codes for Mr. Mckesson’s Twitter and other internet accounts, and subsequently gained access by intercepting those codes when they were sent as text messages,” the Washington Times reported.

However, the mainline press made no mention of the real purpose for the hack, which was likely to obtain secret information about a George Soros and Obama Administration sponsored plot, an elaborate operation dubbed the “Summer of Chaos,” which is aimed at shutting down both the Democratic National Convention and the Republican National Convention in order to trigger martial law nationwide, keeping President Barack H. Obama in the White House beyond his allotted two terms under National Security Presidential Directives.

Shockingly, in a private message purportedly obtained and released by the hackers, Samuel Sinyangwe, a Black Lives Matter activist, said that law enforcement officials “will not be ready for the type of crowds” that the group will be bringing which are designed to shutdown the convention and create “disruptions nationwide.”

The group plans to bring more than 10,000 people to create chaos July 18-21 in both Philadelphia and Cleveland, according to the leaked PMs.

The following is the private Twitter exchange in question, between Deray McKesson and Samuel Sinyangwe:

To top it all off, the “Summer of Chaos” plan goes all the way up to the Obama Administration and even involves U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch, according to leaked messages. As you can see in the Tweets below, this operation goes all the way to the U.S. Department of Justice with mention of “Mrs. Lynch.”

The Obama Admin, in conjunction with Soros and the BLM movement, is pushing for martial law from the top down and plans to burn Trump publicly as a racist by the end of the Democratic and Republican National Conventions in late July.

Additionally, Youtuber John Smith released a video containing leaked details of what may be planned or what officials are anticipating to happen by the year’s end, such as “sporadic isolated riots and civil disturbances.”

Smith’s information also alludes to the fact that the United Nations may even get involved on U.S. soil.

Additionally, Youtuber DAHB007 reported exactly how Deray McKesson’s accounts were successfully hacked:

Please like, comment and share this post!

#SummerOfChaos

#OperationChaos

H/T: @Tabertronic/Twitter

Additional Source:

Bombshell Proof Emerges Black Lives Matter Pushing For Martial Law And No Elections After Hacked Twitter DM’s Find BLM Leaders Scheming With Obama Administration — All News Pipeline

Via Intellihub

©2017. INTELLIHUB.COM. All Rights Reserved.