Melania Trump Wears "I Really Don't Care" Jacket for Surprise Visit to Texas Border
Melania Trump made an unannounced visit to an immigrant children's detention center in McAllen, Texas on Thursday afternoon. Much like her spontaneous trip, the statement on the back of her jacket was also a surprise—to say the least.

Before leaving Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland, the First Lady was photographed wearing a $39 Zara military trench coat from last season that sent a stupefying, yet clear message: “I Really Don’t Care. Do U?”

Image zoom Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Image zoom Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Image zoom Courtesy of Zara

The text is inscribed in graffiti-like script on the back of the green parka, but what is she really trying to tell us? Trump’s surprise trip to Texas was an opportunity for her to get a first-hand glimpse at the conditions where immigrant children are held as a result of President Donald Trump’s “zero tolerance" immigration policy, which has resulted in the separation of thousands of children from their parents. He ended Wednesday via executive order.

But the First Lady—and her close circle of advisors—somehow failed to realize that photos of her in the Zara design would be seen and critiqued. Regardless of whether or not the optics of wearing the trench was an oversight, the message seems to be that she’s apathetic toward the nation’s immigration crisis.

CNN's Jim Accosta reports that the First Lady's spokesperson confirmed the text on the jacket. They added, "It's a jacket. There was no hidden message. After today's important visit to Texas, I hope the media isn't going to focus on her wardrobe."

FLOTUS spox confirms Mrs. Trump wore a jacket to visit border kids that reads: "I really don't care. Do you?" Spox says: "It's a jacket. There was no hidden message. After today's important visit to Texas, I hope the media isn't going to choose to focus on her wardrobe." pic.twitter.com/Bp4Z8n455G — Jim Acosta (@Acosta) June 21, 2018

Her communications director, Stephanie Grisham, echoed the sentiment: "If media would spend their time & energy on her actions & efforts to help kids—rather than speculate & focus on her wardrobe—we could get so much accomplished on behalf of children."

Today’s visit w the children in Texas impacted @flotus greatly. If media would spend their time & energy on her actions & efforts to help kids - rather than speculate & focus on her wardrobe - we could get so much accomplished on behalf of children. #SheCares #ItsJustAJacket — Stephanie Grisham (@StephGrisham45) June 21, 2018

(The topic of the immigration has been heavily covered in the media, but if you would like to know more or find ways to help, click here.)

It's hard to not read into a bold statement printed on a piece of clothing worn by one of the most visible people in the world, but if we were going to give the First Lady the benefit of the doubt, we would guess maybe all of her other parkas are in the wash?

Seems like FLOTUS doesn't care what we think, though.