Is Carnauba Wax Bad For You?
Grade N

Short answer No, carnauba wax is not bad for you. It can’t be digested by humans, so its properties are never absorbed into the body. It is also a plant-based ingredient, making it safe for human consumption. Grade N

× Letter Grade for Carnauba Wax N 'N' stands for neutral. Things placed into this category are (a) neither good nor bad for you, or (b) lack the necessary evidence to reach any conclusions. View Full Grading System Category 'A' A+ Very healthy and numerous health benefits. Side effects are rare. Things rated an 'A+' are typically necessary for survival (for example, water). A Very healthy and numerous health benefits. A few harmful qualities may be associated, but only under certain circumstances such as an allergic reaction. A- Very healthy and numerous health benefits. Harmful qualities may be associated, but aren't usually serious. It is important to note that even the best things in life can become bad in immoderate amounts. So, although something may be rated an 'A+', overconsumption/overdoing can bring unwanted effects. Category 'B' B+ Very beneficial to your health. Things rated a 'B+' may have a few harmful qualities to pay attention to. B Overall beneficial to your health. Things rated a 'B' may have some harmful qualities to pay attention to. B- More beneficial to your health than not. However, harmful qualities are most likely associated and shouldn't be overlooked. The main difference between category 'A' and category 'B' is the harmful qualities typically present in 'B' items. Serious side effects are usually uncommon, but are still possible and should be taken note of. Category 'C' C+ Both beneficial and harmful qualities associated. Things rated a 'C+' are typically a bit more on the beneficial side. Still, moderation is important. C A fairly even ratio of beneficial and harmful qualities. Moderation is important. Very general topics that can lean towards both sides of the spectrum will be placed here as well. Rice, for example, can be good or bad depending on the type. C- More harmful than beneficial. Side effects are common, especially when consumed/done excessively. Moderation is very important. Category 'C' usually denotes to both good and bad qualities. When it comes to this category, it is important to keep this word in mind: moderation. Category 'D' D+ Harmful to your health. Although benefits may be associated, the bad most likely outweighs the good. Moderation is very important. D Harmful to your health. A few benefits may be associated, but the bad outweighs the good. Moderation is extremely important. D- Harmful to your health. Very few, if any, benefits are present. Things in this category should be avoided as much as possible. Category 'D' is typically for things that are more harmful than beneficial. While consuming/doing something unhealthy once in a blue moon shouldn't hurt, we definitely recommend eliminating 'D' items as a regular part of your routine/diet. Category 'F' F Category 'F' is for things that fail to bring anything beneficial to the table, and are very harmful to your health. We recommend completely avoiding anything in this category. Long-term side effects of 'F' items are usually very serious. Category 'N' N 'N' stands for neutral. Things placed into this category are generally (a) neither good nor bad for you, or (b) lack the necessary evidence to reach any conclusions.

Long answer

Carnauba wax is derived from the leaves of the carnauba tree, native to Brazil. In fact, the only place in the world that produces and exports carnauba wax is the northeastern region of Brazil. Carnauba wax is produced by these trees in the hot summer months as a secretion to conserve moisture. The wax is harvested by detaching leaves from the carnauba tree, drying them out in the sun, then beating the leaves to remove the wax. Manufacturers only remove 20 leaves per tree each season in order to preserve the trees. Yellowish in color, the wax is in turn refined and then bleached.

Carnauba wax is exported in two forms: powder and flakes. Most of the wax is exported as a powder. It is available to manufacturers and consumers in three grades: T1, T3, and T4. The level of purification depends on how intensely the wax was filtered, centrifuged, and then bleached.

Carnauba wax is largely used as a finishing coat to make items shiny. This is why manufacturers use it as a glossing agent in products such as car wax, surfboard wax, shoe polish, instrument polish, and furniture wax. It is often mixed with beeswax to shine up and waterproof leather goods. Woodworkers like to use it to buff out wood because it fades with time rather than flaking like other finishes do. It is used in molds for semiconductor devices. The most widely used application of carnauba wax in the U.S. is as a coating for paper.

The glossy properties of carnauba wax are also used as a final coating for many food and pharmaceutical products, mainly vitamins and pills, candy, and the like. It is commonly used as a thickening agent in cosmetics and other skincare products like mascara, deodorant, eye shadow, lipstick, dental floss, and so on.

As far as being safe for the body, carnauba wax is non-toxic, hypoallergenic, and inert. It is composed of fatty acid esters, fatty alcohols, acids, and hydrocarbons. Essentially, carnauba wax is a natural, hypoallergenic material that lends itself to a variety of uses. It has a very high melting point (around 180 degrees Fahrenheit), cannot be dissolved in water, and in its solid, pure form is harder than concrete.

Americans use carnauba wax in a variety of everyday products. You will come into contact with it if you take medications in tablet form, floss your teeth, eat hard candy or candy-coated chocolate, wear makeup, use deodorant, wax items like your car, floors, furniture, or surfboards, even in paper cups. It is used in cosmetics to prevent liquid and oil ingredients from separating, to help maintain a flexible but solid form, and for a glossy finish. In food, it is used not only as a polishing device in hard coatings, but also as an anti-caking and glossing agent in frosting and sauces.

The melting point of this wax is too high for the body to melt, therefore when it is ingested, it goes right through without being absorbed. Not only are its inherent properties safe, but it can’t be broken down enough for them to reach the body anyway.





Commonly found in

automobile waxes

shoe polishes

dental floss

sweets

candies

gummies

instrument polishes

floor and furniture waxes and polishes

paper coatings

surfboard wax

Benefits

durable

dries to a glossy finish

makes skin smooth and soft

Healthier alternatives

beeswax has similar functions, but quite a few more health benefits

Please turn your Ad Blocker off to see this content. Thank you!

Written by DeeAnne Oldham | 04-14-2016 | Was this article unhelpful?