Equal Treatment? examines two categories of perpetrators in both the media and legal analyses:

CATEGORY A : Individuals committing or plotting violent acts who are perceived to be Muslim, allegedly acting in the name of Islam.

CATEGORY B : Individuals committing or plotting violent ideologically motivated acts who are not perceived to be Muslim and motivated by another ideology.

Cases examined in both analyses were divided into three categories:

PRIMARY INCIDENTS: Causing two or more fatalities (one fatality was excluded, as it typically means the death of the perpetrator only)

Causing two or more fatalities (one fatality was excluded, as it typically means the death of the perpetrator only) HIGH-INTENSITY INCIDENTS : Causing at least seven fatalities or at least 50 injuries. This category is the upper extremity of combined fatalities and injuries in the set analyzed, and is grouped to allow better comparison

: VIOLENT PLOTS: Where the planned offense is not executed, but where there is sufficient evidence to bring prosecution

Incident Selection

IMV incidents associated with perpetrators of both categories were selected from existing, published datasets of ideologically motivated violence. Based on a combination of these existing datasets, United States-based IMV incidents from 2002 to 2015 resulting in two or more fatalities were included. We also included a set of violent ideological plots that were prevented or foiled prior to completion, either by law enforcement investigation or through a “sting” operation. The violent plots included bomb plots and firearms plots. As used in this report “violent plot” and “plot” are interchangeable. The goal of selecting this set of incidents was not to create a new or comprehensive database of IMV acts. Instead, the purpose was to facilitate as best as possible an “apples to apples” study, i.e., to compare Category A and Category B perpetrators whose conduct and impact were similar in severity and quality. Incident selection was done prior to any analysis and was not changed after analysis began.