Let's Hang
What is IRL? IRL (which stands for "in real life") is an app that makes it easy and fun to send and receive invites to hang out with friends in real life. The app also features a series of suggestions for invites that users can send, which change regularly based on users’ interests or location, seasons and upcoming holidays. Additionally, IRL allows users to anonymously nominate their friends for things that they’re good at.

What is IRL’s mission? IRL aims to solve technology addiction by bringing people together in real life. We’re more connected today than we’ve ever been, thanks to social. However, we feel more isolated than ever before. On average, US consumers spend 5 hours on their phones each day, and nowhere is this trend more worrisome than with teens. Several recent studies have found a link between smartphone usage and teen depression and suicide. IRL was designed to boost its users’ self-confidence and take away the anxiety and social pressure of inviting friends to hang out in real life. The alternative to IRL is group text messages. With text messages, you’re automatically opting people into a thread that they may not want to be part of. If one person says no, it may influence the response of others in the group, and it leaves a trail of rejection in our text message inbox. With IRL, our goal is to simply help our users spend more time with their friends in the real world, in order to boost their overall happiness.

What are nominations? Why are they anonymous? Nominations or “noms” are a way for your friends to anonymously compliment you for things you are good at. Friends can answer a series of questions to anonymously send ‘noms’, such as “most savage board game player,” “always first on the dance floor,” or “best adventurer to follow off trail.” Users, who receive a nom, can request to reveal the name of the nominator in the app. Nominations make users feel more confident when sending out invites to their friends. Nominations were designed to be anonymous, so that people would feel more comfortable giving out compliments without worrying about being judged. We want everyone to get more compliments!

Why did I get a text message about IRL? You received a text message because one of three reasons: one of your friends (who has your phone number in their contacts list) added you as a friend on the app, invited you to something on the app, or nominated you through the app.

Does IRL send text messages to all of my contacts? No, text messages are only sent to specific contacts in three instances: you’ve sent an invite to a contact, added a contact as a friend on the app or nominated a friend through the app for something that they’re good at.

Are my invites public? Can anyone join? Invites are not public and can only be seen by friends that you’ve invited to it. Only friends that you have invited can join your invites.

How old do you need to be in order to use IRL? You are required to be at least 13 years or older to register and use IRL.

Can strangers contact me on IRL? No, users can only interact with people already in their contacts list, or friend’s of friends only.

Does IRL work with advertisers or sell my data? IRL does not work with advertisers and does not sell your data. We do not generate revenue, as we are venture funded. We are solely focused only building a meaningful product for our users.

How do I opt out of getting a text message? All you have to do is reply “STOP” to any text message that you receive from us. If you have any issues, please contact us at hello@irl.co.

How do I unfriend a user? Simply navigate to the user's profile, tap on the kebab icon and select 'Unfriend'.