Eskom salaries and bonuses will be frozen
CAPE TOWN - Power utility Eskom has revealed that all internal job transfers within the company will not contain a salary hike.

The power utility in a statement said that vacant positions will be frozen as well as bonuses and increases as internal advertisements are positioned to recruit staff already within the organisation.

According to Fin24, acting CEO Phakamani Hadebe said Eskom would not be increasing salaries or bonuses as the power utility wants to avoid depending on a bailout from government as this is not nearly enough to save Eskom.

Hadebe also revealed that Eskom also was re-looking at its structure as it was “top heavy”.

Meanwhile, MPs on Wednesday resolved to summon the inter-ministerial task team looking into municipalities which owe the state-owned power utility, Eskom, close to R14 billion in debt to Parliament.

At a meeting of Parliament's standing committee on public accounts (Scopa), Eskom board chairman Jabu Mabuza told MPs the amount the electricity utility was owed went from R9.5 billion last year to R13.8 at the end of last month.

In a statement, Scopa said it was not happy with the responses received from Eskom, the South African Local Government Association, the department of cooperative governance and traditional affairs, and National Treasury on how they were working together to solve the debt problem, which could affect Eskom's standing with lenders.

"Scopa hopes that a meeting with the inter-ministerial task team will provide resolutions, particularly as some municipalities who are able to pay are reluctant to do so," the statement said.

"Scopa has also resolved to call the top 10 defaulting municipalities to understand why they are not paying their debt."

Scopa named the top ten defaulting municipalities.

READ MORE: MPs to summon ministers over R13.8bn owed to Eskom by municipalities

ALSO READ: Check out WhatsApp's new group features

TOP STORY: WATCH: 10 expensive Cape Town homes if you have R200m

- BUSINESS REPORT ONLINE