Blog
Content Editor



Don't Talk about Your Mountain; Talk to it! In the Bible, when David faced Goliath, everyone around him was talking about the mountain. They were saying, "Goliath is so big. There's no way we can defeat him." Then along came a young man named David. He was only 17 years old. But somehow, he had a different perspective. When he saw Goliath, instead of saying, "He's so big. We don't have a chance," he said, "Who is this uncircumcised Philistine that he should defy the armies of the Living God?" He was saying, "Hey, wait a minute. This is not right. This mountain doesn't need to keep us from our destiny." David's friends and the people around him began to laugh. They said, "David, are you crazy? You can't fight Goliath. You're just a kid. You're too small. You don't have any experience." But David shook it off. He went out to face Goliath--his mountain--and Goliath began to laugh. When he saw how young and small David was, he said, "Am I a dog that you would come at me with a stick?" He was saying, "Don't you have anything better to send out against me than this little runt? It's not even going to be a fight." But, David wasn't focused on the size of his giant; he was focused on the size of his God. He didn't just pray that he would defeat Goliath. He didn't beg and plead with God. No, he knew he already had the victory! David spoke to his mountain. He looked Goliath in the eyes and said, "Goliath, you come against me with a sword and a shield, but I come against you in the name of the Lord God of Israel." In other words, "You've got a sword, but I've got something better. I've got the forces of heaven backing me up." He said, "Goliath, this day the Lord will deliver you into my hands. I will defeat you and feed your head to the birds of the air." He was saying, "You may be big, but I know my God is bigger. And when I speak to the mountain, God's promised it will be removed!" If you're going to break old habits and make changes in your life, you've got to speak to the giants that mock your victory. No matter what you may be facing, no matter how big those goals and dreams may seem, start changing your words and declare victory. Don't talk about your mountain; talk to it! Don't tell the world how big your problems are; tell them how big your God is! Stand in faith, speak victory and move forward in the freedom and blessing God has in store for you! "Truly I tell you, if anyone says to this mountain, 'Go, throw yourself into the sea,' and does not doubt in their heart but believes that what they say will happen, it will be done for them." (Mark 11:23 NIV) This Week's Inspiration Joel Osteen Ministries provides the opportunity to find hope and inspiration wherever you are, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Your Time Is Coming (Prepared In The Process) Are you discouraged today because something isn’t happening in your life as fast as you would like? Find the wisdom in this inspiring message to not give up. God is working behind the scenes and also doing a work in you! What happens in you is extremely important for your future and where God wants to take you.



Everything you go through—the struggle, the disappointment, the difficulty — God will allow to grow and ready you for the next season. But many people miss out and don’t give birth to everything that God has placed inside because they’ve given up too soon during this time of process. That doesn’t have to be you! Let Joel show you how to stay encouraged in the Lord and keep being your best. Once you’re prepared, then God will propel you. You will be amazed at what He will do in your future when you’re fully ready! Sharpen Each Other One of the greatest feelings in life happens when we are helping other people. God gave us an internal reward system because we are intended to motivate and help each other. That's the healthy way to live. Watch More Messages Ad Space Widget