NSG ™ Variants Portfolio
Featured event: A path toward eliminating disease Join STAT and JAX April 24 and hear first-hand about the cutting-edge genomics research behind the fight against Alzheimer's, kidney...

The 58th McKusick Short Course This course includes daily lectures in the mornings and evenings as well as afternoon mini-symposia, workshops, tutorials, demonstrations...

The 60th McKusick Short Course This course includes daily lectures in the mornings and evenings as well as afternoon mini-symposia, workshops, tutorials, demonstrations...

The 59th McKusick Short Course This course includes daily lectures in the mornings and evenings as well as afternoon mini-symposia, workshops, tutorials, demonstrations...

Genome Scanning Service JAX-designed SNP panels are used to develop congenic lines in your lab, confirm strain identity, and monitor genetic...

Webinar: Selection of Humanized Mouse Models for Biomedical Research This webinar reviews the different types of humanized mouse models that support engraftment of functional human immune systems for...

Mouse Genome Informatics International database resource for the laboratory mouse, providing integrated genetic, genomic, and biological data.

In Vivo Pharmacology Our decades of mouse-based research experience in the fields of oncology, immunology and neurobiology, combined with unmatched knowledge of...

28th Annual Short Course on Experimental Models of Human Cancer The Cancer Short Course provides a broad survey of the cancer research and experimental modeling from systems and computational genetics,...

Webinar: Tips and Tricks for Care of NSG™ Mice The revolutionary NOD scid gamma (NSG™) mouse model is used by investigators worldwide to advance research in cancer, infectious diseases...

Humanized NSG™ Mice for Innovative Preclinical Research The NOD scid gamma mouse uniquely supports the engraftment of human hematopoietic cells, enabling the creation of “humanized” NSG™...

Immunology & Infectious Disease The immune system is involved in a wide array of human diseases with roles in allergy, inflammation, infection, neurodegeneration, Type 1...

On-demand Webinar Series: Immunology & Infectious Disease The immune system is involved in a wide array of human diseases with roles in allergy, inflammation, infection, neurodegeneration, Type 1...

Immunology & Infectious Disease The immune system is involved in a wide array of human diseases with roles in allergy, inflammation, infection, neurodegeneration, Type 1...

Solutions by Therapeutic Area JAX® Mice strains are curated to identify models of human disease. Browse models and resources by research area below