Donald Trump broke royal protocol not once but twice while meeting Queen Elizabeth II

Introducing Donald Trump, the Leader of the Free World.

Donald Trump defied protocol, not once, but twice when he met the Queen on Friday.

The POTUS was destroyed on Twitter after he was seen walking in front of Elizabeth II as she was inspecting a guard of honour of the Coldstream Guards.

The Queen had been further rebuked after he and the First Lady, Melania Trump, again defied protocol when they greeted her by refusing to bow or curtsy.

Instead, they opted to shake hands.

Although bowing and curtsying is not a mandatory practice, it is thought to be good manners and almost everyone who meets the Queen does it.

Not Trump, though, apparently.

The monarchy’s official guidance says that there are no obligatory codes of behaviour when meeting the Queen and that it's all down to personal choice.

“For men this is a neck bow (from the head only) whilst women do a small curtsy. Other people prefer simply to shake hands in the usual way,” it says online.

Advertisement

Here's what people had to say about the whole thing...

I can't even watch this... No bow or curtsey and now #Trump walks in front of the Queen #TrumpUKVisit surely he knows the protocol but chooses to ignore it and that's just bloody rude 👑 — Joanna Gasiorowska (@JoGasiorowska) July 13, 2018

Queen Elizabeth II did her royal duty today, but Donald and Melania Trump were rudely late to events including Tea with the Queen, and Melania did NOT courtesy, nor did Donald bow as is a customary manner to show respect.



The Trump’s embody “The Ugly Americans”- rude and crass. — eve with lower case e (@msevereddin) July 14, 2018

No bow by Trump or curtsy by his wife to The Queen when meeting her!



What a perma tanned bellend! — Neil Watson (@WattyRacing) July 13, 2018

Who does Trump thinks he is. He cones over to our country on a supposedly working visit berates our Prime Minister on Brexit then back tracks accusing our papers of spreading fake news. Then to add insult to injury he keeps the Queen waiting 15 mins, doesn't bow just shakes her — Melanie Cassandra Burstall (@MelanieBurstall) July 13, 2018

Me: Not a royalist in any way.

Also me: 'What?! Trump didn't bow to the Queen? How fucking dare he.' #TrumpUKVisit — K12 (@KieranMilward) July 14, 2018

The news that Trump disrespected the Queen comes after he was greeted by large scale protests in London ahead of his visit.

Yesterday, a 20-foot-tall "Trump Baby" blimp was flown above Parliament Square with Trump responding to the inflatable and saying it made him feel "unwelcome" in London.