Tom Brady criticized for kissing 11-year old son too long on the lips
New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady answers questions during a news conference Thursday, Feb. 1, 2018, in Minneapolis. The Patriots are scheduled to face the Philadelphia Eagles in the NFL Super Bowl 52 football game Sunday, Feb. 4. Associated Press

Is it OK for a dad to kiss his son on the mouth? Should that kiss last longer than a peck?

Don’t ask Tom Brady, especially this weekend.

Some people are positively freaked out over the latest installment of the Patriots quarterback’s Facebook documentary series, “Tom vs. Time,” in which Brady’s 11-year-old son kisses him on the mouth.

In the scene, Brady is shirtless on a table getting a massage. His son Jack walks into the room and asks if he can check his fantasy football standings.

Unlimited Digital Access: Only $0.99 For Your First Month Get full access to The Kansas City Star content across all your devices. SAVE NOW

“What do I get?” Brady says.

Jack leans over and gives his father a quick kiss.

“You know, Jack, everything comes with a cost, bud,” the massage therapist says as the boy starts to leave the room.

“That was like a peck,” Brady tells his son, who walks back and kisses his father again on the mouth, but longer this time.

Jack wipes his lips with his T-shirt as he walks away.

Tom Brady won't eat a tomato or sleep without his kale pajamas but he'll kiss his germ spreading kid for 8.5 seconds pic.twitter.com/UOPCyPti0G — Ben Murphy (@BenMurphyTV) February 2, 2018

Jack is Brady’s oldest child from his relationship with “Blue Bloods” actress Bridget Moynahan. He has two other children, Benjamin, 8, and Vivian, 5, with model Gisele Bündchen.

The kiss quickly caught social media’s attention. Twitter penalized Brady for everything from the placement of the kiss to its duration, which some people decided was too long and inappropriate.

CBS New York took its cameras out on the street and polled folks about the kiss, which has spawned online conversations about how parents should and shouldn’t show their children affection.

“I’m a little uncomfortable with that,” said one passerby.

“Too long, like romantic long,” said another.

as someone who comes from (on one side anyway) One Of Those Kissing Families, i really wanted to be able to defend Tom Brady here, but... the kiss is pretty weird — Oldbert Thirtysevenko (@AlbertBurneko) February 1, 2018 Tom Brady is one of my five favorite people (including family members), but him making his son come back and kiss him on the lips for a longer time because his first lip kiss wasn't long enough is some very very disturbing #content — Robbie Vogel (@RobbieVogel14) January 30, 2018 Everyone was questioning Tom Brady for kissing his son on the lips and as a child of European ass people who do this I was ready to defend but boy oh boy does that kiss linger — Sophia Benoit (@1followernodad) February 2, 2018 Peyton Manning when Tom Brady's son tries to kiss him pic.twitter.com/IaYRX54b27 — Curt Turner (@turnbaby33) February 2, 2018 Want to thank my father for not making me kiss him while getting a massage or any other time. Also wanna say how funny it was to see Tom Brady’s son wipe his lips after he made out with his very strange dad. — Kaleb Susko (@ksus12) February 2, 2018 What kind of Dad request a giant wet sloppy kiss on the lips from their son? “That was just a peck”...the “peck” on the lips was more than enough dude. Ya, looking at you Tom Brady. — nicolle (@theresheblowws) February 2, 2018 None of my business if Tom Brady shows affection through an elongated kiss to his son but I’m just gonna say one thing: I have only ever seen white people do this pic.twitter.com/XG5uH2oKQT — I AM JANET FROM ASIA (@janetnghlee) February 2, 2018

Other people saw only a father’s affection for his son in the kiss.

“If you kiss your kids too much, it’s the wrong thing. If you kiss your kids too little, it’s the wrong thing. If you hug too much — people need to back off and stop parent shaming,” Lyss Stern, chief executive officer of Divalysscious Moms, a social network for New York City moms, told CBS New York.

Ok. STOP I can’t believe I’m about to do this but #STOPIT I can’t stand #TomBrady but I hate #ParentShaming It’s an innocent beautiful moment of love. I kiss my children on the mouth and my oldest son is 22. #SickBastards for thinking anything else! #ShameOnYou! #NFL ❤️ — ~Becca~ (@WildlyUnruly) February 1, 2018 Tom Brady and his son love each other...wow!



If you think the kiss was sexual something is wrong with you — REBUS! (@reebsedwards9) February 2, 2018 It was just a kiss. A kiss between father and son. Very soon this kid will think he's too old or too cool to kiss his dad and then they will move on to only hugs and handshakes. Everyone else should move on with their lives. #innocentkiss https://t.co/a3mdopuSds — Karen Kirksey (@kaytwok) February 1, 2018 And yes this is my take on the Tom Brady kissing his kids things. We got real problems in this world, toxic masculinity is one of them. Kiss your damn kids. Teach them to be loving. — Catie Hogan (@CatieHogan) February 2, 2018 Anyone who feels it was inappropriate for Tom Brady to kiss his 11 year old son should get their mind out of the gutter. All I see is a loving dad... and last I checked, that was a good thing. https://t.co/rRCPvbldeI — Carley Shimkus (@CarleyShimkus) January 31, 2018 I don’t like tom Brady but if the man wants to kiss his damn kid then so be it. Not important news move on — ReckyMVRX (@ReckyMVRX) February 2, 2018

This is not the first time Brady has been seen kissing family members, other than his wife, on the mouth. After winning the Super Bowl last year he gave his father a hearty, full-on smooch that also made the rounds on social media.

Yes, Tom Brady kisses his father on the lips — you got a problem with that? https://t.co/lXTJq4u7ht via @GershKuntzman pic.twitter.com/ls8j2tiDfs — New York Daily News (@NYDailyNews) February 6, 2017

Talking about the Brady kiss is a pesky distraction for some people who, just days before the Super Bowl, gave this tempest in a timeline a big kiss-off.

Just watched the Tom Brady/son kiss. Weird? Yes. But silly it’s a trending “news” story 3 days before Brady looks to win a 6th Super Bowl. #Patriots — Britt McHenry (@BrittMcHenry) February 2, 2018