Kaizer Chiefs
MISSION STATEMENT

Kaizer Chiefs is committed to upholding the highest levels of professionalism in all its endeavours and business dealings.

We surround ourselves with Love & Peace because we are passionate and care about our supporters.

Our fans are our greatest asset and the key to our success throughout the years.

In appreciation of this loyalty, Kaizer Chiefs will continually strive to maintain excellence both on and off the field.

Through our youth development programme, we aim to unlock the full potential of individuals in a scientific and professional manner, both on the field and through education. We aim to prepare the youth for the future by equipping them with the necessary life skills to enable them to maximise their potential as players and people, thereby contributing to the well being and development of our country and the continent.

VISION

To become the pre-eminent African football brand that people of all races can identify with.

To continue to develop the game on the African continent and help Africa compete on the world stage.

To become a global brand that is recognisable the world over.

Continue building and upholding the legacy left by our founding fathers.

To inspire hope and contribute to building the nation by uniting South Africans through sport.

ETHOS

Our core values and guiding principles are honesty, integrity, hard work, respect for others, truthfulness, trustworthiness, loyalty, responsibility for personal actions, generosity and kindness.

Supporter-centric

Our supporters are the cornerstone of Kaizer Chiefs’ existence and all our efforts are focused on good relationships, understanding and meeting their needs consistently.

Excellence

We’ve always been driven to excel in all we do. We are professional and run our business properly. As a brand, we aim to maintain the high standards we’ve set ourselves at all times.

Team work

We embrace individuals but we always work in teams – on and off the pitch.

Non-discriminatory

Our work environment is safe, healthy and non-discriminatory. We respect the dignity of every individual as per the constitution of the country. We embrace diversity and our differences.

Respect for law

We respect and obey the law of the country at all times.

Trustworthy

We see our supporters, sponsors, employees and partners as important stakeholders in our business and we ensure we deliver on our promises. We aim to always be trustworthy

Environment

We care for the environment and the communities in which we operate. We promote healthy living, a clean and safe environment.

Accessibility

We are always accessible to all our partners and supporters. We listen to them and share feedback via our various platforms of communication.

Full Name:

Kaizer Chiefs Football Club

Founded:

7 January, 1970

Address:

5/6 Lena Road, Lenaron, Naturena

Contacts:

Tel: +27 11 941 1465

Fax: +27 11 941 1538

E-mail: info@kaizerchiefs.com

Board of Directors:

Kaizer Motaung (Executive Chairman)

Jessica Motaung

AH Muhammad *

* Non-executive

Marketing Director: Jessica Motaung

Football Manager: Bobby Motaung

Team Manager: Gerald Sibeko

Administration Manager: Abdulla Mayet

Finance Manager: Ari Lambropoulos

Brand Manager: Dara Carroll

Security, Risk and Logistics Manager: Katang Masemola

Corporate Communications Manager: Vina Maphosa

Research and Publishing Manager: Ernest Landheer

Digital Manager: Kemiso Motaung

Supporters Structures Manager: Tracy Williams

Supporters Relations Manager: Cecil Motaung

Retail Manager: Emmanuel Khumalo

Head Coach: Ernst Middendorp

Assistant Coach: Shaun Bartlett

Get a look at what the club has done in the community, click here http://kaizerchiefs.com/club/community/