Report to the Deputy Attorney General on the Events at Waco, Texas: Planning and Decision-making Between March 23 and April 19, 1993
Potts said that, although there were constant daily negotiations to get people out of the compound, it had become apparent after 30 days that Koresh a "master manipulator" -- was controlling the situation at Waco.

Potts pointed out that the plan was really just an extension of the emergency assault plan, which had been in effect since the beginning of the standoff.

At one point during the crisis, an HRT helicopter struck a wire and crashed while attempting to place a SWAT team in a field to search for a reported trespasser. Fortunately, there were no fatal injuries. Military personnel familiar with the situation in Waco stated that the HRT equipment could not be used indefinitely.

Coulson described the factors in the deterioration of HRT effectiveness due to the lengthy deployment. The HRT operators, including the sniper observers, were required to watch for long hours through binoculars and rifle scopes in a very tense situation. Also, while the FBI snipers were observing the Branch Davidians, the Davidians likewise' observed and followed the movements of the HRT.

According to Hubbell, he told the FBI representatives that although the Attorney General was not prepared to go forward with the plan, she had not yet made a decision.

Incontro, upon whom fell part of the task of preparing the statement, recalled that Richard told her the evening of April 16 that Hubbell had advised him to the effect that "we were told it wasn't going to happen, but the FBI came over and the Attorney General wanted the statement in order to make a decision."

The Attorney General did not read the prepared statement carefully, nor did she read the supporting documentation provided along with the statement. She read only a chronology, gave the rest of the materials a cursory review, and satisfied herself that "the documentation was there."

She recalled her exact words to be "Get the hell out of there. Don't take any risks with the children."

She did not consider herself in command of the operation -- she felt that any such comment would be "gratuitous" on her part.

She recalls lying awake at night asking herself "Oh my God, what if he blows the place up? What if he holds children up in the windows and threatens to shoot them?"

Her belief is well founded. Witnesses from the Department of Justice and the FBI involved in the planning process said the same thing. No witness in this review has claimed otherwise.

This was a cylinder delivery system. Each of the six cylinders available at the crisis site had the capability of 15 one-second bursts per charge. Each burst would extend out approximately 55 feet from the cylinder creating a fog or gas mist in the area. There were enough raw materials available at the site to recharge each cylinder 20 times.

The 40 mm liquid-filled ferret round, launched by a M79 grenade launcher, could deliver 25 grams of CS liquid on impact. There were approximately 400 ferret rounds available at Waco for HRT and SWAT use. When fired from 20 yards or less, the rounds are capable of penetrating a hollow core door.