Denmark Guide: Health insurance, What am I covered for?: The Danish health insurance system can be split
Public health insurance

All residents in Denmark are entitled to health insurance services and hospital treatment covered by public health insurance. Such services include consultation and treatment from a General Practitioner (GP), as well as subsidised rates for dental care, chiropractic treatment and medication. The Danish public health insurance system also covers specialist consultation, physiotherapy, podiatry and psychological consultation as long as you have been referred by your GP.

Citizens must choose between two groups within the public health insurance scheme:

Group 1: Free consultation with your chosen GP or a specialist upon referral. Treatment from dentists, podiatrists, psychologists and physiotherapists are available at a subsidised rate.

Group 2: You will have to pay a higher rate of contribution. However you are free to choose a different GP each time you need to consult a doctor, rather than keeping the same GP as in group 1. You are also free to consult a specialist without having been referred by a GP. Fees are subsidised at the same rate as group 1. Treatment from dentists, podiatrists, psychologists and physiotherapists are available under the same conditions as in group 1.

Who is covered by public health insurance in Denmark?

Any person living and working in Denmark is entitled to coverage from the health insurance system. Once you register as a resident, you will receive a yellow health insurance card, which is valid immediately and is proof that you are entitled to public healthcare. The card should be carried with you at all times, as it is necessary when you go to the doctor, the hospital, or the dentist. You should also register with a general practitioner (GP).

All EU citizens, or people who have lived in a EU country before moving to Denmark will need to provide information about their latest health insurance country . Due to EU rules, certain nationalities' governments are responsible for paying for health services in Denmark..

European Health Insurance Card (EHIC)

Citizens of the EU who have a valid EHIC card are covered for most medical treatment in Denmark, though not for non-emergencies or emergency repatriation home.

The many forms that you used to need to cover you for health insurance within the EU have been replaced by the EHIC card. However if you are staying in Denmark for more than a year, you will need to have the E106 form as well as your EHIC card.

Private health insurance in Denmark

It is not unusual for foreigners to take out additional private insurance to supplement their automatic entitlement to the Danish public health insurance scheme. Private health insurance policies cover medical costs that are not covered by the public scheme, as well as subsidising fees at private hospitals and clinics. Some employers in Denmark also take out private health insurance policies for their employees.

For more up-to-date information regarding expat health insurance and related issues, visit our expat health blog at ExpatHealth.org .