Gov. Tony Evers calls Donald Trump's accusation that doctors execute babies 'blasphemy'
CLOSE President Donald Trump said that Governor Tony Evers veto of an abortion bill will lead to the execution of babies. USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin

Gov. Tony Evers on Tuesday condemned President Donald Trump's accusations that doctors execute babies, calling his comments "a blasphemy."

Evers tore into Trump over statements the Republican president made Saturday during a rally near Green Bay.

"To say that doctors in the state of Wisconsin are executing babies is just a blasphemy," Evers said during a Milwaukee Press Club event.

Gov. Tony Evers speaks at a Milwaukee Press Club event Tuesday. (Photo: Mary Spicuzza / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Noting that his daughter is an obstetrician-gynecologist, Evers said alleging she and other doctors kill children is "just a horrific thing to say."

"It doesn't happen. We already have things on the books.This is nothing more than a distraction from the work that we need to do," Evers told the crowd gathered at Turner Hall. "If the Republicans are so damn interested in making sure that moms and babies are well, they should really get behind my Medicaid expansion bill."

Evers was responding to comments Trump made Saturday night at his rally in Ashwaubenon, where the president doubled down on comments that have been labeled false by PolitiFact and others.

To a booing crowd, Trump said he was shocked Evers pledged to veto a bill that would punish doctors who don’t try to save the life of an infant born alive after an attempted abortion.

"Your Democratic governor shockingly stated he will veto legislation that would protect Wisconsin babies," Trump said. "The baby's born. The mother meets with the doctor. They take care of the baby. They wrap the baby beautifully and then the doctor and the mother determine whether they will execute the baby."

RELATED: Donald Trump heralds end of 'collusion delusion' in return to battleground Wisconsin

RELATED: Tony Evers will veto 'born alive' abortion bill advanced by GOP lawmakers

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

PolitiFact found Trump's comments to be a "distortion."

Late-term abortions, which are rare, involve a pregnancy that poses an immediate threat to the life of the mother, or infants with abnormalities so serious they are considered unlikely to survive. About 1% of abortions in Wisconsin happen after the 20th week.

In the extremely rare situation that such a baby is born alive, parents would make the decision about asking doctors to make any or all efforts to keep the baby breathing or resuscitate the infant.

Trump portrayed the situation as an execution.

Former Gov. Scott Walker and state Rep. Jim Steineke, the lead Assembly sponsor of Wisconsin's born alive bill, have echoed his comments.

“Thank you President Trump for making it clear just how extreme of a position Gov. Evers has taken in vowing to veto this life-saving legislation,” Steineke said Monday in a statement.

Steineke pointed to federal statistics indicating that as many as 143 babies between 2003 and 2014 were born alive after attempted abortions, adding that he believes the numbers are actually higher.

"We should probably look at reporting requirements in any case where a baby survives an abortion so we can get a better handle on the number of instances where this happens, Steineke said.

"The governor I think unfortunately is using President Trump's comments as a smokescreen, because he really hasn't come out and explained what specifically is in the bill that he opposes," Steineke said. "This is a pro-baby bill."

A public hearing on the bill is scheduled for next month.

Evers criticized Trump, as well as GOP lawmakers repeating his claims — saying that too was a "blasphemy."

The Democratic governor said state officials should instead be focused on using federal funding available through the Affordable Care Act to expand Medicaid to 82,000 more people in Wisconsin.

"When you think about how important it is that we make sure that black moms and African American babies have an opportunity to survive and have outcomes that are just as good as everybody else in the state of Wisconsin, that's what we should be talking about," Evers said. "That's where we should be putting our efforts."

Evers said GOP leaders should be working with him on that rather than pushing the "born alive" bill.

"The president is the president," he said. "He's going to do this kind of crap as long as he's president."

After Tuesday's event, Evers told reporters, "For Trump to be using that kind of language in this state is irresponsible, and if somebody is supporting that language that is equally irresponsible."

Buy Photo Wisconsin Gov. Tony Evers, center, tours the Sikh Temple of Wisconsin on Tuesday. The governor presented the Sikh Temple with a resolution marking April as Sikh Awareness & Appreciation Month. (Photo: Angela Peterson / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Earlier Tuesday, Evers visited Sikh Temple of Wisconsin in Oak Creek and presented a proclamation making April Sikh Awareness and Appreciation Month.

Honoring the six people killed at the temple seven years ago, the governor noted that while much needs to be done to unify the state and nation, the words on a wall inside the temple where so much blood was shed on an August day in 2012 — "we are one" — are words to live by.

Evers posed for photos with Sikh temple members, including families of massacre victims. He sipped tea in a large dining room where snacks and meals are served after services. He took off his shoes and wore a head covering, which is Sikh custom, when he walked into the room where services are held each week.

Sikh Temple Chairman Kulwant Dhaliwal said temple officials asked Evers to issue the proclamation and come for a visit.

"This is what we want people to know. There’s a national campaign to make all Americans aware of who Sikhs are," said Dhaliwal. "Because of the turban (worn by adult men), they think we are terrorists. When the governor comes in and makes a proclamation it helps people understand who we are. It means a lot to us."

Dhaliwal said the governor was invited to return to Oak Creek’s Sikh temple in November to celebrate the 550th birthday of Guru Nanak, the founder of Sikhism.

Meg Jones of the Journal Sentinel contributed to this report.

Contact Mary Spicuzza at (414) 224-2324 or mary.spicuzza@jrn.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MSpicuzzaMJS or Facebook at https://www.facebook.com/mary.spicuzza.

Read or Share this story: https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/2019/04/30/tony-evers-calls-trump-accusation-doctors-execute-babies-blasphemy/3628895002/