Marina Abramovic Institute: The Founders
(Main and virtual tour videos directed by Milica Zec)

Marina Abramovic Institute is dedicated to the presentation and preservation of long durational work, including that of performance art, dance, theater, film, music, opera, and other forms that may develop in the future. MAI will foster collaboration between art, science, technology, and spirituality, bringing these fields into conversation with long durational work. MAI will provide an educational space to host workshops, lectures, residencies, and research.

(Video directed and edited by Milica Zec)

If successful, this Kickstarter will cover the first phase of MAI's development: the design process. Your pledge will contribute to early MAI programming, office operations, and schematic designs of architectural elements, including building structure, lighting, acoustics, and AV. Given that MAI is the first of its kind, its early design phase demands an innovative approach. Leading this process are world-renowned architects Rem Koolhaas and Shohei Shigematsu of the Office for Metropolitan Architecture (OMA), whose unique vision will help MAI to create new ways for audiences and performers to interact.

Current interior of 620 Columbia St., Hudson, NY

In total, $20 million is needed to complete renovations of the institute and begin operations. Marina has paid for phase zero of this development process. She purchased the building for $950,000 and donated it to the institute. She funded the budget of the MAI office for six months and commissioned the architectural concept. As of now, Marina has paid $1.5 million out of pocket towards the early stages of MAI.

A single person, no matter how successful or passionate, cannot single-handedly fund and sustain a cultural institution of this size. She hopes that an equally passionate public will join her in contributing to phase one.

We aim to create a global community of collaborators and want you to be part of it.

By inviting the broader public to contribute to our early development, Kickstarter helps to affirm and build the engaged community necessary for sustaining MAI into the future. We have designed rewards that encourage backers to engage with time-based and immaterial works. With your contribution, you become a founder of the institute not only financially, but also conceptually, by partaking in the very experiences we hope to create.

Marina with MAI Model © OMA

A primary aim of Kickstarter is also a major theme of Marina's forty-year career in performance art: to close the gap between artist and audience. Here, Marina and MAI can connect directly with the institute's future visitors, who can then share in the process of its creation.

If this initiative succeeds, backers will have helped to found both the largest cultural institution ever to get off the ground using Kickstarter, as well as the only project of its kind in the world.

Contributions to this project are 80% tax deductible due to MAI's non-profit 501(c)3 status.

Marina Abramovic, The House With the Ocean View (2002). Duration: 12 days. Photo: Steven P. Harris, Courtesy Sean Kelly Gallery and Marina Abramovic Archives

Marina Abramovic is a New York-based, Serbian-born performance artist who began her career in the early 1970s. Her four decades of work explore the relationship between performer and audience, the limits of the body, and the possibilities of the mind. During her most recent performance, "The Artist Is Present" (2010), Marina sat motionless in MoMA’s atrium, offering her gaze to anyone willing to sit across from her. Over the course of three months, she stared into the eyes of more than 1,500 visitors.

(Video directed and edited by Milica Zec)

It was during this 736-hour performance that Marina became aware of the public’s immense desire to slow down and connect to themselves and to one another in a live setting. Long durational works facilitate this type of connection, but currently there is no space solely dedicated to them. MAI will be this space.

(Video directed and edited by Noah Blumenson-Cook)

MAI will be a platform for long durational work. A long durational work is any work (of performance art, dance, theater, film, music, opera, and others) whose performance exceeds six hours. The history of long durational works is varied and rich. Click here to read about some extraordinary works, including Christian Marclay's The Clock (24 hours), John Lennon and Yoko Ono's Bed-In (168 hours), John Cage's Organ2/ASLSP (As Slow aS Possible) (639 years), Michael Siffre's Biological Clock Experiments (5670 hours), Mata Amritanandamayi's hugs (32 million hugged), and Tehching Hsieh's One Year Performance series (1978-1999).

In order to fulfill its mission, MAI will:

Invite artists to propose, present, and premiere long durational works of performance art, dance, theater, film, music, opera, and more.

Provide space and other resources for art and science residencies to develop new and collaborative long durational projects.

Host lectures, workshops, community outreach initiatives, public programs, and continuing education classes, as well as an extended library of time-based and immaterial works.

Invite visitors to participate in the Abramovic Method, which will prepare them to experience long durational work.









(Drawing by Cassandra Long)

Marina will personally thank all those who contribute to the creation of MAI by hugging every backer of this Kickstarter at a live event called THE EMBRACE. This event will be held in two undisclosed locations, one in New York City and one in Europe, with exact dates and times to be announced. MAI Founders who are unable to attend these events will be offered a special reward in lieu of a hug from Marina.

Digital MAI 8-bit Videogame by Pippin Barr

Pippin Barr is a video game designer who created the viral "The Artist Is Present" 8-bit video game. He’s teamed up with us to create a game that serves as a digital tour of the institute as well as an entertaining and challenging experience. At this level, you'll receive early access to the digital institute, as well as three Abramovic Method games: rice counting exercise, stepping on grass, and complaining to a tree. To read a review of these games from Dirty Mag, click here. To play the entrance to digital MAI, click here!

(Drawing by Cassandra Long) Marina will teach the Abramovic Method water drinking exercise via exclusive live stream. You, Marina, and the other backers at this level will then perform this exercise simultaneously. You may document your performance in any way you choose and opt to include this documentation in MAI digital archives! The goal of this reward is to create a large performance of slow, conscious water drinking that encourages both participants and passersby to slow down and exist more fully in the present.

(Video directed by Noah Blumenson-Cook with music by Tristan Allen)

The Abramovic Method trains audience members with the skills to observe and perform long durational works. Through a series of exercises, participants are encouraged to become more aware of their mental and physical experiences in the current moment, increasing ability to feel their own presence and make empathic connection to others. These exercises come from a belief that everyone can benefit from being more present with themselves and others. Over the course of Marina's career, she has dedicated herself to creating and experimenting with these exercises, and institute is an environment where others can experiment as well.

(Still from rice counting exercise animation created by Arianna Vairo