Data recovery for California fire victims
Thank you for everything that you did for me! I am truly THANKFUL!

A few weeks ago, my life was as normal as it gets owning a Family Entertainment Park in Lumberton, Texas called Adventure Kingdom. Then came Hurricane Harvey, dumping some 52" of rain on our property and the lakes north of us having to opening their dams to let out water so that they would not break. Total devastation! No more normal life! We had 10 feet of water in the front of our 7 acres park and 16 feet in the rear. Everything that I had worked for in 33 years gone over night.

We are in the process of selling our property, equipment and home and then moving to help a friend open a storage facility in Livingston, TX. When I saw some drone footage of our property, I knew it was over. I told myself, “I am not going to cry! I will just get tougher and see where God leads us.” No tears lasted one week. My first tears came after my aunt in Louisiana sent us a check for $200. The reason for the tears was because she is a poor lady with very little to give.

One of my biggest losses was my computer with 33 years of data. Believe it or not, my very first PC was purchased in 1985 with a whopping 10MB drive (the biggest at the time), then an AT with 20MB and so on. I had an external Western Digital backup hard drive, but after checking it, the stupid machine had not backed up since 2014. I was devastated again! I went to my local computer shop and they said it would cost me $400 for one file. Yep, $400 for ONE file and up to $2000 for what they could recover. Walking out of the store, I was like I can't win for losing!

Then, a friend told me that she had read on Facebook about a company helping flood victims, but she couldn't remember the company's name. So I Googled it and came across your name on a blog. I called Kroll Ontrack and got ahold of a rep named Mary. I told her my story and she said, "Well, just send us the hard drive and we will do our best and try to recover as much as possible.” Then I asked her, "How much?" And sweet, precious Mary said the magic words, "FREE!” I busted out crying and could not talk anymore. It took me a long time before I could gain my composure. I know Mary remembers this moment.

Then, I asked how do I get the data back? Do I get online and download it? And, she said, "No, we will mail it back to you on an external hard drive.” Well, crud, I begin crying all over again. And then, she said, "Also, we are going to email you a UPS call tag and you can ship it to us for FREE." There I went again, crying all over my nice shirt! Today, Mary called me back and said that y'all (Texas term for “you all”) were able to recover most of the data and were shipping me the external drive. And, you guessed it...I started crying again. When I gathered myself together, I told her that most Texans don't cry like I do, but what Kroll Ontrack did for me is help me climb out of the deep hole that I am in, dust myself off, and get back to climbing mountains.

Marlon Q., Beaumont, TX