10 U.S. Code § 815 - Art. 15. Commanding officer’s non-judicial punishment
Amendments

2016—Subsec. (b)(2). Pub. L. 114–328, § 5141(1)(B), struck out “on bread and water or diminished rations” after “in quarters, confinement” in concluding provisions.

Subsec. (b)(2)(A). Pub. L. 114–328, § 5141(1)(A), struck out “on bread and water or diminished rations” after “confinement”.

Subsec. (d)(2), (3). Pub. L. 114–328, § 5141(2), struck out “on bread and water or diminished rations” after “confinement”.

2002—Subsec. (e). Pub. L. 107–296 substituted “of Homeland Security” for “of Transportation” in concluding provisions.

1983—Pub. L. 98–209, § 13(b)(1), substituted “non-judicial” for “nonjudicial” in section catchline.

Subsec. (b). Pub. L. 98–209, § 13(b)(2)(A), struck out “of this section” after “subsection (a)” in provisions preceding par. (1).

Subsec. (b)(2)(H)(i). Pub. L. 98–209, § 13(b)(2)(B), substituted “clause (A)” for “subsection (b)(2)(A)”.

Subsec. (e). Pub. L. 98–209, § 2(c), substituted “or a lawyer of the” for “of the Army, Navy, Air Force, or Marine Corps, or a law specialist or lawyer of the Coast Guard or”.

1968—Subsec. (e). Pub. L. 90–623 substituted “or a law specialist or lawyer of the Coast Guard or Department of Transportation” for “or a law specialist or lawyer of the Marine Corps,Coast Guard, or Treasury Department”.

1967—Subsec. (e). Pub. L. 90–179 inserted reference to judge advocate of the Marine Corps and substituted reference to judge advocate of the Navy for reference to law specialist of the Navy.

1962—Subsec. (a). Pub. L. 87–648 redesignated former subsec. (b) as (a), inserted references to such regulations as the President may prescribe, permitted limitations to be placed on the categories of warrant officers exercising command authorized to exercise powers under this article, and on the kinds of courts-martial to which a case may be referred upon demand therefor, promulgation of regulations prescribing rules with respect to the suspension of punishment authorized by this article, and the delegation of powers to a principal assistant by a commanding officer exercising general court-martial jurisdiction or an officer of general or flag rank in command, if so authorized by the Secretary’s regulations, and prohibited, except for members attached to or embarked in a vessel, imposition of punishment under this article on any member of the armed forces who, before imposition of such punishment, demands trial by court-martial. Former subsec. (a) redesignated (b).

Subsec. (b). Pub. L. 87–648 redesignated former subsec. (a) as (b), enlarged authority of commanding officers to impose punishment upon officers by increasing the number of days restriction from not more than 14 to not more than 30 days, and the number of months one-half of one month’s pay may be ordered forfeited by an officer exercising general court-martial jurisdiction from one to two months, empowering officers exercising general court-martial jurisdiction and officers of general or flag rank in command to impose arrest in quarters for not more than 30 consecutive days, restriction, with or without suspension from duty, for not more than 60 consecutive days, and detention of not more than one-half of one month’s pay per month for three months, and officers of general or flag rank in command to order forfeiture of not more than one-half of one month’s pay per month for two months, and the authority of commanding officers to impose punishment upon other personnel of his command to permit correctional custody for not more than seven consecutive days, forfeiture of not more than seven days’ pay, and detention of not more than 14 days’ pay, empowered officers of the grade of major or lieutenant commander, or above, to impose the punishments prescribed in clauses (i) to (vii) of subpar. (2) (H) upon personnel of his command other than officers, changed provisions which permitted reduction to next inferior grade, if the grade from which demoted was established by the command or an equivalent or lower command to permit reduction to the next inferior pay grade, if the grade from which demoted is within the promotion authority of the officer imposing the reduction or any officer subordinate to the one who imposes the reduction, and provisions which permitted extra duties for not more than two consecutive weeks, and not more than two hours per day, holidays included, to authorize extra duties, including fatigue or other duties, for not more than 14 consecutive days, inserted provisions limiting detention of pay for a stated period of not more than one year, prohibiting two or more of the punishments of arrest in quarters, confinement on bread and water or diminished rations, correctional custody, extra duties, and restriction to be combined to run consecutively in the maximum amount imposable for each, combining of forfeiture of pay with detention without an apportionment, and service of correctional custody, if practicable, in immediate association with persons awaiting trial or held in confinement pursuant to court-martial, requiring apportionment of punishments combined to run consecutively, and in those cases where forfeiture of pay is combined with detention of pay, defining “correctional custody”, and struck out provisions which permitted withholding of privileges of officers and other personnel for not more than two consecutive weeks and which authorized confinement for not more than seven consecutive days if imposed upon a person attached to or embarked in a vessel. Former subsec. (b) redesignated (a).

Subsec. (c). Pub. L. 87–648 substituted “under subsection (b)(2)(A)–(G) as the Secretary concerned may specifically prescribe by regulation” for “to be imposed by commanding officers as the Secretary concerned may by regulation specifically prescribe, as provided in subsections (a) and (b),” and deleted “for minor offenses” after “an officer in charge may”.

Subsecs. (d), (e). Pub. L. 87–648 added subsec. (d), redesignated former subsec. (d) as (e), inserted provisions requiring the authority who is to act on an appeal from any of the seven enumerated punishments to refer the case to a judge advocate of the Army or Air Force, a law specialist of the Navy, or a law specialist or lawyer of the Marine Corps,Coast Guard, or Treasury Department for advice, and authorizing such referral of any case on appeal from punishments under subsec. (b) of this section, and substituted “The superior authority may exercise the same powers with respect to the punishment imposed as may be exercised under subsection (d) by the officer who imposed the punishment” for “The officer who imposes the punishment, his successor in command, and superior authority may suspend, set aside, or remit any part or amount of the punishment, and restore all rights, privileges, and property affected.” Former subsec. (e) redesignated (f).

Subsecs. (f), (g). Pub. L. 87–648 redesignated former subsec. (e) as (f) and added subsec. (g).