A lawful step for the immigration system
But prosecutorial discretion, contrary to advocates’ apparent assumption, isn’t authority to negate whole realms of enacted law. It is authority to choose strategies and to direct resources while still achieving the basic aims of the relevant legislation.

The policy that calls for high-volume deportations is not only, or even primarily, Obama’s. It is Congress’s policy, expressed both through the substantive immigration laws and — importantly — through annual appropriations acts. Appropriators have showered the enforcement agencies with resources over the past two decades. For the past four years, those resources have been enough to support 370,000 to 400,000 ICE removals a year. Enacted appropriations have the force of law. (Incidentally, Obama’s removal level is only slightly higher than the last year of the Bush administration. He may hold a record, but it’s by only 2 percent.)

Congress has also grown increasingly specific in its enforcement mandates — for example, not only funding more than 30,000 ICE detention beds but firmly directing that they be in constant use for removals. Appropriations legislation has also specified the creation of a data system, now known as Secure Communities, permitting ICE to link seamlessly to state and local arrest information in order to concentrate efficiently on removing people with criminal records.

For Obama to drop enforcement way below the levels Congress has called for through appropriations laws would be more than legally dubious. It would also set a dangerous precedent that could haunt progressives. Picture a Romney administration thwarting, say, the new consumer protection laws by refusing to spend half the money Congress continually provides for their enforcement. Such hypothetical actions, by any administration, would conjure the ghost of Richard Nixon, who belligerently impounded huge sums that Congress had appropriated simply because enforcement didn’t conform to unilateral executive policies.

Hard-liners may say: But Obama is not enforcing the law; he is rewriting it through his latest initiative. This, too, is incorrect, precisely because the administration has pledged to stay at the level of removals that corresponds to appropriations, even while keeping Dreamers off the deportation list. Its three-year track record of high-volume deportations, maintained in the face of sharp criticism from key supporters, shows its commitment to law-bound enforcement.