'Child Kidnapping, Plain and Simple...Utter Depravity' - Strong Words for DHS in Resignation Letters

July 18, 2018 - Four members of the DHS Homeland Security Advisory Council, Richard J. Danzig, Elizabeth Holtzman, David A. Martin and Matthew G. Olsen, tendered their joint resignation letter to Sec. Nielsen on July 16, 2018.

David Martin and Elizabeth Holtzman filed additional letters, here and here.

Martin noted: "[T]he family separation policy crystallized for many HSAC members profound doubts about the administration's commitment to the rule of law. These doubts were sown, for example, when the president pardoned Sheriff Joe Arpaio, who had been found in criminal contempt of court for willfully violating a civil-rights-based injunction. That pardon was issued less than two weeks after the President refused to condemn the violent massing of Nazi and KKK sympathizers in Charlottesville. Our doubts have then been nurtured regularly by tweets and statements falsely impugning the integrity of the FBI, the Justice Department, the intelligence community, and various federal courts."

Holtzman was even more blunt: "As an author of the Refugee Act of 1980, along with Senator Ted Kennedy, I believe the treatment of refugees by you and President Trump violates that law and our treaty obligations to refugees. The 1980 Act created a framework for the admission of refugees, which it viewed as an integral and important part of US policy. The Act was adopted against the background of the Holocaust, in which the US took only a tiny handful of refugees from the Nazis, leaving untold numbers to perish at their hands. The Act was intended to prevent any repetition of that. It was also passed in response to the massive exodus of boat people from Vietnam. There was a time that the US welcomed refugees. We readily accepted and absorbed more than 600,000 refugees from Cuba, 750,000 refugees from Vietnam and more than 100,000 Jews from the Soviet Union. Considering that history, the thought that the US government is afraid today of 2,000 children and their parents is both laughable and appalling.

Under your administration and that of Donald Trump's, DHS has been transformed into an agency that is making war on immigrants and refugees. The ethnically and religiously motivated travel ban, the refusal to provide relief to the Dreamers and the new mass deportation program that does not prioritize the removal of undocumented aliens with serious criminal records (thereby harming American citizen children and spouses by removing a parent and a breadwinner from the family and hurting the country by removing productive people who have been living here for decades) are malign and ultimately self-destructive policies.

The final straw has been the separation of children from their parents at the Southwest border. This is child kidnapping, plain and simple. Seizing children from their parents in violation of the constitutional rights of both is bad enough (mentally harmful to the children and infinitely painful to both the parents and children), but doing so without creating proper records to enable family reunification shows utter depravity on the part of the government officials involved.

Although it is I who am resigning in protest against these policies, it is you who should be tendering your resignation instead."