Chelsea Clinton Says It Would be “Un-Christian” to Protect Babies From Abortion
Chelsea Clinton’s pro-abortion arguments keep getting worse and worse.

Last month, she linked the legalized killing of unborn babies to a $3.5 trillion boost to America’s economy. Now, she claims it would be “un-Christian” to overturn Roe v. Wade.

The Washington Examiner reports Clinton spoke about her support for abortion Thursday during a SiriusXM Progress Town Hall, and discussed the possibility of Roe being overturned if U.S. Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh becomes the fifth conservative justice on the high court.

“When I think about all of the statistics, that are painful, of what women are confronting today in our country, and what even more women confronted pre- Roe, and how many women died, and how many more women were maimed because of unsafe abortion practices,” Clinton said.

“We just can’t go back to that. That’s unconscionable to me. And also, I’m sure that this will unleash another wave of hate in my direction, but as a deeply religious person, it’s also un-Christian to me,” she continued.

Clinton said her children are what inspire her to keep fighting for Roe v. Wade, the infamous Supreme Court decision that basically legalized abortion for any reason up to birth.

Clinton’s thoughts centered around compassion for struggling pregnant women, but her compassion ended with the unborn child. Since Roe, approximately 60 million unborn babies have been aborted in the United States. Christianity teaches that their lives are valuable as well as their mothers’, because they also are human beings created in the image of God.

Click here to sign up for pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

And the truth is that Roe did not stop women from being hurt and killed in abortions, either. This week, a New Mexico family filed a lawsuit against a late-term abortion business, alleging it killed their young daughter and her unborn baby in a botched abortion and then tried to cover it up.

As of 2008, the CDC reported more than 400 women died from legal abortions in the United States. These numbers are little different from the years prior to Roe. A 1972 Center for Disease Control report noted the maternal death rate from abortions was 39 in the United States, the year prior to Roe. Countless more women have been injured physically or emotionally when they aborted their unborn babies.

Pregnant moms who are struggling deserve real support from Christian and secular communities — the kind of support that recognizes that she and her child both are valuable human beings. What really is “un-Christian” is touting abortion as one of the greatest supports society can provide and telling women that they need to kill their own children to succeed.