Chelsea Clinton Stirs National Outrage After Claiming It's 'Un-Christian' to Stop Abortions — What Do You Think?
MomZette Chelsea Clinton: It Would Be ‘Un-Christian’ to Protect Babies from Abortion Ex-president's daughter said she made her comments as a 'deeply religious person' — you've got to see this

Chelsea Clinton’s latest pro-abortion argument raises a series of urgent questions.

Last month, Chelsea Clinton linked abortion to a $3.5 trillion boost to America’s economy.

Advertisement

Now, she claims it would be “un-Christian” to overturn Roe v. Wade, as LifeSiteNews reported.

Clinton talked about her support for abortion on Thursday during a SiriusXM Progress town hall, according to the Washington Examiner, and discussed the possibility of Roe’s being overturned if Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh becomes the fifth conservative justice on the nation’s highest court.

“When I think about all of the statistics, that are painful, of what women are confronting today in our country, and what even more women confronted pre-Roe, and how many women died, and how many more women were maimed because of unsafe abortion practices,” she said.

“We just can’t go back to that. That’s unconscionable to me,” Clinton continued.

“And also, I’m sure that this will unleash another wave of hate in my direction, but as a deeply religious person, it’s also un-Christian to me.”

Christianity teaches that all lives, no matter what stage they are in, deserve respect and protection; the unborn are to be valued because they are human beings created in the image of God.

Advertisement

Clinton said her children are actually what inspire her to keep fighting for Roe v. Wade — an idea that begs for some serious unpacking.

Related: Magazine Coaches Women on How to ‘Relax’ During an Abortion

While the former president’s daughter expressed concern for struggling pregnant women, her compassion ended with the unborn child.

Ever since Roe v. Wade was made the law of the land, approximately 60 million unborn babies have been aborted in the United States.

Her stance on abortion may be more important than ever, as Chelsea Clinton rates her chances of running for elected office as “a definite maybe.”

“If my city councilor were to retire, if my congresswoman were to retire, my senators, and I thought that I could make a positive impact, then I think I would really have to ask my answer to that question,” Clinton said back in August, while promoting her new children’s book, “She Persisted: 13 American Women Who Changed the World,” at the Edinburgh International Book Festival in Scotland, as Mediaite reported.

Advertisement

“For me it’s a definite no now, but it’s a definite maybe in the future because who knows what the future is going to bring?”

See Chelsea Clinton speak on several political issues in the video below.