Arizona Senate Candidate Kyrsten Sinema Voted to Allow Abortions Up to Birth
Today the national pro-life group Susan B. Anthony List (SBA List) and Center for Arizona Policy Action announced a ground campaign to expose Rep. Kyrsten Sinema’s extreme views on abortion ahead of the midterm election.

Since the summer of 2017, SBA List’s field team of more than 700 pro-life canvassers has visited more than two million voters at their homes across Indiana, Florida, Ohio, Missouri, North Dakota, and Montana. The campaign is part of an historic effort to educate and mobilize voters for the 2018 midterm elections.

UPDATE: Here is a rebuttal to the inaccurate Snopes post claiming this article is false.

“When it comes to abortion, Rep. Sinema could not be more out of step with her pro-life constituents. She has voted repeatedly to continue sending tax dollars to the country’s biggest abortion business, Planned Parenthood. She even voted against a compassionate popular measure to stop abortion after five months, a point by which unborn babies can feel pain,” said SBA List’s National Campaign Chair Jill Stanek, who, as a nurse, witnessed late term babies being born alive during abortion procedures and then left to die.

“That’s extreme. That’s why our team has expanded to Arizona, where we’re proud to partner with CAP Action. Every day we will be working to turn out pro-life voters who don’t always get to the polls, as well as persuadable Democrats, Independents, and Hispanic voters. Our canvassers effectively cut through the noise of television and radio ads one conversation at a time, educating voters about Sinema’s extreme pro-abortion record and the importance of voting for pro-life Martha McSally this election.”

SUPPORT LIFENEWS! If you like this pro-life article, please help LifeNews.com with a donation!

“Kyrsten Sinema is a longtime pro-abortion extremist. As a state legislator, Sinema opposed even modest measures to protect the health and safety of mothers and their preborn children. An ally of the abortion lobby, she’s never been one to even consider supporting common-sense, compassionate regulations on abortion,” said Cathi Herrod, President of CAP Action. “Pro-life Arizonans deserve better – and will make the difference by voting for the candidate with the proven pro-life record, Martha McSally.”