Taming the health-care monster?
Most spending categories showed small increases: private health insurance, up 3.8 percent; Medicaid, 2.5 percent; the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), 3.0 percent; out-of-pocket spending, 2.8 percent. There were two significant outliers: the Department of Veterans Affairs, up 8.7 percent (reflecting in part expanded services for Iraq and Afghanistan veterans); and Medicare, up 6.2 percent. CMS attributed Medicare’s increase to “a one-time change in payment rates to skilled nursing facilities” and more spending on doctors.

What’s harder to know is whether the spending slowdown is temporary or permanent.

Unsurprisingly, Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius claims that the Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”) lowered costs. Actually, the CMS study said the law’s direct impact was “minimal.” Some provisions increased spending; others reduced it. Sebelius would have been on stronger ground if she had made a more subtle argument: that Obamacare’s controls — though not directly reducing spending — inspired greater cost-consciousness among providers.

Hospitals, doctors and medical suppliers are frightened. They recognize that the free flow of money into health care won’t continue. Government will limit reimbursements and spending; the ACA already cuts hospital reimbursement rates and requires deeper discounts from drug companies for Medicaid. Anticipating a stingy future, providers are starting to restrain costs. That’s the theory.

Contributing to the pressure is the rapid growth of “consumer-directed” health plans: a Republican favorite that, though cited in the CMS report, goes unmentioned by Sebelius. By 2011, 17 percent of privately insured workers were in “consumer-directed health plans,” a doubling from 8 percent in 2008. These plans have lower premiums and larger deductibles, arguably making consumers more cost-conscious for routine visits and procedures. This too could cause providers to be more competitive.

Of course, all this may be wishful thinking. Slower health spending may be a blip. The CMS study says the main cause is the weak economy. People lost insurance and, as a result, use less medical care. They go to doctors’ offices less often, delay elective operations and skimp on drugs. From 2007 to 2010, private insurance coverage dropped by 11.2 million; although Medicaid enrollment rose by 7.5 million, the number of uninsured still increased by 7 million. Even the insured may skip care in tough times to avoid deductibles and co-payments.