Definition of Ethylene by Merriam-Webster
Recent Examples on the Web

Avocados produce ethylene gas, which helps them ripen. Amy Mitchell, Country Living, "How to Ripen an Avocado Fast," 3 May 2019

Like apples, pears release a large amount of ethylene, the gas that causes fruit to ripen. Audrey Bruno, SELF, "How to Pick the Most Delicious Pears Every Time," 19 Sep. 2018

Enterprise and Navigator anticipate that U.S. ethylene production will reach 90 billion pounds per year during the same period. Katherine Blunt, Houston Chronicle, "Construction begins on Houston ethylene export terminal," 29 May 2018

That ethylene supply supports the production of polyethylene — the world's most common plastic — at the company's Sweeny complex. Katherine Blunt, Houston Chronicle, "Phillips 66 to launch $1.5 billion expansion of Sweeny hub," 13 June 2018

Last year, three new Gulf Coast ethylene crackers boosted domestic ethane consumption to 1.2 billion barrels a day, the agency reported. Katherine Blunt, Houston Chronicle, "U.S. ethane consumption expected to boom," 20 Feb. 2018

The best way to keep all of that ethylene from causing your apple to go off too soon is to keep them in the fridge—this will reduce the amount of gas produced, which will help them last longer. Audrey Bruno, SELF, "How to Pick the Best Apples Every Single Time," 12 Sep. 2018

The explosion occurred Saturday morning when one of the plant's production lines leaked ethylene, a highly flammable gas used to make many types of plastics. Katherine Blunt, Houston Chronicle, "Most injured workers released from hospitals after Kuraray explosion," 25 May 2018

Kuraray's Eval plant, located on Bay Area Boulevard, opened in 1986 to produce ethylene vinyl alcohol, a chemical used in food packaging. Katherine Blunt, Houston Chronicle, "Most injured workers released from hospitals after Kuraray explosion," 25 May 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'ethylene.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.