Overview of Gastrointestinal Parasites of Pigs
Management and control of GI helminths depends entirely on the production system in place, with individual programs developed for the circumstances of the specific farm, including the knowledge of which parasites are present. Maintaining pigs on concrete or entirely on slatted floors, as on intensive farms, can successfully control those parasites that have intermediate hosts or that require pasture conditions for transmission. Steam cleaning is highly effective in killing eggs and larvae. The management approach for outdoor situations and nonconcrete floors is aimed at avoiding a buildup of eggs and larvae within the area. Good sanitation is critical because fecal-oral transmission, through the contamination of food, soil, or bedding, is the primary route by which pigs become infected. Direct sunlight or dry conditions shorten the survival of some eggs and larvae because moisture and warmth are needed for their development and survival, which probably accounts for decreased transmission during hot and cold months. Thermophilic composting of feces and/or bedding before use as fertilizer inactivates Ascaris suum and Trichuris suis eggs. Both can survive for a few hours at 50°C but only a few minutes at 55°C. Most disinfectants in use on farms, unfortunately, are not effective against parasite eggs, especially those of A suum and T suis. Moving "clean" animals to safe pastures will help reduce parasite buildup, but it must be remembered that eggs of A suum and T suis are capable of surviving 6–9 and 5–11 yr, respectively, in the environment, and reinfection will occur even with 2–3 yr of pasture rest. If it is not possible to rotate pastures, pigs may occupy uncleanable ground for many years. In these situations, parasites can build up quickly, and control may be impossible without the regular use of anthelmintics. Anthelmintic treatments can be incorporated into any broader program as needed but should not be the sole basis of a control program.