Should You Seal Your Penis Shut With This Insane Sticker Instead of Using Condoms?
There’s a new product on the market designed to be an alternative to condoms. And it's absolutely insane. It’s called Jiftip, and the company describes the "Diktip" as “the ideal solution for a set of people that aren't willing to forgo sex completely, but who wish to experience a higher form of intimacy than condoms can provide.”

The Jiftip is touted as an undetectable sticker that covers the urethra to contain semen during sex, therefore working to prevent against things like unplanned pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases. "Real sex without the side effects," the website proclaims, adding you'll "feel everything, except the Jiftip."

The website gets even weirder. Bullet point number two in "The Promise" portion of the page begins with, "An indoor penis party." Huh? It continues to run off the rails. "Is it safe to have an indoor jazz-fest to hold everything inside? Feel safe-be safe requires you pull-out, remove the feel shield and ejaculate [sic]. That's it, safe and worry-free. Oh, if she notices tears in your eyes, let her believe that it's true love." Wow.

(If you want to see this thing in action, Jiftip made an extremely NSFW video showing how the real product applies to an actual penis. It's on YouTube for now, until someone flags it as offensive content.)

Billing this as "a crazy ideas as simple as sex itself," the Jiftip makers wonder why it took so long for people to think to glue a sticker on the tip of their junk. Probably because it's a truly horrible idea, according to people with medical degrees, such as Larry Lipshultz, M.D., a professor of urology at Baylor College of Medicine.

"With a condom the semen is caught in the condom. There is no such space for that with this device and thus no place for the semen to go out other than leak around the device. It could also come off during intercourse," says Dr. Lipshultz. Since the device only covers the urethra and tip of penis, the rest of the penis is still exposed to possible STIs such as herpes and syphilis.”

And Brian Steixner, M.D., a urologist at the Jersey Urology Group in New Jersey, agrees.

“It might not be strong enough to be able to stop the ejaculate at the rate and velocity it is released,” he said. “Condoms have been tested, and they really don’t break unless you’re doing something wrong. So until studies prove that the Jiftip can contain ejaculate, there’s no guarantee.”

Jiftip, for their part, offer the following promise: "WILL IT WORK? HOW CAN YOU KNOW? HOW CAN ANYONE KNOW? You will know after you try." We'd love to meet the marketing person behind that circular logic claim.

Dr. Steixner also warns that if the Jiftip is insanely strong, your ejaculate could get stuck. This means you could potentially mix your semen and urine, or harm your perineum or prostate by backing up a system that is meant to flow forward.

"Preventing against STDs and getting pregnant are two things you don't want to take any chances with."

(For more top stories sent to your inbox daily, sign up for our newsletter.)