Sylvester Stallone Releases New Photos From ‘Rambo 5: Last Blood'
John Rambo is coming back, you guys. The fifth installment of the Rambo movie franchise is in production, and star Sylvester Stallone is keeping fans interested with photos of where his legendary character is going next.

From what we know so far, the new Rambo movie — officially titled Rambo V: Last Blood — picks up with Rambo working on a ranch in Arizona. Our hero goes on to take on Mexican drug cartels after the daughter of one of his friends is kidnapped.

Starting in early October, the 72-year-old action star has been steadily releasing behind-the-scenes photos from the movie on Instagram, and needless to say, we're getting pumped. Most recently, Stallone revealed Rambo's "Heartstopper" knife, which does indeed look like it could live up to its name:

The day before, Stallone shared a photo of the Rambo crew setting up a shot:

And a few hours before that, the actor revealed that it had been "a very tough shoot." "I am missing family and home, but hopefully it’ll all be worth it," he wrote in the caption.

Stallone shared a video of him riding a horse; he didn't mention Rambo in the caption, but given his character's job on a ranch, it seems safe to assume the two are connected.

Here's a shot of John Rambo "lost in thought," according to Stallone's Instagram caption:

A day earlier, he shared a distinctly Rambo-esque quote: "No beast so fierce as a man pushed to the edge."

One photo showed off Rambo’s “small knife.” “He is still making the BIG one,” Stallone wrote on Instagram.

Another showed Rambo in what Stallone described as his "man cave."



Here's Rambo looking pensive in the rain, as all heroes do sometimes:

Stallone first introduced John Rambo's new look on October 2, with a photo of his character in cowboy attire. "Tonight we start filming…!" he announced in the caption.

The same day, he shared a photo of him on horseback, dressed in what looks to be an upgrade to his iconic burlap sack:

As for the movie's cast, Paz Vega has joined as the female lead, playing a reporter named Carmen Delgado; it's her half-sister who is kidnapped, so she teams up with Rambo to get her back. Yvette Monreal has joined the cast as Gabrielle, the woman who is kidnapped, and Sergio Peris-Mencheta will play Hugo Martinez, the main villain who is the leader of a violent drug cartel.

The movie will be shooting in Bulgaria and Spain. It will be directed by Adrian Grunberg, who has directed worked on Netflix’s Narcos and Sense8, with a script co-written by Stallone and Matt Cirulnick. It’s scheduled to hit theaters in fall 2019.