Wind, rain from first storm of season should douse fire, bring air quality relief to Bay Area
Air quality in the Bay Area remained at unhealthy levels Monday, as smoke from the deadly Camp Fire burning in Butte County continued to choke the region. But relief is just around the corner, thanks to a storm system that is expected to drench the Bay Area and bring snow to the Sierra Nevada.

Meteorologists with the National Weather Service are predicting that a pair of storms moving in from the Pacific Ocean will deliver two rounds of rain to Northern California beginning Tuesday night and help wash away smoke from the Camp Fire, which ignited Nov. 8.

Ryan Walburn, a meteorologist with the weather service, said by the time Bay Area residents wake up Wednesday morning the storm will have “flushed that air pollution out of here.”

“First it will be strong southerly winds coming off the ocean,” Walbrun said. “The initial shot of wind will help clear out the particulate matter… By Wednesday afternoon, the entire Bay Area should see some light rainfall.

“That’s good news in terms of air quality.”

Two storm systems are forecast to sweep across our region this week: The first is due in late Tuesday night and Wednesday and the second from late Thursday evening through Friday. Here are forecast rain totals for both systems combined. #CAwx #BayAreaWx #BayAreaRain pic.twitter.com/izzppPBoYF — NWS Bay Area (@NWSBayArea) November 19, 2018

The storm will bring up to 2 inches of rain in the North Bay, about 1 inch in San Francisco and half an inch to 1 inch in the East Bay, forecasters expect. A second system is tracking to bring more rain to Northern California as early as Thursday night, and into Friday morning.

Along with the rain, snow is likely in the Sierra Nevada on Wednesday and Thursday above 6,000 to 6,500 feet, according to the weather service.

As a result, officials at Yosemite National Park announced Monday that they will be closing roads in the park’s high country beginning Tuesday.

The Tioga and Glacier Point Roads in Yosemite will close to all vehicular traffic beginning at 6 pm Tuesday. The roads are normally closed by this time every year due to deep snow. But because this fall has had little rain and snow, they have remained open longer than usual. The roads could reopen, park spokeswoman Jamie Richards said, if dry, warm weather returns and melts the snow.

The National Weather Service issued a hazardous weather advisory for the Bay Area through Sunday, advising motorists to be aware of slick roads, particularly while driving on Thanksgiving. It also issued a winter storm watch for the Sierra Nevada through Thursday morning, saying 20 inches of snow is possible in some locations.

The Camp Fire destroyed the town of Paradise and killed at least 79 people, with 699 people unaccounted for, according to the Butte County Sheriff’s Office. The blaze is the single deadliest wildfire in California history. It has so far burned 150,000 acres, destroyed 10,364 buildings and Monday afternoon was 65 percent contained. Firefighters estimated full containment by Nov. 30.

Scientists with expertise in wildfire plumes and air pollution said Monday that the rain will dramatically reduce the health risk that Northern California residents have been exposed to from breathing the high levels of soot particles. And although some toxins will wash out of the sky, the rain will flush them into streams and out to the ocean, or into the ground.

“Concentrations of things like iron, manganese and mercury can be elevated,” said Manvendra Dubey, an atmospheric chemist at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico. “There are impacts, but once you clean them out, the net exposure will be much less” to people than it was from them breathing soot in the air.

Here's an updated forecast rainfall total for Wednesday through Sunday. The Central Valley could see 1-3", up to 3-6" in the mountains and foothills. #cawx pic.twitter.com/yLQj0Fvrkx — NWS Sacramento (@NWSSacramento) November 19, 2018

Dubey noted that there are serious, long-term health effects from breathing fine soot particles. Tiny particles known as “PM 2.5,” which is short for particulate matter smaller than 2.5 microns in size — roughly one-twentieth the width of a grain of sand on the beach — float in the air and can become lodged deep in the lungs and even reach the bloodstream. This kind of pollution, which comes from dust, coal-fired power plants, wild fires and other sources, contributes to thousands of deaths each year in the United States through breathing and heart problems.

When soot in the air is hit by rain storms, some particles absorb water, swell in size and fall to the ground in rain drops. Other tiny particles do not absorb water well and stay aloft. But they are often blown away by winds that come with rain storms.

For the past week, there has been very little wind in Northern California, but the storms Wednesday are expected to bring wind speeds blowing off the ocean toward the land of about 20 mph.

Rains near the fire area will douse the remaining flames. That should reduce the amount of soot they pump out.

“I think you will see a noticeable cleaning up,” Dubey said of Northern California air quality later this week.

But the rains can also bring problems.

There will be fairly heavy showers in the Chico area, which will help firefighters working on the Camp Fire. But the rain also could increase the risk of ash flows and debris flows in the burned areas, according to the National Weather Service in Sacramento, not only in Paradise, but in other areas that have suffered major fires this summer, including Redding and Lake County.

Air quality index levels across Bay Area cities were in the “unhealthy” red range between 151 and 200 Monday, according to the Bay Area Air Quality Management District. The district extended a Spare the Air Alert through Tuesday, meaning all wood burning indoors and outdoors is prohibited in the nine-county Bay Area. Related Articles Paradise council, residents happy with PG&E underground utility plan

$1 million Camp Fire donation returned to Walmart Foundation

Trump threatens to cut millions from California fire departments after deadly wildfires

Editorial: PG&E can’t be trusted — disband or replace it

Bear cub named Paradise returns home after recovering from Camp Fire burns

Between Oct. 1 and Sunday night, San Francisco had received only .21 inches of rain — 7 percent of the historical average over that time period. San Jose was even worse, at just .03 inches, or 2 percent of normal. And Oakland was at .07 inches, or 3 percent.

If each area receives 1 inch in the coming week, that will bump up their seasonal averages to about 50 percent of normal. If they get 2 inches, they’ll be roughly back to normal.