Social media post botches cherry program reality
In a classic example of what happens on social media when people form opinions based on emotion instead of fact, a Northwestern Michigan tart cherry grower's Facebook posting has gone viral, but with faulty information to back up the posting's claims.

The farmer posted a photo of a small pile of tart cherries and implied that he'd been forced to dump the fruit due to the federal marketing order. The posting, which claims that the farmer must dump 40,000 pounds of tarts, as of mid-day today had been shared more than 45,500 times, triggered about 9,000 likes and other reactions, and generated nearly 6,000 comments, mostly in sympathy with the farmer.

The problem, however, said Kevin Robson, horticulture specialist with Michigan Farm Bureau, is that the information posted shows either shallow understanding of the federal marketing order or a deliberate attempt to change the order because of political disagreement.

Growers establish and enforce the order

That's chasing the wind, Robson said, because the order is established by a majority vote of tart cherry growers.

"It's also enforced by the growers themselves," he said. "It is for the betterment of the industry as a whole, and a great number of cherry growers have benefited, even those who voted against it."

Administered by the Cherry Industry Administrative Board (CIAB), the order this year required tart cherry processors to keep 29 percent (the farmer's posting said he was ordered to dump only 14 percent) of the crop they handle off traditional markets (pies, sweetened desserts, etc.) in an attempt to stabilize both prices and supply, which in cherries has been notoriously volatile.

"For example," Reposing said, "in 1988, when the entity was called the Cherry Administrative Board, growers voted to eliminate the marketing order. Prices began to follow a rollercoaster that led, within 10 years, to tart cherry prices that fell into single figures. Some growers went out of business."

In response to prices that were below costs of production, tart cherry growers in seven states petitioned the USDA to put a new order and administrative board in place, and prices began to stabilize. Still, some growers, such as the one who posted the photo of a small pile of cherries, took exception to the order.

The farmer, according to UpNorthLive.com, said "he'd rather sell all of his cherries for a lower price than sell some of them for a higher price and have to dump the rest."

Reality, Robson said, is that the order was put in place to stabilize prices at profitable levels, and it's already been proven that stable prices aren't possible if tart cherry marketing is left solely to supply and demand.

"Last year we had a (national) crop of 249 million pounds, and this year it's projected to be 351.3 million," said Perry Hedin, executive director of the Cherry Industry Administrative Board.

"That means our best guess is a surplus of 101 million pounds, which is far too much for the market," he said. "We take our production estimate in June and add it to what handlers have in their free inventories, which gives us our supply. We compare that to demand, which is a 3-year average of sales, plus other factors including market growth projections, and compare total supply to projected total demand."

If that entire surplus were put on the market, Robson said, prices would be well below cost of production, the exact situation that led to growers petitioning USDA for a marketing order in the first place.

"Most people would rather have 71 percent of something than 100 percent of nothing," he said.

Dumping isn't the only option

Another misstatement on the Facebook posting, Robson said, is that growers are not allowed to donate or use the dumped cherries "in any way."

"That's just not true," Robson said. "Farmers can use the cherries for research and development, and they could make thousands of cherry pies and donate them to charity if they want. Remember these are tart cherries. They need to be processed — and quickly — to make a viable product. They aren't sweets that you just eat by the handful."

The Facebook posting wrongly puts the blame for cherry dumping on the marketing order, Robson said, when it is the processor who makes the decision to ask farmers to dump cherries.

Role of processors

"We regulate processors, not growers," Hedin said. "This year, we told processors that, based on this formula, you should retain 29 percent of what you handle from the North American market. But processors still have options. They can take the surplus and sell it into the export market or can use it for new product development. The existing market gets filled first. But after that, processors can donate the surplus to charity. It's difficult to coordinate, but it is an available option."

How processors handle the surplus is really up to them, said cherry grower and processor Ben LaCross.

"A processor could make up that difference with new product launches or exports," he said. "A Facebook posting allows people to get their frustrations out and to get sympathy from the general public, and I've seen many comments saying things need to change," he said. "But no one offers a solution.

"Maybe one solution is to limit imports, and I agree that imports are a real big issue. But how do you go about limiting imports and not have political ramifications that go far beyond the cherry industry? That's protectionism. You can't take one year's experience with the marketing order and make a generalization about its functionality. You need to evaluate the long-term impact, and when you do that, you can see that it's been a great tool for increasing sales, the farm-gate value of tart cherries and the economic viability of the industry."

All-in-all, Robson said, the order shows that tart cherry growers are working together to solve their problems, and not even a viral Facebook posting can trump their cooperation.

"It is a fact that growers have sustained better prices at the farm gate level in the years when there has been a federal marketing order compared to years when there wasn't," Robson said. "If one person wants to fight the industry and his fellow farmers' cooperation via social media, that's his prerogative. But the majority of growers have benefited from their remarkable mutual cooperation and ability to work together. The facts show it works. Social media only shows emotion and opinion."