Octopus genetic code is so strange it could be an ALIEN, according to scientists
Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Scientists claim a new map of the octopus genetic code has revealed a creature so strange that it could be an "alien".

The creatures have a hugely complicated genome sequence, and have more protein-coding genes than even humans.

Octopus DNA is highly rearranged - like cards shuffled and reshuffled in a pack - containing numerous so-called "jumping genes" that can leap around the genome.

US researcher Dr Clifton Ragsdale, from the University of Chicago, said: "The octopus appears to be utterly different from all other animals, even other molluscs, with its eight prehensile arms, its large brain and its clever problem-solving abilities.

"The late British zoologist Martin Wells said the octopus is an alien. In this sense, then, our paper describes the first sequenced genome from an alien."

(Photo: PA)

The scientists who sequenced the genome of the California two-spot octopus report their findings in the journal Nature.

They discovered unique genetic traits that are likely to have played a key role in the evolution of characteristics such as the complex nervous system and adaptive camouflage.

(Photo: PA)

Analysis of 12 different tissues revealed hundreds of octopus-specific genes found in no other animal, many of them highly active in structures such as the brain, skin and suckers.

Cephalopods, which include the octopus, squid, cuttlefish and nautilus, are a family of predatory molluscs with an evolutionary history stretching back more than 500 million years to a time long before plants colonised the land.

(Photo: PA)

They inhabit every ocean at almost all depths and possess a range of features that call to mind sci-fi aliens.

These include prehensile sucker-lined tentacles, highly mobile, camera-like eyes sensitive to polarised light, sophisticated camouflage systems that alter skin colour and patterns, jet-propulsion, three hearts, and the ability to regenerate severed limbs.

Although the genome is slightly smaller than a human's it is packed with more genes.

It was as if the octopus genome had been "put into a blender and mixed", said co-author Caroline Albertin, also from the University of Chicago.