Who is Sergei Skripal? The Russian double agent given refuge in UK in spy swap before being found 'poisoned' at shopping centre
Get daily news updates directly to your inbox Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Former Russian double agent Sergei Skripal continues to fight for his life in hospital three days after he was found slumped on a bench.

Skripal, 66, who is suspected to have been poisoned, was discovered unconscious on the bench near a shopping centre on Sunday afternoon.

He was found alongside a 33-year-old woman - believed to be known to him - at the scene in Salisbury, Wiltshire, shortly after 4pm.

The pair were rushed to Salisbury District Hospital, where police said they were being treated for "suspected exposure to an unknown substance". They are believed to remain critically ill in intensive care.

Yesterday, it was claimed Skripal had been in fear of his life after both his wife and son were killed in car crashes in the space of just five years.

But who is the ex-spy? And what is his background?

Scroll down to find out...

(Image: Reuters)

(Image: PA)

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Who is Skripal?

A retired Russian military intelligence colonel, Skripal was sentenced to 13 years in a high-security prison in August 2006.

He was then freed in a 2010 deal which saw 10 Russian sleeper agents expelled from the United States.

Skripal was one of four agents pardoned and released by Moscow in what was said at the time to be the biggest spy swap since the Cold War.

He was flown to the UK along with another of the men freed by Russia in the exchange - military analyst Igor Sutyagin, who was serving a 14-year sentence for spying for the US.

(Image: Reuters)

(Image: Adam Gerrard/Daily Mirror)

The spy swap took place on July 9, 2010 on the tarmac at Vienna's airport and a Boeing 767-200 carrying the four agents was understood to have later touched down at RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire.

Among the Russian agents deported from America in the swap deal was Manhattan socialite and diplomat's daughter Anna Chapman who was married to a British man and lived in London for several years.

The Foreign Office refused to comment at the time on whether the men would remain in the UK.

But it appears Skripal settled for a quieter life in the medieval cathedral city of Salisbury for several years - until he was rushed to hospital on Sunday after the suspected poisoning.

(Image: Reuters)

(Image: Adam Gerrard/Daily Mirror)

The ex-spy's family life

Skripal lived with his wife Liudmila at their £350,000 semi-detached home for just a year before she died, neighbours said.

Liudmila reportedly lost her life in a car crash in 2012, not long after her husband had purchased the property in Salisbury.

"He used to live with his wife but unfortunately she died in a car accident a while ago," neighbour Blake Stephens, 24, told the Daily Mail.

The ex-spy's wife was buried in the UK following the tragedy.

(Image: Daily Mirror)

Then, only five years later, Skripal's son is thought to have also died in a car crash while holidaying in Russia. Further details surrounding both incidents, including the circumstances, are currently unclear.

The son was also reportedly buried in Britain, after being repatriated.

Blake told the newspaper Skripal had lived at the property "with his Russian son and his son's partner" following Liudmila's death.

He added: "We didn't speak to them much."

(Image: Reuters)

It is claimed that Skripal had recently gone to police expressing fears for his life - although this remains unconfirmed.

Neighbours have told how the ex-spy was "quiet", dressed casually and drove a BMW. Police have been at his home since 5pm on Sunday.

Where was Skripal found unconscious?

Skripal and the unidentified woman were found slumped on a bench near a children's play area, close to The Maltings shopping centre.

Witnesses described how it appeared the pair "had been taking something quite strong".

(Image: Adam Gerrard/Daily Mirror)

A number of scenes in Salisbury have been cordoned off - including Skripal's home, a Zizzi restaurant and a pub - and some have been decontaminated, but police and Public Health England have assured the public that they are not at risk.

Met Police Assistant Commissioner Mark Rowley, the UK's top counter-terror officer, said his investigators are helping the investigation of what caused the illness.

He told the BBC: "It's a very unusual case and the critical thing is to get to the bottom of what's caused these illnesses as quickly as possible.

(Image: Daily Mirror)

"If necessary we will bring we will bring that investigation into the counter-terrorism network.

"We're doing all the things you would expect us to do, we're speaking to witnesses, we're taking forensic samples at the scene, we're doing toxicology work and that will help us to get to an answer.

"I can't say any more at this stage."