Former Deputy Secretary of State Tom Nides Rejoins Morgan Stanley as Vice Chairman
Morgan Stanley (NYSE: MS) today announced that Thomas R. Nides, former Deputy Secretary of State and former Chief Operating Officer of Morgan Stanley, will rejoin the Firm as Vice Chairman. In his new role, Mr. Nides will have a broad mandate focusing on the Firm’s global clients and other key constituencies around the world. He will also work with senior management on issues related to external and government affairs. Mr. Nides will be a member of Morgan Stanley’s Operating and Management Committees and will report directly to Chairman and CEO James P. Gorman.

Mr. Gorman said: “We are excited to have Tom rejoin the management team, this time focusing on the Firm’s clients. His deep experience over the past 25 years in government and financial services uniquely qualifies him to deliver the full capabilities of Morgan Stanley to our current and prospective clients globally. Tom will work closely with Institutional Securities Group President Colm Kelleher and Global Wealth Management President Greg Fleming on client issues.”

Mr. Nides said: “I am excited to be returning to Morgan Stanley at a time when the Firm is clearly gaining momentum. With its global reach and intellectual capital, Morgan Stanley is uniquely positioned to help clients navigate the increasingly complex interaction between global macro events, international business and markets. I look forward to participating in that process.”

Morgan Stanley is a leading global financial services firm providing a wide range of investment banking, securities, investment management and wealth management services. The Firm’s employees serve clients worldwide including corporations, governments, institutions and individuals from more than 1,200 offices in 43 countries. For further information about Morgan Stanley, please visit www.morganstanley.com.

Note to editors:

Tom Nides

Prior to joining the Obama Administration as Deputy Secretary of State, Mr. Nides was the Chief Operating officer of Morgan Stanley from 2005 to 2010. He was an executive officer and served as a member of the Operating and Management Committees. Before joining Morgan Stanley, he served as Worldwide President and Chief Executive Officer of Burson-Marstellar and as Chief Administration Officer of Credit Suisse First Boston, the investment banking division of Zurich-based Credit-Suisse Group.

Mr. Nides began his career on Capitol Hill as Assistant to the Majority Whip of the United States House of Representatives and Executive Assistant to the Speaker of the House. Mr. Nides later served as a Senior Vice President of Fannie Mae and as Chief of Staff to the United States Trade Representative.

Mr. Nides has served on the Boards of New York Cares, the Urban Alliance Foundation, the Local Initiatives Support Corporation, the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association and the Advisory Board of the National Zoo.

Media Relations Contact: Wesley McDade, 212.761.2430