Michael Ray Charles and Me

Michael Ray Charles is an artist I have admired for years and is without a doubt my favorite living artist. His work is very controversial due to his honest treatment of racial issues and his confrontational style. I was introduced to his work by one of my art school professors, Charles’ name was on a list of contemporary artists the class was assigned to research in order to “broaden our horizons”. As soon as I saw his paintings I knew some version of that was what I wanted to do.

Charles’ colorful, graphically styled paintings draw upon the rich vein of historical racial stereotyping running through American advertising, product packaging, billboards, radio jingles, and television commercials. Charles relates the Little Black Sambo, Mammy, and minstrel images of a bygone era to contemporary mass-media portrayals of black youths, celebrities, and athletes. Charles feels such imagery is deeply ingrained in the American subconscious. I for one, agree.

“Stereotypes have evolved,” he notes. “I’m trying to deal with present and past stereotypes in the context of today’s society.” Twisted caricatures of African-American experience, such as Aunt Jemima, are represented in Charles’s work as ordinary depictions of blackness, yet are stripped of the aura of harmlessness that lends them an appearance of truth that is very seldom questioned. People just don’t stop to think about where these images come from.

Charles says, “Aunt Jemima is just an image, but it almost automatically becomes a real person for many people, in their minds. But there’s a difference between these images and real humans.” In each of his paintings, notions of beauty, ugliness, nostalgia, and violence emerge and converge, reminding us that we can’t easily divorce ourselves from a past that has led us to where we are, who we have become, and how we are portrayed.

His work furthermore examines how African Americans have been viewed in American history and also how we have come to view ourselves as a result of demeaning stereotypes.

His paintings have a scraped, antique look to resemble peeling vintage commercial art. With these he presents his own satirical campaign for a fictitious product called Forever Free. This product symbolizes the false promises of freedom made to blacks by America and also by the consumer market through their false images.

Charles’ forceful and aggressive use of racial stereotypes has often been at the center of controversy. In a 1999 ARTnews article, Charles explained, “Every time I have a show there are some black folks complaining.” Obviously his blunt approach to his artwork tells us he wants to draw strong reactions from you and me, the viewer. While he’s been criticized for daring to take this approach, some have applauded Charles for boldly questioning the status quo. For example, director Spike Lee has described Charles’ work as “cinematic. His works are one-sheets, posters for movies that Hollywood would never have the nerve to make, exploring race and sex in this country.”

Please comment below, let me hear what you think!

Sign – up for my Free Bi-weekly newsletter

Connect with me on Twitter (MikeOwensArt) on Twitter

Follow @MikeOwensArt



Like me on Facebook @ facebook.com/mikeoart

Michael Owens | Promote Your Page Too