Bikers for Trump meet with President in Bedminster
CLOSE President Trump was pretty active on social media Saturday, targeting the FBI and Democrats. But some of the tweets were deleted and then reposted due to a couple of typos. Susana Victoria Perez has more. Buzz60

Despite heavy rain, President Donald Trump welcomed bikers and their motorcycles to the Trump National Golf Course Saturday for what was billed as a "Bikers For Trump" rally. Trump saluting the flag and reciting the Pledge of Allegiance with Bridgewater Eagle Riders Aerie #2137 President Ray Misuira, Vice President Larry Peters and Sergeant at Arms Walter Pawlikowski. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Janice D'amico)

BEDMINSTER – Despite heavy rain, President Donald Trump welcomed bikers and their motorcycles to the Trump National Golf Course Saturday for what was billed as a "Bikers For Trump" rally.

According to the Associated Press, the event was intended to be an outdoor photo-op with the President, but the weather and flash-flood warnings sent the bikers inside the swanky clubhouse. The White House had said about 180 bikers would be attending the event, including military veterans and members of law enforcement agencies, as well as members of the New Jersey chapter of Bikers for Trump, whose members frequently attended Trump’s campaign rallies, sometimes facing off with anti-Trump protesters.

On Saturday, the bikers chanted "Four more years!" and "USA!" as Trump entered the ballroom. About a dozen members of the Bridgewater Eagle Riders Aerie #2137 were present at the by-invitation only event, said Larry Peters, vice president of the organization. Peters, President Ray Misuira and Sergeant at Arms Walter Pawlikowski led the Pledge of Allegiance with Trump at the event.

"This was not a political thing being done for either side," said Peters, who is not a member of the Bikers for Trump organization. "It was support for the President of the United States of America. That's what it was all about. It was a once-in-a-lifetime experience."

Peters said Trump told staff members the golf club to bring his "friends in from the rain." Initially, the event was to take place outside on the steps of the clubhouse. Once inside, the very wet bikers were given hot, dry towels with which to dry off.

"President Trump was so cordial — like a regular guy — like talking to one of your neighbors," Peters said. "He didn't have a microphone. He didn't use a podium. He didn't have a prepared speech. He was joking around with us and talking like a regular guy."

After speaking with them for a bit while inside, Trump suggested the group all go outside and show him "the beautiful motorcycles," Peters said. The weather had started to clear up.

"W came outside and he wanted to hear the bikes run," Peters said. "So we started the engines and we revved the bikes for him. He was giving us the thumbs up. I had asked him if it was possible for all of us to do the Pledge of Allegiance with him and he said he wouldn't have it any other way. He brought us up on the steps with him and we proceeded to lead the entire group and it was absolutely incredible."

On the Bikers for Trump 2020 Facebook page, Gia Marie said those in attendance had a "a great time."

"We love our President," she said. "We were treated like royalty."

READ: President Donald Trump likely heading back to Bedminster, for a while

READ: Trump and protesters both return to Bedminster

At the event, the Associated Press said Trump pointed out the "sopping-wet" media, which sparked jeers and "boos" from the guests as well as calls to "tell the truth." Trump thanked the group, saying they’d been supporting him since the beginning and called their motorcycles "the most beautiful bikes anyone’s ever seen."

Trump later signed autographs, shook hands and posed for photographs.

After, Trump returned to the podium. He polled those in the crowd on their views of the press, prompting more jeers. One guest joked that the press pool should be thrown out in the rain.

According to the Associated Press, the president mainly ignored reporters’ shouted questions, except for one about former White House adviser and reality star Omarosa Manigault Newman and her new book, which includes scandalous — and often unsupported — accusations against Trump.

The president leaned over and cupped his hand around his mouth as if to whisper.

"Lowlife. She’s a lowlife," Trump said.

He ignored a question about ongoing trade negotiations with Mexico, which prompted some in the crowd to shout, "Build the wall!"

It was a classic, chaotic Trump scene reminiscent of his early campaign, the Associated Press said. The president was continuing an extended working vacation away from Washington.

Later, when the rain had eased, Trump walked outside the residence, where the bikers had gathered with their motorcycles on the drive. He posed for more pictures, stood for the Pledge of Allegiance and urged the bikers to rev their engines.

"Let’s hear those engines now," he called out, gesturing for them to go louder as the motors roared.

Earlier in the day, Trump was busy on Twitter, calling out Attorney General Jeff Sessions and his alleged enemies in the FBI. He also marked the anniversary of the deadly Charlottesville rally with a tweet that said he condemns "all types of racism and acts of violence." It was a change from last year when the event occurred and he tweeted there was "blame on both sides" for the violence that happened when white nationalists descended on Charlottesville to protest the removal of Confederate statutes and marched through town shouting racist slurs.

Staff Writer Cheryl Makin contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: https://mycj.co/2MEX7BY