Variable outcomes of human heart attack recapitulated in genetically diverse mice
Variation in heart morphology and function across CC mouse strains

A preliminary survey of CC founder and RI strains revealed marked differences in various morphological parameters, e.g., coat color and quality, body weight (BWt), behavior, neurological activity, and bleeding (unpublished results), in accordance with previous reports on variation in aspects such as motor performance,13 hematological parameters,14 susceptibility to infections,15,16,17 immunological conditions,18,19 reproduction,20 toxicokinetics,21 glycome repertoire,22 and traits associated with skin cancer.23

To assess parameters of cardiac morphology and function, echocardiographic analysis was performed on 12-week-old male mice from various CC RI strains, with particular focus on LV function. We documented significant variation in LV morphology (Fig. 1a) as well as other parameters, exemplified by LV wall thickness, EF, and stroke volume (SV) (Fig. 1b–d). It was notable that in certain CC RI strains LV mass did not show direct correlation with BWt (Fig. 1e, f), as exemplified by the DAVIS_BA, DONNELL_HA, FEW_FD, and POH_DC strains (colored arrows). Although most strains had steady heart rates of 400–450 bpm during ultrasound imaging under standard conditions (1.5% v/v isoflurane anesthesia and a body temperature of 37 °C), some strains revealed a tendency to maintain a stably higher (>500 bpm, e.g., BEM_AG, DONNELL_HA, FEW_FD, POH_DC) or a stably lower (<400 bpm, e.g., 129 × 1, NOD/ShiLtJ, PEF_EC) heart rate (data not shown). These findings underscore the reproducible variability among CC RI strains in virtually every parameter measured. A complete summary of measurements and calculations is outlined in Table S1 (Supplementary Material).

Fig. 1 Comparative morphological and functional analysis of selected CC RI strains (12-week-old male mice). a Representative echographic images of the left ventricles in longitudinal axis. b–f Plots showing distribution of individual values among RI strains for b LV wall thickness in diastole, c ejection fraction, d LV stroke volume, e body weight (BWt), and f LV mass (calculations based on echographic measurements). Colored arrows point at the strains with most prominent differences between BWt and LV weight. Scale bar, 5 mm a Full size image

Strain variation in perioperative survival after MI

After baseline ultrasound examination, mice were subjected to left coronary artery (LCA) ligation surgery to model MI. Although all assessed strains recovered normally immediately after surgery, there was a significant difference in survival 3–5 days post MI (Fig. 2). This survival drop-off prominent in some strains was due to death by myocardial rupture, a typical feature of the mouse MI model. Notably, the C57BL/6J (B6) parental strain (most widely used in cardiovascular research) displayed one of the highest mortality rates. Two CC RI strains (CIS_AD and MERCURI_HF) had 100% penetrance for this trait.

Fig. 2 Susceptibility of selected CC strains to myocardial rupture. Survival rate of mice 3–5 days after MI corresponding to mortality due to myocardial rupture. Only animals with > 30% LV ischemia were included in the calculation. Initial number of animals per strain is indicated in brackets next to the strain name (n) Full size image

During surgical procedures, there were distinct morphological differences among CC RI strains in trachea diameter and/or LCA position and branching. Narrow/fragile trachea impeded successful intubation, whereas early LCA branching and/or atypical position was a major hindrance for obtaining a reproducible infarct size. Thereafter, strains exhibiting such phenotypes were excluded from further analysis (e.g., PUB_CD, TAS_FE, and YOX_DE). For other strains, only those with a comparably large MI size (~40% of LV) were included for further study; as from previous studies24 and our observations, an MI size of <30% does not result in significant reduction of EF and LV remodeling.

Post-MI diversity in heart function and morphology

Heart function of the surviving mice was assessed by echocardiography 1 month after MI surgery, at which point hearts were collected and whole-mount images obtained (Fig. 3a). As with baseline measurements, there was dramatic variation in the outcome of MI between strains. Considering that reduced EF (ΔEF) and LV dilation (LVD) are the key hallmarks of MI-induced LV systolic dysfunction (LVSD) and subsequent HF,1,25,26 these two parameters were assessed for each strain before and after MI. Significant variation was detected between the strains, with B6 being one of the worst performing strains (Fig. 3b, c).

Fig. 3 Morphological and functional analysis of the hearts one month after MI. a Representative images of the hearts of selected CC RI strains one month after MI, aligned from the most pronounced (top, in red) to the least pronounced (bottom, in green) LVSD/HF phenotype. b Changes in EF for individual strains (green bars—before, red bars—1 m after MI). Strains are aligned according to the degree of EF reduction after MI (ΔEF—blue dots). c LV volume changes (green bars—before, red bars—1 m after MI). Strains are aligned according to the degree of LV dilation after MI (LVD—blue dots). Green and red arrows on X axis indicate the strains with correlating ΔEF and LVD values (LVSD/HF phenotype). Error bars on the graphs denote standard deviation. Data are presented as mean value ± SD of minimum three biological replicates. (Exact number biological replicates per strain is provided in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2.) d TOFU_FB strain as a potential model of MI-induced dilated cardiomyopathy. Representative echographic images of the LV in longitudinal axis before (top) and after MI (middle), whole-mount image of the same heart one month after MI (bottom). e NUK_AC strain as a potential model of spontaneous right ventricular hypertrophy. Normal heart (left), heart with severe RV hypertrophy (right). Scale bars, 5 mm (a, d) Full size image

Strains displaying severe and minimal LVSD based on the combination of ΔEF and LVD traits are highlighted on Fig. 3a in red and green, respectively. Notably, some strains (e.g., GIT_GC, GALASUPREME_CE, JUNIOR_GB, DOD_AH, HAZ_EF) did not show evidence of a direct correlation between ΔEF and LVD traits. For the consistency of the study, these were excluded from LVSD/HF-related analysis. A complete summary of post-MI measurements and calculations is presented in Table S2 (Supplementary Material).

Of all the strains assessed, TOFU_FB exemplified an excellent model of MI-induced dilated cardiomyopathy with 100% survival, high phenotypic penetrance, and reproducibility of post-MI response. Multiple animals of the NUK_AC strain manifested various cardiac abnormalities in homeostatic condition, including heart and right ventricular hypertrophy. These individual animals were not included in this study (Fig. 3d).

Reasoning that scar quality and composition might correlate with LVD, scar analysis was performed on eight selected CC RI strains, with differentially pronounced LVSD/HF phenotype. Significant differences in apparent wall thickness in the embedded scar samples ranged from an average of 100 µm for the BOON_HF strain to over 250 µm for the BOM_GB strain (Fig. 4a). The collagen area fraction (AF) was high in most strains, with substantial inter-sample variability (Fig. 4b). Two of the CC RI strains (FEW_FD and NUK_AC) showed significant collagen fiber alignment (Fig. 4c, d) and in both cases the average orientation of the collagen fibers was close to the circumferential direction. Most other strains showed collagen alignment patterns more similar to that reported following coronary artery ligation in rats.27 Individual scars often displayed substantial alignment as indicated by a mean vector length (MVL) of 0.4 or higher, but the group did not display significant alignment on average, because the mean orientation varied between samples. In summary, whereas collagen content was similar across strains, strength of collagen alignment varied widely.

Fig. 4 Comparative morphological and qualitative analysis of the LV scars one month after MI. a Scar wall thickness. b Collagen area fraction. c Analysis of collagen fiber alignment. The FEW_FD and NUK_AC strains show consistent alignment as determined by a one-sample t-test. d Representative images of well-aligned (top) and poorly aligned (bottom) collagen fibers (polarized microscopy). Scale bar, 100 µm d Full size image

Distinct genetics of heart repair vs ear hole punch healing

To compare the efficiency of heart repair with a recognized model of tissue regeneration established with the Murphy Roths Large (MRL/MpJ) mouse strain,28 ear punch closure analysis was performed on selected CC RI strains. Surprisingly, no direct correlation between these two regenerative scenarios was seen (Fig. 5). Specifically, the BEM_AG and PEF_EC strains recovered relatively well from MI response, yet were not as efficient in ear punch hole healing. By contrast, the BOON_HF and FEW_FD strains responded poorly to the MI challenge, yet healed ear punch holes effectively. These results support the presence of distinct genetic programs underlying cardiac vs. ear wound repair.

Fig. 5 Comparative analysis of heart vs. ear regeneration. a Representative images of selected CC strains one month after MI and ear punch. In green, strains with minimal LV remodeling after MI, and in red, strains with adverse LV remodeling after MI. Note the poor correlation of the degree of ear punch healing with the outcome of MI. Scale bars, 5 mm (heart images) and 1 mm (ear punch images). b Quantification of the ear punch hole area. Data are presented as mean value ± SD of minimum three biological replicates Full size image

Cardiac gene expression profiling and functional annotation

To highlight the molecular differences among CC hearts that might predict functional variation in in cardiac injury response, we performed systematic gene expression profiling on the uninjured hearts of selected CC RI strains. Principal component analysis (PCA) on whole-transcriptome profiles of 27 strains employed in this study did not detect any clustering across strains on the transcriptome-wide level that would correlate with the observed cardiac injury response (Supplementary Fig. S1). Strains with higher resilience in response to LVSD/HF did not cluster separately from more susceptible strains.

To detect meaningful variations in gene expression that could be indicative of predisposition to or protection from MI-induced LVSD/HF, hierarchical clustering on genes was performed in the 12 strains with most pronounced dissimilarities in the LVSD/HF phenotype (see Fig. 3a). No apparent clusters correlating with the phenotype could be identified, in agreement with the PCA results. However, when clustering was repeated on six strains from the extremities of the LVSD/HD spectrum (FIM_DF, POH_DC, PEF_EC, BOON_HF, DAVIS_BA, and B6; see Fig. 3a), five prominent clusters of gene expression profiles displayed correlation with LVSD/HF. Enrichment analysis using PANTHER29 and DAVID30 revealed one cluster (Fig. 6a) enriched in genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation (GO-Slim Biological Process GO:0006119, corrected p-value = 2.02E − 04 and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway mmu00190, corrected p-value = 2.33E − 05). A heatmap of the genes from PANTHER and DAVID enrichment lists (Atp5a1, Ndufa5, Ndufa6, Ndufb5, Ndufb9, Ndufa13, Ndufc1, Cox8b, Cox7b, Cyp4a31, Uqcrb (Fig. 6b)) evidenced reduced gene expression across the strains with minimal LV remodeling and elevated gene expression in the strains with distinct LVSD.

Fig. 6 Expression profiling and functional annotation clustering. a A heatmap of a selected gene expression cluster correlating with MI-induced left ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD) and heart failure (HF) phenotype. The FIM, POH, and PEF strains displayed minimal LVSD, whereas the B6, DAVIS, and BOON strains displayed severe LVSD after MI (see Fig. 3A). b Expression profile of genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation overrepresented in cluster a (p-value > 2.00E − 04). c–e Representative correlation plots of top correlates of gene expression vs. LVSD/HF-related traits (LVD and ΔEF). c Positive correlation of Usmg5 mRNA expression levels with the LVD phenotype (correlation coefficient − 0.92, p-value = 1.88E − 06). d Negative correlation of Nab1 mRNA expression levels with the ΔEF phenotype (correlation coefficient − 0.90, p-value = 9.50E − 06). e Positive correlation of Atp5k mRNA expression levels with the LVD phenotype (correlation coefficient − 0.87, p-value = 7.91E − 05) Full size image

To validate this finding and to explore the connections between individual gene expression levels and predicted LVSD/HF phenotypes, GeneNetwork/WebQTL correlation analysis was performed between the cardiac expression dataset and the LVD and ΔEF traits using 12 strains most susceptible (B6, DAVIS_BA, BOON_HF, TOFU_FB, 129 × 1, FEW_FD) and resilient (FIM_DF, POH_DC, PEF_EC, BOM_GB, NUK_AC, SAT_GA) to LVSD/HF (see Fig. 3a). Of the 500 top candidate genes with a correlation coefficient above ± 0.60, 343 were common for both traits. Enrichment tests on these 343 correlates revealed the “generation of precursor metabolites and energy” (GO:0006091) and “oxidative phosphorylation” (mmu00190) terms being overrepresented (corrected p-values = 4.35E − 02 and 1.49E − 03, respectively) comprising Atp5a1, Atp5e, Atp5k, Cox7b, Ndufb4, Ndufb5, Ndufb9, Sdhd, and Uqcrb. All these genes displayed positive correlations between messenger RNA expression and adverse MI outcome. Usmg5 (also known as Atp5md; ATP synthase membrane subunit DAPIT) was one of the top scoring correlates on the list (Fig. 6c) and had expression also positively correlating with the LVSD/HF phenotype. Usmg5 co-purifies with mitochondrial ATP synthase31 and is critical for maintaining its function.32 Collectively, these data support a plausible connection between elevated intrinsic levels of oxidative phosphorylation and predisposition to LVSD/HF. Notably, the top negative correlate Nab1 (Ngfi-A-binding protein 1; Fig. 6d) is a transcriptional repressor described as a negative regulator of pathological cardiac hypertrophy.33

A summary of the 50 top correlates common for LVD and Δ%EF traits is presented in Table S3 (Supplementary Material). In addition, two other genes with expression positively correlating with the LVSD/HF phenotype are worth noting: (1) Traf3 (tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 3), a major regulator of the innate immune response with expression levels associated with neurological and cardiovascular diseases;34 and (2) Cxcl9, a chemokine associated with various pathological conditions including dilated cardiomyopathy, HF, arrhythmias, and heart transplant rejection.35

Quantitative trait locus analysis

Quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis of variation in MI response revealed one significant QTL (P ≤ 0.05) on Chr 12 (logarithm of the odds (LODs) = 10.3) for susceptibility to myocardial rupture (survival) (Fig. 7a, b). This QTL spans the region 91.430–92.280 Mbp. At this region, the PWK/PhJ and CAST/EiJ founder strains have predominant influences on the trait, with the effects of the PWK strain being significant (P < 0.0001; indicated by the red and green intervals in Fig. 7c, respectively; the founder effects summary in Fig. 7d and the haplotype plots sorted by phenotypic effect, Fig. 7e). The − 2 LOD drop region includes only three protein coding genes: Nrxn3, Dio2, and Cep128. However, all missense single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in this region are contained within Cep128. This gene encodes a centriole appendage protein negatively regulating ciliogenesis36 that has a central role in pathogenesis of human congenital heart disease.37 Of the nine missense SNPs in Cep128, four were unique for the PWK haplotype: rs261503899 (C > T), rs46662645 (A > T), rs262007891 (G > C), and rs266165675 (C > T) (p-value 1.48e − 07); and four to both the PWK and CAST haplotypes: rs252980304 (C > T), rs48026157 (A > C), rs51557552 (T > C), and rs46446778 (T > C) (P = 1.06e − 05). This indicates that Cep128 is an excellent candidate for the causative gene for cardiac rupture at this locus, with the abovementioned SNPs mediating the myocardial rupture trait.

Fig. 7 QTL mapping of the myocardial rupture trait. a A QTL map from a genome-wide scan comparing CC strains according to the myocardial rupture trait value. Chromosomal positions are presented on the X axis, whereas the Y axis shows LOD scores. The three significance threshold lines (from bottom to top) correspond to genome-wide permutation P-values < 0.63 (suggestive) < 0.10 (approaching significance) and ≤ 0.05 (significant, in red). b A QTL map of chromosome 12 containing the locus with the greatest LOD score for this trait. c A founder coefficient plot showing the contribution of the eight CC founder alleles at each position along chromosome 12. Note that the chromosomal positions in parts B and C line up, allowing direct comparison. d At this QTL, the PWK founder strain has a significant effect on the trait. e A haplotype figure showing the founder strain haplotype present in each CC strain at the peak QTL region. Note that three of the five CC strains with the lowest values for this trait (at the top of the haplotype stack) have the PWK haplotype at this position, whereas two of these five strains have the CAST haplotype. Genomic coordinates are relative to the NCBI37/mm9 mouse genome assembly Full size image

Another QTL approaching significance (P ≤ 0.10) was associated with the LVD trait (Fig. 8a, b). This QTL is located on Chr 5 (LOD = 9.1) and falls into the region 112,310–113,205 Mbp containing multiple genes (Cryba4, Tpst2, Tfip1, Srrd, Gm6583, Hps4, Sez6l, Asphd2, Gm6588, and Myo18b). Both the CAST/EiJ and C57BL/6J parental strains displayed significant effects with this QTL (Fig. 8c–e), suggesting that both strains harbor SNP(s) that mediate predisposition to LVD (p-value 9.64e − 04). Although the majority of significantly associated SNPs in the Chr 5 QTL region were specific to the CAST haplotype, nine SNPs were present both in CAST and B6, specifically rs33218387 (G > A), rs253490750 (C > T), rs228327059 (C > T), rs32116976 (C > T), rs32122208 (G > A), rs32118052 (G > C) and rs32118955 (C > T), and rs47968507 (G > C) and rs46076017 (T > C). These SNPs would be the best candidates to explain the QTL.

Fig. 8 QTL mapping of the left ventricular dilation (LVD) trait. a A QTL map from a genome-wide scan comparing CC strains according to the LVD trait value. See Fig. 7 for other details. b A QTL map of chromosome 5 containing the peak locus that is above the line indicating LOD scores approaching significance. c A founder coefficient plot for chromosome 5 showing the contribution of the eight CC founder alleles at each position along the chromosome. At the peak QTL region, the B6 and CAST founder strains have the most effect on the trait (positive contribution). d Founder effects for chromosome 5 at the position of the greatest LOD score, showing significant contributions by the CAST and B6 founder strains. e A haplotype figure showing founder strain haplotype present in each CC strain at the peak QTL region on chromosome 5. Note that three of the five CC strains with the greatest values for this trait (at the bottom of the haplotype stack) have the B6 haplotype at this position, whereas two of these five strains have the CAST haplotype. Genomic coordinates are relative to the NCBI37/mm9 mouse genome assembly Full size image

Remarkably, 24 of the missense SNPs significantly associated with this QTL reside in Myo18b, with two of these (rs47968507 (G/C) and rs46076017 (T/C)) shared by both B6 and CAST. Myo18b has been implicated in sarcomere assembly and maintenance of myofibril structure38 as well as human skeletal and cardiomyopathies when mutated.39,40 In addition, a polymorphism in Sez6l has been associated with ischemic heart disease in humans41 and five SNPs in Sez6l are significantly associated with the LVD trait.

A full list of SNPs associated with the two QTL, including their precise genomic location and predicted effects on protein function, is presented in Tables S4 and S5 (Supplementary Material). All other traits analyzed (e.g., BWt, LV mass, heart rate, EF, and EF change (%EF and Δ%EF), LV SV, LV wall thickness) did not produce QTL with a P < 0.10, although some did have a suggestive P < 0.63.