Global atmospheric teleconnections during Dansgaard–Oeschger events
Data.

Water 18O/16O and 2H/1H composition (expressed as δ18O and δD, respectively) were measured at IsoLab, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. Measurement techniques are described in refs 31,32. Measurements were made at 0.5 m depth averaged resolution, using laser spectroscopy (Picarro L2120-i analyzer). Data are reported relative to the VSMOW (Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water) standard, and normalized to SLAP (Standard Light Antarctic Precipitation, δ18O = −55.5 ‰, δD = −428 ‰ relative to VSMOW). Measurement resolution is generally better than 40 years per sample for the 67 kyr record, with a mean temporal resolution of 17.2 years per sample between 10–67 ka. Measurement uncertainties are better than 0.08‰ for δ18O and 0.8‰ for δD.

Atmospheric methane concentrations were measured on discrete samples at Pennsylvania State University (0–67 ka, 0.5–2 m resolution). Air was extracted from ∼50 g ice samples using a melt–refreeze technique, and analysed on a gas chromatograph with a flame-ionization detector. Corrections for gas solubility, blank and gravitational enrichment are described in ref. 32.

Dansgaard–Oeschger event compositing.

The stacking procedure used in this study is identical to that used in ref. 5. The reader is referred to that study for a complete description of the method and its uncertainties. We summarize and describe additions here. The midpoint of each abrupt DO transition in NGRIP δ18O and WDC CH 4 is identified following ref. 23 and used as a tie point for each DO/AIM event. A time vector, t, is defined from −1,200 years to 1,200 years with 1-year spacing. For each DO/AIM event, the NGRIP δ18O and WDC CH 4 , δ18O and d ln data are linearly interpolated onto time vector t. The midpoints of each DO transition in NGRIP δ18O are fixed to time t = 0 years, and WDC CH 4 midpoint at time t = 56 years, which is the average lag of atmospheric CH 4 behind Greenland δ18O as identified by ref. 22. The relative timing of the WDC isotope records to WDC CH 4 are linked by the small and relatively well-constrained gas age–ice age difference (Δage) of the WAIS Divide core23. All DO/AIM events are then stacked and averaged creating a composite DO/AIM event for each proxy. Our results are robust to the set of events composited, for example, the dropping of random events from the composite and the exclusion of large or small events.

Before stacking, we filter the WDC d ln record to reduce noise. WDC d ln has power at millennial frequencies comparable to that in WDC CH 4 and δ18O as well as high-frequency noise unrelated to the millennial variability of interest here. We wish to reduce high-frequency noise due to measurement, which is normally distributed in the depth domain. We apply a 1-2-1 filter to the raw d ln data on the measured depth scale, which is a tapered weighting function similar to a 3-point moving average but twice the weight is given to the central point. Its response function has a relatively sharp frequency cutoff and is never negative (unlike moving averages); thus, no phase shifting of the data occurs. Below, we assess the influence of this light filtering on change point detection.

Breakpoint determination and uncertainties.

The stacking procedure demonstrates the average response of d ln to abrupt DO transitions and quantifies lags. To objectively identify change points in the composites we use the RAMPFIT25 and BREAKFIT33 algorithms. The use of a modified BREAKFIT change point detection on the WDC δ18O is discussed extensively in ref. 5. RAMPFIT is better suited to this study than BREAKFIT, due to the ramp-like shape of the d ln , CH 4 and NGRIP δ18O composites, although results from both algorithms are comparable (discussed below) and do not affect the conclusions of this study. RAMPFIT has been used previously to detect abrupt change in deuterium-excess records34. The RAMPFIT algorithm fits a ramp function, consisting of three linear sections and two break points (t 1 and t 2 ), to the data in a least-squares sense. We let the algorithm search for the initial breakpoint, t 1 , within the bounds −200 to 200 years, and the second break point, t 2 , within the bounds −100 to 350 years on the WDC d ln composite (recall that the midpoint of the DO transition in NGRIP δ18O is defined at t = 0 years, and the WDC CH 4 midpoint at time t = 56 years). The algorithm finds the best-fit ramp function defined by the mean of the ‘before’ and ‘after’ line segments, the duration of the ramp, and the timing of t 1 and t 2 . The algorithm uses a Monte Carlo moving block bootstrap (MBB) technique33 to address uncertainty in the identification of the breakpoints. We report the mean and standard deviation of the initial breakpoint, t 1 , as the timing of initial d ln change.

We investigate the influence of the choice of smoothing filter applied to the raw d ln record prior to the stacking procedure. We evaluate three different types of smoothing: a 1-2-1 filter; a 1-1-1 filter, that is, a 3-point symmetrically applied moving average; no filtering. The results are summarized in Supplementary Table 1 and shown in Supplementary Fig. 1. The choice of filter slightly influences the mean timing of the change points as detected by RAMPFIT, but in all cases the initial change points, t 1 , are in agreement within uncertainty. Further, in all cases t 1 is synchronous with the initiation of abrupt change in WDC CH 4 within uncertainty.

In the stacking procedure, the individual events in all proxies from WDC are aligned at the midpoint of the WDC CH 4 transitions. However, the exact alignment of events is subject to uncertainty. We perform a Monte Carlo sensitivity analysis (1,000 realizations) in which random perturbations in timing are applied to the individual d ln events that make up the d ln stacks, following ref. 5. These timing uncertainties are discussed in detail in ref. 5. We use the non-systematic errors from that study, which include uncertainty in determining the midpoint of the abrupt shifts in both NGRIP δ18O and WDC CH 4 ; variability in the stated 56 yr lag of WDC CH 4 behind shifts in NGRIP δ18O; and non-systematic errors related to the age-scale construction5,23. Random timing errors within the stated uncertainties of ref. 5 are applied to the unfiltered, individual d ln events. The events are stacked as above and 1,000 realizations are averaged. The resulting composite has a very high signal-to-noise ratio, as uncorrelated variations are heavily reduced. The RAMPFIT routine was performed on the resulting composite d ln response, yielding an initial d ln breakpoint at t 1 = 51 ± 33 yr and t 1 = −35 ± 36 yr for the DO warming and cooling phases, respectively. Our results are thus robust to timescale uncertainties.

An important source of uncertainty in the timing of the breakpoint relative to the abrupt DO transitions is the gas age–ice age difference (Δage). An extensive analysis of this uncertainty is presented in ref. 5. As the δ18O and d ln are measured on the same ice, the 2σ uncertainty bound of 69 years due to Δage, found by ref. 5, is applicable to the d ln composite as well. However, the relative timings of breakpoints in the WDC δ18O and d ln stacks are not subject to any uncertainty associated with Δage, since they are measured on the same ice samples. Thus, our claim that the breakpoint in the d ln stack occurs significantly before the δ18O breakpoint relies solely on the identification of the breakpoint, and not Δage uncertainties. We find that the d ln change point occurs significantly before that in δ18O by an amount of 173 ± 79 yr for the DO warming, and by 235 ± 64 yr for DO cooling.

As a further test of the robustness of our change point detection, we apply the BREAKFIT algorithm to the d ln composite of DO warming events (instead of the RAMPFIT routine used above). The d ln breakpoint as found by the BREAKFIT method (t = 23 ± 38 yr for raw data, and t = 38.4 ± 25.4 yr for filtered data) is in good agreement with results from the RAMPFIT method.

Summary of change point uncertainties.

Here we briefly synthesize the above sensitivity studies and uncertainties in the timing of the d ln breakpoints. For the phasing of WDC d ln breakpoints to NGRIP δ18O we consider: the RAMPFIT MBB uncertainty, ±74 yr (1σ) for DO warming and ±59 yr for DO cooling; the Δage uncertainty5, ±69 yr (2σ); the systematic uncertainty in the NGRIP δ18O-WDC CH 4 phasing from ref. 5, ±27 yr (2σ). Adding all uncertainties in quadrature yields ±83 yr (1σ) for DO warming events, and ±70 yr (1σ) for DO cooling events, as reported in the main text.

We can similarly quantify the uncertainty in the WDC CH 4 , and NGRIP δ18O initial break points, as found by the RAMPFIT analysis. In the case of WDC CH 4 , we consider the RAMPFIT MBB uncertainty, ±4 yr (1σ) for DO warming and ±2 yr for DO cooling; and the systematic uncertainty in the NGRIP δ18O-WDC CH 4 phasing, ±27 yr (2σ). Adding all uncertainties in quadrature yields ±14 yr (1σ) for both DO warming and cooling events (rounding uncertainties to the nearest year). For the NGRIP δ18O change points, we consider only the RAMPFIT MBB uncertainty of ±5 yr (1σ) and ±7 yr, for warming and cooling events, respectively. Note that owing to the much higher signal-to-noise ratio of the NGRIP δ18O and WDC CH 4 stacks, the MBB uncertainties are much lower than those of WDC d ln .

For the phasing of WDC d ln to WDC δ18O breakpoints we consider only the RAMPFIT MBB uncertainty for the d ln breakpoint, ±74 yr (1σ) for DO warming and ±59 yr for DO cooling, and the BREAKFIT uncertainty for the δ18O breakpoint5, ±50.8 yr (2σ). Adding in quadrature yields phasing uncertainties of ±79 yr (1σ) for DO warming events and ±64 yr (1σ) for DO cooling events.

Frequency domain methods.

We use the Thompson multitaper method for coherence and phase estimates, correcting for coherence bias and using a Monte Carlo approach to estimate the 95% confidence limits on the phase estimation (for example, ref. 35). We also use the Thompson multitaper method to estimate spectral power density, employing the MATLAB pmtm.m routine with an improved confidence limit estimation that correctly accounts for the degrees of freedom as implemented by P. Huybers (http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/∼phuybers/Mfiles). We linearly interpolate the data to even time intervals (Δt = 10 yr spacing) before analysis. We perform the analysis on the records over the interval 10–67 ka, 20–67 ka (excluding the deglaciation), 6–67 ka (including the early Holocene), and for different interpolated time spacing (Δt = 10, 20, 40 years). These analytical choices do not meaningfully impact the conclusions of this study.

Characterization of millennial frequencies.

We characterize the WDC d ln , CH 4 and δ18O spectra, providing context for interpreting the phase relationship of WDC d ln to the AIM and DO patterns of climate variability. Normalized (z-score over the 10–67 ka period) CH 4 and δ18O have red power spectra, with increasing power toward lower frequencies through the millennial band; AIM and DO cycles are not periodic but span a range of timescales from ∼500 to 5,000 years. Millennial-scale power in normalized d ln is comparable to that of CH 4 and δ18O. It is important to note that while the δ18O and CH 4 signals are both expressions of millennial variability in the coupled climate system, they do not have the same power distribution across frequency. Specifically, millennial-band power in WDC δ18O is weaker than that in CH 4 (or Greenland δ18O). The distribution of millennial power in WDC d ln has similarities to that of both CH 4 and WDC δ18O.

The unique nature of the millennial band is shown clearly in the coherence and phase between WDC CH 4 and δ18O (Supplementary Fig. 2). The phase relationship transitions from in phase at orbital frequencies, to ∼90° out of phase at millennial frequencies (∼5 to 1 kyr periods of the DO/AIM cycles). This relationship reflects the integrand–integrator relationship between NH and SH climate: temperature change in the North Atlantic (highly correlated with WDC CH 4 ) is inversely related to the time rate of change of temperature in the Southern Hemisphere36. Any signal is 90° out of phase with its derivative across frequency, and has reduced power compared with the derivative. The smoothly decreasing phase angle between WDC CH 4 and δ18O at periods below ∼2,000 yr is equivalent to the discrete ∼200 yr time lag between the Northern and Southern hemispheres during these events5. A discrete time lag between two signals, −Δτ, is equivalent to a smoothly changing phase angle  = −Δτ × ω × 360° with frequency ω (ref. 37).

The d ln record is significantly coherent with both CH 4 and δ18O (Supplementary Fig. 2), but shows a distinct phase relationship: at periods <2.5 kyr, d ln and CH 4 are essentially in phase; at timescales between ∼2.5 kyr and 5 kyr, d ln is out of phase with both δ18O and CH 4 , with a phase angle between 0° (in phase) and 90° (quadrature). One should expect d ln to show phase angles between 0° and 90° with δ18O and CH 4 , if its variability were composed of a superposition of two modes of variability, one in phase with δ18O and the other in phase with CH 4 (which are 90° to each other). Below we show that the relationship of phase angle to frequency observed among the records is expected if d ln represents a combination of the CH 4 and δ18O modes of variability, given the distribution of power in the CH 4 and δ18O records.

Sensitivity of phase relationships to chronological uncertainties.

We investigate the sensitivity of the coherence analysis to chronological uncertainties in the age model and Δage history arising from the dynamical firn densification model on which they are based23. We perform a Monte Carlo sensitivity study in which the coherence and phase between WDC CH 4 , δ18O and d ln are calculated for an ensemble of 103 different possible Δage histories that are generated by varying input parameters to the firn densification model23 within stated uncertainties, as well as four different depth interpolation schemes38 for a total of 4 × 103 possible WDC chronologies. The mean coherence and phase of the Monte Carlo sensitivity study are shown in Supplementary Fig. 2a, b with ±1σ of the spread of results (shading). The results demonstrate that the coherence and phase analysis is insensitive to the small chronological uncertainties of the WDC timescale. The 95% confidence intervals on the estimation of the phase relationship between WDC CH 4 , δ18O and d ln calculated by the cmtm.m routine using an iterative method35 are shown in Supplementary Fig. 2c.

Regression model.

WDC d ln variability is related to the variability in both WDC CH 4 and δ18O. We illustrate this explicitly by multiple linear regression of the combined CH 4 and δ18O signals to WDC d ln , 〈d ln 〉 = a〈δ18O〉 + b〈CH 4 〉, where 〈x〉 indicates that time series x has been normalized by its z-score over the interval 10–67 ka. The combined regression model (a = 0.4589 and b = 0.3951) accounts for 62% of variance of the d ln record at all timescales (Supplementary Fig. 3). The F statistic of the combined model, 4666.3, has a p value within rounding error of zero, indicating that the combined regression model is a significantly better predictor of the d ln record than the δ18O or CH 4 component alone. Much of the remaining variance in WDC d ln not described by the combined model can be attributed to high-frequency noise in WDC d ln ; the linear model explains over 87% of the variance in WDC d ln if high-frequency noise (<1 cycle per 500 yr) is excluded.

We use a Monte Carlo method to test whether the additional variance explained by the combined linear model is significant over that explained by its components alone, accounting for autocorrelation in the time series. We compare the linear regression model, a〈δ18O〉 + b〈CH 4 〉, against two dummy regression models, M 1 = a 1 〈δ18O〉 + b 1 noise 1 , and M 2 = a 2 noise 2 + b 2 〈CH 4 〉, where noise 1,2 are randomly generated AR-1 time series whose mean, standard deviation, and lag-1 autocorrelation match those of the normalized CH 4 and δ18O time series, respectively. We compare the r2 of the real linear model with the distribution of r2 values resulting from 103 random iterations of each dummy model. The distributions of r2 values for M 1 and M 2 have a greatest-likelihood value equal to that of δ18O-only and CH 4 -only models, respectively (r2 = 0.54 and r2 = 0.51), with a decreasing but non-zero probability of a higher r2 value due to noise fitting of the additional random, but autocorrelated, time series. The real linear model’s r2 (0.62) exceeds that of 99.95% and 100% of iterations for M 1 and M 2 , respectively. These results demonstrate conclusively that the additional variance in d ln explained by the combined δ18O and CH 4 variability is significant and not due to noise fitting.

The linear model analysis is consistent with the observed spectral coherency. An arbitrary linear combination of two normalized signals approximately 90° out of phase with each other can result in a signal with any phase relationship to the components. In this case, approximately equal weighting of the components (a = 0.4589 and b = 0.3951) yields a resulting phase relationship of ∼45° between WDC d ln and the components of the model (CH 4 and δ18O). WDC d ln is not precisely 45° to CH 4 and δ18O at all millennial frequencies. For example, d ln and CH 4 have a phase angle slightly greater than 45° at lower millennial frequencies and closer to 0° at higher millennial frequencies. This reflects differences in the power distribution across millennial frequencies of each proxy and how they combine. The linear model captures the combination of power distribution and phase relationships of d ln to the other proxies: the phase relationship of CH 4 to the linear model is equivalent to the phase relationship of CH 4 to d ln , and likewise for δ18O to d ln (Supplementary Fig. 4).

Data availability.

The data that support the findings of this study are available at http://dx.doi.org/10.17911/S9MW2F.