Microbiology of Dental Decay and Periodontal Disease
Daily toothbrushing and regular professional cleanings by the dentist appear to be adequate to prevent periodontal disease. Rigorous debridement of tooth surfaces is the standard treatment. Often, some form of surgery is used to improve access to root surfaces. Recent studies suggest that short-term use of antimicrobial agents, especially metronidazole and doxycycline, is beneficial.

The widespread use of fluoride in the water supply, in dentifrices, and in local applications by the dentist has reduced the prevalence of caries by 30 to 50 percent among young people in many industrialized countries. In clinical trials, the use of topical antimicrobial agents to eradicate diagnosed S mutans infections usually significantly reduces decay.

The tooth surface normally loses some tooth mineral from the action of the acid formed by plaque bacteria after ingestion of foods containing fermentable carbohydrates. This mineral is normally replenished by the saliva between meals. However, when fermentable foods are eaten frequently, the low pH in the plaque is sustained and a net loss of mineral from the tooth occurs. This low pH selects for aciduric organisms, such as S mutans and lactobacilli, which (especially S mutans ) store polysaccharide and continue to secrete acid long after the food has been swallowed.

This chapter reviews the bacterial aspects of dental caries and periodontal disease and suggests that, in the future, treatment will be directed toward eliminating or suppressing certain bacterial species that appear to be overt pathogens in the dental plaque.

The tooth surfaces are unique in that they are the only body part not subject to metabolic turnover. Once formed, the teeth are, under the correct conditions, essentially indestructible, as witnessed by their importance in fossil records and forensic medicine. Yet in the living individual, the integrity of the teeth is assaulted by a microbial challenge so great that dental infections rank as the most universal affliction of humankind. The discomfort caused by these infections and their enormous cost (dental infections rank third in medical costs, behind heart disease and cancer, in the United States) gives dental diseases prominence despite their non-life-threatening nature.

Dental Caries (Decay)

Dental decay is due to the dissolution of tooth mineral (primarily hydroxyapatite, Ca 10 (P0 4 ) 6 (0H) 2 ) by acids derived from bacterial fermentation of sucrose and other dietary carbohydrates. These bacteria live in bacterial communities known as dental plaque which accumulates on the tooth surface. For almost a century it was believed that any bacterial community on the tooth surface could cause decay, and treatment was almost exclusively the mechanical cleaning of these surfaces by toothbrushing, using some type of mild abrasive. Such treatments based upon debridement and, in extreme cases, upon dietary carbohydrate restriction, were singularly unsuccessful in reducing dental decay. In fact, the prevalence of dental decay was so high among young men that it was the major cause of rejection from military service in World Wars I, II, and the Korean War. This staggering amount of dental morbidity led to the formation of dentistry as a separate health profession in the late 19th century; to the expectation that all people would, if they lived long enough, be edentulous (toothless); and to a dental health bill to the public of approximately 34 billion dollars per year in 1990.

Things have changed. Water fluoridation has proven to be a most cost-effective way of reducing decay; fluoride dentifrices were even more effective than initially projected; and research findings indicate that most carious lesions actually reflect a sucrose-dependent Streptococcus mutans infection. Individuals at risk for this infection can be diagnosed and treated by frequent mechanical intervention, by intensive application of prescription levels of fluorides or other antimicrobials (such as chlorhexidine), by restriction of ingestion of sucrose between meals, or by use of products that contain sucrose substitutes (such as xylitol). The net result is that dental decay in the late 20th century is a controllable infection and should be preventable in many individuals. Almost 50% of young children are caries-free, and the level of edentia among individuals over 65, has dropped from 50% to about 20%.

Etiology Dental decay has been known since recorded history, but was not an important health problem until sucrose became a major component of the human diet. When sucrose is consumed frequently, an organism known as Streptococcus mutans emerges as the predominant organism, and it is this organism that has been uniquely associated with dental decay. In 1924 S mutans was isolated from human carious lesions, but subsequently was not thoroughly studied until the 1960s when it was re-identified as the etiologic agent of a transmissible caries infection in rodent models. In these studies, all of Koch's postulates for infectivity were fulfilled in animal models. However, it proved difficult to show that S mutans was a human dental pathogen, because S mutans appears to be a member of the normal flora on the teeth, and it was difficult to show that an increase in S mutans actually preceded and/or coincided with the earliest clinical lesion. Dental decay is measured clinically as a cavitation on the tooth surface ( ). However, cavitation is a late event in the pathogenesis of decay, being preceded by a clinically detectable subsurface lesion known as a white spot ( ), and prior to that by subsurface demineralization that can only be detected microscopically. From a diagnostic and treatment perspective, the lesion should be detected at the white spot stage. This usually cannot be done without rigorous descriptive criteria (not all white spots are due to the decay process) and because the white spot stage in the caries-prone fissures and approximal surfaces of the tooth cannot be directly visualized during a dental examination. Figure 99-1 Schematic drawing of a cross-section of tooth showing decay and white spot lesions. The prevalence of dental morbidity is documented in terms of the number of teeth (T) or tooth surfaces (S) that have obvious decay (D), contain a dental restoration or filling (F), or are missing (M). These DMF teeth (DMFT) and DMF surface (DMFS) scores do not discriminate as to the relative proportions of the score due to decay, versus fillings and extractions. This insensitivity of the DMFT and DMFS scores in quantitating the actual decay, independent of morbidity led in early clinical studies to unimpressive associations between S mutans and DMFT or DMFS scores. However, when the comparison was limited to individuals with decayed teeth or when the plaque samples were taken from a decayed tooth site, a significant association between S mutans and decay was evident. This association is clearly seen in individuals who developed xerostomia secondary to radiation treatment of head and neck cancer. S mutans and lactobacilli are normally present in low numbers in the plaque of these individuals. When the salivary flow decreases, the pH in the plaque drops, leading to a selection for aciduric (acid-tolerant) bacteria, such as S mutans and lactobacilli. New decayed lesions become obvious within 3 months after radiotherapy and the patient may average one or more new decayed surfaces per post-radiation month. During the development of decay, the proportions of, first, S mutans and then lactobacilli increased significantly. This sequence of events indicated that S mutans was involved with the initiation of decay, whereas the lactobacilli were associated with the progression of the lesion. This bacterial succession is illustrated in , which shows the sequence of events occurring on the surface of a caries-free tooth that either becomes carious or remains caries free. In either case, the tooth surface initially represents a carrier state relative to harboring a primary cariogen, such as S mutans, in the plaque on a smooth surface. The proportion of the cariogen in the flora is similar in both cases, but the location of S mutans differs within the plaques. In the tooth destined to develop decay, S mutans is located on the enamel surface, whereas in the tooth destined to remain caries free, S mutans is confined to the saliva-plaque interface. Debriding procedures, such as toothbrushing and flossing, might remove most plaque organisms, but could leave untouched those bacteria either firmly attached to the enamel surface or sequestered in defects in the enamel surface. In surfaces destined to become carious, the residual organisms would include S mutans, whereas in surfaces destined to remain caries free, S mutans would be absent. Over time these caries-free surfaces might alternately acquire and lose S mutans, thereby having an intermittent carrier-state status. However, in those surfaces in which caries will eventually develop, S mutans becomes a dominant member of the flora, undoubtedly secondary to frequent sucrose ingestion. Figure 99-2 Relationship between location of cariogenic bacteria and development of dental caries. The incipient or white spot lesion occurs when the acidogenic activity of the cariogen causes tooth mineral to be mobilized from the subsurface enamel to buffer the pH at the plaque-enamel interface. Bacteriologic sampling at this stage should reveal both a proportional and an absolute increase in the levels of S mutans. When the lesion progresses to the stage of cavitation, the organisms penetrate into the enamel crystals ( ). Also, secondary cariogens, such as the lactobacilli, appear as a result of the selection for aciduric organisms in the plaque. When the lesion reaches the advanced clinical stage, conditions may be such that S mutans can no longer survive, and only secondary cariogens like the lactobacilli and opportunistic organisms can be found. This model predicts that a bacterial succession occurs during the progression of a carious lesion and that the flora of the advanced lesion may bear little resemblance to the flora of the incipient lesion. Thus it was necessary to sample the plaque during the initial lesion or white spot stage to find the etiologic agents of decay. When this was done, S mutans dominated in the flora. However, for the lesion to progress to the stage of cavitation, lactobacilli seem necessary. Thus while S mutans could be isolated from both progressive and nonprogressive lesions, L casei could only be isolated from progressive lesions.

Pathogenesis These clinical studies indicated that of the 200 to 300 species which can be isolated from plaque, only S mutans, and to a lesser extent the lactobacilli, can be consistently associated with dental decay. What makes these organisms cariogenic relative to all other bacterial types found in the plaque? In the 19th century, microbial acid production from dietary substrates was linked to the etiology of dental decay in what was called the chemoparasitic theory of decay. But researchers were not able to associate any single acidogenic species with decay, and concluded that decay was bacteriologically nonspecific and due to the increased amounts of acid formed when bacteria accumulated in plaque on the tooth surfaces. It was noted that decay occurred at retentive sites on the teeth and recommended mechanical debridement of these sites as the best method of reducing decay. While the clinical observations were correct, there was no way of determining that the retentive sites were caries prone because they provide the micro-environment which selects for S mutans and lactobacilli. In this section we shall examine those attributes of S mutans and the lactobacilli that enable them to be successful on retentive sites and show that these attributes constitute, in effect, the virulence factors which make these organisms specific odontopathogens. Sucrose in the diet Considerable evidence from epidemiologic observations and animal experiments indicates that, shortly after sucrose is introduced into the diet, a notably higher incidence of decay occurs. The relationship between sucrose ingestion and dental caries is reasonably well understood. The supragingival plaque flora derives its nutrients from various sources that include diet, saliva, sloughed epithelial cells, dead microbes, and gingival crevice fluid or exudate. All sources, except the foods in the diet provide only small amounts of nutrients. Dietary components are normally high-molecular-weight polymers (such as starch and proteins) that are in the mouth for short periods. They have a minimal effect on plaque growth except in those instances when food is retained between and on the teeth. Sucrose, however, changes this pattern because it is a low-molecular-weight disaccharide that can be rapidly sequestered and utilized by the plaque flora. Plaque organisms capable of fermenting sucrose have a decided advantage over the non-sucrose fermenters in that they can proliferate during periods of sucrose ingestion and thereby become the dominant plaque organisms. Sucrose fermentation produces a rapid drop in the pH, to 5.0 or lower, at the point of interface between plaque and enamel. When sucrose is ingested during meals, sufficient saliva is secreted to buffer the plaque pH and decay does not occur. In fact, studies show that as much as one-half of a pound of sucrose consumed daily at meals for two years was not associated with an increase in dental decay; however, when the same or lesser amounts of sucrose were ingested between meals, subjects developed new decay at the rate of about three to four tooth surfaces per year. The frequent ingestion of sucrose has been shown to increase the lengths of time that sucrose could be detected in the saliva. This means that if this sucrose were available for microbial fermentation in the plaque, low plaque pHs would be present for long periods each day. When the plaque pH value falls below 5.0-5.2, the salivary buffers are overwhelmed and as lactic acid diffuses into the tooth, enamel begins to dissolve, releasing Ca and PO 4 ions from sites beneath the surface enamel ( ). Normally, the bathing saliva replenishes these minerals, but if the length of the flux from the enamel is great, repair does not occur and cavitation results. Thus, sucrose consumption per se does not cause decay, but the frequent ingestion of sucrose by prolonging the time period by which the plaque is acidic, is cariogenic. Figure 99-3 Pathogenesis of dental decay. Plaque bacteria that ferment sucrose produce acids, which in vitro lower the pH value to below 5.0. However, only S mutans of all these species reliably caused decay in germ-free animals fed a high-sucrose diet. This suggested that microbial acid production was not the exclusive determinant of decay and that S mutans had to possess other attributes which were responsible for its virulence. S mutans was subsequently shown to metabolize sucrose in a remarkably diverse fashion that is not matched by any other known plaque organism. The major pathway is concerned with energy metabolism; in this process, the enzyme invertase splits sucrose into its component glucose and fructose molecules, which are then converted to lactic acid by the glycolytic pathway. Other enzymes, called glucosyltransferases, split sucrose but transfer the glucose moiety to a glucose polymer known as a glucan. S mutans forms several complex glucans that differ in their core linkage, amount of branching, and molecular weight. The first glucan identified had a core linkage consisting of an a1–6 bond that classified it as a dextran. Later, a unique glucan having an a1–3 core linkage was identified and given the name mutan. S mutans also has enzymes that split sucrose and transfer the fructose moiety to a fructose polymer known as a fructan. Other plaque bacteria can use sucrose to synthesize one or more of these polymers, with the exception of mutan. Only S mutans can form all of them, a fact that led to an inquiry into the relationship between polymer production and caries formation. A series of in vitro experiments showed that the glucans enable S mutans to adhere to surfaces. This suggested that in vivo these adhesive polymers would enable S mutans to adhere tenaciously to the tooth surface and to accumulate on these surfaces, thereby causing decay in the underlying surface. Animal experiments in which rodents were infected with mutants of S mutans that lacked the ability to form either dextran or mutan, indicated that the absence of mutan was associated with a greater reduction in smooth surface decay than was the absence of dextran. In each instance, the amount of pit and fissure decay was not significantly affected by these mutations. Decay on smooth surfaces seems to depend on the retentive polymers formed by S mutans, whereas in sites where retention is provided by the anatomy of the teeth (pits, fissures, and contact points between teeth), these polymers are not as important. Accordingly, pit and fissure decay may be caused simply by any acidogenic organism that can survive in these retentive sites. This nonspecific explanation does not seem completely satisfactory, because in animal models and in human caries, S mutans, again, is the dominant organism involved or associated with pit and fissure decay. A few other organisms, such as Lactobacillus casei and Streptococcus faecalis, can cause fissure decay in germ-free rats. These three organisms are all relatively aciduric compared to other plaque bacteria; that is, they not only produce acids, but they are relatively resistant to the resulting low pH caused by acid accumulation. Lactobacilli are the most aciduric of the plaque bacteria, but these organisms only predominate by the time the carious lesion has extended into the dentin. At the time the earliest carious lesion is detected, only S mutans has reached significant levels and proportions ( ). When S mutans, lactobacilli, and other plaque species were compared in vitro for their ability to ferment sucrose at different pH values, S mutans was found to be more active than the other bacteria at pH 5.0, and thus, it is probably most active in vivo at the very pH at which the teeth begin to demineralize. This aciduricity best explains the involvement of both S mutans and lactobacilli in human decay. A retentive site is colonized by those organisms present in saliva. S mutans, although scarce in the initial inoculum (fewer than 0.1% of the initial colonizers), is selected for if the average pH value in the site is not well buffered by saliva. Frequent ingestion of sucrose-containing products predisposes toward lower pH values and thus selects for S mutans. When the pH remains in the vicinity of 5.0–5.5, tooth mineral is solubilized, thereby buffering the plaque and maintaining an environment suitable for growth of S mutans. Eventually, enough mineral is lost so that a cavitation occurs in the enamel, and if this enlarges so that it extends into the dentin, a semiclosed system is formed in which the pH value drops below 5.0. Under these acidic conditions, growth of lactobacilli is favored, and these organisms succeed as the predominant flora in the carious lesion.

Clinical Manifestation Dental decay occurs at discrete sites on the surface of the enamel. Progress through the enamel is usually slow because of the remineralizing action of the saliva, and is asymptomatic. When decay spreads into the dentin, the process accelerates, most likely because the very low pH that can arise in this semiclosed environment denatures the collagen scaffold that holds the hydroxyapatite salts in place and rapidly solubilizes them. When the dentinal decay approaches the innervated tooth pulp, the pain can be intermittent or continuous, and dull or excruciating. Pain is the chief complaint of the patient.

Microbiologic Diagnosis A microbiologic diagnosis for a S mutans/lactobacilli infection is rarely sought, primarily because the acute pain that brings the patient to the dentist is almost always relieved by a dental restoration or extraction. Thus, the knowledge of an underlying S mutans infection would not change the treatment. However, microbiologic diagnosis would be advantageous in the management of the patient to prevent or minimize future decay. Such situations would occur whenever an expensive treatment is planned, such as orthodontic treatment, or the placement of dental crowns and bridges to replace missing teeth. Microbiologic examination would also be useful at the end of any restorative treatment to determine the residual level of S mutans and lactobacilli colonization on the teeth. Scandinavian investigators have empirically determined that 106 CFU S mutans per milliliter of stimulated saliva can be associated with future caries activity. Accordingly, they have recommended active intervention with fluoride, dietary counseling, and antimicrobial agents in individuals so infected. They have designed simple chairside tests that can, in a semiquantitated manner provide information on the salivary levels of S mutans. All of these tests rely on the fact that S mutans is resistant to 5 ug/ml of bacitracin and that it will grow in the presence of 20% sucrose. In liquid media containing these additives, S mutans will form adherent colonies on the side of glass, plastic strips, or any other solid surfaces that are present. In a practical application of these tests, the clinician would not place orthodontic bands on an individual with 106 CFU of S mutans, because this individual would be apt to develop decay around the margins of the bands. Likewise an individual who is having extensive bridgework (the placing of dental restorations across an edentulous space) would be at risk of developing new decay around the margins of these restorations. In both instances, the patient needs to be treated for S mutans infection prior to the placement of the dental devices or restorations.