HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT FOR ALUMINIUM, ALUMINIUM OXIDE, AND ALUMINIUM HYDROXIDE
Further studies are needed to settle the debate over the link between aluminium and aluminium in drinking water and neurological disorders and congnitive impairment. Ideally, individual level data on drinking water exposure as well as other relevant risk factors would be obtained; in the absence of this, replication of the Rondeau et al. (2000) analysis in other study populations, with the ability to control for important confounders and effect modifiers, is needed to assess this potential risk.

In many occupational studies of aluminium workers, it was not known whether respiratory tract illness was due to exposure to aluminium or other substances. There have been very few studies of neurological effects of occupational exposure via inhalation to aluminium and aluminium compounds (as measured in serum), and it is not known if the very specific neurological deficits observed lead to more severe illness such as AD. Therefore, large-scale, longitudinal, studies of occupational exposure to aluminium and aluminium compounds via inhalation, with precise methods of exposure measurement, are needed to assess the risks of respiratory tract disease and neurological effects due to aluminium and aluminium compounds.

Occupational populations can be exposed to airborne concentrations of aluminium exceeding concentrations to which the general population is exposed by approximately three orders of magnitude (see ). Aluminium intake resulting from these exposures is estimated to be 21 mg/day, compared to 0.06 mg/day for the general population, with uptake for occupationally exposed individuals amounting to 6 × 10 -3 mg/kg b.w./day, compared to 1.7 × 10 -5 for the general population ( ). The resulting margin of exposure for occupationally exposed populations is approximately 8, compared to 7000 for general population exposure to airborne aluminium (see ).

Individuals with impaired renal function do not clear aluminium as effectively as healthy individuals. This population can also be exposed to extremely high levels of aluminium that are administered inadvertently via their intravenous feeds. This route of exposure may be particularly significant because it bypasses the barrier imposed by GI absorption characteristics. Infants, especially those born pre-term, are also vulnerable to aluminium exposure due to immaturity of the GI wall, the BBB, and the renal system. In addition to their added susceptibility due to compromised renal function, patients on dialysis may be subject to higher aluminium exposure levels if dialysis or intravenous fluid becomes contaminated, a problem that was more common in the past. Although not explicitly quantified, the susceptibility of these populations suggests that the exposure level of concern is less than it is for the general population. At the same time, some sensitive populations may have been exposed to very high aluminium exposures in the past. Because of the substantial quantities of injected fluids received by dialysis patients and their increased susceptibility, the MOE for this pathway for this population may be less than unity.

Relevant exposure levels of concern for the general population identified as part of dose response assessment included: irritation following inhalation (50 mg/m 3 ), neurological effects due to drinking water exposure (100 μg aluminium/L water), reproductive toxicity due to oral intake (400 mg/kg-b.w./day), and irritation following injection (1 injection). We characterized risk (see ) by calculating a margin of exposure, or MOE (the exposure level of concern divided by actual exposure), for each of these pathway-endpoint combinations. The MOE values were large for local irritation following inhalation (7000) and reproductive toxicity associated with oral intake (2900). For irritation following injection, the MOE is less than unity, although the severity of this endpoint is limited. For neurological effects associated with drinking water exposure, the MOE may be as small as unity. The evidence supporting this effect, however, comes from studies that have a number of methodological limitations, a finding that suggests the causal nature of the association is uncertain.

Exposure assessment quantified aluminium intake and uptake (i.e., absorption of aluminium into systemic circulation) for a variety of pathways (see ). For the general population, intake of aluminium from food (7.2 mg/day for females and 8.6 mg/day for males) dominated that from drinking water (0.16 mg/day) and inhalation exposure (0.06 mg/day). Antacids and buffered aspirin can contribute on the order of thousands of mg/day to aluminium intake. Relative contributions to uptake are ranked similarly to these intake contributions. However, because inhaled aluminium is approximately seven times more bioavailable than aluminium in drinking water, the contribution of inhaled aluminium to uptake (1.7 × 10 -5 mg/kg b.w./day) exceeds the corresponding contribution from drinking water (6.9 × 10 -6 mg/kg b.w./day). Uptake of aluminium in food is approximately 1 × 10 -4 mg/kg b.w./day. Aluminium uptakes from antacids and buffered aspirin amount to 3.1 × 10 -1 and 4.3 × 10 -2 mg/kg b.w./day, respectively.

Hazard identification qualitatively identifies adverse effects by route of exposure, and determines whether those effects are likely in humans at some level of exposure, perhaps much greater than exposure levels experienced in the population of interest. It is important to note that the identification of effects that can be caused by aluminium says nothing about how likely those effects are at exposure levels in human populations. That probability depends on the level of exposure and the dose-response relationship. This report classified the weight of evidence for each exposure pathway and health effect as strong, modest, limited, or having no clear evidence (see ). We concluded that there is strong evidence that aluminium can cause irritation following exposure via either inhalation or injection. Modest evidence of an effect exists for reproductive toxicity following oral exposure, for neurological toxicity following either oral or injection exposure, and for bone toxicity following injection exposure. All other effects were judged to be supported by either limited evidence or no clear evidence at all. Exposure assessment, dose-response assessment, and risk characterization were conducted for those effects for which the evidence was judged to be either strong or modest. The remainder of this section describes our findings for the general population, subpopulations at special risk, and occupationally-exposed populations.

As a result of inadvertent human poisoning with excessive amounts of aluminium, there are reports of damage to bone and CNS as target organs. Further, the administration of aluminium-containing vaccines for extended time periods was found to be associated with the development of MMF at the injection site. In the past, individuals with impaired renal function receiving dialysis were reported to be at greater risk for aluminium intoxication associated with contaminated replacement fluids. However, this incidence has diminished markedly in recent years with the use of non-contaminated fluid and replacement of high-dose antacid therapy with alternatives. Although infants and children may be at higher risk for toxicity due to aluminium, a causal relationship was not confirmed. Hence, it should be noted that only at excessive concentrations of aluminium are toxic manifestations seen in human sensitive subpopulations.

Contact sensitivity to aluminium is very rare. Sensitization has occurred after injection of aluminium-adjuvant containing vaccines and pollen extracts, resulting in persistent granuloma at the injection site. These effects are much more frequent with aluminium hydroxide than aluminium phosphate adjuvants and more commonly seen following subcutaneous (s.c.) than i.m. injection. Less common is sensitivity during continuous application of aluminium-containing antiperspirants, topical aluminium application, and occupational exposure to aluminium dust and filings which result in recurrent eczema.

There is a large body of literature, mostly in the form of clinical reports, which documents the adverse effects of non-occupational aluminium exposure in individuals with impaired renal function. These patients are typically exposed to aluminium through dialysate fluid or medicinal sources. Anaemia, bone disease, and dialysis encephalopathy are the most commonly reported complications of aluminium exposure in this population.

Evidence surrounding the relationship between aluminium in food and the risk of AD is very minimal. This may be a result of the difficulty in obtaining accurate exposure information in dietary studies. One small case control study found a positive relationship between the consumption of foods containing high levels of aluminium and the risk of developing AD. These results have not been confirmed in a larger investigation.

Regular consumers of antacids represent a unique subpopulation with heavy exposure to aluminium. A significantly elevated odds ratio for AD for regular antacid consumers compared to non-regular users was found; however, when only aluminium containing acids were analyzed there was no significant association. Other studies have not found a significant association between antacid use and AD. Little is known about the impact of aluminium-containing antacids in human pregnancy and lactation.

The neurotoxic properties of aluminium are well established; however, the evidence surrounding the potential association between aluminium and neurological disorders in humans is much less clear. Aluminium exposure from drinking water has been extensively investigated in relation to the development of neurological disorders, including AD, due to the proposed enhanced bioavailability of aluminium in this form. The data surrounding this association is difficult to interpret due to the large variation in study designs and the highly variable quality of these studies. The majority, but not all, of epidemiological studies identified, reported a positive association between aluminium levels in drinking water and risk of cognitive impairment dementia, or AD. There is some evidence to suggest silica in drinking water is protective against the development of dementia. Fluoride has also been identified as having a potential protective effect. Many of the studies which have investigated the relationship between aluminium in drinking water supplies and the risk of developing AD are limited by methodological issues. These issues include: lack of individual exposure information, poor disease ascertainment, failure to adjust for important confounding factors, and small sample sizes. A recent study conducted in France is methodologically superior to the other studies conducted to date. The finding of a significant positive relationship between drinking water aluminium levels and the development of AD in this large prospective study, together with the finding of a positive relationship in a number of less methodologically sound studies, suggests that the association between aluminium and AD should be further investigated.

Changes typical of foreign body reaction, alveolar proteinosis and wall thickening, diffuse pulmonary fibrosis and interstitial emphysema, and some nodule formation but not to the extent of fibrosis caused by quartz dust were associated with occupational exposure in the aluminium industry. This was most severe in Germany during World War II, where industrial environments were heavily contaminated with airborne aluminium flake powder. Lower aluminium exposures contribute to Shaver’s disease, a pulmonary fibrosis seen in workers in bauxite refining or exposed to finely divided aluminium powders; and caused pneumoconiosis, fibrosis, and some cases of asthma.

Several epidemiological studies have reported an increased risk of developing lung cancer or bladder cancer for workers in the aluminium industry, however, in all of these studies the risk has been attributed to the exposure to the PAHs generated during aluminium production rather than from exposure to aluminium compounds. Studies investigating the effects of occupational exposure to aluminium are limited by many methodological issues. Rarely is a worker exposed solely to aluminium containing compounds and exposure information is often not adequate to rule out other toxic substances as the cause of the observed effect. Small sample sizes, misclassification bias, selection of inappropriate comparison groups, and lack of information to control for confounding factors are common weaknesses in these occupational studies.

Adverse neurological outcomes as a result of occupational aluminium exposure have also been extensively investigated. Aluminium exposure in these studies was estimated in a number of different ways including; exposure grading for different job categories, determination of total body burden of aluminium, number of years working in the aluminium industry, and ever v.s. never worked in the aluminium industry. Occupational aluminium exposure was significantly correlated with a variety of neuropyschiatric symptoms including; loss of coordination, loss of memory, and problems with balance. Studies which specifically examined the relationship between AD and occupational aluminium exposure did not show any significant correlation. However, these studies are limited by methodological issues.

Occupational exposure to aluminium occurs during the refining of the primary metal and in secondary industries that use aluminium products. Several studies have reported adverse respiratory tract effects in aluminium industry employees. Asthma-like symptoms, known as potroom asthma, have been the most intensely investigated respiratory effect. Wheezing, dyspnea, and impaired lung function (typically assessed by measuring forced expiratory volume (FEV 1 ) and forced volume capacity (FVC)) are the primary features of this disorder. Several cross-sectional, case-control and longitudinal studies have demonstrated increased frequency of adverse pulmonary effects in potroom workers as compared to non-exposed workers. The cause of potroom asthma has not been fully elucidated, but job specific exposure measurements based on personal sampling data and analysis of plasma levels suggests that exposure to fluorides may be an important determinant. There is some evidence to support that individuals with hay fever and individuals with elevated eosinophil counts are at increased risk of developing potroom asthma. Other studies did not find an association between allergic status and the development of symptoms. The respiratory problems documented in potroom aluminium workers are generally associated with toxic chemicals other than aluminium in the workplace. In contrast, exposure to aluminium powder is thought to be directly correlated with the development of pulmonary fibrosis in aluminium industry workers.

There is little reported for aluminium compounds in the way of immunotoxicity. There may be an altered immune response to challenge following excess aluminium exposure and this may be influenced by the health and hormonal status of the dam with increased susceptibility to bacterial infection seen in pregnancy.

Experimental aluminium inhalation has been shown to produce effects interpreted as alveolar proteinosis and lipid pneumonia. Inhalation of aluminium had some protective effect against quartz dust-induced fibrosis in some, but not all, studies. Intratracheal aluminium instillation produced nodular fibrosis. Aluminium is used as an adjuvant in vaccines and hyposensitization treatments to precipitate toxins and toxoids, enhance their antigenic properties and reduce their rate of absorption and elimination. Aluminium can produce aluminium-species-dependent dermal irritation.

Although not reported in every study, the majority of studies that utilized high doses of aluminium reported significant reductions in weight gain, particularly in studies initiated in young animals. The physiologic basis for this outcome is unclear, but it was reported that animals exposed to high doses of aluminium in drinking water consumed less food. Whether general effects of aluminium on metabolic processes depress metabolism or reduce nutritional efficiency remains to be resolved.

From the present data, however, it is difficult to determine what level of exposure poses a risk for human health or which systems are most vulnerable. Based on projections from studies in dogs, individuals with sustained aluminium levels in serum that are 10-fold higher than the average range, or 1-2 μg/L, may be at increased risk for bone abnormalities. The exposure levels at which other systems might be affected are more difficult to project, particularly when trying to assess risk for late-onset illnesses.

Aluminium may also have negative effects on hematopoiesis. However, these effects are relatively mild unless animals are deficient in iron. In this latter setting, there will be increased levels of free Tf, which can then bind aluminium and compete for Tf receptor; further limiting the amount of iron available for erythrogenesis. Aluminium may also interfere with the metabolism of other metals. On this latter point, the strongest data, meaning most reproducible, suggest that aluminium exposure can lead to increased excretion of phosphorous.

Outside of the nervous system, the data regarding the potential for alumimium to cause abnormalities is mixed. There is clear evidence that sustained exposure to high levels of aluminium can cause bone abnormalities. Aluminium is clearly deposited in bone at sites of new growth. Bones in animals exposed to aluminium may show increased weakness and increased brittleness. Deficiencies in calcium or magnesium may exacerbate the effects of aluminium. Aluminium overload leads to PTH suppression and with regards to the bone, may be associated with altered calcium homeostasis.

However, there has not been strong evidence from animal studies that aluminium directly modulates cognitive function. As described in Effects on Laboratory Mammals and In Vitro Test Systems, Neurotoxicity,Behavioural Studies of Laboratory Animals Exposed to Aluminium, there have been several studies that have examined the cognitive abilities of mice and rats exposed to aluminium. For the most part, these studies did not report profound cognitive impairment even when exposed to very high levels of aluminium. Therefore, it seems unlikely that aluminium might lower the threshold for AD by blunting cognitive ability of adults.

Apart from the potential that aluminium might interact directly with molecules implicated in AD and related neurodegenerative disorders, studies in animals have revealed potential mechanisms by which aluminium might indirectly impact on the function of the nervous system. In Effects on Laboratory Mammals and In Vitro Test Systems, Neurotoxicity, Alzheimer’s Disease, studies are described that reported aluminium may affect levels of cholesterol, which has been suggested in numerous studies as a potential modulator or Alzheimer-type amyloid formation. Effects on Laboratory Mammals and In Vitro Test Systems, Neurotoxicity, In Vivo Models, Rodent Models of Aluminium Toxicity by Direct Injection describes several studies that have reported elevated levels of markers of oxidative stress in animals exposed to aluminium. These studies suggest potential mechanisms by which long-term exposure to aluminium could be deleterious and could synergistically worsen cognitive abilities in individuals that have pathologic abnormalities associated with AD.

In regards to mechanisms by which aluminium could play a role in AD, there are both direct and indirect modes of potential action. In a direct mode, aluminium could potentiate the aggregation of molecules known to form pathologic lesions in AD. There is evidence that aluminium can promote the aggregation of β-amyloid peptide in vitro. However, whether aluminium would dissociate from Tf at an appreciable rate and bind β-amyloid peptide in vivo is unclear. One study found no association between AD-like pathology and long-term ingestion of aluminium. Indeed in this study of older patients, the incidence of AD-associated pathology in patients with DAE was no different from controls. Although these studies would suggest that there is little direct evidence for an association between AD and aluminium, a study of transgenic mice that produce Alzheimer-type amyloid pathology noted that mice feed diets high in aluminium showed increased levels of amyloid (see Effects on Laboratory Mammals and In Vitro Test Systems, Neurotoxicity, Alzheimer’s Disease). Moreover, it is well established in the rabbit that exposure to aluminium induces the formation of filamentous structures containing cytoplasmic neurofilament protein (see Effects on Laboratory Mammals and In Vitro Test Systems, Neurotoxicity, Motor Neuron Disease). Therefore, it is difficult to determine how a life-time of exposure to aluminium might influence the development of Alzheimer-type pathology by affecting the folding or clearance of “at-risk” proteins such as β-amyloid, tau, and α-synuclein.

In the studies of animals, it is important to note that a few reports have documented a pathologic accumulation of aluminium in intracellular lysosome-derived structures. Aluminium accumulation in lysosome-like cytoplasmic granules of retinal neurons in rats exposed to very high doses of aluminium was reported (see Effects on Laboratory Mammals and In Vitro Test Systems, Neurotoxicity, In Vivo Models, Rodent Models of Aluminium Toxicity by Direct Injection). Severe atrophy of the retina and loss of photoreceptors was also noted. Similarly, another study noted intracellular accumulations of aluminium in the brain of rats feed diets high in aluminium. For CNS it seems likely that the mode of delivery to the tissue is through Tf-mediated uptake. From animal studies and the clear association of aluminium exposure and DAE, it is clear that high levels of aluminium in CNS can lead to neurotoxicity. From the current literature it remains difficult to assess what a concentration of aluminium in serum (chronic levels) correlates with neurotoxicity. The effects of aluminium on the developing nervous system have also not been thoroughly addressed.

The form of aluminium most often presented to tissues outside of the blood stream is expected to be bound to Tf. In brain, aluminium is prone to dissociate from Tf as a soluble citrate salt. Most cells of the central nervous system (CNS) express Tf receptor, and thus receptor-mediated uptake would be one mechanism by which aluminium could enter cells of the brain. Free flow endocytosis of aluminium citrate could be an alternative route of uptake. As outlined in Effects on Laboratory Mammals and In Vitro Test Systems, Neurotoxicity, In Vivo Models, Neuropathology, there is at least one example of human pathology which is consistent with this mode of tissue exposure. Choroid plexus epithelia, cortical glia, and cortical neurons of patients exhibiting dialysis associated encephalopathy (DAE) develop intracellular argentophylllic granules that are lysosome-derived and intracytoplasmic. Uptake of aluminium-Tf complexes via receptor-mediated endocytosis would be expected to produce just such pathology. Whether aluminium, of any amount or speciation, escapes these compartments to impact on intracellular processes in humans is unknown. If relatively high doses produce pathology of such a distinctive nature, then it is reasonable to presume that lower doses of aluminium would follow similar pathways into the nervous system of humans.

Oral administration of aluminium did not affect reproductive capacity in males or females. Exposure to aluminium during gestation did not affect maternal health or development of the foetuses and neonates. Further, there was no evidence of teratogenic alterations in the foetuses of mothers fed dietary aluminium. Maternal dietary exposure to excessive amounts of aluminium during gestation and lactation resulted in neurobehavioural abnormalities in mouse offspring. At physiological concentrations the reproductive system does not appear to be a target for aluminium-induced effects; and if there is exposure during pregnancy, the growth and development of offspring of metal-treated mothers is not adversely affected.

Regardless of the duration of exposure, the toxicity attributed to aluminium is dependent upon the physiochemical properties (solubility, pH, bioavailability, etc.), type of aluminium preparation, route of administration, and physiological status (presence of renal dysfunction). Following oral exposure, aluminium distributes throughout the organism with accumulation in bone, kidneys and brain being of concern to humans with evidence of renal dysfunction, anemia or neurobehavioural alterations reported after excessive doses. The presence of aluminium in vaccines was found to be associated with macrophagic myofasciitis (MMF) at the site of i.m. injection. The toxicity of aluminium is affected by chelating agents and ligands although the mechanisms underlying toxicity remain unknown. However, it should be noted that only at excessive concentrations of aluminium are toxic manifestations seen and, hence aluminium is considered to possess a “low” potential for producing adverse effects.

Following i.v. injection, ~ 0.001 to 0.01% of the aluminium dose enters each gram of brain and ~ 100-fold more each gram of bone. Brain aluminium uptake across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) may be mediated by Tf-receptor mediated endocytosis (TfR-ME) and a Tf-independent mechanism that may transport aluminium citrate. There appears to be a transporter that effluxes aluminium from the brain into blood. Aluminium distributes into the placenta, foetus, milk, hair, and can be quantified in all tissues and fluids. Greater than 95% of aluminium is eliminated by the kidney, probably by glomerular filtration. Less than 2% appears in bile.

The volume of distribution (V d ) of aluminium is initially consistent with the blood volume, and then increases with time. Steady state serum to whole blood aluminium concentrations are ~ equal. Greater than 90% of serum aluminium is bound to Tf. Although aluminium has been reported in many intracellular compartments, concentrations were often greater in the nucleus. Ferritin can incorporate aluminium.

Absorption of aluminium from the gastrointestinal tract (GI) appears to be primarily in the distal intestine. There is evidence supporting several mechanisms of intestinal aluminium absorption, including sodium transport processes, an interaction with calcium uptake, and paracellular diffusion. Aluminium penetration of the skin is very shallow. Aluminium may be able to enter the brain from the nasal cavity by a direct route, bypassing systemic circulation, but convincing evidence is lacking. Absorption of aluminium from intramuscularly (i.m.) injected aluminium hydroxide and aluminiun phosphate adjuvants is significant, and may eventually be complete. Tissue aluminium concentration increases with age.

Serum aluminium > 30 μg/L in dialysis patients has been associated with osteomalacia and related disorders and > 80 μg/L associated with encephalopathy. Up to 5 mg/kg of desferrioxamine once or twice weekly has been shown to be safe and effective for long-term treatment of aluminium overload.

Biological monitoring of human aluminium exposure has been conducted with urine, which is thought to indicate recent exposure, and plasma, which is thought to better reflect the aluminium body burden and long-term exposure. However, neither is a very good predictor of the aluminium body burden, which is better estimated by bone aluminium, the desferrioxamine challenge test, or combined measurement of serum iPTH (parathyroid hormone) and the desferrioxamine test.

Greater than 95% of aluminium is eliminated by the kidney; ~ 2% in bile. Occupational aluminium exposure increases urinary more than plasma aluminium concentration above their normal levels. Depending on the type and route of exposure, aluminium clearance has been characterized as having multiple half-times and are estimated in hours, days, and years. Most of the Al was eliminated within the first week; the terminal half-life probably represents < 1% of the injected aluminium.

Tissue aluminium concentration increases with age. Some studies have reported that the aluminium concentration in the bulk brain samples, neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) and plaques was higher in AD subjects than controls. Other studies have found no difference. Hair aluminium concentration has been described but its value as an indicator of aluminium body burden has not been demonstrated.

Steady state serum to whole blood aluminium concentrations are ~ equal. Slightly > 90% of plasma aluminium is associated with transferrin (Tf), ~ 7 to 8% with citrate, and < 1% with phosphate and hydroxide. Normal plasma aluminium concentration is believed to be 1 to 2 μg/L. Normal tissue aluminium concentrations are greater in lung (due to entrapment of particles from the environment) than bone than soft tissues. Approximately 60, 25, 10, 3 and 1% of the aluminium body burden is in the bone, lung, muscle, liver and brain, respectively. Higher concentrations are seen in uraemia and higher still in dialysis encephalopathy.

Oral aluminium bioavailability is greater from water than from aluminium hydroxide or sucralfate. Oral aluminium bioavailability from aluminium hydroxide is ≤ 0.1%, and is less with higher doses. Increased oral aluminium absorption has been suggested in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Down’s subjects. Oral aluminium bioavailability from the diet has been estimated to be ~ 0.1 to 0.3%, based on daily aluminium intake and urinary elimination. Results of a few studies with a controlled diet and tea are consistent with this estimate.

The use of 26 Al as a tracer and accelerator mass spectrometry has enabled safe studies of aluminium toxicokinetics with real exposure-relevant doses in humans. Aluminium bioavailability from occupational inhalation exposure is ~ 2% whereas oral aluminium bioavailability from water has been reported to be 0.1 to 0.4%. Oral aluminium bioavailability is increased by citrate, acidic pH, and uraemia and may be decreased by silicon-containing compounds. Oral aluminium bioavailability is also inversely related to iron status.

Workers in the aluminium production and user industries, as well as aluminium welders, experience considerable exposures to the metal and/or its compounds. In absence of occupational exposures and chronic use of aluminium-containing antacids and buffered aspirin, food is the major intake source of aluminium, followed by drinking water. When considering bioavailability, namely the fraction that is actually taken up into the blood stream, food is again the primary uptake source for individuals not occupationally exposed. However, chronic use of antacids, buffered aspirins and other medical preparations would likely constitute the major uptake source, even when exposed at work.

Aluminium may be designated as crustal in origin, and thus surface soils at uncontaminated sites constitute a source of soluble aluminium species in surface water and aluminium-containing particulates in sediments and ambient-air aerosols. Not surprisingly, the latter are present extensively in air samples in agricultural communities and when road dust is extensive. Environmental acidification is known to mobilize aluminium from land to aquatic environments. Interestingly, aluminium levels and its various forms (species) are often similar in source water and after its treatment with potassium alum as a flocculent during drinking water purification.

Aluminium has not been classified with respect to carcinogenicity; however, “aluminium production” has been classified as carcinogenic to humans by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) (for further explanation, please see Effects on Humans, Effects from Occupational Exposure, Cancer). Occupational limits exist in several countries for exposures to aluminium dust and aluminium oxide. For non-occupational environments, limits have been set for intake in foods and drinking water; the latter are based on aesthetic or practical, rather than health, considerations.

The largest markets for aluminium metal and its alloys are in transportation, building and construction, packaging and in electrical equipment. Transportation uses are one of the fastest growing areas for aluminium use. Aluminium powders are used in pigments and paints, fuel additives, explosives and propellants. Aluminium oxides are used as food additives and in the manufacture of, for example, abrasives, refractories, ceramics, electrical insulators, catalysts, paper, spark plugs, light bulbs, artificial gems, alloys, glass and heat resistant fibres. Aluminium hydroxide is used widely in pharmaceutical and personal care products. Food related uses of aluminium compounds include preservatives, fillers, colouring agents, anti-caking agents, emulsifiers and baking powders; soy-based infant formula can contain aluminium. Natural aluminium minerals especially bentonite and zeolite are used in water purification, sugar refining, brewing and paper industries.

Bauxite is the most important raw material used in the production of aluminium. Bauxite is refined to produce alumina from which aluminium metal is recovered by electrolytic reduction; aluminium is also recycled from scrap. Aluminium hydroxide is produced from bauxite. In 2004, primary aluminium was being produced in 41 countries, the largest producers being China, Russia, Canada and the United States. In that year, worldwide production of primary aluminium, alumina and aluminium hydroxide reached about 30, 63, and 5 million tonnes per annum, respectively. More than 7 million tonnes of aluminium is recovered annually from recycled old scrap.

Aluminium and its compounds comprise about 8% of the Earth’s surface; aluminium occurs naturally in silicates, cryolite, and bauxite rock. Natural processes account for most of the redistribution of aluminium in the environment. Acidic precipitation mobilizes aluminium from natural sources, and direct anthropogenic releases of aluminium compounds associated with industrial processes occur mainly to air. Certain uses lead to the presence of aluminium in drinking water and foodstuffs.

A compendium is provided of aluminium compounds used in industrial settings, and as pharmaceuticals, food additives, cosmetics and as other household products. Most aluminium compounds are solids exhibiting high melting points. The solubility of aluminium salts is governed by pH, because the aluminium(III)-cation (Al 3+ ) has a strong affinity for the hydroxide ion, which promotes precipitation. Like Mg 2+ and Ca 2+ ions, Al 3+ in most situations seeks out complexing agents with oxygen-atom donor sites such as carboxylate and phosphate groups, including in biological systems. Aluminium oxides, hydroxides and oxyhydroxides occur in numerous crystallographic forms, which exhibit different surface properties. Few compounds of aluminium are classified in Annex 1 of the European Economic Union Council (EEC) Directive 67/1548, with aluminium powder and sodium aluminium fluoride (cryolite) as examples of exceptions, as well as compounds in which the anion renders them reactive such as aluminium phosphide. And finally, the more recent analytical methods available for the study of chemical speciation in solids and solution, and for quantitative analysis, have been applied to the determination of aluminium and the identification of its various forms.

26 Al is a rare radioactive isotope of aluminium and is produced in particle accelerators by bombarding a magnesium target with deuterons. It is radioactive and has a long t ½ (716,000 years) and can thus be detected radiometrically or by mass spectrometry ( Priest, 1994 ). Whole-body counting is possible and increases the versatility of this technique. It has been employed in determining the human toxicokinetics, and the tissue distribution, bioavailability and GI uptake of aluminium ( Priest, 2004 ).

Ellis et al. (1988) illustrated that in vivo monitoring of skeletal aluminium burden in patients with renal failure using neutron activation analysis (NAA) was possible. However, the research reactor required is not widely available. The promise of a portable instrument for an accelerator-based in vivo procedure for detecting aluminium body burden by NAA has recently been reported ( Comsa et al., 2004 ).

Limitations of the latter approach have recently been demonstrated for localizing aluminium in maize root tissue ( Eticha et al., 2005 ), although Ruster et al. (2002) recommended this technique for quantifying deposition of aluminium in bone. In 1985, Verbueken et al. critically reviewed studies that examined the localization of aluminium in histological sections, namely, by electron probe X-ray microanalysis, secondary ion mass-spectrometry and laser microprobe mass analysis (LAMMA). These techniques are used in conjunction with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) or transmission electron microscopy (TEM); thus the microanalytical results are correlated with tissue structure. Further details about these and related microanalytical techniques are outlined by Ortner et al. (1998) . Verbueken et al. (1985) concluded that all three techniques are helpful in localizing aluminium in tissues, but LAMMA provides the greatest sensitivity (i.e., can detect lower concentrations). Recently, accumulation of aluminium was detected in newly-formed lamellar bone after implantation of titanium plates containing 6% aluminium employing energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDXS) in conjunction with SEM. Similarly, the use of micro-beam proton-induced X-ray emission (PIXE μbeam) confirmed that aluminium leaked diffusely from a titanium-aluminium-vanadium alloy dental implant into the surrounding bone, while vanadium did not ( Passi et al., 2002 ).

Of the three substances reviewed in detail in this report, only aluminium powder is classified in Annex 1 of the European Economic Union Council Directive 67/548. Indeed, very few of the compounds listed in and are classified; those that are listed are recognized as hazardous and are widely used, such as cryolite and aluminium phosphide (see Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Identity).

Adsorption capacity is central to some of the major uses of Al 2 O 3 , Al(OH) 3 and other aluminium compounds (e.g., aluminium phosphate, AlPO 4 ). Adsorption of antigens onto Al(OH) 3 and AlPO 4 constitutes the basis for their use as vaccine adjuvents ( Gupta, 1998 ). At neutral pH, gels of these compounds have different charges, the phosphate being negative and the hydroxide positive. This is important, relative to the charge borne by the antigen at physiological pH. The various forces described are optimized by adjustment of the pH and ionic strength of the medium, temperature, particle size of the adsorbent, and the surface area of the latter ( Gupta, 1998 ). Similarly, the natural hydrophilic surface characteristic of Al 2 O 3 is central to its use as solid-phases in chromatography. More recently, stable surface coatings have been developed which render the Al 2 O 3 surface hydrophobic, which makes it even more versatile in chromatographic applications. Al 2 O 3 and the aluminium oxyhydroxides are used to remove moisture from gases such as argon, alkanes, and sulphur dioxide. They are also used to remove hydrogen fluoride (HF) from air by adsorption; fluoride ions can also be removed effectively by them from water. Fluoride is adsorbed on to alumina at low pH values and can be desorbed on increasing the pH. Clearly, the inhalation of particulates of Al 2 O 3 and related oxyhydroxides in aluminium smelting operations may constitute a delivery vehicle for adsorbed HF ( Höflich et al., 2005 ; L’vov et al., 2005 ). Finally, the use of finely divided aluminium metal, Al(OH) 3 , aluminium potassium silicate and other aluminium compounds to generate dye (colour) lakes (see ) stems from the surface adsorptive forces/capacities described.

In simple terms, the surface layer of a metal binary compound has exposed metal ions (and anions) with reduced coordination number, which can behave as Lewis acids (or bases). At the solid-solution interface, proton association and dissociation can lead to pH-dependent surface charges and complexation. This is further complicated by specific adsorption of cations or anions right at the solid/solution interface, with some ordering of counter-ions in a more diffuse layer at points further into the solution ( Stumm & Morgan, 1996 ). A zero point of charge occurs, which is pH dependent. It is also influenced by the extent of specific ion adsorption. In addition to surface electrostatic and complexation reactions, hydrogen-bonding and London-van der Waals forces can be involved in the adsorption of surfactants, non-polar organic solutes, polymers and polyelectrolytes ( Stumm & Morgan, 1996 ).

Gibbsite, γ-Al(OH) 3 [CAS No 14762-49-3] is one of the three minerals that make up bauxite ore; the others being Al 2 O 3 and the oxyhydroxides boehmite [α-Al 2 O 3 • H 2 O or α-AlO(OH)] and diaspore [β- Al 2 O 3 • H 2 O or β-AlO(OH)]. Of the latter, diaspore is the high temperature/high pressure form ( Pearson, 1992 ). Gibsite has three structural polymorphs, namely bayerite [α-Al(OH 3 ); CAS No 20257-20-9], nordstandite [β-Al(OH 3 ); CAS No 13840-05-6] and doyleite which is rather rare ( Mineralogy Database, 2006 ). On heating the Al(OH) 3 , polymorphs follow a different Al 2 O 3 transition sequence in reaching the high temperature α-Al 2 O 3 form ( Pearson, 1992 ).

Aluminium oxide (Al 2 O 3 ) occurs in two major forms. α-Al 2 O 3 [corundum; CAS No 1302-74-5] constitutes a high temperature form and is formed on heating aluminium hydroxide, Al(OH) 3 , at a temperature of 1000 °C or above. It is very hard and resistant to hydration and attack by acids; it occurs in nature as corundum ( Cotton & Wilkinson 1980 ). γ-Al 2 O 3 is generated at 500°C and readily takes up water and dissolves in acids. Other minor forms generated when heating Al(OH) 3 include: χ-, κ-, δ-, θ-Al 2 O 3 ( Pearson, 1992 ; Trunov et al., 2005 ). Recent studies suggest that the structure of the surface layers of α-Al 2 O 3 depends on hydration: on the surface of a highly polished single crystal, the aluminium atom (more correctly Al 3+ ions) are exposed, while in the ideal (unrelaxed) structure the oxygen atoms (actually oxide anions, O 2- ) are at the surface. On hydration, the latter are overlaid by a semi-ordered absorbed water layer with the presence of extensive hydrogen bonding and hydroxyl groups resulting in a relaxed structure. In fact, the hydrated surface structure appears to be in between that of the ideal α-Al 2 O 3 surface and that of γ-Al(OH) 3 . The Al 3+ ions in the Al-terminated surface are strong Lewis acids and react strongly with water, while surface hydroxyl groups are Lewis bases that interact with metal ions ( Eng et al., 2000 ). Surface reactivity constitutes the basis for the use of aluminium oxide and hydroxide as industrial catalysts, absorbents and chromatography packing materials (i.e., as stationary phases). Not surprisingly, the reactivity of solid Al 2 O 3 depends on its specific crystal structure and hydrophilic/hydrophobic surface properties, and thus the degree of surface hydration ( Pearson, 1992 ).

The reactivity of aluminium powders depends on their morphology (size, shape and surface area), bulk density and aluminium content. For example, Ilyin et al. (2002) , have demonstrated that nanoparticles of fine aluminium powders exhibit maximal values of oxidation (combustion) rates compared to microparticles, and this occurred at lower temperatures. Not surprisingly, because of their thinness and corresponding high surface area, aluminium flake powders (see Sources of Human Exposure, Anthropogenic Sources, Uses, Aluminium Powders) also are relatively reactive. Trunov et al. (2005) and Meda et al. (2004) have reported similar findings. Consequently fine and ultrafine aluminium powders show better promise as propellant additives than do the more conventional-sized (of the order of 10μm) aluminium powders. Interestingly, the combustion products of nano-sized aluminium powders are also different, such as a higher proportion of low-temperature aluminium oxide polymorphs ( Meda et al., 2004 ) (see below) and product morphology. Ilyin et al. (2002) demonstrated that combustion of spherical micro-sized aluminium powders resulted in spherical products, while spherical fine powders produced submicron needles. As explained in the next paragraph, this is important for human exposure characterization.

The formation of aluminium fluoride complexes in fluoridated drinking water has been debated extensively. Fluoridation of municipal drinking water supplies is a common practice for the prevention of dental caries; fluoride is added at a concentration of around 50 μmol/L (1 mg/L), corresponding to a pF (that is a −log[F]) of 4.3. Further, the pH of municipal water supplies is typically 8.0 ± 0.4 (e.g., Nieboer et al., 1995 ). Consequently, and with reference to , the distribution curves depicted for pH 7.5 are the most relevant. Thus, again, Al(OH) 4 − is the dominant form in which Al 3+ occurs, with little evidence for complexation with the fluoride ion.

From , it is clear that, at physiological pH of 7.4, little or no free (hydrated) Al 3+ exists in aqueous solution; the anion Al(OH) 4 − predominates. The distribution curve in illustrates the competition between hydroxide and citrate as ligand molecules. Under the conditions indicated in the legend to , the competition with the OH − is suppressed by the citrate tetra-anion. At physiologic pH, the AlLH -1 (OH) 2- complex dominates.

Formally, the definition of elemental speciation is limited to a chemical perspective; thus a chemical species is defined as: “a specific form of a chemical element, such as a molecular or complex structure or oxidation state” ( Caruso et al., 2003 ; Templeton et al., 2000 ). However, Nieboer et al. (1999 ; 2005) subscribe to a broader working definition of “speciation”, that is: “an interdisciplinary field of activity concerned with all dimensions of the occurrence and measurement of an element in separately identifiable forms (i.e., chemical, physical or morphological)”. The former and more restrictive definition is employed below for the solution chemistry of Al 3+ , while the latter is helpful when considering the reactivity of aluminium oxide and aluminium hydroxide solids.

In biological systems, Al 3+ , like Mg 2+ and Ca 2+ , seeks out carboxylate and phosphate groups linked to macromolecules (i.e., proteins, RNA and DNA) or as constituents of low-molecular-mass ligands such as amino acids, nucleotides, citrate, phytates, lactate, carbonate, phosphate and sulphate ( Harris, 1992 ). Because of the small size of the unhydrated Al 3+ , it can also bond to the phenolic group of the amino acid tyrosine in proteins. Most of the Al 3+ in human serum is bound to the protein Tf (see Toxicokinetics, Distribution (Including Compartmentalization), Human Studies, Transport in Blood), which is a recognized carrier of trivalent metal ions, especially Fe 3+ ( Barker et al., 1990 ; Harris, 1992 ; Harris et al., 1996 ). Involvement of tyrosine phenolate groups in the Fe 3+ -Tf complex is well established ( DaSilva & Williams, 1991 ). Under certain instances, such as in its citrate complex, Al 3+ can also bind to a deprotonated alcohol group ( Feng et al., 1990 ).

In terms of chemical reactivity, the following compounds are notable for their reactions with water: aluminium alkyls, alkyl halides, hydrides; the anhydrous halides (namely bromide, chloride and iodide); and the carbide, chlorate, nitride and phosphide. Explosive gases are released on contact with water, specifically hydrogen (H 2 ) from the hydrides and methane (CH 4 ) from the carbide. Release of toxic gases on hydration can also occur, that is chlorine dioxide (ClO 2 ) from the chlorate; ammonia (NH 3 ) from the nitride; phosphine (PH 3 ) from the phosphide; and hydrogen sulphide (H 2 S) from the sulphide.

The water solubility of aluminium compounds is limited except for its salts, namely the chloride, nitrate, sulphate and chlorate (often as a corresponding hydrate). Salts of low molecular organic acids also have some water solubility (e.g., acetate, benzoate and lactate), as do salts containing aluminium anion complexes (e.g., ammonium hexafluoroaluminate and tetrachloroaluminate; sodium and potassium aluminate.) As explained in Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Chemical and Morphological Speciation, pH is often a factor that can limit solubility in water. Solubility of inorganic aluminium compounds in organic solvents is limited to those which are anhydrous such as the bromides, chlorides, and iodides. Aluminium alkyls, alkyl halides, alkoxides and complexes of long-chain FAs and of high molecular mass organic ligands exhibit solubility in organic solvents.

summarizes the available physico-chemical properties of the compounds. Most of the aluminium compounds are solids exhibiting high melting points; some are liquids. No gaseous substances were identified. Only a few of the compounds sublimate, namely anhydrous aluminium chloride and fluoride, aluminium nitride and sulphide, as well as the complex with 8-hydroxyquinoline. Most of the substances are white or colourless.

In spite of aluminium being highly electropositive (i.e., readily forming positive ions), it is resistant to corrosion because of the formation of a hard, tough surface film of its oxide ( Cotton & Wilkinson, 1980 ). Fresh aluminium surfaces achieve this by reacting with water or molecular oxygen. Hydrothermal oxidation of aluminium powders at 150-250°C and water vapour pressures of 500-4500 kPa suggest that surface-adsorbed water oxidizes the aluminium with the release of molecular hydrogen and the formation of aluminium hydroxyoxides on the particle surface ( Tikhov et al., 2003 ). Similarly, thermogravimetric studies of aluminium powders have shown that oxidation with molecular oxygen generates surface layers composed of various aluminium oxide polymorphs, specifically the γ-, θ-, and α- forms depending on the temperature ( Trunov et al., 2005 ) (see also Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Chemical and Morphological Speciation). Furthermore, aluminium metal is soluble in dilute mineral acids, but is inactivated (passivated) by concentrated nitric acid; it is attacked by hot alkali hydroxides ( Cotton & Wilkinson, 1980 ).

Aluminium is a ubiquitous element in nature and as the metal that has gained industrial and commercial use based upon certain physical and chemical properties such as low specific gravity, high tensile strength, ductility, malleability, reflectivity, corrosion resistance, and high electrical conductivity. Aluminium alloys are light, strong and readily machined into shapes ( IPCS,1997 ; see Sources of Human Exposure, Anthropogenic Sources, Uses for listings of industrial and non-industrial uses).

Most of the substances listed in and are generally available in high purity and thus impurities are not an issue from a risk assessment perspective. However, it is clear that for many of the aluminium compounds, the degree of hydration can vary. Recently, the presence of a thin surface coating of ultrafine particles of sodium fluoride on aluminium oxide particulates has been demonstrated for aerosols collected in an aluminium refinery ( Höflich et al., 2005 ; L’vov et al., 2005 ).

and indicate that the primary identification of aluminium compounds is by the CAS Registry Number. Other numbering systems are not as widely accepted and are thus not as useful. For example, European Inventory of Existing Commercial Substances (EINECS) numbers are available for aluminium (013-001-00-6), aluminium oxide (215-691-6) and aluminium hydroxide (244-492-7) through the International Uniform Chemical Information Database. However, most of the chemicals listed in and are indicated as not having been assigned such a number ( ESIS, 2007 ). Exceptions are those compounds that exhibit high toxicity or are widely used, such as aluminium phosphide (EINECS # 015-004-00-8) and cryolite (15096-52-3). Note that for the three substances that form the focus for this review, the common names assigned in the tables are the same as the EINECS names.

The focus of this document is on aluminium metal, aluminium oxide and aluminium hydroxide; however, in order to more fully understand their toxicity and related human health effects, other pertinent studies involving aluminium compounds were reviewed. The basis for this is that the chemistry and biochemistry of the aluminium ion (Al 3+ ) dominate the pathways that lead to toxic outcomes. Most aluminium compounds currently used in industry, pharmaceuticals, food additives, cosmetics and other household products are identified in this section (see and ). Many of the compounds listed in these tables have been studied in health-related research and are featured in the critical assessments detailed in subsequent sections of this risk assessment document.

In the absence of a consensus on the acceptable “safe” concentration of aluminium in plasma to guide therapy, it was suggested that 0.5 to 1.9 μM (13.5 to 51 μg/L) be considered as reflecting increased exposure, 2.0 to 2.9 μM (54 to 78 μg/L) excessive exposure, and > 3 μM (81 μg/L) a toxic concentration, that perhaps warrants mobilization ( Fenwick et al., 2005 ).

The Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative suggested Al-based antacids could be used in patients with chronic kidney disease who have serum phosphorus levels >7.0 mg/dL (2.26 mmol/L) as a short-term (4 weeks) therapy, and for one course only, to be replaced thereafter by other phosphate binders and that more frequent dialysis should also be considered in these patients ( National Kidney Foundation, 2003 ).

The U.S. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation has issued a standard in which it is recommended that water used in the preparation of dialysate solution contain less than 10 μg/L Al in order to limit the unintentional administration of aluminium to dialysis patients ( AAMI, 1998 ; ATSDR, 1999 ). However, there is concern that unless long-term exposure is limited to lower aluminium concentrations, there will be slow, but permanent, exposure of a greater percentage of dialysis patients to aluminium ( Fernandez-Martin et al., 2000 ). These authors suggested the recommended level should be 2 μg/L.

The WHO has not proposed a health-based guideline for aluminium in drinking water because of the limitations in the animal data; however, it has derived “practicable levels” of ≤0.1 and ≤0.2 mg/L for large and small facilities, respectively, based on optimization of the coagulation process in water treatment plants that use aluminium-based coagulants ( WHO, 2004 ). A health based maximum contaminant level (MCL) has also not been promulgated for aluminium under the U.S. Safe Drinking Water Act; a secondary non-enforceable MCL has been set at a concentration range of 0.05 - 0.2 mg/L ( ATSDR, 1999 ; EPA, 1979 ; IRIS, 1997 ). The EU directive for aluminium in drinking water is 0.2 mg/L as an “Indicator Parameter” ( Lenntech, 2004 ). Australia has also recommended a drinking water guideline value of 0.2 mg/L based on aesthetic considerations ( Queensland Government, 2002 ). Canada has not set a health-based guideline. However, it is recommended in the Canadian Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, “as a precautionary measure”, that water treatment plants using aluminium-based coagulants optimize their operations to reduce residual aluminium levels in the treated water to the lowest extent possible. Where aluminium-based coagulants are used in conventional treatment plants, the operational guidance level is <0.1mg/L (based on a 12 month running average of monthly samples); for other types of treatment systems using such coagulants, the operational guidance value is <0.2 mg/L ( Federal-Provincial-Territorial Committee on Drinking Water, 2006 ).

The Joint Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) / World Health Organization (WHO) Expert Committee on Food Additives and Food Contaminants recommended a provisional tolerable weekly intake (PTWI) of 7.0 mg/kg b.w.; this value includes the intake of aluminium from its use as a food additive ( FAO/WHO, 1989 ; IPCS, 1997 ). In 2006, the PTWI was lowered to 1.0 mg/kg b.w. citing that aluminium compounds may exert effects on reproductive and developing nervous systems at lower doses than were used in setting the previous guideline ( FAO/WHO, 2006 ). In the United States, an intermediate duration oral exposure Minimal Risk Level (MRL) of 2.0 mg/kg/day has been developed ( ATSDR, 1999 ; IRIS, 1999 ) based on neurotoxicity in mice ( ATSDR, 1999 ; Golub et al., 1989 ). No MRLs for any duration of inhalation exposure have been set for aluminium and the EPA has not designated aluminium or its compounds as hazardous air pollutants under the Clean Air Act; however, the EPA has regulated aluminium and certain aluminium compounds under this Act ( ATSDR, 1999 ).

The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requires employers to reduce exposures to aluminium to or below an 8-hr time-weighted average (TWA) of 15 mg/m 3 for total aluminium dust or 5 mg/m 3 for the respirable fractions ( NIOSH, 2005 ). Limits have also been set for aluminium in the workplace by the ACGIH (1996) ( ATSDR, 1999 ) and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH) (2005 ) in the United States; these values are listed in . In general, in the absence of occupational limits, countries in Europe also use those established by the ACGIH (E. Nordheim, personal communication, 2005).

Due to hepato-, skeletal and neurotoxicity seen in premature infants that received aluminium as a contaminant in total parenteral nutrition solutions (see Effects on Humans, Effects from Non-Occupational Exposure, Bone and Effects on Humans, Subpopulations at Special Risk, Infants and Children) the U.S. Food and Drug Administration enacted a labeling requirement, that went into effect July 26, 2004, which permits no more than 25 μg Al/L in large volume parenterals and a statement of the exact amount of Al present in small volume parenterals ( US FDA, 2000 ).

Classification and labelling requirements in the European Union (EU) are based on inherent hazardous properties of a substance, and are laid down in Directive 67/548 ( EEC, 1967 ) and later amendments and adaptations. The requirement covers physico-chemical properties, human health, and environmental toxicity. The classification is based on the results of specific prescribed tests, generally test guidelines developed by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Discussions regarding the classifications with respect to considerations for either health or environment are conducted in EU expert groups which evaluate the test data and propose the classification. This proposed classification is set out in Directives from the Commission. The classification of aluminium compounds is summarized in Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Classification.

The carcinogenic risk from aluminium and its compounds has not been evaluated by IARC. However, IARC has deemed that that there is sufficient evidence to show that certain exposures occurring during the production of aluminium cause cancer in humans; therefore “aluminium production” has been classified as carcinogenic to humans (Group I) ( IARC, 1987 ). The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has not classified aluminium for human carcinogenicity ( ATSDR, 1999 ; IRIS, 1999 ) and the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) has designated aluminium as a group A4 substance (“not classifiable as to human carcinogenicity”) ( ACGIH, 1996 ; ATSDR, 1999 ).

Aluminium hydroxide is used widely in non-prescription stomach antacids, in buffered analgesics and other pharmaceuticals, and in antiperspirants and dentifrices, as a filler in cosmetics, plastics, rubber and paper and as a soft abrasive for brass and plastics ( ATSDR, 1999 ; HSDB, 1995 ); it is also used pharmaceutically to lower the plasma phosphorus levels in patients with renal failure ( ATSDR, 1999 ; Budavari et al., 1989 ). Aluminium hydroxide is also the basis for producing fire retardant materials.

Aluminium metal and its alloys are used extensively in building construction (e.g., siding, roofing, doors, windows), in transportation (in the manufacture of automobiles and aircraft), in packaging (e.g., for beverage cans), and in electrical equipment. Other uses include die-cast motor parts, cooking utensils, decorations, road signs, fencing, beverage cans, coloured kitchenware, food packaging, foil, corrosion-resistant chemical equipment, solid fuel rocket propellants and explosives, dental crowns, jewellery and denture materials. Aluminium is also used for power lines, electrical conductors, insulated cables and wiring ( ATSDR, 1999 ; IAI, 2006b ). The largest markets for aluminium are transportation (27%), building and construction (23%), packaging (16%) and electrical equipment (10%). Transportation uses are one of the fastest growing areas for aluminium use showing a growth rate of about 4% per annum in 1999 ( Wagner, 1999 ). lists the approximate distribution of the different product segments in which aluminium is used on a global basis (E. Nordheim, personal communication, 2005)

Aluminium metal is light in weight and is durable because surfaces of products made from it are oxidized to form a thin protective coating of aluminium oxide (alumina). However pure aluminium is extremely soft and therefore is often mixed with other metals and elements (e.g., copper, magnesium, manganese, silicon, lithium and zinc) to form alloys which are stronger and harder and hence of increased versatility ( ATSDR, 1999 ; Wagner, 1999 ). The tensile strength of some copper-aluminium alloys can exceed that of mild steel by as much as 50% ( Wagner, 1999 ). Reference to the uses of aluminium thus normally relates to those for aluminium as an alloy.

The recycling of aluminium requires much less energy than that used to recover the metal from its ores. The annual amount of aluminium recovered from purchased and tolled (new and old) scrap was about 15 million tonnes in 2004 ( IAI, 2005 ). The automotive industry is the largest consumer of recycled cast aluminium accounting for about 70% of production. It was expected that demand for secondary aluminium would increase significantly as the automotive industry addressed the growing need for lighter vehicles ( Wagner, 1999 ).

In addition to primary aluminium production, more than 7 million tonnes is produced per year from post consumer (old) recycled scrap. Almost 100 per cent of all production scrap and over 60 per cent of all old scrap are recycled; it has been noted that the proportion of aluminium produced from scrap (“recycled aluminium”) is rising rapidly ( IAI, 2005 ).

It is noted by the International Programme on Chemical Safety (IPCS) ( IPAI, 1993 ; IPCS, 1997 ) that annual worldwide production of primary aluminium was 14.8 million tonnes in 1992; by 2004 production essentially doubled to 29.6 million tonnes ( ). Between 2001 and 2004 production increased by between 6 and 8% per annum. In 2004, primary aluminium was being produced in 41 countries, the largest producers being China (22% of world production) followed by Russia (12%), Canada (9%), the United States (8.5%), Australia (3.8%), Brazil (5%), and Norway (4.5%) ( USGS, 2004 ). China and Russia surpassed the United States as the largest producers of primary aluminium in 2001 ( ).

In 1992, worldwide production of bauxite was 106 million tonnes; based on a comparison of this quantity with the quarterly average values for 1993 and 1994, production in major producing countries appeared to be fairly constant ( IPCS, 1997 ; World Bureau of Metal Statistics, 1994 ). However, by 2003 world mine production of bauxite had reached approximately 146 million tons (150 million tonnes) and rose to about 156 million tons (160 million tonnes) in 2004 ( USGS, 2005a ) 1 .

Secondary aluminium refining, also referred to as smelting or more commonly recycling, involves recycled aluminium scrap as feed. The scrap is melted in furnaces, fluxes are added, unwanted constituents are removed in the form of dross, and other metals are added if the final products are alloys ( Healy et al., 2001 ). Dross forms on the surface of molten aluminium and consists of aluminium oxide, entrained aluminium, and smaller amounts of aluminium nitride, aluminium carbide and magnesium oxide ( Staley & Haupin, 1992 ). This is further processed to recover the aluminium content.

Aluminium produced by the Hall-Héroult electrolytic reduction process may be refined to a purity of up to 99.9% by the Badeau low-temperature electrolytic process ( ATSDR, 1999 ; HSDB, 1995 ). This process is not the only primary refining method. Other approaches have been successfully developed, especially for the production of high purity (99.995%) aluminium ( Staley & Haupin, 1992 ).

Aluminium is first extracted at 140 - 250°C with caustic soda from the bauxite, precipitated as aluminium hydroxide after the removal of iron and silicon impurities, and subsequently converted to aluminium oxide in a calcination process. These steps encompass the Bayer process ( Sleppy, 1992 ). In the second stage, the aluminium oxide is dissolved in molten cryolite (Na 3 AlF 6 ) and electrolyzed at temperatures of 920-980°C at carbon electrodes to yield the pure molten metal at the cathode and carbon dioxide at the anode (as well as some carbon monoxide and oxygen). The electrolytic cells are referred to as pots and the work area is the potroom. Because the anodes are consumed, they need to be replaced or generated in situ. In the first instance, pre-bake anodes are employed, while in the second approach (referred to as the Søderberg method) the anode is baked on site and carbon, in the form of a paste of petroleum coke and coal tar, has to be added to the top of the pot ( Abramson et al., 1989 ; Kongerud et al., 1994 ; Staley & Haupin, 1992 ). Pre-baked anodes are produced in a separate department by moulding petroleum coke and coal tar pitch binder into blocks and baking at 1000-1200°C. Casting constitutes the final third step and is carried out in the foundry. It involves the pouring of aluminium ingots. Note that aluminium trifluoride (AlF 3 ) is an important additive for the potroom electrolyte. It is prepared from Al 2 O 3 and hydrogen fluoride ( Sleppy, 1992 ; Staley & Haupin, 1992 ).

Bauxite, a naturally occurring, heterogeneous material, is the most important raw material used in the production of aluminium ( ATSDR, 1999 ; Dinman, 1983 ). Bauxite is made up primarily of one or more aluminium hydroxide minerals together with various mixtures of silica, iron oxide, titania, aluminium silicates, and other impurities in minor or trace amounts. The commercial sources of bauxite consist mainly of gibbsite or boehmite. Bauxite is extracted by open-cast mining ( Dinman, 1983 ; IPCS, 1997 ). Nepheline and alunite are minerals which have also been used as raw materials for production of aluminium oxide. They are still used at some plants in the Commonweath of Independent States, but are a minor part of world production ( Kammer, 1999 ).

Aluminium is released and dispersed in the environment by natural processes and from human activity. Natural processes account for most of the redistribution of aluminium in the environment ( ATSDR, 1999 ; IPCS, 1997 ; Wagner, 1999 ) as a result of the weathering of rocks and minerals in which it is present. Mobilization from natural sources can, however, also result from the deposition of acidic precipitation ( IPCS, 1997 ; Wagner, 1999 ). Direct anthropogenic releases of aluminium compounds occur primarily to air and these are associated with industrial processes. Thus, the mining and processing of aluminium ores and the production of aluminium metal, alloys and compounds can lead to the release of aluminium compounds into the environment. The use of aluminium and its compounds in processing, packaging and storage of food products, and as flocculants in the treatment of drinking-water may contribute to its presence in drinking-water and food stuffs ( ATSDR, 1999 ).

Aluminium and its compounds are major constituents of the Earth’s crust, comprising up to about 8% of the Earth’s surface. It is the third most abundant element (after oxygen and silicon) and the most abundant metallic element, and is found in combination with oxygen, fluorine, silicon, sulphur and other species; it does not occur naturally in the elemental state ( ATSDR, 1999 ; Brusewitz, 1984 ; Wagner, 1999 ). Naturally occurring aluminium is present in silicates such as feldspars and micas, complexed with sodium and fluorine as cryolite, and in bauxite rock (comprising hydrous aluminium oxides, aluminium hydroxides and impurities such as free silica) ( IPCS, 1997 ).

Estimates of the bioavailability of aluminium for the various sources and pathways are summarized in the right-hand column of . They are based on comparing aluminium intakes by inhalation and ingestion with its urinary excretion (output), as well as toxicokinetic studies. Details are provided in Toxicokinetics, Absorption, Studies in Humans. Food is the primary source for uptake for individuals not occupationally exposed. However, chronic use of antacids, buffered aspirins and other medicinal preparations would likely constitute the major uptake source, even when exposed at work. In the absence of such medicinal usages, occupational exposure would be expected to contribute more to the body burden than food and drinking water.

Estimates of daily aluminium intakes are provided in . For an individual who is not occupationally exposed and does not use antacids, buffered aspirin, or antiulcerative or antidiarrheal preparations (see Human Exposure, General Population Exposures, Medical), food is the major intake source of aluminium. If antacids, buffered aspirin, and other medicinal preparations are used, the food contribution will be relatively insignificant. The same is true for workers with occupational exposures, although in this case inhalation could be relatively more important than food as a source. The potential for anti-perspirants to contribute significant aluminium absorption through the skin has been suggested, but not well demonstrated (see Toxicokinetics, Absorption, Studies in Humans, Dermal Exposure).

As described in Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Properties of Aluminium Compounds / Chemical and Morphological Speciation, and Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Classification, explosivity, flammability, oxidizing potential and related reactivities are not considered to be of primary interest with respect to assessing the health impacts of exposure to aluminium and its compounds.

In the past, iatrogenic aluminium poisoning has been a serious issue ( Savory, 1994 ). This was due to the use of aluminium contaminated dialysis solutions and aluminium-based phosphate binders in patients with chronic renal failure and, similarly, contaminated human serum albumin and other biological products employed in i.v. therapy (see Nieboer et al. (1995 ) for a detailed summary; also see Effects on Humans, Subpopulations at Special Risk). The aluminium contamination of total parenteral nutrition solutions (see Sources of Human Exposure, Anthropogenic Sources, Legislative Controls, Classification and Labelling) has been mainly introduced in calcium gluconate and phosphates obtained from small volume parenteral vials ( Mouser et al., 1998 ).

Based on the aluminium compounds added to non-prescription drugs and anti-ulcerative drugs, the following daily doses (in mg) have been estimated: 840-5000 (antacids); 130-730 (buffered aspirins) and 830 (anti-ulcerative) ( ATSDR, 1999 ; IPCS, 1997 ; Soni et al., 2001 ). These intakes are massive compared to the dietary intakes discussed in Human Exposure, General Population Exposures, Food and Beverages / Drinking Water. Antidiarrheal agents also contain considerable levels of aluminium additives, as much as 1450 mg per dose ( ATSDR, 1999 ). Of course, other medical uses of aluminium compounds mentioned in and in other sections of this document provide exposure opportunities, namely as astringents, antiseptics, analgesics, antimicrobial agents, vaccine adjuvants, topical drugs, and compounds of dental materials and prosthetics, among others.

Aluminium concentrations in bottled commercial drinking water have been reported in a small number of instances. Rosborg et al. (2005) report a median level of total aluminium of 1.33 μmol/L (36 μg/L). Interestingly, when they compared carbonated samples from a single brand, one contained in a plastic bottle and the other in an aluminium can, the respective concentrations were 0.63 μmol/L (17 μg/L) and 2.7 μmol/L (72 μg/L) respectively. Gillette-Guyonnet et al. (2005) reported that aluminium concentrations in 3 of 8 commercial mineral waters obtained in 1992 were below the detection limit of 0.1 μmol/L (3 μg/L), while the remainder had values between 0.2 μmol/L (5 μg/L) and 1.2 μmol/L (32 μg/L). By comparison, levels for 6 city water supplies sampled in the same time period ranged from 0.4 μmol/L (10 μg/L) to 2.3 μmol/L (63 μg/L), and another was 2.2 μmol/L (60 μg/L) in 1999-2000. Finally, López et al. (2002) found a mean ± SD of recoverable aluminium (that found on digestion at 120°C for 90 minutes) of 2.1±1.6 μmol/L (58±43 μg/L) in both 15 regional samples of tap water and 11 samples of glass bottled water bought in supermarkets. By contrast, mineral water purchased in plastic bottles had considerable higher concentrations, namely 4.5±1.2 μmol/L (121±32 μg/L). Leaching from the plastic storage bottles was suspected in this case.

Many of the organic and inorganic water-soluble species discussed in Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Chemical and Morphological Speciation and those shown to exist in surface waters and soil extracts (see Human Exposure, Environmental Levels, Water) may be expected to be stable at the pH values of drinking water.

A perusal of recent reports of total and total dissolved aluminium (for definitions see Human Exposure, Environmental Levels, Water and ) in drinking water after municipal treatment indicated that levels are generally below 7.4 μmol/L (200 μg/L). Recently reported concentrations of dissolved aluminium and the year collected are: 1.36±1.28 μmol/L (38±35 μg/L; 1995/6; ( Gauthier et al., 2000 ); and 2.0-3.6 μmol/L (53-96 μg/L; 1995/6; see ). Total aluminium levels are of comparable magnitude: 0.85-3.9 μmol/L (23-105 μg/L; 1993/7; ( Zhao et al., 2001 ); 0.2-6.1 μmol/L (4-165 μg/L; c.2000; López et al., 2002 ); and a mean of 2.2 μmol/L (60 μg/L; 1999/2000; Gillette-Guyonnet et al., 2005 ). Compared to the compilation for the 1980s reported by Nieboer et al. (1995) there appears to be some moderate downward trend in the reported total aluminium concentrations.

Intakes for infants appear considerably lower; for example, a 4-month old infant consuming cow’s milk-based formula was estimated to take in 0.03-0.05 mg/day, compared to 0.27-0.53 mg/day when fed soya-based formula ( MAFF, 1993 ; also see Dabeka & McKenzie, 1992 ; and Pennington & Schoen, 1995 ). Navarro-Blasco & Alvarez-Galindo (2003) have reported comparable findings (based on the previous PTWI of 7 mg/kg b.w., rather than the current value of 1 mg/kg b.w.): “Standard formulae gave lower intakes amounting to about 4% PTWI; specialized and preterm formulae resulted in moderate intake (11 to 12 and 8 to 10% PTWI, respectively); and soya formulae contributed the highest intake (15% PTWI)”.

In the IPCS (1997) monograph, estimates of the average adult dietary daily intake of aluminium are tabulated for 8 countries. These data and other reported values for adults are depicted in . It is clear that, since the mid 1980s, the estimates fall below 15 mg/day. As suggested in the IPCS (1997) review, the lower values in this group likely reflect reduced use of aluminium food additives in some of the countries. The intakes in estimated for or reported in 1985 or before of 20-25 mg/day may be due to the inclusion of larger portions of food items with additives, although analytical limitations cannot be excluded.

For systemic effects of a toxicant, uptake into the blood stream is required. Consequently, from this perspective the PM 10 aerosol fraction is more pertinent than the PM 2.5 fraction. Particles are swallowed quickly when deposited in the nasopharynx region of the respiratory tract (inhalation through the nose) and when deposited in the oropharynx region (mouth breathing) ( NRC, 1979 ). Similarly, deposited particles cleared by way of mucous from the ciliated nasal passages and the tracheobronchial tree are either expectorated or swallowed. Because deposition in the entire respiratory system (i.e., upper and lower) is included in the inhalable fraction (see Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Chemical and Morphological Speciation), it is for this reason that the inhalable aerosol fraction (see Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Chemical and Morphological Speciation) is recommended in the workplace when assessing potential systemic toxic outcomes ( Nieboer et al., 1999 ; Vincent, 1993 ). Relative to this, the “total” aerosol fraction discussed in Human Exposure, Occupational Exposure would be second best, followed in order by the PM 10 and PM 2.5 fractions.

In , aluminium concentrations in the PM 2.5 and PM 10 aerosol fractions are compiled. In the corresponding text (Human Exposure, Environmental Levels, Air), it was pointed out that the mean total particulate mass found for the PM 2.5 and PM 10 fraction measurements were near or exceeded the U.S. EPA’s annual standards in most instances for non-remote sites. A perusal of the aluminium-specific data in indicates that mean PM 2.5 concentrations were in the range 0.035-1.82 μg/m 3 and 0.58-6.97 μg/m 3 in the PM 10 fractions. For agricultural communities, the maximum aluminium concentrations were 4.8 μg/m 3 (PM 2.5 ) and 17.3 μg/m 3 (PM 10 ), and 2.7 μg/m 3 (PM 2.5 ) and 5.4 μg/m 3 (PM 10 ) downwind of large urban centres. As pointed out in Human Exposure, Environmental Levels, Air, the natural crustal origin of aluminium accounts for the fact that the highest concentrations are being observed in agricultural areas.

Occupational exposures in workplaces using non-powdered aluminium metal well below its melting point (see Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Properties of Aluminium Compounds, ) may be expected to be considerably lower than those in primary and secondary aluminium refineries. By contrast, exposures in the manufacture of products involving aluminium powder (see and and Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Properties of Aluminium Metal and Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Chemical and Morphological Speciation) are likely to be comparable to those experienced in powder production. Similarly, workers involved in alloy production are likely to have aluminium exposures like those associated with comparable operations described for secondary refining and casting in primary refining. By contrast, exposures for aluminium welders have been reported extensively. Exposures depend on the type of welding: metal inert-gas (MIG), tungsten inert-gas (TIG), or manual metal (MMA) welding, as well as the type of welding electrodes (with or without flux). The following “total” aerosol fractions have been reported: 5-10 mg/m 3 ( Apostoli et al., 1992 ); 0.3-10.2 mg/m 3 with a mean of 2.4 mg/m 3 ( Sjögren et al., 1985 ; MIG); 0.2-5.3 mg/m 3 with a mean of 1.5 mg/m 3 ( Sjögren et al., 1988 ; mostly MIG); 0.2-6.1 mg/m 3 with a mean of 1.4 mg/m 3 (( Nielsen et al., 1993 ; MIG and TIG); 0.17 mg/m 3 (electrodes without flux) and 0.81 mg/m 3 (flux-coated electrodes) ( Vandenplas et al., 1998 ; MMA)). The particles generated in MIG welding have a mass median diameter of about 0.4 μm, with those for TIG welding being somewhat smaller ( Sjögren et al., 1985 ).

An extensive survey of 7 secondary aluminium smelters in the UK found inhalable aluminium air concentrations of 0.04 to 0.90 mg/m 3 , with a mean value of 0.31 mg/m 3 . These measurements are comparable in magnitude to the concentrations reported in for jobs involving slag treatment. Healy et al. (2001) did indeed identify the slagging out of rotary furnaces as a dusty operation. Comparable concentrations have been reported for two foundries in South Africa: 0.17 mg/m 3 for smelters; 0.027 mg/m 3 for operators; and 0.58 mg/m 3 for fettlers (i.e., those lining furnaces) ( Rollin et al., 1991a ).

The reports by Röllin et al. (1996 ; 2001) suggest that newer potroom technologies can substantially reduce exposure to aluminium. In a new primary smelter, the median “total” aluminium levels were 0.03 to 0.084 mg/m 3 , while in a plant using the more standard potroom smelting approach exposures were: mean (range) in mg/m 3 of 1.47 (1.25-1.66), potroom 1; 0.35 (0.20-0.57), potroom 2; and other operator, 0.036 (0.02-0.13).

Several noteworthy trends are evident from the data in . Exposure to bauxite, aluminium and the metal (as powder or sheets) is associated with low concentrations of water-soluble aluminium, by contrast to exposures in the potrooms, secondary smelting, and AlF 3 production. Consequently, one might expect to observe higher urinary aluminium concentrations among workers in the latter group, which was indeed the case. Surprisingly, the aluminium powder workers exhibited substantially higher before-shift concentrations in urine than other workers. This observation suggests that particulates that deposited and accumulated in the respiratory tract serve as sinks. Further, Gitelman (1995) and Gitelman et al. (1995) conducted a survey involving 40 control subjects and 235 workers employed in 15 plants in the USA engaged in primary and secondary aluminium refining and in the manufacture of products (e.g., powder technologies, cables, rolling mills). Personal exposures ranged from 0.01-1.20 mg/m 3 , with a median of 0.025 mg/m 3 for respirable fractions (<10 μm), and 0.001-3.0 mg/m 3 with a median of 0.10 mg/m 3 for the “total” aerosol fractions. The maxima in their survey likely pertained to primary refining and work with powders.

Although personal measurements of exposure to dust containing aluminium oxide and other aluminium compounds have been made in the aluminium production industry, they are not extensively documented in the published literature. The emphasis has rather been on PAHs, fluorides and HF measurements ( Benke et al., 1998 ). However, the reports by Pierre et al. (1995 ; 1998) provide a helpful overview. They surveyed 234 workers employed in primary aluminium refining, 88 in secondary aluminium refining and 13 in aluminium powder production. A summary of their findings is given in . Aluminium air concentrations were measured as the “total” aerosol fraction. Relative to the inhalable aerosol fraction defined in Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Chemical and Morphological Speciation, “total” personal samplers undersample particles larger than 15 μm ( Vincent, 1994 ). Unfortunately, for most of the worker groups surveyed, only mean values are available.

Bioconcentration of aluminium in aquatic plants and plants grown on low pH soils is known ( Gallon et al., 2004 ; IPCS, 1997 ). Aerial deposition appears to contribute to plant surface levels of aluminium, as illustrated for spruce needles. Because of its high concentrations in sediments, it is difficult to interpret the aluminium concentrations reported ( IPCS, 1997 ) for crustaceans such as crayfish, and bottom feeders such as carp. In other fish, little aluminium seems to be present in edible tissue, but with the gills showing preferential accumulation ( IPCS, 1997 ; Reid et al., 1991 ; Wilkinson et al., 1993 ). As reviewed in Human Exposure, General Population Exposures, Food and Beverages, grains, vegetables, legumes, and especially herbs and spices, exhibit significant tissue concentrations of aluminium.

Dermal contact with and ingestion of sediments and soils is not expected to constitute significant exposure routes, even though the aluminium contents of these media are substantial as mentioned in Human Exposure, General Discussion. Typical aluminium concentrations for major sediments are 9,000 – 94,000 μg/g and 700-300,000 (median 71,000) μg/g in soils ( ATSDR, 1999 ; Bowen, 1979 ; IPCS,1997 ; Sanei et al., 2001 ). As described in the previous section, soils are a source of soluble aluminium species for surface water and, of course, of sediment particles as well ( Sanei et al., 2001 ). Further, aluminium partitions from water to sediment and particulates. Consequently, soils and sediments are determinants for the level and forms of aluminium in surface water and thus raw water as a source for drinking water.

A study by Schintu et al. (2000) provides insight about the levels and speciation (i.e., its chemical and physical forms) of aluminium in raw water and in water after its treatment in the production of drinking water. It corroborates the wide variability of aluminium concentrations and speciation in surface water and that the corresponding parameters for drinking water are more uniform. In characterizing aluminium exposure, some recent epidemiological studies of AD have considered aluminium speciation in their statistical analyses (e.g., Gauthier et al., 2000 ). Consequently, it is relevant to explore this aspect in some detail here for raw water and in Human Exposure, General Population Exposures, Drinking Water for drinking water.

Environmental acidification is known to mobilize aluminium from land to aquatic environments, and this process has been demonstrated to vary with the seasons or major storm events ( ATSDR, 1999 ). Anthropogenic point sources can add to the aquatic aluminium burden. It is clear from Fig 2.1 in Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Chemical and Morphological Speciation that aluminium becomes markedly more soluble below a pH of about 5.

In terms of human health risk, dermal contact with and consumption of water are pertinent pathways of exposure. Consequently, aluminium concentrations in surface and drinking water are of primary interest. Further, as documented elsewhere ( ATSDR, 1999 ; IPCS, 1997 ), aluminium concentrations in marine waters tend to be considerably lower than in fresh water. The latter, therefore, will be the focus in this section.

Prior to 1987, it was the practice to measure particulate air pollution levels as total suspended particles (TSP) ( Samet et al., 2000 ). TSP constitutes air-borne particles with d ae <30 μm ( Cyrys et al., 2005 ). In 1987, annual and 24-hr standards were promulgated by the U.S. EPA for the PM 10 aerosol fraction (see Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Chemical and Morphological Speciation) of 50 and 150 μg/m 3 , respectively. In 1997, this agency added standards for PM 2.5 , namely 15 (annual) and 65 μg/m 3 (24-hr) ( EPA, 1997 ). Both the PM 10 and PM 2.5 aerosol fractions have been associated with adverse health effects as reported in Identity, Physical and Chemical Properties, Analytical Methods, Physical and Chemical Properties, Chemical and Morphological Speciation. Reported ambient aluminium concentrations in these fractions are summarized in . A perusal of these data indicates mean PM 2.5 aluminium levels were in the range 0.035 to 1.82 μg/m 3 (excluding the arctic and Antarctica sites) and 0.58-6.97 μg/m 3 for PM 10 . By comparison, the mean total particulate mass reported in the PM 2.5 and PM 10 fractions for non-remote sites were near or often exceeded the annual standards indicated. Detailed analyses of these data outlined in the original publications have identified the trends and interpretations summarized in the next paragraph.

Aluminium is the third most abundant element in the Earth’s crust with oxygen and silicon being the first and second. The respective percentages are 50, 26 and 7.5 ( Williams & Fraústo da Silva, 1996 ). It is therefore not surprising that soils and weathered rocks constitute the major sources of aluminium in environmental media ( Bowen, 1979 ). The mobilization of these natural sources far exceeds the anthropogenic releases into air, in waste-water effluents and industrial waste ( ATSDR, 1999 ). The environmental mobilization, transport and distribution of aluminium, as well as the levels observed in air, water, soils, sediments and food items have been extensively summarized in previous monographs ( ATSDR, 1992 ; IPCS, 1997 ) and in topic-specific reviews. Rather than reproducing these efforts, only the seminal features of these issues will be highlighted in the present chapter. However, all recent developments and topics pertinent to human risk assessment are reviewed and discussed in detail.

There are no published reports of physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modelling of aluminium. The International Commission on Radiological Protection concluded that the t ½ would be 100 days, based on 61 mg of aluminium in the human body (21 mg in the skeleton), daily intake of 45 mg in food and fluids, fractional absorption of 0.01 from the GI tract and from inhalation, and distribution of 30% of the aluminium that leaves systemic circulation to bone and 70% to all other organs and tissues ( ICRP, 1975 ). Much of the data obtained during the past 40 years are different from the assumptions used in this prediction. A model with a plasma and two tissue compartments was developed based on t ½ s of 10.5 and 105 hr, that fit plasma and urine 26 Al after 26 Al citrate ingestion reasonably well ( Fifield et al., 1997 ; Priest, 2004 ). Similarly, an 8 compartment model was based on the results obtained during 10 years after 26 Al citrate ingestion by one human subject. The model assumes distribution of 60, 24, 7.5, 5.25, 2.2 and 1.25% of the aluminium from blood and ECFs into urine, soft tissues including liver, a rapidly exchangeable bone surface pool, a slowly exchangeable bone surface pool, cortical bone mineral and trabecular bone mineral, respectively. The compartmental t ½ s were calculated to be 1.43, 6, 45, 10500 and 500 days for the five non-urine compartments, respectively ( Priest, 2004 ). Based on 26 Al in blood and urine samples after a single oral 26 Al administration to 3 healthy and 2 subjects with renal failure and i.v. in 3 healthy human subjects, Kislinger et al. (1997) developed a tentative open compartment model to describe aluminium biokinetics. The model has a central compartment that incorporates separate plasma and interstitial fluid compartments, each with sub-compartments for aluminium Tf and aluminium citrate. It has three peripheral compartments. One is for bone connected to the interstitial citrate compartment since the authors stated that studies in rats have shown that bones are supplied with aluminium by citrate. A second compartment represents muscles and organs including liver, kidneys and spleen connected to both central Tf compartments (plasma and interstitial fluid) as those organs receive aluminium from Tf. The third peripheral compartment is of unknown identity and was arbitrarily connected to the two central Tf compartments. Aluminium input was represented from a duodenal compartment into both the blood plasma Tf and citrate compartments. Output is described from plasma citrate into urine and a minor pathway from plasma Tf into the residual (beyond duodenal) intestinal tract into the stool. Compartment volumes and transport rates between compartments were determined based on the results of 8 subjects. In another report from the same group, Nolte et al. (2001) presented this model again, modifying the percentage of aluminium bound to citrate in plasma from 20% in the previous model to 6% and assigning the two peripheral non-bone compartments to liver and spleen that receive aluminium from plasma Tf and muscles, heart and the kidneys that receive aluminium from interstitial fluid Tf. Incorporating values reported from studies of aluminium in healthy individuals and renal failure patients, and from healthy and nephrectomized rats as well as rats in iron deficiency and iron overload, they calculated compartment volumes and transport rates between compartments. The same group reported the addition of one subject who received i.v. aluminium citrate, bringing the total to 6 healthy and 2 chronic renal-failure subjects who received 26 Al either orally or i.v. Urine samples were obtained for up to 9, and blood for up to, 512 days. Again drawing on much of the published literature, the model was tested ( Steinhausen et al., 2004 ) and the results were found to agree well with model predictions.

It has been suggested that the serum aluminium concentration should be kept below 30 μg/L ( Razniewska, 2005 ). Psychomotor function in long-term dialysis patients whose mean serum aluminium was 59 μg Al/L was significantly impaired compared to that in controls ( Altmann et al., 1989 ). Others suggested that a level of 40 to 50 μg Al/L warrants discontinuation of aluminium gels, 60 μg Al/L might indicate increased body burden, and > 100 μg Al/L indicates potential encephalopathy and the need for increased monitoring in dialysis patients. An AUC > 100 or 150 μg/L could present a risk of aluminium toxicity in these patients ( Alfrey, 1986 ) and overt aluminium toxicity has been seen when the serum aluminium concentration was > 200 μg/L ( Berend et al., 2002 ; Spencer, 2000 ). Mild neurophysiological and neuropsychological adverse effects were seen in MIG welders. The body burden threshold associated with these detrimental effects was estimated to be ~ 4 to 6 μM (108 to 162 μg/L) in urine and 0.25 to 0.35 μM (7 to 9 μg/L) in serum ( Riihimaki et al., 2000 ).

Biological monitoring of human exposure to aluminium has been conducted with urine, which has been thought to indicate recent exposure, or serum, which has been thought to better reflect the aluminium body burden and long-term exposure ( Alessio et al., 1989 ; Apostoli et al., 1992 ; Nieboer et al., 1995 ). However, neither is a very good predictor of the aluminium body burden.

As noted above, injection of 26 Al in animals increased 26 Al in bone ~ 100-fold more than in brain, yet steady state bone aluminium concentration is < 100-fold greater than that in the brain. This suggests aluminium clearance from bone is more rapid than from brain, which is reasonable considering bone turnover and lack of neuron turnover. The elimination t ½ of aluminium from human brain is predicted to be very long.

Zapatero et al. (1995) found that serum aluminium concentration positively correlated with age in 356 healthy adults. This could not be attributed to the age-related decrease of renal function. It is unknown if it relates to the long t ½ of aluminium in one or more compartments in the human so that steady state is not reached in a lifetime, to age-related increased absorption, or to other factors. In a previous study, Naylor et al. (1990) failed to find a correlation between age and serum, whole blood, urine or hair aluminium concentrations, in 76, 42, 42, and 42 subjects, respecively.

As discussed in Toxicokinetics, Distribution (Including Compartmentalization), Human Studies, Tissue Aluminium Concentrations, Brain, brain aluminium levels have been reported to increase with age. Slow, or no, brain aluminium elimination and continued aluminium exposure would produce an increasing aluminium burden with age, as has been seen in the human. Assuming the t ½ of brain aluminium in the human to be 20 to 50 years, the amount of aluminium that would accumulate in the brain after 60 years of daily consumption of 300 μg aluminium, assuming that 5 × 10 -3 % of each dose enters each gram of brain and resides therein with a t ½ of ≥ 20 years, would equal or exceed the amount seen in the normal 60 year old human. One might then conclude that normal concentrations of aluminium in drinking water would significantly contribute to elevated brain aluminium concentrations, and therefore could pose a potential health hazard.

Priest et al. (1995) provided a formula to predict the aluminium body content (B τ ) as a function of time with repeated daily aluminium exposure, B τ = 0.52(τ 0.68 -1), where τ = time in days after the start of the exposure, and B τ is expressed as a multiple of the daily systemic aluminium intake. Modification, using more recent data, suggests the aluminium body burden after long term (years) of fairly constant aluminium intake would be ~ 400 times the daily aluminium intake ( Priest, 2004 ).

The t ½ of the first phase of urinary aluminium elimination in 3 previously non-exposed volunteers exposed to aluminium welding fumes for 1 day was 8 hr ( Sjögren et al., 1985 ). In 5 aluminium welders exposed < 1 year to aluminium fumes, the t ½ was estimated to be 8 to 9 days, whereas in workers exposed > 10 years it was ≥ 6 months ( Sjögren et al., 1988 ). The t ½ of aluminium elimination in two welders after 20 and 21 years exposure was ~ 3 years, based on daily urinary aluminium excretion compared to the estimated body burden of aluminium which, in turn, was based on bone aluminium concentration ( Elinder et al., 1991 ). This group calculated a t ½ of 9.8 years for aluminium elimination based on urine aluminium concentrations of 1 welder ( Sjögren et al., 1996b ). Aluminium t ½ were estimated from urinary aluminium after termination of occupational aluminium exposure of 9 to 50 years duration. Elimination t ½ of 0.7 to 7.9 years were estimated, based on a few samples per subject ( Ljunggren et al., 1991 ). These t ½ s might be underestimates.

Following the consumption of aluminium-contaminated drinking water in Camelford, Cornwall, England, stainable bone aluminium was seen in 2 people six and seven months later whereas no stainable aluminium was seen 19 months later ( Eastwood et al., 1990 ). Aluminium was not elevated, as determined by EAAS, at either time ( McMillan et al., 1993 ).

Multiple phases of elimination were seen in a study in which one human received i.v. 26 Al citrate suggesting multiple compartments of alu