Investigating the health care delivery system in Japan and reviewing the local public hospital reform
We apply a cluster analysis technique to classify all 47 prefectures into several groups based upon three kinds of data: the number of hospitals, beds, and doctors. Based on the hierarchical cluster analysis technique, which aims at integrating closely located data into groups at each stage, 47 prefectures were clustered into four groups ( ). Detailed data for each cluster are provided with basic statistical data in . From , we find that the prefectures belonging to each cluster in I, II, III, and IV have significantly different mean values. Namely, the average values for all three indices, ie, number of hospitals, beds, and staff, get smaller from cluster I to IV. This means that the four clusters from I to IV are ordered from the largest to the smallest with respect to all these indices. Incidentally, the same clustering is obtained for all cases of separate data for 2006 and 2011, and for the aggregate data for these 2 years.

We find that the concave function with parameter estimates 0.629 and 0.639, which are less than 1.0, for 2006 and 2011, respectively, can approximate the actual data better for the relationship between DBD and DHS. This parameter implies that the percentage increase of DBD corresponding to a unit percentage increase of DHS, interpreted as the DBD elasticity with respect to DHS, becomes less as the latter factor, DHS density, increases. Also, we find that the relationship between DST and DBD is linear with a slope larger than 1.0 for both years 2006 and 2011, in which that for 2011 is almost 15% larger than the 2006 estimate. This implies that we need much more staff per bed recently even with respect to the density per capita. Thus, the same trend is found in hospital resources measured by density; namely, hospitals per 1,000 population tend to have more beds, and beds per 1,000 population tend to have more staff in 2011 compared with 2006. The density models indicate that the scale of hospitals is relatively small in prefectures with high hospital resource density because the hospital elasticity of beds is only approximately 0.63, and the coefficients are smaller than those of the non-density models. Prefectures with high hospital resource density are usually the less developed ones, with more geographic barriers and lower population density, which prevent local governments from providing medical services with just a few large hospitals. The results reflect the impacts of the health policy during this period: the number of hospitals and beds decreased, and the beds were concentrated in large hospitals. The average density of hospital staff increased among prefectures because of the policy promoting the number of medical staff, but a substantial number of the increased medical staff was absorbed by more developed prefectures like TKY, OSK, and KNG.

The health care resources in Japan are concentrated in these rather “profitable areas”, and not in remote areas. Considering that the location of these health care resources is generally and largely determined by the population size, we investigate the relationship between the distribution of health resources and the population density for all prefectures. To measure the equality of health care resources objectively, we take the density of the health care resources into account. From the relationship between hospital density (DHS) and bed density (DBD), given by indices such as the number of hospitals per 100 thousand population and the number of beds per 1,000 population for all prefectures, we find that DHS is much higher in those underdeveloped prefectures located in the southern part of Japan such as KOC, KGS, and TKS, while those populated prefectures like KNG, SIT, and CHB had a lower density of hospitals, hospital beds, and staff. Compared to 2006, we find that the density of hospital staff significantly increased in 2011.

On the relationship between staff and beds, we find that there is a significant difference between the years 2006 and 2011, so the estimate for the slope is given as 1.042 and 1.234 as in , an almost 20% increase during the 5-year period. The actual average number of staff per beds is 1.049 and 1.206 in 2006 and 2011, respectively. Regarding the relationship between doctors and beds, we find that those nine populated prefectures mentioned earlier are remarkably higher than the others with respect to their numbers, while the remaining 38 prefectures are densely distributed in the area with lower numbers. In addition, we find that doctors increases higher than proportional to beds’s increase; namely, their relationship can be expressed by a convex (quadratic) function, as shown in . These relationships indicate that compared to 2006, the number of hospitals and hospital beds decreased while the number of hospital staff increased in 2011.

We investigate the relationship among the number of hospitals, beds, staff, and doctors by applying regression model analysis techniques. The regression results for each type of function form between two factors are shown in . These three factors hospitals, beds, and staff are mutually highly correlated. Regarding the relationship between beds and hospitals for all prefectures for the years 2006 and 2011 in Japan, we find that they are proportionally related to each other. Their proportional coefficients corresponding to the actual average values for the number of beds per hospitals are not significantly different between the years 2006 and 2011 (181.9 and 184.0, respectively). Thus, for the relationship between beds and hospitals, combining the data for 2006 and 2011 and applying the single variable linear function passing the origin, we obtain the estimate for the slope of the linear regression model as 185.5, as shown in .

Investigating the number of hospitals, beds, staff, and doctors for each prefecture in Japan in 2006 and 2011, respectively, for hospitals and beds, most prefectures have smaller values in 2011 than in 2006. However, for the number of staff and doctors, we find that in most prefectures, the values in 2011 are larger than those in 2006. This indicates that most prefectures addressed the staffing problem without increasing the number of hospitals and beds. We also find that the prefectures having a much larger number of hospitals, beds, and staff are Hokkaido (HKD), Tokyo (TKY), Osaka (OSK), Fukuoka (FKO), Saitama (SIT), Chiba (CHB), Kanagawa (KNG), Aichi (AIC), and Hyogo (HYG), ie, the most urbanized and populated prefectures in Japan with the major corresponding large cities of Sapporo, Tokyo, Osaka, Fukuoka, Saitama, Chiba, Yokohama, Nagoya, and Kobe, respectively, in metropolitan and designated populated urban areas. The less developed prefectures, such as Tottori (TTR), Shimane (SMN), and Fukui (FKI), have fewer hospital resources.

We find that among LPHs, OPHs, and PRHs, the order between the largest and smallest shares among hospitals, beds, and staff changes. Namely, LPHs and OPHs have the largest share in staff (16.4% and 19.0%, respectively), then bed shares (14.7% and 15.7%, respectively), and then hospital shares (11.2% and 8.0%, respectively) are the smallest. On the other hand, PRHs have the largest share in hospitals (80.8%), then in beds (69.6%), and the staff’s share is the smallest (64.6%). This fact implies that PRHs are rather widely distributed with a relatively smaller number of beds and staff, while public hospitals, LPHs, and OPHs are more concentrated with a relatively large scale with more beds and more staff to provide a wide range of advanced medical services. Thus, we can say that PRHs and LPH-OPHs play complementary roles; namely, they are mutually complementary in providing medical services.

The figures in the lower row in the second and the third columns of give the number of beds and staff per corresponding hospital for LPHs, OPHs, and PRHs. The OPHs have the largest scale in terms of both the number of beds and the number of staff per hospital at 363.1 and 529.2, respectively. On the other hand, PRHs show the smallest scale in terms of both the number of beds and the number of staff per hospital compared with LPHs and OPHs. The LPH data remain in between those of OPHs and PRHs, but are much closer to the PRH data rather than the OPH data. Thus, we find that OPHs, eg, national public hospitals and social security-owned hospital with large-scale facilities, focus more on advanced care and comprehensive medical services, while PRHs provide more primary care and basic medical services. The functions of LPHs are between these two types.

Hospitals are the major and most important health care resource in Japan. We classify hospitals into three groups depending upon their ownership: LPHs, other public hospitals (OPHs), and private hospitals (PRHs). LPHs are those operated by prefectures, municipalities, and LIACs; OPHs include national public hospitals and social insurance organization-owned hospitals; and PRHs are those operated by medical corporations, individuals, and others. shows the number of hospitals, beds, and staff for each type of hospital in Japan in 2011. PRHs dominate all three categories, for the percentage of hospitals, beds, and staff at 80.8%, 69.6%, and 64.5%, respectively. For LPHs, we see the share for the number of hospitals, beds, staff ranging between 11% and 17%, while for OPHs, the share of the number of hospitals is 4.6% and for staff is 19.0%. This implies that national hospitals employ more staff per facility compared with the other types of hospitals. Comparing the range of the three shares for hospitals, beds, and staff, we find that the hospital shares’ range is the largest from approximately 8.0% to 80.8%, with the beds’ shares ranging from 14.7% to 69.6%, and the staff’s shares ranging from 16.4% to 64.6%.

LPHs distribution and measuring the equity

Public and private medical facilities receive the same payments according to the uniform fee schedule in Japan. Many public hospitals are compensated for their losses by budget allocations from the national government or local governments because they have to undertake policy-based medical services. National public hospitals focus more on highly advanced medical treatment, clinical research for designing health policies, and the education and training of health workers, while LPHs concentrate more on local needs. The LPHs are owned by local governments, operating in the form of local public enterprises (LPEs), which are established for the purpose of promoting the welfare of local residents. Several fundamental rights, such as budgeting, middle, and long-term planning formulation, and other important administrative powers, are retained by local governments. In 2008, the first 22 LPHs were transferred from local governments to the LIAC. Unlike LPHs operated by local governments, LIACs have a legal status, which allows them to be more independent.11

Although the proportion of LPHs is not very large in Japan’s health care delivery system, they intensively get involved in performing public functions. According to the data from Ministry of Health Labour and Welfare, at the end of 2011, LPHs only accounted for approximately 11% of hospitals, 15% of hospital beds, and 16% of hospital staff, while they operated approximately 67% of the infectious disease beds, 23% of the emergency beds, and 30% of the tuberculosis beds. The role of LPHs is even substantial within the context of LPEs. Hospitals are one of the most important industries run by LPEs. The LPHs comprise the second largest industry (LPEs are classified as water supply, transportation, and electricity industries, etc, according to their function) in terms of expenditure, which was 4.4 trillion yen, 25% of total expenditure, and was the largest industry in terms of revenue, which was 3.2 trillion yen, 35.8% of total revenue.

Regarding the distribution of LPH resources among prefectures in 2011, we find that the number of LPHs is highly correlated with the number of LPH beds. Pearson correlation coefficients are 0.861 in 2006 and 0.830 in 2011. The average number of LPHs in a prefecture is 20.6. The OIT has the smallest number of LPHs, which is only five, while HKD has 98. The average number of LPH beds was 4,956.0, with the lowest number being 1,140.0 in SAG, and the highest number, 15,531.0 in HKD. The average number of LPH staff in a prefecture is 6,675.5. The OIT has the smallest hospital staff, 1,952.2, while HKD has the biggest, 19,006.5. The average percentage of LPHs in a prefecture is 14.1%; OIT has the lowest percentage of LPHs, while YMG has the highest percentage. They were 3.1% and 36.8%, respectively. The average percentage of beds owned by LPHs was 17.3%, with the lowest percentage being 5.0% in FKO, and the highest percentage being 39.0% in YMG. The average percentage of LPH staff was 19.3%, with the lowest being 5.4% in FKO and the highest being 43.8% in YMG.

The results reveal that although the absolute amount of LPH resources in underdeveloped prefectures in the Tohoku area, such as YMG, IWT, and AOM, was lower than that in developed prefectures, such as FKO, OSK, SAG, and KNG, the share of LPH resources in these prefectures was much higher. This reflects the important role of LPHs in these underdeveloped prefectures.

Equity regarding the health care system and the allocation of health care resources has been a great concern for many researchers. A large number of studies have investigated the allocation of human resources in the health care system of Japan. Most of these studies use the Gini index to evaluate whether the health resources are distributed evenly. Many of these research studies apply concentration indices such as the Lorenz curve and the Gini index12,13 and the Atkinson and Theil indices.14 We consider these approaches using these indices as a “macro approach”, while we are focused upon more “micro approaches” in our paper using various kinds of measures in more detail related to hospitals, beds, and staff. Assuming that LPHs have played an important role in maintaining the equity of the health care delivery system in Japan, we believe that the LPH reform launched in late 2007 has had impacts on the equity of this system. Thus, the data after the LPH reform should be analyzed.

Shinjo and Aramaki15 used the data in 2008 at the secondary health care delivery service areas (SHSA) level to analyze the factors that influence the distribution of health care resources in Japan in their multiple regression analysis. They found that health care services were significantly scarcer in outflow groups after controlling for demographic and socioeconomic factors. The provision of health care services was also unbalanced among different inpatient flow groups. We believe that collecting cross-sectional data and trying to analyze the effects of time are very important for policy-makers. In this paper, we apply the “gap” analysis technique in order to investigate the distribution of health care resources. We try to measure the scale of the health care resource shortage among prefectures.

We denote the set of health care delivery resources and the set of prefectures by M = {hospitals, beds, doctors} and N = {1, …, 47(=n)}, respectively. Then let a j and p j indicate the area and the population, respectively, for each prefecture j, j ∈ N = {1, …, n}. We denote the amount of health care delivery resource i, i ∈M for each prefecture j, j ∈ N by x ij · Assuming that the health care delivery resource would be allocated proportionally to the area and population, we let y i j A and y i j P be the expected proportional allocation of health resource i in prefecture j based upon the area share and the population share, respectively. Thus, applying the Hamilton method (the largest fraction method) in order to calculate the closest integral value to each of y i j A and y i j P we can write them as follows.

y i j A = a j A ∑ j x i j , y i j P = p j P ∑ j x i j (1)

where A = ∑ j a j and P = ∑ j p j

The Hamilton method first gives an integral value equal to the largest integer not exceeding y i j A and y i j P to each prefecture. Then calculating the descending order data based upon the remainders given by the difference between y i j A or y i j P and the nearest (equal or less than respective value) integer, we give additional resources to all possible prefectures with the largest remainder until the total number of resources is allocated. Denoting the final allocation by the Hamilton method, which we call the proportional allocation, as [ y i j A ] and [ y i j P ] , respectively, we can calculate the gap of the allocation of health care delivery resource i in prefecture j as x i j A − [ y i j A ] and x i j P − [ y i j A ] , respectively, by taking the difference between the current allocation and the proportional allocation for each resource. From all these gaps corresponding to the health care delivery resources of beds and doctors for each prefecture for 2 years 2006 and 2011, a positive value indicates the prefecture possesses more health care resources than expected by the proportional allocation, while a negative value indicates fewer health care resources than that to be allocated to the corresponding prefecture. We find that the seven most urbanized and populated prefectures in Japan, TKY, OSK, KNG, SIT, FKO, CHB, and AIC, are located far from the other 40 prefectures. Namely, regarding the bed-gap only FKO has large positive values for both population and area gaps, while TKY, KNG, SIT, CHB, and AIC have positive values for the area gap and a negative population gap, and OSK has a positive value for the area gap and no population gap. Especially, both TKY and OSK have large positive values for the area gap. On the other hand, regarding the doctor gap, TKY, OSK, and FKO have large positive values for both the population and area gaps, while KNG, SIT, CHB, and AIC have positive values for the area gap and negative population gaps. In particular, TKY has very large positive values for both the area and population gaps.

Regarding the bed gap among the other 40 prefectures, those in the southern part of Japan, such as KMM, YGC, and NGS, have positive values for both the population and area gaps, while the prefectures with large shares of LPHs, such as IWT, AKT, FKS, and AOM, have positive values for the population gap and negative area gaps. Prefectures, including MYG, YMG, TCG, and GNM have negative values for both the population and area gaps. We also find that the mean of the absolute values of the bed gap decreased from 51,165 in 2006 to 50,357 in 2011 by area and slightly increased from 12,170 to 12,415 by population. Regarding the doctor gap among the other 40 prefectures, as a general trend, we can say that several prefectures shifted from the negative population quadrant to the positive population quadrant, which indicates that more doctors were attracted to those two metropolises. Also, the mean of the absolute value of the doctor gap increased from 6,749 in 2006 to 7,553 in 2011 by area and increased from 1,145 to 1,209 by population. This indicates that the distribution of doctors became unbalanced in Japan between 2006 and 2011.

We apply the cluster analysis technique to the gap data. The following three kinds of data sets are inputs to the cluster analysis: i) bed gap data (by area, by population), ii) doctor gap data (by area, by population), and iii) Bed and Doctor aggregated gap data. The computational results of the cluster analysis are given in . From , we find that HKD (Hokkaido) is always exceptional as it constitutes a cluster by itself. This is due to the fact that HKD’s allocation of beds and doctors by area is exceptionally far smaller than that in other prefectures as it has an extremely large area. We also find that the Doctor only and the Bed-Doctor aggregate cases give the same clustering result, while the Bed only case gives a slightly different result for clusters II and III. Clusters II and III contain the most populated urban prefectures such as TKY, OSK, FKO, CHB, KNG, and AIC for all cases. Cluster II for the Doctor and the Bed-Doctor aggregate cases consists of TKY, OSK, and FKO only, which means that all these prefectures have large positive gaps both by area and by population. Cluster III for these cases consists of SIT, CHB, KNG, and AIC, which correspond to the fact that these prefectures have large positive gaps by area and large negative gaps by population.