Dentin: Structure, Composition and Mineralization
Physiologically and anatomically, dentin is a complex structure. Within what is named as a “whole dentin”, different types of dentins have been identified, even within a single species.

Phylogenetic studies have revealed that during evolution, originally dentin analogues were very similar to bone, with osteoblast/odontoblast-like cells located within alveoli, as it is the case for osteocytes surrounded by bone within lacunae [1,2]. This organization called osteodentin, is still observed during tooth development in some mammalian species such as rodents [3], and as reparative dentin in humans. Odontoblasts polarize, elongate and start to display two distinct parts: a cell body and a process. During the next step of evolution, the cell bodies are located outside the mineralized tissue, along the border of the mineralization front, and long processes occupy the lumen of dentin tubules. In contrast with bone, dentin is not vascularized, except in some fish teeth where the existence of vasodentin is well-documented [4]. When mammalian odontoblasts become terminally polarized, they produce an orthodentin, with cell bodies located outside the predentin/dentin layer at the periphery of the pulp and cell processes crossing the predentin and extending inside dentin tubules up to the dentin-enamel junction. Tubules are characteristic of orthodentin. The diameter of tubules varies between 2 and 4 micrometers. The number of dentine tubules is about 18 000 and 21 000 tubules per mm2 [5]. They are more numerous in the inner third layer than the outer third layer of the dentin.

At this early stage, it worth to note that polarizing odontoblasts parallel with the basement membrane display some buddings. These membrane protrusions detach and become matrix vesicles very similar to what has been described in cartilage and bone, and these vesicles are thought to contribute to the initial dentin mineralization [ 14 ]. This is the only instance where a cell-derived organelle participates directly in mineralization during dentinogenesis. For the most part, the cells produce the extracellular matrix that is involved in the mineralization process.

In the root of the tooth, again the elastic modulus is not uniform and the outer part provides a frame that may resist axial and lateral pressures [ 13 ]. From a structural point of view, dentin tubules are scarce in the mantle dentin, and lacking in many cases. Bent and narrow tubules are deviated by calcospheritic structures present in the granular Tomes’s layer.

In the crown, the so-called mantle dentin, indentation measurements using Vickers microhardness show a gradual increase in hardness along the outer 200mm [ 7 ]. This outer layer is less mineralized and consequently the resilient mantle dentin may be adapted for dissipating pressures or forces which otherwise would induce enamel fissures and detachment of the fragmented enamel from the outer dentin-enamel junction. Dentin tubules are missing or reduced in number and bent in these layers of outer dentin. For some years, there was a debate about the observation that when using the “stains all” staining method [ 8 ] or antibodies raised against dentin phosphoproteins [ 9 ] the mantle dentin was unstained in contrast with the circumpulpal dentin, and consequently Takagi and Sasaki suggested that this layer was deprived of phosphorylated proteins [ 8 ]. However, chemical analysis revealed that proteins usually phosphorylated are actually present but in an underphosphorylated form or not phosphorylated at all [ 10 ]. In this context it is interesting to note that the mantle dentin is unaffected in X-linked hypophosphatemia [ 11 ] whereas in contrast rickets produces within the circumpulpal dentin enlarged non-mineralized interglobular spaces containing dentin ECM molecules [ 12 ]. Hence, the nature of the NCP’s differs between the mantle and circumpulpal dentins, the outer layer being not influenced by the organic phosphorous status. As a consequence, in the crown, the outer layers are less mineralized than the rest of the dentin. They display some elastic properties and therefore provide some resilience, important from a mechanical point of view and allowing dissipation of stress forces [ 7 ]. However, the thickness of the outer layer is about 200mm, therefore larger than the presumed width of the mantle dentin.

With some variation, most mammalian species have an outer mantle dentin layer, 15–30mm thick, at the periphery of the tooth in the coronal region., , This is mainly an atubular layer, having few thin and curved tubules. . In the root, similar layers are identified as follows 1) a Tomes granular layer, formed by calcospheritic structures that have not fully merged, and consequently by interglobular spaces, and/or 2) the hyaline Hopewell-Smith layer , each 15 – 30 micrometers in thickness. The network of porosities, probably formed by organic remnants, is vertically oriented, and unrelated to the tubules [ 6 ]. The functions of these peripheral layers have not been clearly established. However, some hypothesis may be drawn from their physical and chemical -chemical properties.

II-2-Circumpulpal dentins

The circumpulpal dentin forms the largest part of the dentin layer. Thin at initial stages of dentinogenesis, its thickness continuously increases (about 4mm/day) at the expense of the space initially occupied by the pulp. Again, it is not a homogeneous dentin layer. The most prominent part of the circumpulpal dentin is formed by intertubular dentin, whereas peritubular dentin is found around the lumen of the tubules,. The ratio between inter-tubular and peri-tubular dentin is highly species dependant. Peritubular dentin is missing in the continuously growing rodent incisors. In contrast, in horses, the ratio is roughly 50%, and decreases in humans (about 10–20%), with huge variations depending on the area where the calculations are made.

Differences in the structure and composition of the two dentins are well documented. Type I collagen is the major protein of intertubular dentin (90%), whereas no collagen fibrils are observed in the peritubular dentin. Differences have been also reported in the composition of non-collagenous proteins of the two dentins [15–18]. Along these lines, some crystallo-chemical specificities of the inter- and peri-tubular dentins have been established.

In intertubular dentin, s form the plate-like crystallites, 2–5 nm in thickness and 60nm in length. At lowermagnification, inter-tubular crystallites have a needle like appearance. They are located either at the surface the collagen fibrils, and parallel withthe collagen fibril axis; the crystallites randomly fill interfibrillar spaces [19]. Demineralization of intertubular dentin reveals a dense network of collagen fibrils, coated by non-collagenous proteins. Glycosaminoglycans as stained by cationic dyes are associated with the collagen hole zones resulting from the overlapping of collagen subunits. In the peri-tubular dentin, isodiametric structures about 25nm in diameter have been reported [15, 20]. At higher resolution, the crystals are bearing the following measurements: a= 36nm, b=25nm and c= 9.75nm [21]. They form a ring around the lumen of the tubules. After mild demineralization no collagen fibrils are detectable, but a thin network of non-collagenous proteins and phospholipids are visible [15, 18, 19].

During odontogenesis, odontoblasts are critical for the formation of a primary dentin, until the tooth becomes functional. When contacts between antagonistic cusps are established, then the formation of secondary dentin starts immediately, and continues throughout life. Initially, odontoblasts constantly produce matrix molecules that result in the formation of a 10 micrometers thick layer, reduced afterward to a daily 4 micrometers deposit. However, there is not much difference between primary and secondary dentin. The only major difference is morphological, and the S-curve of the tubules is more accentuated in the secondary dentin, due to the gradual space restriction of odontoblasts, located at the periphery of a withdrawing pulp.

The concomitant formation of inter- and peri-tubular dentin results from two different type of mineralization. Inter-tubular dentin results from the changes occurring between a dynamic non-mineralized predentin and the dentin located behind the mineralization front, a border that we now call metadentin [22]. Polarized odontoblasts are formed by a cell body that is key for the synthesis of extracellular matrix molecules (ECM) components along with a long process where the secretion of ECM takes place both in predentin and dentin. Processes are also implicated in the re-internalization of some fragments after the degradation of some ECM molecules. Some ECM molecules, namely collagen and proteoglycans, are secreted in the predentin, whereas other ECM molecules are secreted more distally near the mineralization front, or even further within the lumen of tubules. In the proximal predentin, odontoblasts are responsible for the secretion of native type I collagen together with some proteoglycans (decorin, biglycan, lumican, fibromodulin) implicated in collagen fibrillation [23, 24]. Some non-collagenous proteins (NCP) are implicated in the nucleation and growth of the mineral phase, or in its inhibition. Most phosphorylated proteins are secreted in the metadentin, near the mineralization front. In the proximal predentin (near the cell bodies) the mean diameter of collagen fibrils is about 20nm, whereas in the central part the mean diameter reaches 40nm, and in the distal part, near the mineralization front, fibril diameter vary between 55–75nm [25]. This suggests that the increased diameter is due to lateral aggregation of collagen subunits [26]. In contrast, in the mineralized dentin, the diameter of the collagen fibrils is stable.

The formation of inter-tubular dentin provides a unique three-layer model, very convenient to study matrix-derived mineralization. Anatomically, three are successive layers: 1- the cellular stratum (odontoblast cell bodies and Höehl’s cells [27], located at the periphery of the pulp), 2- the immature predentin layer, with a constant 15–20 micrometers thickness), and 3- the mineralized dentin, starting at the mineralization front up to the mantle dentino-enamel junction. This model is similar to the compartmentalized bone model, where three parts are also found: the osteoblast/bone lining cells layer, osteoid and bone. This observation may shed light on a processes shared by bone and dentin. However, while there may be some similarities between bone and tooth formation it is also clear there they also have unique properties. For example, bone formation is followed by a constant remodeling due to osteoclast-osteoblast interactions, hormonal influences and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)s degradation of the existing matrix proteins, whereas after its formation, dentin is a quite stable structure.

Peritubular dentin does not result from such transformation of predentin into dentin, but rather from the adsorption along the lumen of the tubules of an amorphous matrix, may be secreted by the odontoblast processes within dentin, or taking origin from the serum (dentinal lymph). Proteoglycans, lipids and other ECM proteins are implicated in the formation of a thin amorphous network, giving rise to a dense hypermineralized peritubular dentin. In two species, the elephant and the opossum (Didelphis albiventris) the formation of peritubular dentin occurs prior to intertubular dentin, with prominent calcospheritic structures present at the mineralization front [28, 29]. In the other species so far studied, the formation of peritubular dentin occurs within the tubules, some distance away from the mineralization front, and is mostly developed in the two inner parts of the circumpulpal dentin.

After eruption, as a reaction to carious decay or to abrasion, beneath a calciotraumatic line, interpreted as an interruption of normal dentinogenesis, reactionary or tertiary dentin is formed. This dentin is relatively? unstained by the “stains all” method, hence is deficient in acidic proteins some of which are presumed to be phosphorylated. As iss the case for the mantle dentin, this is due either to a defective post-translational modification (ie phosphorylation), or to the absence of these proteins. Reactionary dentin appears either as a layer of the osteodentin type, or as a tubular or atubular orthodentin, depending the speed and severity of the carious attack, the progression of the reaction and the age of the patient. Such dentin may also be a physio-pathological response to the release of some components of dental material fillings, free-monomers of resins or silver amalgam containing mercury. Reactionary dentin is synthesized by odontoblasts, or if these cells are altered, this layer is produced by the subjacent cells of the Höehl‘s layer, issued for the last division of pre-odontoblasts, which are latent adult progenitors. Reactionary dentin is different from what is named reparative dentin. However, this last type of so-called “dentin” does not result from the activity of odontoblasts or their associated cells, but specifically from pulp progenitors, implicated in the formation of a bone-like or in structure-less mineralization (pulp diffuse mineralization or pulp stones). Such structures are closer to bone rather than to dentin.

To conclude this part, depending on the type and the location of the dentin, at least three different physiological mineralization processes occur. Firstly, the dentin outer layers result from cell-derived events involving the presence of matrix vesicles and their enzymatic equipment. This process may or may not be associated with odontoblast apoptosis. Secondly, the active transformation of predentin into dentin is the origin of intertubular dentin formation. This is a matrix-controlled process, type I collagen playing a major role, at least as non-collagen proteins carrier. Thirdly, a passive deposit of serum-derived molecules along the tubule walls leads to the formation of peritubular dentin. This is why, under a generic name of dentinogenesis, different types of mineralization are producing specifically very different tissues. The unanswered question is why is it necessary to have three totally different processes involved in the formation of dentin in a single tooth. This leads to the question of What are the determinants for selecting one of the three pathways or why one over other?