Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors: Pharmacology and Toxicology
AChE inhibitors or anti-cholinesterases inhibit the cholinesterase enzyme from breaking down ACh, increasing both the level and duration of the neurotransmitter action. According to the mode of action, AChE inhibitors can be divided into two groups: irreversible and reversible. Reversible inhibitors, competitive or noncompetitive, mostly have therapeutic applications, while toxic effects are associated with irreversible AChE activity modulators.

Carbamates, due to their reversible AChE inhibitory action, found an important application in human medicine as pharmacologically active compounds. Natural carbamate derivate physostigmine (Fig. ), the secondary metabolite in the plant Physostigma venenosum, is widely used in the treatment of myasthenia gravis. As a potent AChE inhibitor, this therapeutic agent reduces ACh hydrolysis rate, and thereby increases its level in damaged neurosynaptic clefts improving nerve impulse transmission. Besides, pyridostigmine (Fig. ) is capable to prevent the irreversible binding of OP to AChE. Consequently, it is applied as a prophylactic against nerve agent intoxication [ 77 - 79 ]. Furthermore, rivastigmine (Fig. ) is a carbamate with probably the most meaningful pharmacological application, being validated in the symptomatic treatment of AD (see above).

Some carbamate compounds are used as herbicides such as ferbam, mancozeb, thiram (Fig. ). In addition, carbamates exhibit fungicide activity as well – butylate, pebulate, metham, molinate, cycloate, vernolate (Fig. ). It is generally thought that their acute toxicity to humans is low, but they may irritate skin, eyes and throat causing sneezing and coughing [ 67 ].

Carbamate compounds are applied as fungicides, insecticides and herbicides in agriculture, and belong to the second group of pesticides inhibiting cholinesterases. Carbamates containing hydrogen and methyl group in the place of R 2 and R 1 (Fig. ) , respectively, exert the insecticide activity. Carbamate insecticides include aldicarb, carbofuran, carbaryl, fenobucarb, propoxur (Fig. ). Their insecticide killing action is based on reversible AChE inactivation. Carbamates are considered to be safer than OP insecticides that irreversibly inhibit AChE causing more severe cholinergic poisoning [ 67 , 73 - 75 ]. It was found that stress conditions can improve carbamates diffusion into the central nervous system, while the blood brain barrier penetration in the healthy body is prevented [ 76 ].

Since carbamates, as well as OPs, are AChE inhibitors, both compounds cause similar toxic acute effects and symptoms derived from poisoning. The principal difference between OP and carbamate induced inhibitory action is in the stability of the AChE-OP/carbamate complex. Actually, OPs are able to phosphorylate serine residues of AChE in non-reversible way (Fig. ), whereas the carbamylated serine residue is less stable and the carbamyl moiety can be split from the enzyme by spontaneous hydrolysis (decarbamylation time is 30-40 minutes) [ 68 , 69 ]. Therefore, carbamates are considered reversible AChE inhibitors. Furthermore, carbamates, analogously to OPs, reversibly inhibit neuropathy target esterase, but, unlike OPs, are not able to dealkylate i.e. age the inhibited enzyme. So, carbamates are not delayed neuropathy inducers (see more about OP induced neuropathy below) [ 70 , 71 ]. Moreover, they exhibit protective effects when applied before OPs induced neuropathy. Thereupon, the neuropathic OPs are not able to inhibit and age neuropathy target esterase previously reversibly inhibited by carbamates. On the other hand, carbamates stimulate delayed neuropathy or make it more severe, when they are dosed after applying OP neuropathic doses, inducing promotion of delayed neuropathy [ 72 ].

Carbamates are organic compounds derived from carbamic acid (NH 2 COOH). The structure of biologically active carbamates is displayed in Fig. ( ), where X can be oxygen or sulphur (thiocarbamate), R 1 and R 2 are usually organic or alkyl substituents, but R 1 or R 2 may also be hydrogen, and R 3 is mostly an organic substituent or sometimes a metal. In addition to their use as therapeutic drugs in human medicine (AD, myasthenia gravis, glaucoma, Lewy bodies, Parkinson’s disease), these reversible AChE inhibitors have been applied as pesticides, then as parasiticides in veterinary medicine, and in prophylaxis of organophosphorus compounds (OPs) poisoning as well [ 67 ].

Generally, the disadvantage of the AChE inhibitors in AD treatment is modest and temporary benefits lasting for a maximum 12-24 months. Actually, these drugs do not reduce the rate of decline in cognitive or functional capacities over the long term [ 65 , 66 ]. Despite this fact, reversible AChE inhibitors provide meaningful symptomatic benefits, thereby remaining the mainstay of pharmacotherapy in AD. Moreover, their use is standard and supported by evidence [ 39 ].

Looking for potent and selective AChE inhibitors as potential anti-Alzheimer drugs, new compounds have recently been designed, synthesized and tested. Novel donepezil-tacrine and oxoisoaporphine-tacrine congeners hybrid related derivatives, coumarin and huperzine A derivatives have exhibited high AChE inhibitory activity with IC 50 values in the nanomolar range, and ability to bind simultaneously to both peripheral and catalytic sites of the enzyme. For the reason, these dual binding site inhibitors are promising compounds for developing disease-modifying drugs for the future treatment of AD [ 58 - 62 ], Additionally, new synthesized symmetrical bispyridinium and carbamate anti-AChE compounds inhibit the enzyme in micromolar concentrations, making them the potential candidates for the treatment of AD [ 63 , 64 ].

Considering the clinical effects of donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine, there is no evidence that any of these medications is superior in terms of efficacy. However, donepezil has been found to be better tolerated, with less gastrointestinal side effects than rivastigmine or galantamine [ 39 ]. Beside the described drugs approved by FDA and EMA for the AD symptomatic treatment, new AChE inhibitors have been synthesized and tested. So, the derivative of hepatotoxic tacrine (Fig. ) - the potent inhibitor of AChE anionic active site, 7-methoxytacrine was widely studied as a suitable substitute to tacrine. In vitro and in vivo tests indicated both its less toxic effects and stronger inactivating power against AChE related to tacrine [ 54 ]. Furthermore, natural alkaloid huperzine A (Fig. ) is originated from the firmoss Huperzia serrata, and can be synthesized as well. The target of this AChE inhibitor is the peripheral anionic site, which makes the AD drug able to affect the symptoms as well as the cause of the disorder [ 55 , 49 ] (see about donepezil above). The drug is a more potent AChE inhibitor than tacrine, galantamine and rivastigmine, while donepezil exhibits higher anti-AChE activity. Compared to other AChE inhibitors, huperzine A demonstrated better penetration through blood-brain barrier, higher oral bioavailability and longer AChE inhibition. Clinical trials with this AChE inhibitor revealed cognitive and functional impairments at patients with AD, schizophrenia and vascular dementia, and memory improvement of elder people [ 56 ]. In addition, protoberbrine alkaloids (berberine, palmatine, jatrorrhizine, epiberberine), as natural robust AChE inhibitors, are contemplated promising symptomatic therapeutic agents for AD [ 57 ]. It is necessary to emphasize that the pharmacological profile of the eutomer (bioactive enantiomer or enantiomer having higher pharmacological activity) and distomer (opposite to eutomer) of the chiral drugs (e.g. donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) is differential.

(trade name Razadyne, Nivalin) is an alkaloid (Fig. ) isolated from the plant Galanthus woronowii being applied for the treatment of mild to moderate AD. It is a selective, competitive, rapidly-reversible AChE inhibitor that interacts with the anionic subsite, as well as with the aromatic gorge [ 47 - 49 ]. Besides, the drug is an allosteric ligand at nicotinic cholinergic receptors inducing their modulation. It interacts with the nicotinic receptor at binding sites separate from those for ACh and nicotinic agonists, and acts specifically to enhance the activity (sensitize) of nicotinic receptors in the presence of ACh [ 50 , 51 ]. As the severity of cognitive impairment in AD correlates with loss of nicotinic receptors, this effect appears to be beneficial for the disorder treatment [ 52 ]. Galantamine absorption is rapid and complete, with absolute oral bioavailability between 80 and 100% and seven hours half-life. The treatment is usually initiated at 4 mg twice daily, and can be increased gradually up to 12 mg twice daily [ 39 ]. The drug side effects are similar to those of other AChE inhibitors, mainly with gastrointestinal symptoms. Galantamine seems to be less tolerated compared with the other AD drugs. However, a careful and gradual titration over more than three months may improve long-term tolerability [ 29 ]. Since galantamine has allosteric potentiating effects at nicotinic receptors, it affects not only cholinergic transmission but also other neurotransmitter systems such as monoamines, glutamate, and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) through its allosteric mechanism. These effects may result in more beneficial effects, and improve cognitive dysfunction and psychiatric illness in schizophrenia, major depression, bipolar disorder and alcohol abuse [ 53 ].

(Fig. ) (sold under the trade name Exelon) is a powerful, slow-reversible carbamate inhibitor that blocks cholinesterase activity through binding at the esteratic part of the active site. Unlike donepezil that selectively inhibits AChE, rivastigmine inhibits both BuChE and AChE. It has received approval for the treatment of mild-to-moderate AD in 60 countries including all member states of the European Union and the USA [ 43 ]. The drug is administered orally as capsules or liquid formulations, with good absorption and bioavailability of about 40% in the 3 mg dose. It is eliminated through the urine and has relatively few drug-drug interactions. The treatment is initiated at 1.5 mg twice daily, and is increased gradually over weeks to 6 mg twice daily; the increment is 3 mg per day every 2 to 4 weeks. Early and continued treatment of AD with rivastigmine maximizes the observed beneficial effects in the rate of decline of cognitive function, activities of daily living, and severity of dementia with daily doses of 6 to 12 mg. Adverse events are consistent with the cholinergic actions of the drug, and include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, headache, syncope, abdominal pain and dizziness [ 32 , 44 ]. The side effects can be reduced using transdermal patch delivering rivastigmine. The target dose of 9.5 mg/day delivered by patch provides similar clinical effects (improved memory and thinking, activities of daily living, concentration) as the highest recommended doses of rivastigmine capsules, but with three times fewer reports of nausea and vomiting [ 45 ]. In addition to AD, rivastigmine can be applied in the treatment of Lewy bodies and Parkinson’s disease dementia [ 43 , 46 ].

(Fig. ) is a selective, reversible AChE inhibitor that binds to the peripheral anionic site exerting not only symptomatic effects in the AD treatment, but also causative ones delaying the deposition of amyloid plaque [ 34 , 35 ]. The drug is produced by pharmaceutical companies Eisai and Pfizer under the trade name Aricept. Although its principal therapeutic use is in the palliative treatment of mild to moderate AD, some clinical studies state that donepezil improves cognitive function in patients with severe AD symptoms as well [ 36 ]. It is available as disintegrating tablet and oral solution, being 100% oral bioavailability with ease crossing the blood-brain barrier and slow excretion. As it has a half-life of about 70 hours, it can be taken once a day. The drug is available in 5 and 10 mg dose strengths, and treatment is usually initiated at 5 mg per day, and increased after several weeks to 10 mg per day. Maximum daily dose is 23 mg once daily [ 37 ]. Patients receiving the higher dose showed mild improvement in cognitive functions, and no improvement on overall functioning. On the other hand, the higher drug dose induced the increased incidence of cholinergic side effects in patients, which limited its wider use [ 38 ]. Common donepezil adverse effects include gastrointestinal anomalies-nausea, diarrhea, anorexia, abdominal pain, as well as increase in cardiac vagal tone causing bradycardia [ 39 ]. Additionally, recent studies have suggested donepezil ability to improve speech in children with autism, while its indication in other cognitive disorders such as Lewy body dementia, schizophrenia and vascular dementia is not currently approved [ 40 - 42 ].

AD is a progressive neurological disorder, the most common form of dementia, characterized by memory loss and other intellectual abilities serious enough to interfere with daily life [ 25 ]. The disease is associated with loss of cholinergic neurons in the brain and the decreased level of ACh [ 26 ]. The major therapeutic target in the AD treatment strategies is the inhibition of brain AChE [ 26 , 27 ]. There is no cure for AD, and reversible AChE inhibitors, employed in the therapy, treat symptoms related to memory, thinking, language, judgment and other thought processes. Actually, different physiological processes related to AD damage or destroy cells that produce and use ACh, thereby reducing the amount available to deliver messages to other cells. Cholinesterase inhibitor drugs, inhibiting AChE activity, maintain ACh level by decreasing its breakdown rate. Therefore, they boost cholinergic neurotransmission in forebrain regions and compensate for the loss of functioning brain cells. No drug has an indication for delaying or halting the progression of the disease [ 28 ]. Medications currently approved by regulatory agencies such as the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) to treat the cognitive manifestations of AD and improve life quality of the patients are: donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine as reversible AChE inhibitors, and memantine as an NMDA receptor antagonist [ 29 , 30 , 31 ]. Tacrine was the first of the AChE inhibitors approved for the AD treatment in 1993, but its use has been abandoned because of a high incidence of side effects including hepatotoxicity [ 32 , 33 ].

Reversible AChE inhibitors play an important role in pharmacological manipulation of the enzyme activity. These inhibitors include compounds with different functional groups (carbamate, quaternary or tertiary ammonium group), and have been applied in the diagnostic and/or treatment of various diseases such as: myasthenia gravis, AD, post-operative ileus, bladder distention, glaucoma, as well as antidote to anticholinergic overdose.

2.2. Irreversible Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors – Organophosphorus Compounds

OPs are esters or thiols derived from phosphoric, phosphonic, phosphinic or phosphoramidic acid (Fig. ).

General structural formula of OPs.

R 1 and R 2 are aryl or alkyl groups that are bonded to the phosphorus atom either directly (forming phosphinates), or through an oxygen or sulphur atom (forming phosphates or phosphothioates). In some cases, R 1 is directly bonded to the phosphorus atom, and R 2 is bonded to an oxygen or sulphur atom (forming phosphonates or thiophosphonates). In phosphoramidates, at least one of these groups is –NH 2 (un-, mono- or bi-substituted), and the atom double-bonded with phosphorus is either oxygen or sulphur. The –X group, also binding to the phosphorus atom through oxygen or sulphur atom, may belong to a wide range of halogen, aliphatic, aromatic or heterocyclic groups. This ″leaving group″ is released from the phosphorus atom when the OP is hydrolyzed by phosphotriesterases or upon interaction with protein targets. In medicine and agriculture, the word ″organophosphates″ refers to a group of insecticides and nerve agents that inhibit AChE [52, 71, 80].

The OPs exert their main toxicological effects through non-reversible phosphorylation of esterases in the central nervous system [81, 82]. The acute toxic effects are related to irreversible inactivation of AChE [82]. Actually, OPs are substrate analogues to ACh, and like natural substrate enter the active site covalently binding to serine –OH group. As in acetylation, OP is split and the enzyme is phosphorylated (Fig. ). While the acyl enzyme is quickly hydrolyzed to regenerate the free enzyme, dephosphorylation is very slow (on the order of days), and phosphorylated enzyme cannot hydrolyze the neurotransmitter [83]. The inhibition of the enzyme leads to accumulation of ACh in the synaptic cleft resulting in over-stimulation of nicotinic and muscarinic ACh receptors and impeded neurotransmission. The typical symptoms of acute poisoning are agitation, muscle weakness, muscle fasciculations, miosis, hypersalivation, sweating. Severe poisonings may cause respiratory failure, unconsciousness, confusion, convulsions and/or death [82, 84-86].

Mechanism of OPs induced AChE inhibition is presented using the reaction scheme:

E + PX ⇄ E ∗ PX → k 3 EP + X

where, E–enzyme, PX–OP, E*PX–reversible enzyme-OP complex, EP–phosphorylated enzyme, X–OP leaving group [87].

Irreversible inhibition occurs in two steps; the first one is fast, short term reversible enzyme inactivation, and its influence is dominant in the begining of the inhibition. The next step is slow irreversible inhibition producing a very stable enzyme-inhibitor complex (phosphorylated enzyme)-inhibitor is covalently bonded to the enzyme [88]. Time dependent irreversible inhibition can be described by the equation:

In E E 0 = − k 3 t 1 + K I / I (1)

where, E/Eo–remaining enzyme activity related to initial enzyme activity (control) (E o ), K I –dissociation constant for enzyme-inhibitor complex E*PX, k 3 –the first rate constant for the conversion of the reversible enzyme-inhibitor complex to phosphorylated enzyme, EP, (I)–inhibitor (OP) concentration, t–time interval after the enzyme and inhibitor mixing. If (I) » (E o ), the reciprocal slope value of linear dependence ln(E/Eo) - t (Fig. ) can be presented in the form:

1 k app = 1 k 3 + K I k 3 ⋅ 1 I (2)

(a). Progressive development of inhibition produced by reaction of AChE with different concentrations of diazoxon plotted as semi logarithmic curve in accordance with Equation (1). Diazoxon concentrations (in mol/l): (1) 2 × 10-8, (2) 3 × ...

The values of inhibition parameters, K I and k 3 , are calculated from the slope and intersection of 1/k app - 1/(I) linear dependence (Fig. ) [89,90].

Effective OPs have the following structural features: a terminal oxygen connected to phosphorus by a double bond (oxo form), two lipophilic groups (–R 1 , –R 2 ) bonded to the phosphorus, and a good leaving group (–X) bonded to the phosphorus (Fig. ) [91].

OPs can produce delayed neurotoxic effect in humans and chickens, called OP induced delayed neuropathy. It is associated with phosphorylation and further dealkylation (aging) (Fig. ) of a protein in neurons called neuropathy target esterase, subsequently leading to this syndrome. The symptoms of this neuropathy are paralysis and ataxia, and appear between 14 and 24 days after the poisoning [67, 70, 71].

2.2.1. Organophosphorus Insecticides The majority of OPs have been commonly used as nonspecific insecticides for over fifty years, to control a variety of insects in agriculture and the household environment. The synthesis of OP pesticides in large quantities started after World War II, and parathion was among the first marketed, followed by malathion and azinphosmethyl. Commonly used OP insecticides have included ethyl parathion, malathion, methyl parathion, chlorpyrifos, diazinon, dichlorvos, phosmet, fenitrothion, tetrachlorvinphos, azinphos methyl, pirimiphos-methyl, dimethoate, phosalone (Fig. ) [74, 75, 91-93]. In the 1970s organochlorine insecticides (DDT, dieldrin, aheptachlor) were banned because of their persistence and accumulation in the environment, and replaced by more degradable OPs. Selected OP insecticides. Actually, OP insecticides in the environment undergo the natural degradation pathway including mainly homogeneous and heterogeneous hydrolysis (especially at high pH) enhanced by the presence of dissolved metals, humic substances, microorganisms and other compounds present in soil [94-96]. OP degradation processes also occur in chemical treatments for purification of polluted waters, generally referred as advanced oxidation processes, as well as throughout the enzymatic reactions in birds, fish, insects and mammals. Degradation studies revealed different kinetics, mechanisms and transformation products, suggesting complete mineralization of the starting compound (usually thio form), but forming toxic break down products as well [89, 97-100]. Actually, oxidation and isomerisation reaction products were reported as much more potent AChE inhibitors compared to the starting thio OPs, while hydrolysis products do not noticeably affect the enzyme activity. Inhibition parameters, IC 50 and K i , for diazinon, malathion, chlorpyrifos and their transformation products are given in Table , indicating even several hundred times lower IC 50 values for oxo and iso forms related to the thio compounds, and non-inhibiting hydrolysis products [89, 90, 101]. IC 50 and K I Values for Irreversible Inhibition of AChE Activity by Diazinon, Chlorpyrifos, Malathion, and their Transformation Products Although OPs insecticides degrade rapidly, that made them an attractive alternative to the organochloride pesticides, they have greater acute toxicity, posing risks to people who may be exposed to large amounts - workers employed in the manufacture and application of these pesticides. OPs are one of the most common causes of poisoning worldwide occurring as a result of agricultural use, suicide or accidental exposure. OP pesticides can be absorbed by all routes, including inhalation, ingestion, and dermal absorption [102]. Their toxicity is not limited to the acute phase, but chronic effects have long been noted. Actually, repeated or prolonged exposure to OPs may result in the same effects as acute exposure including the delayed symptoms. The effects, reported in workers repeatedly exposed, include impaired memory and concentration, disorientation, severe depressions, irritability, confusion, headache, speech difficulties, delayed reaction times, nightmares, sleepwalking and drowsiness or insomnia. Influenza-like condition with headache, nausea, weakness, loss of appetite, and malaise has also been reported [103]. Neurotransmitters such as ACh are profoundly important in the brain's development, and many OPs have neurotoxic effects on developing organisms, even from low levels of exposure, causing various diseases of nervous and immune system [85, 104]. Oxo forms of OP insecticides,are highly, approximately equally toxic to warm-blooded as well as cold-blooded organisms. On the other hand, thio forms are converted into the oxo forms by mixed function oxidases. The activation proceeds in cold-blooded organisms but this is not common in warm-blooded organisms where dealkylation into non toxic compounds takes place [51, 105]. Thus, numerous derivatives of highly toxic insecticides have been prepared to reduce the toxicity towards warm-blooded organisms and retain toxicity to insects, thereby enhancing their specificity. The examples of effective, commonly used OP insecticides, and relative safe for warm-blooded organisms are: malathion, chlorpyrifos, fenitrothion, pirimiphos-methyl, dimethoate, phosalone [51]. Nowadays, the common use of OP insecticides results in their accumulation, environmental pollution and acute and chronic poisoning events [106]. For this reason, the use of OP insecticides has to be strictly controlled and restricted. Accordingly, the majority of countries have strong regulations on the application of pesticides; e.g. in the European Union it is regulated by the directive 91/41/EHS [51]. Also, the applied insecticides and their by-products in the environment, water and food are monitored applying different bioanalytical techniques [107].

2.2.2. Organophosphorus Nerve Agents/Gases Nerve agents of OP group include tabun, sarin, soman, cyclosarin and VX. Sarin, soman and cyclosarin are phosphonofluoridates, and VX is a phosphonothioate (Fig. ). Soman has four, while sarin and VX have two isoforms, which significantly differ in toxicity and irreversible AChE inactivation rate. Based on the acute toxicity, VX is the most toxic compound among all the nerve agents [67]. The developing and production of these extremely toxic nerve agents started in the 1930s, and later used in wars and by terrorists on several occasions. As chemical weapons, they are classified as weapons of mass destruction by the United Nations, and their production and stockpiling was outlawed by the Chemical Weapons Convention. Selected nerve agents. Acute poisoning by a nerve agent leads to contraction of pupils, profuse salivation, convulsions, involuntary urination and defecation, and eventual death by asphyxiation as control is lost over respiratory muscles. Some nerve agents are readily vaporized or aerosolized and the primary portal of entry into the body is the respiratory system. Nerve agents can also be absorbed through the skin, requiring that those exposed to such agents wear a full body suit in addition to a respirator [108]. Moreover, the effects of nerve agents are very long lasting and cumulative (increased by successive exposures), and survivors of nerve agent poisoning usually suffer chronic neurological damage that can lead to continuing psychiatric effects [109].

2.2.3. Irreversible Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors as Therapeutic Agents OPs, except their use as toxic compounds, have been applied in ophthalmology as therapeutic agents in the treatment of chronic glaucoma, an eye disease in which the optic nerve is damaged in a characteristic pattern. The disease is associated with increased fluid pressure in the eye, and can permanently damage vision in the affected eye(s) and lead to blindness if left untreated [110]. These medical useful OPs include diisopropyl fluorophosphate and echothiophate. Diisopropyl fluorophosphate (DFP, DIFP, diisopropyl phosphorofluoridate) (Fig. ) is a parasympathomimetic drug, irreversible anti-cholinesterase, and has been used locally in the oily eye drops form as a miotic agent in the glaucoma treatment. It is known as fluostigmine and dyflos in such uses. It exerts ocular side effects mainly associated with its AChE inhibitory properties, and ability to induce delayed peripheral neuropathy [67, 111]. Pharmacologically important OPs. Echothiophate (phospholine) (Fig. ) is a parasympathomimetic phosphorothioate, irreversible AChE inhibitor. It is used as an ocular antihypertensive in the treatment of chronic glaucoma and, in some cases, accommodative esotropia. Its application is local (eye drops), and the effects can last a week or more. The drug is available under several trade names such as phospholine iodide. Adverse effects include muscle spasm and other systemic effects [112]. OP compounds may be used in the therapy of neurological damages such as AD and Parkinson's disease. The example is trichlorfon (metrifonate) (Fig. ) that used to be applied as a pesticide, and has medicine implementation analogous to the carbamate rivastigmine (described above) [113]. The described reversible and irreversible AChE inhibitors are summarized in Table . Commonly used Reversible and Irreversible AChE Inhibitors and their Application