Anticancer Potential of Citrus Juices and Their Extracts: A Systematic Review of Both Preclinical and Clinical Studies
The initial electronic databases search resulted in 3,135 articles that were reduced to 2120 when duplicates were discarded. Of these latter, 31 articles were selected for detailed review, with only 22 ones eligible for inclusion in the final review process. Figure shows the flow of papers through the review. According to the kind of study, the selected ones were further divided in preclinical (n = 20) and observational clinical studies (n = 2). Tables – summarize the different variables of all studies taken into account. Articles excluded because they were conference abstracts or book chapters were n = 197. Records excluded for title and abstract were n = 1892. Articles excluded after full text review were n = 9: two because combined Citrus juice with CF, one because tested the anti-proliferative effects of a Citrus juice on non-malignant cells, one because cells exposure time to a Citrus juice was less than 24 h and five because did not test Citrus juices or their extracts.

Citrus juices and their extracts in cancer: focus on preclinical studies

Citrus fruits (CF) originated from tropical and sub-tropical areas of South-East Asia and were imported into Europe during the times of the Roman Empire. In Mediterranean basin, CF found favorable climatic conditions leading to extensive cultivation and the origin of many new hybrids (Duarte et al., 2016). Hence, Citrus taxonomy is quite controversial, so that there are different attempts to classify this Rutaceae family (Swingle and Reece, 1967; Tanaka, 1977; Mabberley, 1997). According to recent taxonomy, there are three ancestral taxa: Citrus maxima (pomelos), Citrus reticulata (mandarins), and Citrus medica (citrons) (Garcia-Lor et al., 2013). CF exerts many beneficial effects that improve human health, including mainly anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial and anticancer effects, as well as protection against cardiovascular and nervous system injury (Lv et al., 2015; Mandalari et al., 2017). As recently stated by Cirmi and co-workers, an impressive number of preclinical studies explored the anticancer activity of Citrus flavonoids as single compounds (Cirmi et al., 2016b). Conversely, limited investigations tested the potential of Citrus juices or their extracts against cancer.

In this systematic review, we included and discussed twenty preclinical studies in which Citrus juices or their extracts were used as anticancer agents. In particular, twelve papers evaluated the effect of Citrus juices in in vitro experimental models, and eight in in vivo ones.

Citrus sinensis (orange) is a small tree originated in China and then imported to Europe between sixteenth and seventeenth century by Portuguese expeditions (Ferrão, 1979). It is described as a hybrid between Citrus maxima (pomelo) and Citrus reticulata (mandarin). Orange juice (OJ) is one of the most consumed among other CF juices worldwide, and even one of the most studied regarding its health benefits. Indeed, it is well known its antioxidant property that is due to its content of both Vitamin C and flavonoids (Constans et al., 2015). In this regard, recently we studied the antioxidant activity of an extract from orange juice (OJe) rich in flavonoids in both cell-free and cell-based experimental models. In particular, we showed its capability of preventing oxidative stress induced by hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) in human lung epithelial A549 cells, diminishing reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and membrane lipid peroxidation, as well as enhancing mitochondrial functionality and averting DNA-oxidative damage (Ferlazzo et al., 2015). Moreover, we demonstrated the iron-chelating activity exerted by OJe in Fe 2 SO 4 -exposed A549 cells and its induction of the antioxidant catalase, thus stopping oxidative injury induced by iron (Ferlazzo et al., 2016c). We further studied the antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity of OJe through an animal model resembling colitis (Fusco et al., 2017) in which it counteracted cytokine generation, nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kB) activation, nitrotyrosine and poly ADP-ribose (PAR) formation, as well as enhanced myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity, increased manganese-dependent superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) expression and modulated both pro- and anti-apoptotic factors. Finally, it has been demonstrated that both OJ and OJe are capable of reducing cardiovascular risks (Buscemi et al., 2012) and exert anti-epileptic effect (Citraro et al., 2016). We found seven preclinical studies on the anticancer activity of OJ matching the eligibility criteria of our review. Among these, four have been investigated in in vitro experimental models (Kawaii et al., 1999; Camarda et al., 2007; Fernandez-Bedmar et al., 2011; Dourado et al., 2015) and two in animal models (So et al., 1996; Miyagi et al., 2000). Through in vitro study, Kawaii and co-workers screened 34 Citrus juices for their antiproliferative activity on several cancer cell lines (A549, human lung carcinoma; B16 mouse melanoma 4A5; CCRF-HSB-2, T-cell leukemia; TGBC11TKB, human gastric adenocarcinoma) and non-cancer cell line (HUVEC, human umbilical vein endothelial cells; HFK normal human foreskin keratinocytes) (Kawaii et al., 1999). Citrus juices tested included C. bergamia, C. limon, C. grandis, C. paradisi, C. aurantium, C. sinensis, C. nobilis, C. unshiu, C. reticulata, C. tangerine, and C. clementina. Although with different strength, all the tested juices showed antiproliferative activity, with the most exerted by C. nobilis (Kawaii et al., 1999). The growth inhibitory effect of both lemon and orange juices was also assessed by Fernández-Bedmar and collaborators on human leukemia HL-60 cells, suggesting a stronger activity of lemon rather than orange juice (IC 50 1.4 and 4.4%, respectively) (Fernandez-Bedmar et al., 2011). Moreover, Camarda and co-workers showed the antiproliferative effect of OJ and some varieties of C. reticulata in human chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) K562, human breast adenocarcinoma MCF-7 and HL-60 cells (Camarda et al., 2007). Finally, both sweet red-fleshed and blond OJ exert pro-apoptotic effect on Loucy T acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell line (Dourado et al., 2015). The first study assessing the inhibition of rats' mammary tumor generation caused by 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA) through OJ treatment was performed in 1996 by So et al. (1996). Some years later, Miyagi and collaborators evaluated the capability of OJ to inhibit azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon tumor in male rats, indicating that flavonoids and limonoid glucosides are implied in this antitumor activity (Miyagi et al., 2000).

Citrus reticulata (mandarin), originated from South-East China, was imported in Europe just in the nineteenth century, where it was cultivated mainly in Italy and Spain (Zaragoza, 1991), and represents the ancestor of different hybrids and mutants cultivated throughout the world (Scora, 1988; Mabberley, 2009). The main representative Citrus reticulata varieties in the Mediterranean area are Citrus deliciosa, Citrus unshiu, and Citrus clementina (Tanaka, 1954). Navarro and co-workers have studied the juice of mandarin (MJ) growing in Mediterranean area for its antioxidant activity (Navarro et al., 2011), while Oikeh et al. demonstrated its anti-microbial activity, in some cases, better than other CF (Oikeh et al., 2016). We analyzed five preclinical studies in which MJ was tested for its potential anticancer activity. In particular, we found two in vitro (Camarda et al., 2007; Celano et al., 2015) and three in vivo studies (Tanaka et al., 2000, 2012; Kohno et al., 2001). As mentioned above, OJ, C. clementina and C. deliciosa juices exert antiproliferative effect in K562 and HL-60 cells (Camarda et al., 2007). Lately, Celano and co-workers have examined the anticancer properties of a mandarin juice extract rich in flavonoids (MJe) on three diverse cell lines of human anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (CAL-62, 850C, and C-643). In this study, we demonstrated that MJe blocks cell cycle in G2/M phase, causing a reduction in cell proliferation and an increase in autophagic cell death (Celano et al., 2015). Furthermore, MJe reduced activity of MMP-2, thus decreasing cell migration (Celano et al., 2015). In animal models, Tanaka and collaborators showed the ability of natural MJ and MJs enriched in hesperidin and β-cryptoxanthin to reduce the AOM-induced colon carcinogenesis in F344 rats (Tanaka et al., 2000). Moreover, the juices cited above were also found to reduce lung neoplasms induced by 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) in A/J mice (Kohno et al., 2001). Finally, these MJs, both natural and enriched, decreased the gene expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)1-β, IL-6, NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), COX-2, and iNOS in the tongue and colon of F344 rats subjected to 4-Nitroquinoline-1-Oxide (4-NQO) or AOM to induce carcinogenesis, respectively (Tanaka et al., 2012).

Citrus paradisi (grapefruit) is thought to be a natural hybrid between Citrus maxima and Citrus sinensis that was found in the Caribbean after the discovery of the Americas by Columbus, and then exported to Europe (Barrett and Rhodes, 1976; de Moraes et al., 2007; Ollitrault et al., 2012). Grapefruit juice (GJ) has been extensively studied for its pharmacokinetic interactions with many drugs (Ahmed et al., 2015) and for its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties (de la Garza et al., 2015). Only two studies performed in animal models explored the anticancer properties exerted by GJ. Madrigal-Bujaidar and co-workers showed that GJ suppressed the colon carcinogenesis induced by AOM in mice, by up-regulating apoptosis and reducing both cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and inducible nitric oxide synthases (iNOS) levels, thus suggesting even its anti-inflammatory activity (Madrigal-Bujaidar et al., 2013). Miyata and collaborators demonstrated that GJ also suppresses colon DNA-damage induced by 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) in F344 male rats, however without identifying the mechanism of action (Miyata et al., 2002).

Citrus limon (lemon) has uncertain origin, even if it is thought to come from South-East Asia, as reported in data from Chinese literature of fifth century BC (Duarte et al., 2016). Then, Arabs brought this Citrus in Europe in twelfth century (Duarte et al., 2016). Citrus limon is known to be a hybrid between Citrus medica, Citrus reticulata, and Citrus maxima (Garcia-Lor et al., 2013). Lemon juice (LeJ) is thought to have, among others, anti-bacterial (Yang et al., 2013) and anti-oxidant activities (Tounsi et al., 2011). Only the paper by Raimondo et al. met the inclusion criteria of our review and its content is discussed below. Authors demonstrated that the nanovescicles extracted by ultracentrifugating LeJ might induce apoptosis in CML cells by activating TRAIL-mediated cell death (Raimondo et al., 2015).

Citrus aurantifolia (lime) is a tree originated in the tropical Northern Indian area. It was brought by Arabs into Middle East, Northern Africa and Mediterranean Europe, and then Spanish expeditions spread this Citrus in Central and South Americas. It is still widely cultivated in those areas cited above (Khan et al., 2017). Citrus aurantifolia is thought to be a hybrid between C. medica and C. micrantha, according to Nicolosi et al. (2000). Lime juice (LiJ) is claimed to exert antimicrobial activity on both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria (Aibinu et al., 2006). Only two studies carried out in vitro tested the antiproliferative activity of LiJ (Gharagozloo et al., 2002; Patil et al., 2009). Ghargozloo and co-workers suggested that concentrated LiJ could reduce proliferation of human lymphoblastoid B cell line (RPMI-8866) (Gharagozloo et al., 2002). Furthermore, Patil and collaborators showed that LiJ extracted in different solvents including acetone, chloroform and methanol, modulates the expression of caspase-3, Bax, Bcl-2, and p53, thus inducing apoptosis in Panc-28 pancreatic cancer cell line (Patil et al., 2009).

Citrus medica (citron) is native of Indian region, and is known to be the first CF arrived in the Mediterranean basin, and both Greek and Latin literatures confirmed its presence as food in their diets. Indeed, its name came from “Media” which was the term that referred to Persian area that is where Greek discovered this fruit during Alexander the Great's expeditions (Duarte et al., 2016). As cited previously, C. medica is one of the three ancestral taxa from which every CF drew its origin (Garcia-Lor et al., 2013). We found only one in vitro study in which the antiproliferative activity of citron juice (CJ) was evaluated (Entezari et al., 2009). Authors demonstrated that CJ, at different ripeness stages, showed antiproliferative activity on 1321 human astrocytoma cancer cells. Moreover, they assessed the anti-mutagenicity activity of CJ through Ames test, in which the “half-ripe” CJ resulted stronger than the “ripe” one (Entezari et al., 2009).

Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia (Risso and Poiteau) also called Citrus bergamia (Risso and Poiteau) or bergamot is thought to be a hybrid between Citrus aurantium L. and either Citrus limon L. (lemon) or Citrus aurantiifolia (lime). Additionally, it may be a mutation of the latter (Rapisarda and Germanò, 2013). It may originate from Canary Islands, Greece or Antilles and then introduced in Spain (“bergamot” can draw its name from the Spanish village “Berga”) and, subsequently, in southern Italy. More likely, it may be native of the Calabria region (Italy) where the best worldwide microclimate incentivizes both its plantation and spontaneous growth. Bergamot fruits are mainly used to extract the bergamot essential oil (BEO) mostly used in fragrance, cosmetics, confectionery and food industries. Moreover, BEO possesses antiseptic activities (Cirmi et al., 2016a) and it is used in aromatherapy (Navarra et al., 2015b). It is included in the official Pharmacopoeias of several countries, and its chemical composition has been accurately investigated (Costa et al., 2010). Experimentally, in the last decades, it has been investigated for its potential neuroprotective (Corasaniti et al., 2007) and antitumor activities (Celia et al., 2013; Navarra et al., 2015a). Bergamot juice (BJ), obtained through endocarp squeezing, has only been treated as a waste product of BEO factory chain for long time. Recently, it drew attention because of its hypolipemic and hypoglycaemic activity of its polyphenol fraction (Mollace et al., 2011; Toth et al., 2015; Mannucci et al., 2017). Furthermore, the flavonoid-rich extract from BJ (BJe) possesses both antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities, as assessed in several in vitro (Risitano et al., 2014; Ferlazzo et al., 2015, 2016c; Curro et al., 2016) and in vivo models (Impellizzeri et al., 2015, 2016). In addition, it exerts antimicrobial effects (Filocamo et al., 2015; Mandalari et al., 2017). Evidence that BJ, BJe or other polyphenol extracts from BJ did not exhibit noticeably signs of systemic toxicity either in animals or in human suggests their valuable risk/benefit ratio (Marino et al., 2015). Four studies focused on the anticancer activity of BJ and BJe, in particular three performed in vitro (Delle Monache et al., 2013; Visalli et al., 2014; Ferlazzo et al., 2016b) and one in vivo (Navarra et al., 2014), and met the inclusion criteria of our systematic review. We have demonstrated that BJ is able to reduce growth rate in various cancer cell lines through diverse mechanisms. In neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) BJ caused cell cycle arrest in G1 phase without triggering apoptosis, and induced morphological change that in turn increased the rate of detached cells in different physiological substrates and in endothelial cell monolayer. This peculiarity was due to the ability of BJ to induce impairment of actin filaments and reduce expression of active form of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), thus inhibiting cell adhesiveness and migration (Delle Monache et al., 2013). Conversely, in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells (HepG-2) BJ diminished growth rate through the activation of both extrinsic and intrinsic apoptosis that involved NF-κB, p53, and p21 pathways (Ferlazzo et al., 2016b). Furthermore, the BJ-induced reduction of neuroblastoma cells (SK-N-SH and LAN-1) adhesiveness, as assessed in vitro through a laminar flow assay on selectins, might be responsible for the slight inhibition of pulmonary metastasis colonization in an in vivo model of neuroblastoma spontaneous metastases formation in SCID mice (Navarra et al., 2014). We further indicated that the pool of flavonoids presents in BJ is responsible for its anticancer effects, since BJe is able to inhibit the growth of HT-29 human colorectal carcinoma cells by induction of apoptosis that can be triggered through different mechanisms depending on the drug concentration (Visalli et al., 2014). Indeed, lower BJe concentrations suppressed MAPK pathways and modulated some proteins linked to the apoptotic machinery, thus inducing arrest of cell cycle and apoptosis. Instead, higher BJe concentrations raised ROS generation leading to loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and DNA oxidative damage (Visalli et al., 2014).