Varying rotation lengths in northern production forests: Implications for habitats provided by retention and production trees
Modeling procedures

To examine the effect of rotation lengths and associated thinning regimes on the availability of habitats promoting biodiversity, we modeled different silvicultural programs (thinning program and time for final felling) obtained by optimizing the LEV according to Faustmann (1849) for interest rates between 0 and 5% with 1% increments. We applied the Heureka model, which is the most developed and used forestry planning and optimization tool in Sweden (Wikström et al. 2011) and calculated economically optimal management protocols for four production forest types in Sweden. We modeled two even-aged stands of Norway spruce: one on a high-productive site [Site index (SI) = 30 m] and another on a low-productive site (SI 18 m). We also modeled two even-aged stands of Scots pine, on high-productive (SI 24 m) and low-productive (SI = 16 m) sites. Site index is determined by top height at the age of 100 years, where top height is the average height of the 100 trees ha−1 with the largest diameter at breast height (dbh) (Elfving and Kiviste 1997). Site index has been shown to correlate well with potential production (Ekö et al. 2008). These site indices were chosen in order to represent high- and low-productive site conditions for areas where Scots pine and Norway spruce dominate in Sweden. Although these stands involve the targeted production of single tree species, they are not pure monocultures: natural regeneration and the targeted retention of other tree species result in more diverse tree species composition.

The simulations were done in two steps. First, we used the standard procedure for treatment program optimization in the Heureka software (Wikström et al. 2011) to determine rotation lengths and associated thinning regimes for the chosen interest rates. The procedure computes a large set of management alternatives for each stand with respect to the timing of final felling and the number and timing of thinnings. In all cases, ‘thinning from below’ was simulated and thinning intensity involved the removal of between 25 and 40% of basal area. In the simulations, broadleaved trees had a higher probability of removal during thinning operations, but the broadleaved proportion was nevertheless retained above 10% during the entire rotation. The different management alternatives were ranked according to the LEV and the alternative with the highest LEV was chosen for further analysis. Thereafter, the chosen rotations with associated thinning regimes (silvicultural programs) were simulated as described below.

Growth of stands and individual trees was simulated using empirical growth and yield functions (Fahlvik et al. 2014). For stand growth, stand basal area and individual tree diameter are simulated for five-year periods. At the end of each five-year period, individual tree diameters are adjusted to sum up to the stand basal area given by the stand-level function. At the stand level, the model simulates total five-year basal area growth (m2 ha−1) for all tree species. At the single-tree level, separate models provide five-year diameter growth rates for Scots pine, Norway spruce, birch (Betula spp.), and aspen (Populus tremula). Both models are empirical and generate growth based on variables describing the site (e.g., latitude, temperature sum, and site index), the stand (e.g., age, basal area, and time since thinning), and individual tree functions (e.g., diameter and age). Validation of both the stand and individual tree growth models were done by Fahlvik et al. (2011), who demonstrated that the outcomes from the model fit well with the observed tree growth. Potential height growth is modeled for individual trees with height growth functions for top-height trees (Elfving and Kiviste 1997). Thereafter, height growth is reduced with a competition modifier depending on the basal area of trees larger than the subject tree. Estimated individual tree diameter and height are used to calculate individual tree stem volume according to volume functions developed by Brandel (1990). Thereafter, individual tree stem volumes are summed to achieve per hectare values. Hereafter, we use the term ‘production trees’ to refer to the trees grown for industrial use, and ‘retention trees’ for the trees retained for biodiversity conservation at clearfelling.

Mortality due to damaging agents such as storm and insect attacks, and self-thinning due to high density, was simulated for all trees. For the retention trees, mortality rates were assumed to be 12% for the first five years after clearcutting and 6% during the subsequent five-year period. Ten years after clearcutting, the mortality model used for production trees was applied to retention trees (Fridman and Ståhl 2001). Increased mortality a few years after clearfelling has been observed in several empirical studies (Hautala and Vanha-Majamaa 2006; Jönsson et al. 2007; Rosenvald et al. 2008; Heikkala et al. 2014). The assumed levels are in line with a study of retention trees in central Sweden, showing a cumulative mortality rate of 18.5% in the 20 years following clearcutting (Hallinger et al. 2016). As Heureka cannot make distinctions regarding the spatial arrangement of retention trees, the chosen values represent a compromise between the mortality rates associated with single-tree versus group retention practices.

To obtain representative amounts of retention trees, three generations of stand simulations (i.e., three rotations) were run, with the third generation used for the analysis. In the first generation, all simulations were done with treatment programs optimized for the same interest rate (IR) of 2%. We therefore created a common starting point for coming generations, with retention trees representative of today’s current practice. Thereafter, a second generation was simulated using the target IR, with this IR repeated for the simulation of the subsequent (third) generation, which then was analyzed. In this third generation, we have a stand that also contains the surviving retention trees from the two previous generations. Using this generation, we analyze the long-term effects on such structures due to our different rotation lengths with associated thinning regimes. In accordance with the widely implemented forest certification standards (Johansson et al. 2013), 10 retention trees per hectare were excluded from harvest at the end of the first generation. At the end of subsequent generations, additional retention trees were excluded from harvest to compensate for mortality among retention trees during the previous rotation. Therefore, each generation started with 10 retention trees. Only aspen, birch, and pine trees were selected as retention trees, with aspen and birch above 20 cm being prioritized (in that order) over pine. According to our selection criteria, if there were fewer than 10 aspens or birches with a dbh over 20 cm, the largest pines were added to achieve 10 retained trees per hectare. Such a prioritization of large broadleaved trees in the selection of individual retention trees is consistent with current practice in Fennoscandia (see also Roberge et al. 2015).

In order to simulate standing and lying dead wood availability (stumps not included), tree mortality was modeled using a two-step approach. In the first step, average mortality for each stand was estimated, and thereafter mortality was distributed to individual trees. Average mortality was modeled with a logistic function where basal area of larger trees, site index, vegetation type, and thinning history are used as explanatory variables (Elfving 2010). Probability of mortality of individual trees was modeled with the tree species-specific logistic functions developed by Fridman and Ståhl (2001). Decomposition of dead wood was modeled using a negative exponential decay rate according to Harmon et al. (2000). Decay was calculated with the function e −rT where “T” is the time and “r” is a tree species-specific constant for decay in biomass and volume. The value of r for decomposition of volume was 0.013 for Norway spruce and broadleaves and 0.010 for Scots pine. As a response variable, we used only hard dead wood (i.e., little decay), which was determined on the basis of density (Sandström et al. 2007). At final felling, 56% of the dead wood was assumed to be destroyed during the harvest operation (Hautala et al. 2004).

For the economic analysis, the income provided by individual trees was calculated according to a price list provided by the Swedish forest-owner association. The price list distinguishes pine, spruce, and birch timber. Sawlog prices increase with diameter, and sawlog prices are higher than pulpwood prices. Logging costs are calculated according to the productivity of the forestry operation and the average per hour cost for harvesters and forwarders (Brunberg 2012a, b). The cost for regeneration was set at 600€ ha−1, and pre-commercial thinning was set at 250€ ha−1.