Photo Of Illegal Alien Mom With Children In Diapers Running From Teargas Was a Staged Hoax
Democrats are facing a serious problem. On the one hand, they’re pushing progressive – read Marxist – policies at the federal level like not only free college tuition but the removal of most student loan debt, a Medicare For All program that would eliminate private insurance and have the government be the single payer – what could go wrong? – and a mind-boggling Green New Deal program that would cost a conservative estimate of $93 trillion.

Progressives are very good at talking down to us about how the rich have to pay their fair share, even though IRS stats show the rich pay most of the federal income tax burden.

On the other hand, for decades Democrats in Congress created what are known as SALT (State And Local Tax) deductions that allowed their filthy rich residents to write off their state and local taxes on their federal income taxes. Progressive states like California, Illinois, New York, and New Jersey have very high state income tax rates to pay for all the government programs they give out, and they need their filthy rich to stay in those states for all the economic activities they generate.

So, while the progressive Left was virtue signaling about the rich having to pay their fair share, it was all a load of double Dutch, claptrap, baloney. They were allowing their filthy rich to write off their outrageously high state income taxes on their federal income taxes.

What the progressive states never mention is that their filthy rich’s write-offs caused other states like Wyoming, Alaska, Texas, Florida, and South Dakota that don’t have an income tax, and even states like Tennessee and New Hampshire that have extraordinarily low state income tax rates, to have to subsidize progressive states’ filthy rich by increasing their federal income taxes to make up for the losses.

Donald Trump’s 2017 Republican tax reform eliminated the SALT deduction, and now the filthy rich in progressive states are moving out and heading to Florida, Texas, and other states without income taxes. Let’s just hope they don’t continue to vote stupidly and ruin their new home states the way they did the progressive states they are leaving.

The irony here is that Democrats are finding out that the SALT deductions were the only reason their filthy rich stuck around for so long, and while they’re trying to increase the SALT caps for said filthy rich to stay in their states, they’re not going to be able to convince the same people that crazy federal programs like Medicare For All and the Green New Deal, that will raise their federal income taxes even more than their fair share, are a good idea.

The programs being proposed by the likes of Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, Kamala Harris and the rest of the clown car competition for a shot at the 2020 race will cost in the trillions of dollars, so much more money that progressive states won’t be able to hide SALT deductions from the public anymore.

If you took every dime from the filthy rich, it wouldn’t even make a dent in the bill that these crazy proposals would bring, and the proposals are coming at a time when money has never been more mobile, giving people the ability to vote with their feet. This is not even mentioning what these programs would cost middle class working families who aren’t really clamoring for the socialist programs being touted by 2020 Democrats.

Democrats are painting themselves into a corner at a time when many of their party are leaving in droves. Pretty soon they go the way of the Whigs, and I, for one, couldn’t be happier to see it happen.

H/T Washington Examiner

My book is here! And I personally handed a copy to our President at the White House!!! I hope you enjoy it @ realDonaldTrump!

BOOK – Why I Couldn't Stay Silent

Follow David on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Patreon and YouTube @DavidJHarrisJr