S.L. 2013-381
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA

SESSION 2013

SESSION LAW 2013-381

HOUSE BILL 589

AN ACT to restore confidence in government by establishing the voter information verification act to promote the electoral process through education and increased registration of voters and by requiring voters to provide photo identification before voting to protect the right of each registered voter to cast a secure vote with reasonable security measures that confirm voter identity as accurately as possible without restriction, and to further reform the election laws.

The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:

PART 1. SHORT TITLE

SECTION 1.1. Parts 1 through 6 of this act shall be known and cited as the Voter Information Verification Act.

PART 2. PHOTO IDENTIFICATION

SECTION 2.1. Article 14A of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes is amended by adding a new section to read:

" § 163‑166.13. Photo identification requirement for voting in person.

(a) Every qualified voter voting in person in accordance with this Article, G.S. 163‑227.2, or G.S. 163‑182.1A shall present photo identification bearing any reasonable resemblance to that voter to a local election official at the voting place before voting, except as follows:

(1) For a registered voter voting curbside, that voter shall present identification under G.S. 163‑166.9.

(2) For a registered voter who has a sincerely held religious objection to being photographed and has filed a declaration in accordance with G.S. 163‑82.7A at least 25 days before the election in which that voter is voting in person, that voter shall not be required to provide photo identification.

(3) For a registered voter who is a victim of a natural disaster occurring within 60 days before election day that resulted in a disaster declaration by the President of the United States or the Governor of this State who declares the lack of photo identification due to the natural disaster on a form provided by the State Board, that voter shall not be required to provide photo identification in any county subject to such declaration. The form shall be available from the State Board of Elections, from each county board of elections in a county subject to the disaster declaration, and at each polling place and one‑stop early voting site in that county. The voter shall submit the completed form at the time of voting.

(b) Any voter who complies with subsection (a) of this section shall be permitted to vote.

(c) Any voter who does not comply with subsection (a) of this section shall be permitted to vote a provisional official ballot which shall be counted in accordance with G.S. 163‑182.1A.

(d) The local election official to whom the photo identification is presented shall determine if the photo identification bears any reasonable resemblance to the voter presenting the photo identification. If it is determined that the photo identification does not bear any reasonable resemblance to the voter, the local election official shall comply with G.S. 163‑166.14.

(e) As used in this section, "photo identification" means any one of the following that contains a photograph of the registered voter. In addition, the photo identification shall have a printed expiration date and shall be unexpired, provided that any voter having attained the age of 70 years at the time of presentation at the voting place shall be permitted to present an expired form of any of the following that was unexpired on the voter's 70th birthday. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, in the case of identification under subdivisions (4) through (6) of this subsection, if it does not contain a printed expiration date, it shall be acceptable if it has a printed issuance date that is not more than eight years before it is presented for voting:

(1) A North Carolina drivers license issued under Article 2 of Chapter 20 of the General Statutes, including a learner's permit or a provisional license.

(2) A special identification card for nonoperators issued under G.S. 20‑37.7.

(3) A United States passport.

(4) A United States military identification card, except there is no requirement that it have a printed expiration or issuance date.

(5) A Veterans Identification Card issued by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs for use at Veterans Administration medical facilities facilities, except there is no requirement that it have a printed expiration or issuance date.

(6) A tribal enrollment card issued by a federally recognized tribe.

(7) A tribal enrollment card issued by a tribe recognized by this State under Chapter 71A of the General Statutes, provided that card meets all of the following criteria:

a. Is issued in accordance with a process approved by the State Board of Elections that requires an application and proof of identity equivalent to the requirements for issuance of a special identification card by the Division of Motor Vehicles under G.S. 20‑7 and G.S. 20‑37.7.

b. Is signed by an elected official of the tribe.

(8) A drivers license or nonoperators identification card issued by another state, the District of Columbia, or a territory or commonwealth of the United States, but only if the voter's voter registration was within 90 days of the election. "

SECTION 2.2. Article 14A of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes is amended by adding a new section to read:

" § 163‑166.14. Evaluation of determination of nonreasonable resemblance of photo identification.

(a) Any local election official that determines the photo identification presented by a voter in accordance with G.S. 163‑166.13 does not bear any reasonable resemblance to that voter shall notify the judges of election of the determination.

(b) When notified under subsection (a) of this section, the judges of election present shall review the photo identification presented and the voter to determine if the photo identification bears any reasonable resemblance to that voter. The judges of election present may consider information presented by the voter in addition to the photo identification and shall construe all evidence presented in a light most favorable to the voter.

(c) A voter subject to subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be permitted to vote unless the judges of election present unanimously agree that the photo identification presented does not bear any reasonable resemblance to that voter. The failure of the judges of election present to unanimously agree that photo identification presented by a voter does not bear any reasonable resemblance to that voter shall be dispositive of any challenges that may otherwise be made under G.S. 163‑85(c)(10).

(d) A voter subject to subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be permitted to vote a provisional ballot in accordance with G.S. 163‑88.1 if the judges of election present unanimously agree that the photo identification presented does not bear any reasonable resemblance to that voter.

(e) At any time a voter presents photo identification to a local election official other than on election day, the county board of elections shall have available to the local election official judges of election for the review required under subsection (b) of this section, appointed with the same qualifications as is in Article 5 of this Chapter, except that the individuals (i) may reside anywhere in the county or (ii) be an employee of the county or the State. Neither the local election official nor the judges of election may be a county board member. The county board is not required to have the same judges of election available throughout the time period a voter may present photo identification other than on election day but shall have at least two judges, who are not of the same political party affiliation, available at all times during that period.

(f) Any local or State employee appointed to serve as a judge of election may hold that office in addition to the number permitted by G.S. 128‑1.1.

(g) The county board of elections shall cause to be made a record of all voters subject to subsection (c) of this section. The record shall include all of the following:

(1) The name and address of the voter.

(2) The name of the local election official under subsection (a) of this section.

(3) The names and a record of how each judge of election voted under subsection (b) of this section.

(4) The date of the determinations under subsections (a) and (b) of this section.

(5) A brief description of the photo identification presented by the voter.

(h) For purposes of this section, the term "judges of election" shall have the following meanings:

(1) On election day, the chief judge and judges of election as appointed under Article 5 of this Chapter.

(2) Any time other than on election day, the individuals appointed under subsection (e) of this section.

(i) The State Board shall adopt rules for the administration of this section. "

SECTION 2.3. Article 7A of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes is amended by adding a new section to read:

" § 163‑82.7A. Declaration of religious objection to photograph.

(a) At the time of approval of the application to register to vote, a voter with a sincerely held religious objection to being photographed may execute a declaration before an election official to that effect to be incorporated as part of the official record of voter registration.

(b) At any time after the voter has registered to vote that the voter has determined the voter has a sincerely held religious objection to being photographed, that voter may execute a declaration before an election official to be incorporated as part of the official record of that voter's voter registration.

(c) At any time after a voter has executed a declaration before an election official under this section and that voter no longer has a sincerely held religious objection to being photographed, that voter may request the cancellation of the declaration in writing to the county board.

(d) All declarations under subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall include a statement by the voter that the voter has a sincerely held religious objection to being photographed and a requirement for the signature of the voter, which includes a notice that a false or fraudulent declaration is a Class I felony pursuant to G.S. 163‑275(13).

(e) The State Board shall adopt rules to establish a standard form for the administration of this section. "

SECTION 2.5. G.S. 163‑166.7(a) reads as rewritten:

"(a) Checking Registration. – A person seeking to vote shall enter the voting enclosure through the appropriate entrance. A precinct official assigned to check registration shall at once ask the voter to state current name and residence address. The voter shall answer by stating current name and residence address. address and presenting photo identification in accordance with G.S. 163‑166.13. In a primary election, that voter shall also be asked to state, and shall state, the political party with which the voter is affiliated or, if unaffiliated, the authorizing party in which the voter wishes to vote. After examination, that official shall state whether that voter is duly registered to vote in that precinct and shall direct that voter to the voting equipment or to the official assigned to distribute official ballots. If a precinct official states that the person is duly registered, the person shall sign the pollbook, other voting record, or voter authorization document in accordance with subsection (c) of this section before voting."

SECTION 2.6. G.S. 163‑166.9 reads as rewritten:

"§ 163‑166.9. Curbside voting.

(a) In any election or referendum, if any qualified voter is able to travel to the voting place, but because of age or physical disability and physical barriers encountered at the voting place is unable to enter the voting enclosure to vote in person without physical assistance, that voter shall be allowed to vote either in the vehicle conveying that voter or in the immediate proximity of the voting place.

(b) Any qualified voter voting under this section shall comply with G.S. 163‑166.13(a) by one of the following means:

(1) Presenting photo identification in accordance with G.S. 163‑166.13.

(2) Presenting a copy of a document listed in G.S. 163‑166.12(a)(2).

(c) The State Board of Elections shall promulgate adopt rules for the administration of this section."

SECTION 2.7. G.S. 163‑227.2(b) reads as rewritten:

"(b) Not earlier than the third Thursday before an election, in which absentee ballots are authorized, in which a voter seeks to vote and not later than 1:00 P.M. on the last Saturday before that election, the voter shall appear in person only at the office of the county board of elections, except as provided in subsection (g) of this section. A county board of elections shall conduct one‑stop voting on the last Saturday before the election until 1:00 P.M. and may conduct it until 5:00 P.M. on that Saturday. That voter shall enter the voting enclosure at the board office through the appropriate entrance and shall at once state his or her name and place of residence to an authorized member or employee of the board. board and present photo identification in accordance with G.S. 163‑166.13. In a primary election, the voter shall also state the political party with which the voter affiliates and in whose primary the voter desires to vote, or if the voter is an unaffiliated voter permitted to vote in the primary of a particular party under G.S. 163‑119, the voter shall state the name of the authorizing political party in whose primary he wishes to vote. The board member or employee to whom the voter gives this information shall announce the name and residence of the voter in a distinct tone of voice. After examining the registration records, an employee of the board shall state whether the person seeking to vote is duly registered. If the voter is found to be registered that voter may request that the authorized member or employee of the board furnish the voter with an application form as specified in G.S. 163‑227. The voter shall complete the application in the presence of the authorized member or employee of the board, and shall deliver the application to that person."

SECTION 2.8. Article 15A of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes is amended by adding a new section to read:

" § 163‑182.1A. Counting of provisional official ballots cast due to failure to provide photo identification when voting in person.

(a) Unless disqualified for some other reason provided by law, the county board of elections shall find that a voter's provisional official ballot cast as a result of failing to present photo identification when voting in person in accordance with G.S. 163‑166.13 is valid and direct that the provisional ballot be opened and counted in accordance with this Chapter if the voter complies with this section.

(b) A voter who casts a provisional official ballot wholly or partly as a result of failing to present photo identification when voting in person in accordance with G.S. 163‑166.13 may comply with this section by appearing in person at the county board of elections and doing one of the following:

(1) Presenting photo identification as defined in G.S. 163‑166.13(e) that bears any reasonable resemblance to the voter. The local election official to whom the photo identification is presented shall determine if the photo identification bears any reasonable resemblance to that voter. If not, that local election official shall comply with G.S. 163‑166.14.

(2) Presenting any of the documents listed in G.S. 163‑166.12(a)(2) and declaring that the voter has a sincerely held religious objection to being photographed. That voter shall also be offered an opportunity to execute a declaration under G.S. 163‑82.7A for future elections.

(c) All identification under subsection (b) of this section shall be presented to the county board of elections not later than 12:00 noon the day prior to the time set for the convening of the election canvass pursuant to G.S. 163‑182.5.

(d) If the county board of elections determines that a voter has also cast a provisional official ballot for a cause other than the voter's failure to provide photo identification in accordance with G.S. 163‑166.13, the county board shall do all of the following:

(1) Note on the envelope containing the provisional official ballot that the voter has complied with the proof of identification requirement.

(2) Proceed to determine any other reasons for which the provisional official ballot was cast provisionally before ruling on the validity of the voter's provisional official ballot. "

SECTION 2.9. G.S. 163‑87 reads as rewritten:

"§ 163‑87. Challenges allowed on day of primary or election.

On the day of a primary or election, at the time a registered voter offers to vote, any other registered voter of the precinct may exercise the right of challenge, and when he the voter does so may enter the voting enclosure to make the challenge, but he the voter shall retire therefrom as soon as the challenge is heard.

On the day of a primary or election, any other registered voter of the precinct may challenge a person for one or more of the following reasons:

(1) One or more of the reasons listed in G.S. 163‑85(c).

(2) That the person has already voted in that primary or election.

(3) Repealed by Session Laws 2009‑541, s. 16.1(b), effective August 28, 2009.

(4) If the challenge is made with respect to voting in a partisan primary, that the person is a registered voter of another political party.

(5) Except as provided in G.S. 163‑166.13(d) and G.S. 163‑166.14, the voter does not present photo identification in accordance with G.S. 163‑166.13.

The chief judge, judge, or assistant appointed under G.S. 163‑41 or 163‑42 may enter challenges under this section against voters in the precinct for which appointed regardless of the place of residence of the chief judge, judge, or assistant.

If a person is challenged under this subsection, and the challenge is sustained under G.S. 163‑85(c)(3), the voter may still transfer his that voter's registration under G.S. 163‑82.15(e) if eligible under that section, and the registration shall not be cancelled under G.S. 163‑90.2(a) if the transfer is made. A person who has transferred his that voter's registration under G.S. 163‑82.15(e) may be challenged at the precinct to which the registration is being transferred."

PART 3. IMPLEMENTATION

SECTION 3.1. G.S. 20‑37.7(d) reads as rewritten:

"(d) Expiration and Fee. – A special identification card issued to a person for the first time under this section expires when a drivers license issued on the same day to that person would expire. A special identification card renewed under this section expires when a drivers license renewed by the card holder on the same day would expire.

The fee for a special identification card is the same as the fee set in G.S. 20‑14 for a duplicate license. The fee does not apply to a special identification card issued to a resident of this State as follows:

(1) who The applicant is legally blind, blind.

(2) The applicant is at least 70 years old, old.

(3) The applicant is homeless, has been issued a drivers license but the drivers license is cancelled under G.S. 20‑15, in accordance with G.S. 20‑9(e) and (g), as a result of a physical or mental disability or disease.

(4) The applicant is homeless. To obtain a special identification card without paying a fee, a homeless person must present a letter to the Division from the director of a facility that provides care or shelter to homeless persons verifying that the person is homeless.

(5) The applicant is registered to vote in this State and does not have photo identification acceptable under G.S. 163‑166.13. To obtain a special identification card without paying a fee, a registered voter shall sign a declaration stating the registered voter is registered and does not have other photo identification acceptable under G.S. 163‑166.13. The Division shall verify that voter registration prior to issuing the special identification card. Any declaration shall prominently include the penalty under G.S. 163‑275(13) for falsely making the declaration.

(6) The applicant is appearing before the Division for the purpose of registering to vote in accordance with G.S. 163‑82.19 and does not have other photo identification acceptable under G.S. 163‑166.13. To obtain a special identification card without paying a fee, that applicant shall sign a declaration stating that applicant is registering to vote and does not have other photo identification acceptable under G.S. 163‑166.13. Any declaration shall prominently include the penalty under G.S. 163‑275(13) for falsely making the declaration. "

SECTION 3.2. G.S. 130A‑93.1 is amended by adding a new subsection to read:

" (c) Upon verification of voter registration, the State Registrar shall not charge any fee under subsection (a) of this section to a registered voter who signs a declaration stating the registered voter is registered to vote in this State and does not have a certified copy of that registered voter's birth certificate or marriage license necessary to obtain photo identification acceptable under G.S. 163‑166.13. Any declaration shall prominently include the penalty under G.S. 163‑275(13) for falsely or fraudulently making the declaration. "

SECTION 3.3. G.S. 161‑10(a)(8) reads as rewritten:

"(8) Certified Copies of Birth and Death Certificates and Marriage Licenses. – For furnishing a certified copy of a death or birth certificate or marriage license ten dollars ($10.00). Provided however, a Register of Deeds register of deeds, in accordance with G.S. 130A‑93, may issue without charge a certified Birth Certificate birth certificate to any person over the age of 62 years. Provided, however, upon verification of voter registration, a register of deeds, in accordance with G.S. 130A‑93, shall issue without charge a certified copy of a birth certificate or a certified copy of a marriage license to any registered voter who declares the registered voter is registered to vote in this State and does not have a certified copy of that registered voter's birth certificate or marriage license necessary to obtain photo identification acceptable under G.S. 163‑166.13. Any declaration shall prominently include the penalty under G.S. 163‑275(13) for falsely or fraudulently making the declaration. "

SECTION 3.4. G.S. 163‑275(13) reads as rewritten:

"(13) For any person falsely to make or present any certificate or other paper to qualify any person fraudulently as a voter, or to attempt thereby to secure to any person the privilege of voting; voting, including declarations made under this Chapter, G.S. 20‑37.7(d)(5), 20‑37.7(d)(6), 130A‑93.1(c), and 161‑10(a)(8); "

PART 4. ABSENTEE VOTING

SECTION 4.1. G.S. 163‑229(b) reads as rewritten:

"(b) Application on Container‑Return Envelope. – In time for use not later than 60 days before a statewide general election in an even‑numbered year, and not later than 50 days before a statewide primary, other general election or county bond election, the county board of elections shall print a sufficient number of envelopes in which persons casting absentee ballots may transmit their marked ballots to the county board of elections. However, in the case of municipal elections, sufficient container‑return envelopes shall be made available no later than 30 days before an election. Each container‑return envelope shall have printed on it an application which shall be designed and prescribed by the State Board of Elections, providing for all of the following:

(1) the The voter's certification of eligibility to vote the enclosed ballot and of having voted the enclosed ballot in accordance with this Article, Article.

(2) a A space for identification of the envelope with the voter, voter and the voter's signature.

(3) and a A space for the identification of the two persons witnessing the casting of the absentee ballot in accordance with G.S. 163‑231, those persons' signatures, and those persons' addresses.

(4) A space for the name and address of any person who, as permitted under G.S. 163‑226.3(a), assisted the voter if the voter is unable to complete and sign the certification and that individual's signature.

(5) A space for approval by the county board of elections.

(6) The envelope shall A space to allow reporting of a change of name as provided by G.S. 163‑82.16.

(7) A prominent display of the unlawful acts under G.S. 163‑226.3 and G.S. 163‑275, except if there is not room on the envelope, the State Board of Elections may provide for that disclosure to be made on a separate piece of paper to be included along with the container‑return envelope.

The container‑return envelope shall be printed in accordance with the instructions of the State Board of Elections."

SECTION 4.2. G.S. 163‑230.1 reads as rewritten:

"§ 163‑230.1. Simultaneous issuance of absentee ballots with application.

(a) A qualified voter who is eligible to vote by absentee ballot under G.S. 163‑226(a) desires to vote by absentee ballot, or that voter's near relative or verifiable legal guardian, shall complete a request form for in writing an application for absentee ballots, an absentee application and absentee ballots so that the county board of elections receives the that completed request form not later than 5:00 P.M. on the Tuesday before the election. That completed written request form shall be signed by the voter, the voter's near relative, or the voter's verifiable legal guardian. in compliance with G.S. 163‑230.2. The county board of elections shall enter in the register of absentee requests, applications, and ballots issued the information required in G.S. 163‑228 as soon as each item of that information becomes available. Upon receiving the application, completed request form, the county board of elections shall cause to be mailed to that voter in a single package: package that includes all of the following:

(1) The official ballots the that voter is entitled to vote; vote.

(2) A container‑return envelope for the ballots, printed in accordance with G.S. 163‑229; and G.S. 163‑229.

(3) Repealed by Session Laws 1999‑455, s. 10.

(4) An instruction sheet.

The ballots, envelope, and instructions shall be mailed to the voter by the county board's chairman, member, officer, or employee as determined by the board and entered in the register as provided by this Article.

(a1) Absence for Sickness or Physical Disability. – Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, if a voter expects to be unable to go to the voting place to vote in person on election day because of that voter's sickness or other physical disability, that voter or that voter's near relative or verifiable legal guardian may make written the request under subsection (a) of this section in person for absentee ballots to the board of elections of the county in which the voter is registered after 5:00 p.m. on the Tuesday before the election but not later than 5:00 p.m. on the day before the election. The county board of elections shall treat that completed request form in the same manner as a request under subsection (a) of this section but may personally deliver the application and ballots to the voter or that voter's near relative or verifiable legal guardian. enter in the register of absentee requests, applications, and ballots issued the information required in G.S. 163‑228 as soon as each item of that information becomes available. The county board of elections shall personally deliver to the requester in a single package:

(1) The official ballots the voter is entitled to vote;

(2) A container‑return envelope for the ballots, printed in accordance with G.S. 163‑229; and

(3) An instruction sheet.

(a2) Delivery of Absentee Ballots and Container‑Return Envelope to Applicant. – When the county board of elections receives a completed request form for applications and absentee ballots, the board shall promptly issue and transmit them to the voter in accordance with the following instructions:

(1) On the top margin of each ballot the applicant is entitled to vote, the chair, a member, officer, or employee of the board of elections shall write or type the words "Absentee Ballot No. ____" or an abbreviation approved by the State Board of Elections and insert in the blank space the number assigned the applicant's application in the register of absentee requests, applications, and ballots issued. That person shall not write, type, or print any other matter upon the ballots transmitted to the absentee voter. Alternatively, the board of elections may cause to be barcoded on the ballot the voter's application number, if that barcoding system is approved by the State Board of Elections.

(2) The chair, member, officer, or employee of the board of elections shall fold and place the ballots (identified in accordance with the preceding instruction) in a container‑return envelope and write or type in the appropriate blanks thereon, in accordance with the terms of G.S. 163‑229(b), the absentee voter's name, the absentee voter's application number, and the designation of the precinct in which the voter is registered. If the ballot is barcoded under this section, the envelope may be barcoded rather than having the actual number appear. The person placing the ballots in the envelopes shall leave the container‑return envelope holding the ballots unsealed.

(3) The chair, member, officer, or employee of the board of elections shall then place the unsealed container‑return envelope holding the ballots together with printed instructions for voting and returning the ballots, in an envelope addressed to the voter at the post office address stated in the request, seal the envelope, and mail it at the expense of the county board of elections: Provided, that in case of a request received after 5:00 p.m. on the Tuesday before the election under the provisions of subsection (a1) of this section, in lieu of transmitting the ballots to the voter in person or by mail, the chair, member, officer, or employee of the board of elections may deliver the sealed envelope containing the instruction sheet and the container‑return envelope holding the ballots to a near relative or verifiable legal guardian of the voter.

The county board of elections may receive completed written requests request forms for applications at any time prior to the election but shall not mail applications and ballots to the voter or issue applications and ballots in person earlier than 60 days prior to the statewide general election in an even‑numbered year, or earlier than 50 days prior to any other election, except as provided in G.S. 163‑227.2. No election official shall issue applications for absentee ballots except in compliance with this Article.

(b) The application shall be completed and signed by the voter personally, the ballots marked, the ballots sealed in the container‑return envelope, and the certificate completed as provided in G.S. 163‑231.

(c) At its next official meeting after return of the completed container‑return envelope with the voter's ballots, the county board of elections shall determine whether the container‑return envelope has been properly executed. If the board determines that the container‑return envelope has been properly executed, it shall approve the application and deposit the container‑return envelope with other container‑return envelopes for the envelope to be opened and the ballots counted at the same time as all other container‑return envelopes and absentee ballots.

(c1) Required Meeting of County Board of Elections. – During the period commencing on the third Tuesday before an election, in which absentee ballots are authorized, the county board of elections shall hold one or more public meetings each Tuesday at 5:00 p.m. for the purpose of action on applications for absentee ballots. At these meetings, the county board of elections shall pass upon applications for absentee ballots.

If the county board of elections changes the time of holding its meetings or provides for additional meetings in accordance with the terms of this subsection, notice of the change in hour and notice of the schedule of additional meetings, if any, shall be published in a newspaper circulated in the county at least 30 days prior to the election.

At the time the county board of elections makes its decision on an application for absentee ballots, the board shall enter in the appropriate column in the register of absentee requests, applications, and ballots issued opposite the name of the applicant a notation of whether the applicant's application was "Approved" or "Disapproved".

The decision of the board on the validity of an application for absentee ballots shall be final subject only to such review as may be necessary in the event of an election contest. The county board of elections shall constitute the proper official body to pass upon the validity of all applications for absentee ballots received in the county; this function shall not be performed by the chairman or any other member of the board individually.

(d) Repealed by Session Laws 1999‑455, s. 10.

(e) The State Board of Elections, by rule or by instruction to the county board of elections, shall establish procedures to provide appropriate safeguards in the implementation of this section.

(f) For the purpose of this Article, "near relative" means spouse, brother, sister, parent, grandparent, child, grandchild, mother‑in‑law, father‑in‑law, daughter‑in‑law, son‑in‑law, stepparent, or stepchild."

SECTION 4.3. G.S. 163‑230.2 reads as rewritten:

"§ 163‑230.2. Method of requesting absentee ballots.

(a) Valid Types of Written Requests. – A completed written request form for an absentee ballot as required by G.S. 163‑230.1 is valid only if it is written entirely by the requester personally, or is on a form generated created by the county board of elections State Board and signed by the requester. voter requesting absentee ballots or that voter's near relative or verifiable legal guardian. The county board of elections shall issue a request form only to the voter seeking to vote by absentee ballot or to a person authorized by G.S. 163‑230.1 to make a request for the voter. If a requester, due to disability or illiteracy, is unable to complete a written request, that requester may receive assistance in writing that request from an individual of that requester's choice. The State Board shall make the form available at its offices, online, and in each county board of elections office, and that form may be reproduced. A voter may make a request in person or by writing to the county board for the form to request an absentee ballot. The request form for an absentee ballot shall require at least the following information:

(1) The name and address of the residence of the voter.

(2) The name and address of the voter's near relative or verifiable legal guardian if that individual is making the request.

(3) The address of the voter to which the application and absentee ballots are to be mailed if different from the residence address of the voter.

(4) One or more of the following in the order of preference:

a. The number of the voter's North Carolina drivers license issued under Article 2 of Chapter 20 of the General Statutes, including a learner's permit or a provisional license.

b. The number of the voter's special identification card for nonoperators issued under G.S. 20‑37.7.

c. The last four digits of the applicant's social security number.

(5) The voter's date of birth.

(6) The signature of the voter or of the voter's near relative or verifiable legal guardian if that individual is making the request.

(a1) A completed request form for an absentee ballot shall be deemed a request to update the official record of voter registration for that voter and shall be confirmed in writing in accordance with G.S. 163‑82.14(d).

(a2) The completed request form for an absentee ballot shall be delivered to the county board of elections. If the voter does not include the information requested in subdivision (a)(4) of this section, a copy of a document listed in G.S. 163‑166.12(a)(2) shall accompany the completed request form.

(a3) Upon receiving a completed request form for an absentee ballot, the county board shall confirm that voter's registration. If that voter is confirmed as a registered voter of the county, the absentee ballots and certification form shall be mailed to the voter, unless personally delivered in accordance with G.S. 163‑230.1(a1). If the voter's official record of voter registration conflicts with the completed request form for an absentee ballot or cannot be confirmed, the voter shall be so notified. If the county board cannot resolve the differences, no application or absentee ballots shall be issued.

(b) Invalid Types of Written Requests. – A request is not valid if it does not comply with subsection (a) of this section. If a county board of elections receives a request for an absentee ballot that does not comply with subsection (a) of this section, the board shall not issue an application and ballot under G.S. 163‑230.1.

(c) Rules by State Board. – The State Board of Elections shall adopt rules for the enforcement of this section."

SECTION 4.4. G.S. 163‑231 reads as rewritten:

"§ 163‑231. Voting absentee ballots and transmitting them to the county board of elections.

(a) Procedure for Voting Absentee Ballots. – In the presence of a person two persons who is are at least 18 years of age, and who is are not disqualified by G.S. 163‑226.3(a)(4) or G.S. 163‑237(b1), the voter shall: shall do all of the following:

(1) Mark the voter's ballots, or cause them to be marked by that person in the voter's presence according to the voter's instruction; instruction.

(2) Fold each ballot separately, or cause each of them to be folded in the voter's presence; presence.

(3) Place the folded ballots in the container‑return envelope and securely seal it, or have this done in the voter's presence; presence.

(4) Make the application printed on the container‑return envelope according to the provisions of G.S. 163‑229(b) and make the certificate printed on the container‑return envelope according to the provisions of G.S. 163‑229(b).

(5) Require those two persons in whose presence the voter marked that voter's ballots to sign the application and certificate as witnesses and to indicate those persons' addresses.

Alternatively to the prior paragraph of this subsection, any requirement for two witnesses shall be satisfied if witnessed by one notary public, who shall comply with all the other requirements of that paragraph. The notary shall affix a valid notarial seal to the envelope, and include the word "Notary Public" below his or her signature.

The person persons in whose presence the ballot is marked shall at all times respect the secrecy of the ballot and the privacy of the absentee voter, unless the voter requests the person's assistance and the that person is otherwise authorized by law to give assistance. The person in whose presence the ballot was marked shall sign the application and certificate as a witness and shall indicate that person's address. When thus executed, the sealed container‑return envelope, with the ballots enclosed, shall be transmitted in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section to the county board of elections which issued the ballots.

(a1) Repealed by Session Laws 1987, c. 583, s. 1.

(b) Transmitting Executed Absentee Ballots to County Board of Elections. – The sealed container‑return envelope in which executed absentee ballots have been placed shall be transmitted to the county board of elections who issued them those ballots as follows:

(1) All ballots issued under the provisions of Articles 20 this Article and Article 21A of this Chapter shall be transmitted by mail or by commercial courier service, at the voter's expense, or delivered in person, or by the voter's near relative or verifiable legal guardian and received by the county board not later than 5:00 p.m. on the day before of the statewide primary or general election or county bond election. Ballots issued under the provisions of Article 21A of this Chapter may also be electronically transmitted.

(2) If ballots are received later than that hour, the hour stated in subdivision (1) of this subsection, they those ballots shall not be accepted unless one of the following applies:

a. (i) federal Federal law so requires, requires.

b. (ii) if The ballots issued under this Article 20 of this Chapter are postmarked and that postmark is dated on or before by the day of the statewide primary or general election or county bond election and are received by the county board of elections not later than three days after the election by 5:00 p.m., or 5:00 p.m.

c. (iii) if The ballots issued under Article 21A of this Chapter are received by the county board of elections not later than the end of business on the business day before the canvass conducted by the county board of elections held pursuant to G.S. 163‑182.5. Ballots issued under Article 20 of this Chapter not postmarked by the day of the election shall not be accepted by the county board of elections.

(c) For purposes of this section, "Delivered in person" includes delivering the ballot to an election official at a one‑stop voting site under G.S. 163‑227.2 during any time that site is open for voting. The ballots shall be kept securely and delivered by election officials at that site to the county board of elections office for processing. "

SECTION 4.5. G.S. 163‑226 is amended by adding a new subsection to read:

" (d) The Term "Verifiable Legal Guardian." – An individual appointed guardian under Chapter 35A of the General Statutes. For a corporation appointed as a guardian under that Chapter, the corporation may submit a list of 10 named individuals to the State Board of Elections who may act for that corporation under this Article. "

SECTION 4.6.(a) G.S. 163‑226.3(a)(4) reads as rewritten:

"(a) Any person who shall, in connection with absentee voting in any election held in this State, do any of the acts or things declared in this section to be unlawful, shall be guilty of a Class I felony. It shall be unlawful:

…

(4) For any owner, manager, director, employee, or other person, other than the voter's near relative or verifiable legal guardian, to (i) make a written request pursuant to G.S. 163‑230.1 or (ii) sign an application or certificate as a witness, on behalf of a registered voter voter, who is a patient in any hospital, clinic, nursing home or rest home in this State or for any owner, manager, director, employee, or other person other than the voter's near relative or verifiable legal guardian, to mark the voter's absentee ballot or assist such a voter in marking an absentee ballot. This subdivision does not apply to members, employees, or volunteers of the county board of elections, if those members, employees, or volunteers are working as part of a multipartisan team trained and authorized by the county board of elections to assist voters with absentee ballots. Each county board of elections shall train and authorize such teams, pursuant to procedures which shall be adopted by the State Board of Elections. If neither the voter's near relative nor a verifiable legal guardian is available to assist the voter, and a multipartisan team is not available to assist the voter within seven calendar days of a telephonic request to the county board of elections, the voter may obtain such assistance from any person other than (i) an owner, manager, director, employee of the hospital, clinic, nursing home, or rest home in which the voter is a patient or resident; (ii) an individual who holds any elective office under the United States, this State, or any political subdivision of this State; (iii) an individual who is a candidate for nomination or election to such office; or (iv) an individual who holds any office in a State, congressional district, county, or precinct political party or organization, or who is a campaign manager or treasurer for any candidate or political party; provided that a delegate to a convention shall not be considered a party office. None of the persons listed in (i) through (iv) of this subdivision may sign the application or certificate as a witness for the patient.

…."

SECTION 4.6.(b) The State Board of Elections shall adopt rules prior to October 1, 2013, concerning the multipartisan teams authorized by G.S. 163‑226.3(a)(4), as amended by subsection (a) of this section, to ensure that each county has, no later than the day absentee voting begins for each primary and election, trained teams to promptly assist patients and residents of any hospital, clinic, nursing home, or rest home in that county in casting absentee ballots as provided by law. Such rules shall be initially established as temporary rules in accordance with Chapter 150B of the General Statutes.

SECTION 4.7. G.S. 10B‑30 is amended by adding a new subsection to read:

" (d) A notary may not charge any fee for witnessing and affixing a notarial seal to an absentee ballot application or certificate under G.S. 163‑231. "

PART 5. REGISTRATION AND EDUCATION

SECTION 5.1. G.S. 163‑82.22 reads as rewritten:

"§ 163‑82.22. Voter registration at public libraries. public libraries and public agencies.

(a) Every library covered by G.S. 153A‑272 shall make available to the public the application forms described in G.S. 163‑82.3, and shall keep a sufficient supply of the forms so that they are always available. Every library covered by G.S. 153A‑272 shall designate at least one employee to assist voter registration applicants in completing the form during all times that the library is open.

(b) If approved by the State Board of Elections, the county board of elections, and the county board of commissioners, a county may offer voter registration in accordance with this section through the following additional public offices:

(1) Senior centers or facilities operated by the county.

(2) Parks and recreation services operated by the county. "

SECTION 5.2. The State Board of Elections shall disseminate information about photo identification requirements for voting, provide information on how to obtain photo identification appropriate for voting, and assist any registered voter without photo identification appropriate for voting with obtaining such photo identification. Information may be distributed through public service announcements, print, radio, television, online, and social media. The State Board shall work with public agencies, private partners, and nonprofits to identify voters without photo identification appropriate for voting and assist those voters in securing the photo identification appropriate for voting. All outreach efforts to notify voters of the photo identification requirements shall be accessible to the elderly and persons with disabilities. The State Board of Elections shall work with county boards of elections in those counties where there is no Division of Motor Vehicles drivers license office open five days a week to (i) widely communicate information about the availability and schedules of Division of Motor Vehicles mobile units and (ii) provide volunteers to assist voters with obtaining photo identification through mobile units.

SECTION 5.3. Education and Publicity Requirements. – The public shall be educated about the photo identification to vote requirements of this act as follows:

(1) As counties use their regular processes to notify voters of assignments and reassignments to districts for election to the United States House of Representatives, State Senate, State House of Representatives, or local office, by including information about the provisions of this act.

(2) As counties send new voter registration cards to voters as a result of new registration, changes of address, or other reasons, by including information about the provisions of this act.

(3) Counties that maintain a board of elections Web site shall include information about the provisions of this act.

(4) Notices of elections published by county boards of elections under G.S. 163‑22(8) for the 2014 primary and 2014 general election shall include a brief statement that photo identification will be required to vote in person beginning in 2016.

(5) The State Board of Elections shall include on its Web site information about the provisions of this act.

(6) Counties shall post at the polls and at early voting sites beginning with the 2014 primary elections information about the provisions of this act.

(7) The State Board of Elections shall distribute information about the photo identification requirements to groups and organizations serving persons with disabilities or the elderly.

(8) The State Board of Elections, the Division of Motor Vehicles, and county boards of elections in counties where there is no Division of Motor Vehicles drivers license office open five days a week shall include information about mobile unit schedules on existing Web sites, shall distribute information about these schedules to registered voters identified without photo identification, and shall publicize information about the mobile unit schedules through other available means.

(9) The State Board of Elections and county boards of elections shall direct volunteers to assist registered voters in counties where there is no Division of Motor Vehicles drivers license office open five days a week.

SECTION 5.4. The State Board of Elections shall include in all forms prepared by the Board a prominent statement that submitting fraudulently or falsely completed declarations is a Class I felony under Chapter 163 of the General Statutes.

SECTION 5.5. By April 1, 2014, the State Board of Elections shall review and make recommendations to the Joint Legislative Elections Oversight Committee on the steps recommended by the Board to implement the use of electronic and digital information in all polling places statewide. The review shall address all of the following:

(1) Obtaining digital photographs of registered voters and verifying identity of those voters.

(2) Maintaining information stored electronically in a secure fashion.

(3) Utilizing electronically stored information, including digital photographs and electronic signatures, to create electronic pollbooks.

(4) Using electronic pollbooks to assist in identifying individuals attempting to vote more than once in an election.

(5) A proposed plan for a pilot project to implement electronic pollbooks, including the taking of digital photographs at the polling place to supplement the electronic pollbooks.

(6) Any other related matter identified by the State Board impacting the use of digital and electronic information in the voting place.

PART 6. EFFECTIVE DATE

SECTION 6.2. Parts 1 through 6 of this act become effective as follows:

(1) Parts 1 and 6 of this act are effective when this act becomes law.

(2) Part 2 of this act becomes effective January 1, 2016, and applies to primaries and elections conducted on or after that date.

(3) Part 3 of this act becomes effective January 1, 2014.

(4) Part 4 of this act becomes effective January 1, 2014, and applies to primaries and elections held on or after that date, except that Section 4.6(b) is effective when it becomes law.

(5) Part 5 of this act becomes effective October 1, 2013.

(6) At any primary and election between May 1, 2014, and January 1, 2016, any registered voter may present that voter's photo identification to the elections officials at the voting place but may not be required to do so. At each primary and election between May 1, 2014, and January 1, 2016, each voter presenting in person shall be notified that photo identification will be needed to vote beginning in 2016 and be asked if that voter has one of the forms of photo identification appropriate for voting. If that voter indicates he or she does not have one or more of the types of photo identification appropriate for voting, that voter shall be asked to sign an acknowledgment of the photo identification requirement and be given a list of types of photo identification appropriate for voting and information on how to obtain those types of photo identification. The list of names of those voters who signed an acknowledgment is a public record.

PART 7. STUDY FILLING OF VACANCIES IN THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

SECTION 7.1 The Joint Legislative Elections Oversight Committee shall study the method of filling vacancies in the General Assembly, and recommend to the General Assembly any legislation it deems advisable. It may make an interim report prior to the date that the General Assembly reconvenes the 2013 Regular Session in 2014, and shall make a final report before the convening of the 2015 Regular Session of the General Assembly.

PART 8. FILLING OF VACANCIES IN THE UNITED STATES SENATE

SECTION 8.1. G.S. 163‑12 reads as rewritten:

"§ 163‑12. Filling vacancy in United States Senate.

Whenever there shall be a vacancy in the office of United States Senator from this State, whether caused by death, resignation, or otherwise than by expiration of term, the Governor shall appoint to fill the vacancy until an election shall be held to fill the office. If the Senator was elected as the nominee of a political party, the person appointed by the Governor shall be a person affiliated with that same political party. The Governor shall issue his a writ for the election of a Senator to be held at the time of the first election for members of the General Assembly that is held more than 60 days after the vacancy occurs. The person elected shall hold the office for the remainder of the unexpired term. The election shall take effect from the date of the canvassing of the returns."

PART 9. FILLING OF VACANCIES IN UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

SECTION 9.1. The Joint Legislative Elections Oversight Committee shall study the method of filling vacancies in the United States House of Representatives by special election, and recommend to the General Assembly any legislation it deems advisable. It may make an interim report prior to the date that the General Assembly reconvenes the 2013 Regular Session in 2014, and shall make a final report before the convening of the 2015 Regular Session of the General Assembly.

PART 10. SPECIAL ELECTION DATES

SECTION 10.1. G.S. 163‑287 reads as rewritten:

"§ 163‑287. Special elections; procedure for calling.

(a) Any municipality county, municipality, or any special district shall have authority to call special elections as permitted by law. Prior to calling a special election, the city council or the governing body of the county, municipality, or special district shall adopt a resolution specifying the details of the election, and forthwith deliver the resolution to the appropriate local board of elections. The resolution shall call on the local board of elections to conduct the election described in the resolution and shall state the date on which the special election is to be conducted. The special election may be held only at the same time as any other State, county or municipal primary, election or special election or referendum, but may not otherwise be held within the period of time beginning 30 days before and ending 30 days after the date of any other primary, election, special election or referendum held for that city or special district. general election or at the same time as the primary election in any even‑numbered year.

(b) Legal notice of the special election shall be published no less than 45 days prior to the special election. The local board of elections shall be responsible for publishing the legal notice. The notice shall state the date and time of the special election, the issue to be submitted to the voters, and the precincts in which the election will be held. This paragraph subsection shall not apply to bond elections.

(c) The last sentence of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any special election related to the public health or safety, including a vacancy in the office of sheriff or a bond referendum for financing of health and sanitation systems, if the governing body adopts a resolution stating the need for the special election at a time different from any other State, county, or municipal general election or the primary in any even‑numbered year.

(d) The last sentence of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to municipal incorporation or recall elections pursuant to local act of the General Assembly.

(e) The last sentence of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to municipal elections to fill vacancies in office pursuant to local act of the General Assembly where more than six months remain in the term of office, and if less than six months remain in the office, the governing board may fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term notwithstanding any provision of a local act of the General Assembly.

(f) This section shall not impact the authority of the courts or the State Board to order a new election at a time set by the courts or State Board under this Chapter. "

SECTION 10.2. Article 1 of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes is amended by adding a new section to read:

" § 163‑3. Special elections.

Special elections shall be called as permitted by law and conducted in accordance with G.S. 163‑287. "

SECTION 10.3. G.S. 18B‑601(f) reads as rewritten:

"(f) Election Date. – The board of elections shall conduct and set the date for the alcoholic beverage election, which may not be sooner than 60 days nor later than 120 days from the date the request was received from the governing body or the petition was verified by the board. election in accordance with G.S. 163‑287. No alcoholic beverage election may be held on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November of an even‑numbered year. "

SECTION 10.4. G.S. 63‑80(c) reads as rewritten:

"(c) Following the joint public hearing but prior to the adoption by a unit of local government of any resolution creating a special airport district, the governing body of such unit may submit the question of the unit's participation in a special airport district to the qualified voters of such unit. The form of the question as stated on the ballot shall be in substantially the following words:

"Shall the governing body of _______________________ approve ______________'s participation in the proposed _____________________ special airport district?

[ ] YES [ ] NO"

If a majority of the qualified voters of the unit who vote thereon approve such participation, the governing body of such unit may adopt a resolution creating the particular special airport district. The election shall be conducted in accordance with G.S. 163‑287 and the results thereof certified, declared and published in the same manner as bond elections within the unit."

SECTION 10.5. G.S. 63‑87 reads as rewritten:

"§ 63‑87. Bond elections.

Elections for the purpose of authorizing the levy of taxes for the issuance of bonds shall be called by the district board and shall be conducted in accordance with G.S. 163‑287 and the results canvassed by the boards of elections having jurisdiction within the participating units. Such results shall be certified to the district board and such board shall certify and declare the result of the election and publish a statement of the result once as provided in the Local Government Bond Act."

SECTION 10.6. G.S. 69‑25.1 reads as rewritten:

"§ 69‑25.1. Election to be held upon petition of voters.

Upon the petition of thirty‑five percent (35%) of the resident freeholders living in an area lying outside the corporate limits of any city or town, which area is described in the petition and designated as "________________________ Fire District," the board of county

(Here insert name)

commissioners of the county shall call an a special election in said district for the purpose of submitting to the qualified voters therein the question of levying and collecting a special tax on all taxable property in said district, of not exceeding fifteen cents (15¢) on the one hundred dollars ($100.00) valuation of property, for the purpose of providing fire protection in said district. The county tax office shall be responsible for checking the freeholder status of those individuals signing the petition and confirming the location of the property owned by those individuals. Unless specifically excluded by other law, the provisions of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes concerning petitions for referenda and special elections shall apply. If the voters reject the special tax under the first paragraph of this section, then no new election may be held under the first paragraph of this section within two years on the question of levying and collecting a special tax under the first paragraph of this section in that district, or in any proposed district which includes a majority of the land within the district in which the tax was rejected.

Upon the petition of thirty‑five percent (35%) of the resident freeholders living in an area which has previously been established as a fire protection district and in which there has been authorized by a vote of the people a special tax not exceeding ten cents (10¢) on the one hundred dollars ($100.00) valuation of property within the area, the board of county commissioners shall call an a special election in said area for the purpose of submitting to the qualified voters therein the question of increasing the allowable special tax for fire protection within said district from ten cents (10¢) on the one hundred dollars ($100.00) valuation to fifteen cents (15¢) on the one hundred dollars ($100.00) valuation on all taxable property within such district. Elections Special elections on the question of increasing the allowable tax rate for fire protection shall not be held within the same district at intervals less than two years."

SECTION 10.7. G.S. 69‑25.2 reads as rewritten:

"§ 69‑25.2. Duties of county board of commissioners regarding conduct of elections; cost of holding.

The board of county commissioners, after consulting with the county board of elections, shall set a date for the special election in accordance with G.S. 163‑287 by resolution adopted. The county board of elections shall hold and conduct the election in the district. The county board of elections shall advertise and conduct said election, in accordance with the provisions of this Article and with the procedures prescribed in Chapter 163 governing the conduct of special and general elections. No new registration of voters shall be required, but the deadline by which unregistered voters must register shall be contained in the legal advertisement to be published by the county board of elections. The cost of holding the election to establish a district shall be paid by the county, provided that if the district is established, then the county shall be reimbursed the cost of the election from the taxes levied within the district, but the cost of an election to increase the allowable tax under G.S. 69‑25.1 or to abolish a fire district under G.S. 69‑25.10 shall be paid from the funds of the district."

SECTION 10.8. G.S. 105‑465 reads as rewritten:

"§ 105‑465. County election as to adoption of local sales and use tax.

The board of elections of any county, upon the written request of the board of county commissioners, or upon receipt of a petition signed by qualified voters of the county equal in number to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of votes cast in the county, at the last preceding election for the office of Governor, shall call a special election for the purpose of submitting to the voters of the county the question of whether a one percent (1%) sales and use tax will be levied.

The special election shall be held under the same rules applicable to the election of members of the General Assembly. No new registration of voters shall be required. All qualified voters in the county who are properly registered not later than 21 days (excluding Saturdays and Sundays) prior to the election shall be entitled to vote at the election. The county board of elections shall give at least 20 days' public notice prior to the closing of the registration books for the special election.

The county board of elections shall prepare ballots for the special election. The question presented on the ballot shall be "FOR one percent (1%) local sales and use tax on items subject to State sales and use tax at the general State rate and on food" or "AGAINST one percent (1%) local sales and use tax on items subject to State sales and use tax at the general State rate and on food".

The county board of elections shall fix the date of the special election, election on a date permitted by G.S. 163‑287, except that the special election shall not be held on the date or within 60 days of any biennial election for county officers, nor within one year from the date of the last preceding special election under this section."

SECTION 10.9. G.S. 105‑473(a) reads as rewritten:

"(a) The board of elections of any county, upon the written request of the board of county commissioners thereof, or upon receipt of a petition signed by qualified voters of the county equal in number to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of votes cast in the county at the last preceding election for the office of Governor, shall call a special election for the purpose of submitting to the voters of the county the question of whether the levy of a one percent (1%) sales and use tax theretofore levied should be repealed.

The special election shall be held under the same rules and regulations applicable to the election of members of the General Assembly. No new registration of voters shall be required. All qualified voters in the county who are properly registered not later than 21 days (excluding Saturdays and Sundays) prior to the election shall be entitled to vote at said election. The county board of elections shall give at least 20 days' public notice prior to the closing of the registration books for the special election.

The county board of elections shall prepare ballots for the special election which shall contain the words "FOR repeal of the one percent (1%) local sales and use tax levy," and the words "AGAINST repeal of the one percent (1%) local sales and use tax levy," with appropriate squares so that each voter may designate his vote by his cross (X) mark.

The county board of elections shall fix the date of the special election; election on a date permitted by G.S. 163‑287; provided, however, that the special election shall not be held on the day of any biennial election for county officers, nor within 60 days thereof, nor within one year from the date of the last preceding special election held under this section."

SECTION 10.10. G.S. 105‑507.1(a) reads as rewritten:

"(a) Resolution. – The board of commissioners of a county may direct the county board of elections to conduct an advisory referendum within the county on the question of whether a local sales and use tax at the rate of one‑half percent (1/2%) may be levied in accordance with this Part. The election shall be held on a date jointly agreed upon by the boards and shall be held in accordance with the procedures of G.S. 163‑287. The board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the question at least 30 days before the date the election is to be held."

SECTION 10.11. G.S. 105‑509(b) reads as rewritten:

"(b) Resolution. – The board of trustees of the regional public transportation authority may, if all of the conditions listed in this subsection have been met, direct the respective county board or boards of elections to conduct an advisory referendum within the special district on the question of whether a local sales and use tax at the rate of one‑half percent (1/2%) may be levied within the district in accordance with this Part. The tax may not be levied without voter approval. The election shall be held on a date jointly agreed upon by the authority, the county board or boards of commissioners, and the county board or boards of elections and shall be held on a date permitted by and in accordance with the procedures of G.S. 163‑287. An election to authorize the levy of a tax under this Part may be held only on one of the following dates: (i) Tuesday after the first Monday of November in the even‑numbered year, the date of the general election under G.S. 163‑1, (ii) the date of the primary election in the even‑numbered year under G.S. 163‑1(b), (iii) Tuesday after the first Monday in November of the odd‑numbered year, or (iv) a date in September or October of the odd‑numbered year as listed in G.S. 163‑279(a)(2), (3), or (4) but only if at least one municipality in the county is holding a primary or election on that date. The conditions are as follows:

(1) The board of trustees has obtained approval to conduct a referendum by a vote of the following:

a. A majority vote of each of the county boards of commissioners within the special district, if it is a multicounty special district.

b. A majority of the county board of commissioners within the special district, if it is a single‑county special district.

(2) A public hearing is held on the question by the board or boards of commissioners at least 30 days before the date the election is to be held."

SECTION 10.12. G.S. 105‑510(b) reads as rewritten:

"(b) Resolution. – The board of trustees of the regional transportation authority may, if all of the conditions listed in this subsection have been met, direct the respective county board or boards of elections to conduct an advisory referendum within the special district on the question of whether a local sales and use tax at the rate of one‑half percent (1/2%) may be levied within the district in accordance with this Part. The tax may not be levied without voter approval. The election shall be held on a date jointly agreed upon by the authority, the county board or boards of commissioners, and the county board or boards of elections and shall be held on a date permitted by and in accordance with the procedures of G.S. 163‑287. An election to authorize the levy of a tax under this Part may be held only on one of the following dates: (i) Tuesday after the first Monday of November in the even‑numbered year, the date of the general election under G.S. 163‑1, (ii) the date of the primary election in the even‑numbered year under G.S. 163‑1(b), (iii) Tuesday after the first Monday in November of the odd‑numbered year, or (iv) a date in September or October of the odd‑numbered year as listed in G.S. 163‑279(a)(2), (3), or (4) but only if at least one municipality in the county is holding a primary or election on that date. The conditions are as follows:

(1) The board of trustees has obtained approval to conduct a referendum by a vote of the following:

a. A majority vote of both of the county boards of commissioners within the special district, if it is a multicounty special district.

b. A majority of the county board of commissioners within the special district, if it is a single‑county special district.

(2) A public hearing is held on the question by the board or boards of commissioners at least 30 days before the date the election is to be held."

SECTION 10.13. G.S. 105‑511.2(a) reads as rewritten:

"(a) Resolution. – The board of commissioners of a county may direct the county board of elections to conduct an advisory referendum within the county on the question of whether a local sales and use tax at the rate of one‑quarter percent (1/4%) may be levied in accordance with this Part. The election shall be held on a date jointly agreed upon by the boards and shall be held on a date permitted by and in accordance with the procedures of G.S. 163‑287. An election to authorize the levy of a tax under this Part may be held only on one of the following dates: (i) Tuesday after the first Monday of November in the even‑numbered year, the date of the general election under G.S. 163‑1, (ii) the date of the primary election in the even‑numbered year under G.S. 163‑1(b), (iii) Tuesday after the first Monday in November of the odd‑numbered year, or (iv) a date in September or October of the odd‑numbered year as listed in G.S. 163‑279(a)(2), (3), or (4) but only if at least one municipality in the county is holding a primary or election on that date. The board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the question at least 30 days before the date the election is to be held."

SECTION 10.14. G.S. 105‑537(b) reads as rewritten:

"(b) Vote. – The board of county commissioners may direct the county board of elections to conduct an advisory referendum on the question of whether to levy a local sales and use tax in the county as provided in this Article. The election shall be held on a date jointly agreed upon by the board of county commissioners and the board of elections and shall be held in accordance with the procedures of G.S. 163‑287."

SECTION 10.15. G.S. 106‑343 reads as rewritten:

"§ 106‑343. Appropriations by counties; elections.

The several boards of county commissioners in the State are hereby expressly authorized and empowered to make such appropriations from the general funds of their county as will enable them to cooperate effectively with the state Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services and Federal Department of Agriculture in the eradication of tuberculosis in their respective counties: Provided, that if in 10 days after said appropriation is voted, one fifth of the qualified voters of the county petition the board of commissioners to submit the question of tuberculosis eradication or no tuberculosis eradication to the voters of the county, said commissioners shall submit such questions to said voters. Said election shall be held and conducted under the rules and regulations provided for holding stock‑law elections in G.S. 68‑16, 68‑20 and 68‑21. G.S. 163‑287. If at any such election a majority of the votes cast shall be in favor of said tuberculosis eradication, the said board shall record the result of the election upon its minutes, and cooperative tuberculosis eradication shall be taken up with the state Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services and Federal Department of Agriculture. If, however, a majority of the votes cast shall be adverse, then said board shall make no appropriation."

SECTION 10.16. G.S. 115C‑501(h) reads as rewritten:

"(h) To Annex or Consolidate Areas or Districts from Contiguous Counties and to Provide a Supplemental School Tax in Such Annexed Areas or Consolidated Districts. – An election may be called in any districts or other school areas, from contiguous counties, as to whether the districts in one county shall be enlarged by annexing or consolidating therewith any adjoining districts, or other school area or areas from an adjoining county, and if a special or supplemental school tax is levied and collected in the districts of the county to which the territory is to be annexed or consolidated, whether upon such annexation or consolidation there shall be levied and collected in the territory to be annexed or consolidated the same special or supplemental tax for schools as is levied and collected in the districts in the other county. If such election carries, the said special or supplemental tax shall be collected pursuant to G.S. 115C‑511 and remitted to the local school administrative unit on whose behalf such special and supplemental tax is already levied: Provided, that notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 115C‑508, if the notice of election clearly so states, and the election shall be held prior to August 1, the annexation or consolidation shall be effective and the tax so authorized shall be levied and collected beginning with the fiscal year commencing July 1 next preceding such elections. levied. "

SECTION 10.17. G.S. 115C‑501 is amended by adding a new subsection to read:

" (j) All elections called under this section shall be conducted in accordance with G.S. 163‑287. "

SECTION 10.18. G.S. 115D‑33(d) reads as rewritten:

"(d) All elections shall be held in the same manner as elections held under Article 4, Chapter 159, of the General Statutes, the Local Government Bond Act, and may be held at any time fixed by the tax‑levying authority of the administrative area or proposed administrative area of the institution for which such election is to be held. shall be held on a date permitted by G.S. 163‑287. "

SECTION 10.19. G.S. 115D‑35(a) reads as rewritten:

"(a) Formal requests for elections on the question of authority to appropriate nontax revenues or levy special taxes, or both, and to issue bonds, when such elections are to be held for the purpose of establishing an institution, shall be originated and submitted only in the following manner:

(1) Proposed multiple‑county administrative areas: Formal requests for elections may be submitted jointly by all county boards of education in the proposed administrative area, or by petition of fifteen percent (15%) of the number of qualified voters of the proposed area who voted in the last preceding election for Governor, to the boards of commissioners of all counties in the proposed area, who may shall fix the time for such election by joint resolution on a date permitted by G.S. 163‑287, which shall be entered in the minutes of each board.

(2) Proposed single‑county administrative area: Formal requests shall be submitted by the board of education of any public school administrative unit within the county of the proposed administrative area or by petition of fifteen percent (15%) of the number of qualified voters of the county who voted in the last preceding election for Governor, to the board of commissioners of the county of the proposed administrative area, who may shall fix the time for such election by resolution on a date permitted by G.S. 163‑287, which shall be entered in the minutes of the board."

SECTION 10.20. G.S. 130A‑69 reads as rewritten:

"(a) If after a sanitary district has been created or the provisions of this Part have been made applicable to a sanitary district, a petition signed by not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the resident freeholders within any territory contiguous to and adjoining the sanitary district may be presented to the sanitary district board requesting annexation of territory described in the petition. The sanitary district board shall send a copy of the petition to the board of commissioners of the county or counties in which the district is located and to the Department. The sanitary district board shall request that the Department hold a joint public hearing with the sanitary district board on the question of annexation. The Secretary and the chairperson of the sanitary district board shall name a time and place for the public hearing. The chairperson of the sanitary district board shall publish a notice of public hearing once in a newspaper or newspapers published or circulating in the sanitary district and the territory proposed to be annexed. The notice shall be published not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. If after the hearing, the Commission approves the annexation of the territory described in the petition, the Department shall advise the board or boards of commissioners of the approval. The board or boards of commissioners shall order and provide for the holding of a special election in accordance with G.S. 163‑287 upon the question of annexation within the territory proposed to be annexed.

(b) If at or prior to the public hearing, a petition is filed with the sanitary district board signed by not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the freeholders residing in the sanitary district requesting an election be held on the annexation question, the sanitary district board shall send a copy of the petition to the board or boards of commissioners who shall order and provide for the submission of the question to the voters within the sanitary district. This election may be held on the same day as the election in the territory proposed to be annexed, and both elections and registrations may be held pursuant to a single notice. A majority of the votes cast is necessary for a territory to be annexed to a sanitary district.

(c) The election shall be held by the county board or boards of elections as soon as possible in accordance with G.S. 163‑287 after the board or boards of commissioners orders the election. The cost of the election shall be paid by the sanitary district. Registration in the area proposed for annexation shall be under the same procedure as G.S. 163‑288.2.

…."

SECTION 10.21. G.S. 139‑39 reads as rewritten:

"§ 139‑39. Alternative method of financing watershed improvement programs by special county tax.

The board of county commissioners in any county is authorized to call a special election to determine whether it be the will of the qualified voters of the county that they levy and cause to be collected annually, at the same time and in the same manner as the general county taxes are levied and collected, a special tax at a rate not to exceed twenty‑five cents (25¢) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) valuation of property in said county, to be known as a "Watershed Improvement Tax," the funds therefrom, if the levy be authorized by the voters of said county, to be used for the prevention of flood water and sediment damages, and for furthering the conservation, utilization and disposal of water and the development of water resources. Any special election shall be conducted in accordance with G.S. 163‑287. "

SECTION 10.22. G.S. 147‑69.6(f) reads as rewritten:

"(f) The Board of Commissioners of Swain County may direct the Swain County Board of Elections to conduct an advisory referendum on the question of whether any portion of the principal of the Fund should be disbursed to and expended by the county for a particular purpose. The election shall be held on a date jointly agreed upon by the two boards, which may be the same day as any other referendum or election in the county, but may not otherwise be during the period beginning 30 days before and ending 30 days after the day of any other referendum or election to be conducted by the board of elections and already validly called or scheduled by law. The election shall be held in accordance with the procedures of G.S. 163‑287. The question to be presented on the ballot shall disclose the specific purpose proposed for expenditure of the principal investment of the Trust Fund and the amount proposed for expenditure."

SECTION 10.23. G.S. 153A‑60 reads as rewritten:

"§ 153A‑60. Initiation of alterations by resolution.

The board of commissioners shall initiate any alteration in the structure of the board by adopting a resolution. The resolution shall:

(1) Briefly but completely describe the proposed alterations;

(2) Prescribe the manner of transition from the existing structure to the altered structure;

(3) Define the electoral districts, if any, and apportion the members among the districts;

(4) Call a special referendum on the question of adoption of the alterations. The referendum shall be held and conducted by the county board of elections. The referendum may be held only on a date permitted by G.S. 163‑287. at the same time as any other state, county or municipal primary, election, special election or referendum, or on any date set by the board of county commissioners, provided, that such referendum shall not be held within the period of time beginning 60 days before and ending 60 days after any other primary, election, special election or referendum held in the county.

Upon its adoption, the resolution shall be published in full."

SECTION 10.24. G.S. 153A‑405(a) reads as rewritten:

"(a) If authorized to do so by the concurrent resolutions that established it, a commission may call a referendum on its proposed plan of governmental consolidation. If authorized or directed in the concurrent resolutions, the ballot question may include the assumption of debt secured by a pledge of faith and credit language and may also include the assumption of the right to issue authorized but unissued faith and credit debt language as provided in subsection (b) of this section. The referendum may be held on the same day as any other referendum or election in the county or counties involved, but may not otherwise be held during the period beginning 30 days before and ending 30 days after the day of any other referendum or election to be conducted by the board or boards of elections conducting the referendum and already validly called or scheduled by law. shall be held in accordance with G.S. 163‑287. "

SECTION 10.25. G.S. 158‑16 reads as rewritten:

"§ 158‑16. Board of commissioners may call tax election; rate and purposes of tax.

The board of county commissioners in any county is authorized and empowered to call a special election to determine whether it be the will of the qualified voters of said county that they levy and cause to be collected annually, at the same time and in the same manner as the general county taxes are levied and collected, a special tax at a rate not to exceed five cents (5¢) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) valuation of property in said county, to be known as an "industrial development tax," the funds therefrom, if the levy be authorized by the voters of said county, to be used for the purpose of attracting new and diversified industries to said county, and for the encouragement of new business and industrial ventures by local as well as foreign capital, and for the purpose of aiding and encouraging the location of manufacturing enterprises, making industrial surveys and locating industrial plants in said county, and for the purpose of encouraging agricultural development in said county. Any special election shall be conducted in accordance with G.S. 163‑287. "

SECTION 10.26. G.S. 159‑61(b) reads as rewritten:

"(b) The date of a bond referendum shall be fixed by the governing board, but shall not be more than one year after adoption of the bond order. order, only on a date permitted by G.S. 163‑287. The governing board may call a special referendum for the purpose of voting on a bond issue on any day, including the day of any regular or special election held for another purpose (unless the law under which the bond referendum or other election is held specifically prohibits submission of other questions at the same time). A special bond referendum may not be held within 30 days before or 10 days after a statewide primary, election, or referendum, or within 30 days before or 10 days after any other primary, election, or referendum to be held in the same unit holding the bond referendum and already validly called or scheduled by law at the time the bond referendum is called. The clerk shall mail or deliver a certified copy of the resolution calling a special bond referendum to the board of elections that is to conduct it within three days after the resolution is adopted, but failure to observe this requirement shall not in any manner affect the validity of the referendum or bonds issued pursuant thereto. Bond referenda shall be conducted by the board of elections conducting regular elections of the county, city, or special district. In fixing the date of a bond referendum, the governing board shall consult the board of elections in order that the referendum shall not unduly interfere with other elections already scheduled or in process. Several bond orders or other matters may be voted upon at the same referendum."

SECTION 10.27. G.S. 160A‑103 reads as rewritten:

"§ 160A‑103. Referendum on charter amendments by ordinance.

An ordinance adopted under G.S. 160A‑102 that is not made effective upon approval by a vote of the people shall be subject to a referendum petition. Upon receipt of a referendum petition bearing the signatures and residence addresses of a number of qualified voters of the city equal to at least 10 percent of the whole number of voters who are registered to vote in city elections according to the most recent figures certified by the State Board of Elections or 5,000, whichever is less, the council shall submit an ordinance adopted under G.S. 160A‑102 to a vote of the people. The date of the special election shall be fixed at on a date permitted by G.S. 163‑287. not more than 120 nor fewer than 60 days after receipt of the petition. A referendum petition shall be addressed to the council and shall identify the ordinance to be submitted to a vote. A referendum petition must be filed with the city clerk not later than 30 days after publication of the notice of adoption of the ordinance."

SECTION 10.28. G.S. 160A‑104 reads as rewritten:

"§ 160A‑104. Initiative petitions for charter amendments.

The people may initiate a referendum on proposed charter amendments. An initiative petition shall bear the signatures and resident addresses of a number of qualified voters of the city equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the whole number of voters who are registered to vote in city elections according to the most recent figures certified by the State Board of Elections or 5,000, whichever is less. The petition shall set forth the proposed amendments by describing them briefly but completely and with reference to the pertinent provisions of G.S. 160A‑101, but it need not contain the precise text of the charter amendments necessary to implement the proposed changes. The petition may not propose changes in the alternative, or more than one integrated set of charter amendments. Upon receipt of a valid initiative petition, the council shall call a special election on the question of adopting the charter amendments proposed therein, and shall give public notice thereof in accordance with G.S. 163‑287. The date of the special election shall be fixed at on a date permitted by G.S. 163‑287. not more than 120 nor fewer than 60 days after receipt of the petition. If a majority of the votes cast in the special election shall be in favor of the proposed changes, the council shall adopt an ordinance amending the charter to put them into effect. Such an ordinance shall not be subject to a referendum petition. No initiative petition may be filed (i) between the time the council initiates proceedings under G.S. 160A‑102 by publishing a notice of hearing on proposed charter amendments and the time proceeding under that section have been carried to a conclusion either through adoption or rejection of a proposed ordinance or lapse of time, nor (ii) within one year and six months following the effective date of an ordinance amending the city charter pursuant to this Article, nor (iii) within one year and six months following the date of any election on charter amendments that were defeated by the voters.

The restrictions imposed by this section on filing initiative petitions shall apply only to petitions concerning the same subject matter. For example, pendency of council action on amendments concerning the method of electing the council shall not preclude an initiative petition on adoption of the council‑manager form of government.

Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the submission of more than one proposition for charter amendments on the same ballot so long as no proposition offers a different plan under the same option as another proposition on the same ballot."

SECTION 10.29. G.S. 160A‑583 reads as rewritten:

"§ 160A‑583. Funds.

The establishment and operation of a transportation authority as herein authorized are governmental functions and constitute a public purpose, and the municipality is hereby authorized to appropriate funds to support the establishment and operation of the transit authority. The municipality may also dedicate, sell, convey, donate or lease any of its interest in any property to the authority. Further, the authority is hereby authorized to establish such license and regulatory fees and charges as it may deem appropriate, subject to the approval of the governing body of the municipality. If the governing body finds that the funds otherwise available are insufficient, it may call a special election without a petition and submit to the qualified voters of the municipality the question of whether or not a special tax shall be levied and/or bonds issued, specifying the maximum amount thereof, for the purpose of acquiring lands, buildings, equipment and facilities and for the operations of the transit authority. Any special election shall be conducted in accordance with G.S. 163‑287. "

SECTION 10.30. G.S. 162A‑68(d) reads as rewritten:

"(d) If, at or prior to such public hearing, there shall be filed with the district board a petition, signed by not less than ten per centum (10%) of the qualified voters residing in the district, requesting an election to be held therein on the question of including the political subdivision or unincorporated area, the district board shall certify a copy of such petition to the board or boards of commissioners, and the board or boards of commissioners shall request the county board or boards of elections to submit such question to the qualified voters within the district in accordance with G.S. 163‑287 and the other applicable provisions of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes; provided, that the election shall not be held unless the Environmental Management Commission has adopted a resolution approving the inclusion of the political subdivision or unincorporated area in the district.

Notice of such election, which shall contain a statement of the boundaries of the territory proposed to be included in the district and the boundaries of the district after inclusion, shall be given by publication once a week for three successive weeks in a newspaper or newspapers having general circulation within the district, the first publication to be at least 30 days prior to the election."

SECTION 10.31. G.S. 162A‑77.1 reads as rewritten:

"§ 162A‑77.1. Special election upon the question of the merger of metropolitan sewerage districts into cities or towns.

Any district lying entirely within the corporate limits of a city or town may be merged into such city or town in accordance with the provisions of this section.

The governing body of a city or town, with the approval of the district board, shall call and conduct a special election within such city or town on the question of the merger of the district into the city or town. A vote in favor of such merger shall constitute a vote for such city or town to assume the obligations of the district. Such special election may be called and conducted by the governing body of a city or town upon its own motion after passage of a resolution of the district board requesting or approving the special election. Any special election shall be conducted in accordance with G.S. 163‑287.

A new registration of voters shall not be required for the special election. The special election shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of law applicable to regular elections in the city or town.

If a majority of the votes are in favor of the merger, then:

(1) All property, real and personal and mixed, including accounts receivable, belonging to such district shall vest in, belong to, and be the property of, such city or town. All district boards are hereby authorized to take such actions and to execute such documents as will carry into effect the provisions and the intent of this section.

(2) All judgments, liens, rights of liens, and causes of action of any nature in favor of such district shall vest in and remain and inure to the benefit of such city or town.

(3) All taxes, assessments, sewer charges, and any other debts, charges or fees, owing to such district shall be owed to and collected by such city or town.

(4) All actions, suits and proceedings pending against, or having been instituted by, such district shall not be abated by this section or by the merger herein provided for, but all such actions, suits, and proceedings shall be continued and completed in the same manner as if merger had not occurred, and such city or town shall be a party to all such actions, suits, and proceedings in the place and stead of the district and shall pay or cause to be paid any judgments rendered against the district in any such actions, suits, or proceedings. No new process need be served in any such action, suit, or proceeding.

(5) All obligations of the district, including outstanding indebtedness, shall be assumed by such city or town, and all such obligations and outstanding indebtedness shall constitute obligations and indebtedness of such city or town, and the full faith and credit of such city or town shall be deemed to be pledged for the punctual payment of the principal of and the interest on any general obligation bonds or bond anticipation notes of such district, and all the taxable property within such city or town, as well as that formerly located within the district, shall be and remain subject to taxation for such payment.

(6) All ordinances, rules, regulations, and policies of such district shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended by the governing body of such city or town.

(7) Such district shall be abolished, and shall no longer be constituted a public body or a body politic and corporate, except for the purposes of carrying into effect the provisions and the intent of this section.

If a majority of the votes are against the merger, then such merger shall not be effective unless approved by a majority of the qualified voters who vote thereon in a subsequent special election conducted under authority of this section.

Any action or proceeding in any court to set aside a special election held under authority of this section or the result thereof, or to obtain any other relief upon the ground that such election or any proceeding or action taken with respect to the holding of such election is invalid, must be commenced within 30 days after the day of such special election. After the expiration of such period of limitation, no right of action or defense founded upon the invalidity of the election or the result thereof shall be asserted, nor shall the validity of the election or of the result thereof be open to question in any court upon any ground whatever, except in an action or proceeding commenced within such period."

SECTION 10.32. This Part becomes effective January 1, 2014, and applies to special elections held on or after that date.

PART 11. POLL OBSERVERS

SECTION 11.1. G.S. 163‑45 reads as rewritten:

"§ 163‑45. Observers; appointment.

(a) The chair of each political party in the county shall have the right to designate two observers to attend each voting place at each primary and election and such observers may, at the option of the designating party chair, be relieved during the day of the primary or election after serving no less than four hours and provided the list required by this section to be filed by each chair contains the names of all persons authorized to represent such chair's political party. The chair of each political party in the county shall have the right to designate 10 additional at‑large observers who are residents of that county who may attend any voting place in that county. The list submitted by the chair of the political party may be amended between the one‑stop period under G.S. 163‑227.2 and general election day to substitute one or all at‑large observers for election day. Not more than two observers from the same politi