National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) formerly known as National Climatic Data Center (NCDC)
Some of our systems may have problems when using Internet Explorer. For additional information, please see Browser Support Issues.

Information

These links provide quick access to many of NCEI's climate and weather datasets, products, and various web pages and resources.

* Access to online data (online meaning available through our website for online delivery) are available at no charge. Some orders could be subject to a certification, consultation fee or handling charge. See the notes at the bottom of this page.

Additional Information: Certified Data DVD Station List Offline Options Back to the top Period of record: Varies by station

8. Weather Maps/Charts Description: National Weather Service charts archived at NCEI Analysis and Forecast Charts Sample Certification charges apply Additional Information: Offline Options Back to the top Period of record: 1948 – Current

9. Comparative Climatic Data (CCD) Description: Climatic averages and extremes for major U.S. cities. CCD Publication Sample Available online Additional Information: Offline Options Back to the top Period of record: Varies

10. Climatic Wind Data Publication Description: Climatic wind data from NCEI's LCD publication, U.S. Air Force climatic briefs, and more Climatic Wind Data for the U.S. Available online Additional Information: Offline Options Back to the top Period of record: Varies, but generally 1930 – 1996

12. CD-ROMs/DVDs Description: A listing of all available CD-ROMs and DVDs from NCEI Catalog Available for online ordering, delivered by first class mail Additional Information: Offline Options Back to the top Period of record: Varies by dataset

14. Global Summary of the Day (GSOD) Description: Global daily climatic data Global Summary of the Day Sample Available online Additional Information: Offline Options Back to the top Period of record: Varies, as far back as 1930, and in some cases to the present

15. U.S. Historical Climatology Network (USHCN) Description: The USHCN consists primarily of long-term COOP stations whose monthly temperature records have been adjusted for systematic, nonclimatic changes that bias temperature trends U.S. Historical Climatology Data Available online Additional Information: Offline Options Back to the top Period of record: Varies, as far back as 1900, and in some cases to the present

16. U.S. Climate Reference Network (USCRN) Description: Hourly observations from the 114+ USCRN stations USCRN Hourly Observations Available online Additional Information: Offline Options Back to the top Period of record: 2004 - Present

*Notes