Pregnant women get that shrinking feeling
SOME pregnant women complain that their brains have gone on leave

—they find it difficult to concentrate, and have poor memories. Now, an

explanation may be at hand: a group of anaesthetists and radiologists believe

that women’s brains shrink during late pregnancy and take up to six months to

regain their full size.

Anita Holdcroft, the anaesthetist leading the team, based at the Royal

Postgraduate Medical School in London, believes that this unexpected observation

could be linked to the cognitive problems experienced by some pregnant women and

new mothers. “These are very early findings, but it may be that the two features

are linked,” she says.

At a meeting in Sheffield this week, organised by the Physiological Society,

Holdcroft described how the researchers built up three sets of magnetic

resonance images to give three-dimensional pictures of the brains of 10 healthy

women. The first set were taken towards the end of pregnancy, the second 6 to 8

weeks after delivery and the third up to 6 months later. Comparing the images,

Holdcroft and her colleagues found that as the women’s physiology returned to

the non-pregnant state, their brains increased in size. It is possible that the

women’s brains were swelling from a normal size, the researchers concede, but

they think it much more likely that the women’s brains had shrunk during

pregnancy.

The pituitary gland at the base of the brain—which releases a

wide range of hormones, including some responsible for regulating

reproduction—showed the opposite effect, apparently increasing in size

during pregnancy.

Advertisement

Holdcroft believes that the changes in the brain are more likely to be the

result of changes in the volume of individual cells, rather than changes in the

number of cells in the brain. Her team is now investigating the mechanisms

involved.

The research into brain size and pregnancy started with women who developed

pre-eclampsia, a syndrome involving high blood pressure and fluid build-up that

affects some pregnant women, causing their faces, legs and arms to swell. If

untreated, it can lead to fatal seizures.

“We assumed that their brains would also swell, but last year we found that

they shrink,” says Holdcroft. The new research suggests that this is not a

symptom of pre-eclampsia, but a normal feature of pregnancy.