Russia’s Nationalist Summer Camp
Shortly after 7 A.M. on a recent summer morning, the Russian national anthem wafted through the crisp air above Seliger, a system of lakes two hundred miles north of Moscow. Two swelling bars in, a light rain began to fall. Tents, clustered like mushrooms under the conifers, stirred, and dazed campers, three and a half thousand of them, crawled out of their sleeping bags. By the time they reached the gray plastic outdoor sinks to brush their teeth, the public-address system had moved on from the national hymn and through songs from Soviet cartoons to end at Bananarama’s version of “Venus.”

Seliger is a strange place, built on the model of Soviet summer camps like Artek, which were both rewards for party loyalty and sites of Communist indoctrination. It is run by Nashi, an organization created in 2005, after pro-Western “color revolutions” swept former Soviet republics and terrified the Kremlin, to provide political “training” for Russian youth. The camp, like other Nashi projects, is funded by the state, and Russian businesses cover the rest. (Nashi’s founder, Vasily Yakemenko, once stated bluntly that, with the Kremlin at its back, demanding corporate sponsorship was easy.)

Which is why sponsors’ banners littered the trees, including one from Russian Technologies, the state weapons exporter, saluting the campers with this lyrical neo-Soviet greeting:

But the most visible sponsor this year was the nickel magnate, playboy, and New Jersey Nets owner Mikhail Prokhorov, who reportedly contributed $1.5 million to underwrite the camp. Prokhorov visited Seliger for a couple days and even slept in a tent as his bodyguards roved around the camp. He gave a nearly three-hour talk, fielding questions like “How do you start a business?” and “Do you like blondes or brunettes?”

Corporate sponsorship was why, in addition to the banners, the trees were festooned with plasma screens showing Russian music videos. It is also why there is brand new gym equipment on the beach, and why the morning announcements, which begin promptly at 9 A.M., come from a fully equipped concert stage bracketed by giant portraits of President Dmitry Medvedev and Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, who has a summer home nearby.

Harder to explain was why, on this particular morning, a troupe of breakdancers led the aerobics session to the tune of James Brown’s “Get Up,” making the campers resemble those Filipino inmates made to reprise the choreography from “Thriller.”

Strangest of all, organizers welcomed nine hundred foreign students to this year’s Innovation Forum, a ten-day session meant to invoke the Kremlin’s newest five-year plan. It was an odd graft onto a summer camp usually devoted to rabid Kremlin propaganda, complete with “breeding tents” for producing Slavic babies and, in 2007, a “Red Light District,” where organizers Photoshopped the heads of opposition leaders onto the bodies of centerfolds. Despite their difficulties obtaining Russian visas, this international youth contingent, which allegedly included three Americans (who were nowhere to seen), seemed to signal that this summer would be different, that it would be in keeping with the Kremlin’s new foreign policy of moderation, coöperation, modernization. Politics were largely absent. The Nashi commissars—hard-nosed political leaders of the movement—had set up camp on the edge of the lake, and kept their presence, and their flags, to a minimum. Even the Georgian flag was flying, despite tensions with Russia, although no one had seen any of the Georgians.

If it weren’t for the odd, utopian quotes from Medvedev and Putin…

…or for titles in the camp library (“Dmitry Medvedev’s War and Peace”; “Stalin—Victor”); or for the lecture by a Moscow professor who fretted over the decline of “Russianness” around the world and about how much uglier women in New York were, compared to his Russian travelling companions; or for the rehearsal, complete with a helicopter landing, for the visit from President Medvedev (who, when he did arrive, danced in the rain with the kids, like the tech geek that he is), Seliger seemed no different from any other summer camp.

There was the requisite inappropriate sexual activity, cool kids and uncool kids, the boys (in this case, Chechens) who kept to themselves. There was even a ridiculous fashion trend—butt pads, Styrofoam squares that strap onto one’s rear end to make sitting an option any time, anywhere—and other youthful hijinks. Dima, twenty, and Oleg, twenty-four, who studied math and physics in Moscow, decided to take the innovation part of Seliger at face value. “What is innovation?” Oleg asked rhetorically. “Innovation is improving life at Seliger!” To cook, he explained, campers had to use heavy black kettles suspended from wires strung between the tree trunks.

His solution, however, “is compact, it doesn’t burn or degrade in the heat, and it is disposable,” Oleg explained before placing a tied-off, water-filled condom directly into the campfire.

“Unfortunately,” he said, “we ran out of banana-flavored condoms, so today’s porridge will be plain.”

Once the foreigners went home, however, it was as if their ten-day visit, full of global cheer and moderation, had never happened. Or, worse, had been a front. Posters went up with “LIAR” painted in red letters across the faces of Kremlin critics. A picture of Lyudmila Alexeeva, the eighty-three-year-old human rights activist and head of the Moscow Helsinki Group, showed her wearing a a Wehrmacht cap. A “Fifth Column” prize was announced, for “liars, falsifiers, and those who blacken our homeland’s reputation.” For the first time, Seliger had become a model not of brainwashing but of compartmentalization. Which is a fitting reflection of today’s Russian state, reaching out to the world with one hand and, with the other, appeasing those who seek protection under a shell of intolerance and paranoia. It’s a good thing, however, that the international campers went home before the propaganda offensive began, because those two thoughts cannot ultimately coexist in one young brain—or in a government.