Moon Shot: Race, a Hoax, and the Birth of Fake News
Few people today remember that in 1835, men first walked on the moon. That year, however, it was all anyone could talk about. Reports in the Sun, the New York newspaper founded just a couple of years before, described sightings of men with bat wings, unicorns, and bipedal beavers on the moon’s surface, leading to much speculation and vast newspaper sales in New York and in the rest of the relatively new nation. All the city’s papers printed extracts or rebuttals; every outlet had to weigh in. The news of life on the moon spread like riots had the previous year, when mobs of white New Yorkers hit the streets looking for blacks, abolitionists, and “amalgamators”—the name given to those whom they feared were in favor of race-mixing—to intimidate, beat up, or worse. Needless to say, none of these lunar discoveries proved true. The Moon Hoax was concocted by Richard Adams Locke, the editor of the Sun, and today it reads not just as a parody of science and faith or a prank on a gullible public but also, somehow, as a transference of some of the energy that had led to those riots. Many white readers would rather embrace lunar man-bats than their fellow human beings. With Halley’s Comet predicted for 1835, it was an auspicious year. Indeed, the comet was first spotted by U.S. astronomers on the very day Locke launched his Moon Hoax, and the heavenly body helped make the Sun’s celestial claims all the more believable. Locke also made use of a classic hoax technique: the Sun purported to be merely reprinting, from the Edinburgh Journal of Science, discoveries made by the astronomer Sir John Herschel in his South African observatory. In Herschel, Locke found a perfect, if unaware, “co-conspirator,” as he was not only widely respected but also known to be far away on research and not easily reached. The alleged author of the reports, moreover, was not Herschel himself but his amanuensis, meaning that the Sun’s articles were formatted as a series of quotes within quotes—hearsay, really, from others who were never quite present. But the hoax started more simply, in one voice—that of the paper itself. “It is impossible to contemplate any great Astronomical discovery without feelings closely allied to a sensation of awe,” the first article began. It continued: To render our enthusiasm intelligible, we will state at once, that by means of a telescope of vast dimensions and an entirely new principle, the younger Herschel, at his observatory in the Southern Hemisphere, has already made the most extraordinary discoveries in every planet of our solar system; has discovered planets in other solar systems; has obtained a distinct view of objects in the moon, fully equal to that which the unaided eye commands of terrestrial objects at the distance of a hundred yards; has affirmatively settled the question whether this satellite be inhabited, and by what order of beings; has firmly established a new theory of cometary phenomena; and has solved or corrected nearly every leading problem of mathematical astronomy. Apart from the claim about the inhabitation of the “satellite,” this account of Herschel’s accomplishments and qualifications is true. Locke, a graduate of Cambridge, was knowledgeable and skilled enough to invent strange discoveries and parrot the official-sounding language surrounding them. His tone is entirely deadpan, though it is unclear what the exact point of the hoax was—simply to increase sales? To satirize those who believed in moon creatures? Certainly, there is a piousness to science that Locke seems to be sending up. The mid-eighteen-thirties marked the rise of eugenics and racialism, with phrenology emerging as just one of the many pseudosciences that sought to enact, reinforce, and restrict racial difference. Science, religion, and conceptions of race all confirmed one another: the Bible, the stars, and even the shapes of heads were enlisted over and over again to prove established prejudices true. “Objective” investigators constantly rediscovered that Negroes, Indians, and other dark races (some of them European, mind you) were indeed still inferior. The “Great Lunar Astronomical Discoveries” made in Herschel’s name were similarly hierarchical—Locke’s hoax unfolds almost biblically, as in Genesis, day by day. Reading it now, we see how each day’s discovery by the paper’s readers also neatly mirrors the fictional Herschel’s nightly observations. Let there be the light of the moon; then the firmaments and valleys, “a lofty chain of obelisk-shaped, or very slender pyramids, standing in irregular groups,” cataracts and “innumerable cascades” of water; then the creatures, including moon-bison, and a unicorn “who would be classed on earth as a monster.” This may be telling in and of itself—the observations constantly classify and impose earthly assumptions on extraterrestrial beings in a way familiar to contemporary science, especially race science, at least to our ears. Several nights, “being cloudy, were unfavorable to observation.” The cloudiness, significantly, was here on Earth.

News of the “discoveries” on the moon became the proverbial talk of the town, with other papers not only reprinting but also confirming the story. Those who debated the articles argued not over whether the series was true but over how true; among those who suspected it was all a hoax, talk focussed on how the trick was achieved rather than on exposing it. The story seemed too good—if not too good to be true then at least too good not to be told. The hoax held hints revealing its own speciousness, if anyone cared to look—for one, the prestigious Edinburgh Journal of Science, from which the excerpts were meant to be taken, had folded months before. Still, the daily revelations continued, exploring “The Lake of Death” and surrounding volcanoes, including the crater “Endymion” (which shared its name with Keats’s famous poem, dedicated to the hoaxer and suicide Thomas Chatterton). Eventually, Herschel discovered humanoids on the moon: “They averaged four feet in height, were covered, except on the face, with short and glossy copper-colored hair, and had wings composed of a thin membrane, without hair, lying snugly upon their backs, from the top of the shoulders to the calves of the legs. The face, which was of a yellowish flesh color, was a slight improvement upon that of the large orang outang, being more open and intelligent in its expression, and having a much greater expansion of forehead. . . . The hair on the head was a darker color than that of the body, closely curled, but apparently not woolly, and arranged in two curious semi-circles over the temples of the forehead.” These creatures sound like such a range of racial types that it is hard to know how to read them now. In the racial coding of the day, they sound stereotypically black—as noted by Benjamin Reiss in his tremendous book “The Showman and the Slave,” about P. T. Barnum and Joice Heth, the African-American woman whom Barnum touted as George Washington’s former mammy. The creatures’ hair, for instance, is “apparently not woolly”—neither is the hair of people of African descent, but that was how whites of the time described black hair almost without deviation. “As if this were not subliminal cue enough,” Reiss writes, “Locke concluded with a subtle reference to their childishness and oversexualized nature.” These inverted angels have yellowish flesh, copper hair, and, as the beast from Revelation, one almost imagines feet of brass. Locke has crafted a chimera both fanciful and false, a combo platter of types. The moon beings were amalgams much like the racial ones feared by “the common man” opposed to abolition. This may only support the notion that the Moon Hoax was intended as satire; though I would insist that intent doesn’t determine whether or in what way something is a hoax, Locke’s motives appear as complex and varied as “the canvass” of his alleged moon landscape. In Matt Goodman’s book about the hoax, “The Sun and the Moon,” from 2008, he writes that Locke helped make the Sun the one paper in the city to come out against slavery in a state that, while it no longer sanctioned the institution, by and large supported it in the South, and partook of its spoils. James Gordon Bennett, the head of its fierce competitor, the Morning Herald, called the Sun a “drivelling contemporary nigger paper.”* But no one today would mistake the Sun as being fully abolitionist. As an anti-slavery tract, in any event, the hoax is too obscure; as racist propaganda, it is not obvious enough, given the extremes that surrounded it. Phrenology and the rest of the racialist sciences then coming into being were mere allegories in the end, finding one-to-one correlations between the subject’s body and his intelligence or preconceived lack thereof. Still, Locke had set his Moon Hoax not just in the black of outer space but in the perceived darkness of Africa, which, to most of the Sunsreaders, may have seemed just as distant, hostile, and in need of saving. It would prove symbolic not only of slavery but also of salvation that Locke’s Herschel was viewing space, both for real and for hoax, from the Cape of Good Hope—the populated moon’s surface was seen by many readers as a sign of providence, of connection with a god who, in his wisdom, had made the universe hospitable. This missionary moon stood in direct contrast to a view of Africa as heathen jungle to be tamed, Christianized, colonized, bested, bought. One group of missionaries would inquire of the real Herschel about sending Bibles to the lunar residents. And there weren’t just man-bats on the moon but also another, superior race of beings. That they lived in the “Vale of the Triads” indicated that they were the third-highest of the three kinds of upright beings on the moon. It is tempting to see the lunar humanoids as hierarchical in the same ways that white eugenicists characterized races on Earth, from beaver bipeds (metaphoric Native Americans) to woolly man-bats (Negroes) to this last group, in which “nearly all the individuals . . . were of a larger stature than the former specimens, less dark in color, and in every respect an improved variety of the race.” These last beings are first. “They were creatures of order and subordination.” Most subsequent accounts of the hoax fail to mention the Vale dwellers, that superior, lighter race—perhaps because those beings make clear that race and racialism have plenty to do with the hoax and its success. Whether Locke meant to have these creatures taken as symbolic whites, or just as remarkable discoveries—or as things barely to be believed at all—the Moon Hoax’s popularity certainly owed much to its re-creating on the moon what many white readers believed could be found at home: there, on the other end of a telescope, wasn’t just life but order, not just extinct craters but vibrant temples, not just sustenance but subordination, not just humanoids but hierarchies.