The San Bernardino County Sun from San Bernardino, California on August 29, 1965 · Page 3
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiii Ajf" SAN BERNARDINO SUM-TELEGRAM A3 East Germans Free American, Briton After 16 Days' Arrest Natchez Given Ultimatum in Race Bombing NATCHEZ, Miss. (AP) leaders said last night BERLIN (UPI) Communist East Germany yesterday released a young Tulsa, Okla., tourist and a British student Another American and an Englishman still are being detained by the East Germans. They are William W. Lovett of San Francisco and Arthur Wil-braham, a British aeronautics' scientist and linguist. Lovett was arrested last May who had been suspected of help ing refugees escape to the West. Izvestia Raps 'Hooliganism' In Wild East MOSCOW (UPI) - The government newspaper Izvestia yesterday chastised three residents of Novosibirsk, 2,000 miles from Moscow in the Soviet Wild East, for "hooliganism." The paper put the finger on a drunk who stole a streetcar, a stunt flier who flew under bridges, and an aircraft mechanic who went on a joyride up and down runways in an Ilyushin-f transport. Izvestia said the drunk overturned the trolley, the pilot terrified bathers, and the mechanic finally had to be stopped by authorites. "We're not against fun," Izvestia said, "but the Novosibirsk style verges on hooliganism even worse." The Communists said the American, Benjamin Franklin on charges he injured an East' Whitehall III, 21, and the Briton, John Thwaites, 19, were freed from custody be cause they were unaware of East Berlin conditions and were "taken in" by West Berlin Truck Meets Bus Head On; 11 Die, 27 Hurt VINTON, La. (AP) -A Hous-ton-to-New Orleans bus collided with a truck carrying heavy lumber near this southwest, Louisiana town Friday night, killing 11 persons and injuring 28. The front 10 feet of the Greyhound bus were sheared off. The impact catapulted giant timbers from the truck through the passenger sections of the bus. "It was just awful," said W. M. Pierce, a Houston truck driver who reached the scene moments later. "When I arrived I saw three passengers walking around," Pierce said. "They were covered with blood. Another passenger was hanging out of a window and apparently dead." " A; deputy sheriff said some of the bodies were so mangled that identification could only be made through fingerprints. State police said their checks showed there were 40 persons aboard the bus, only three of whom escaped injury. The truck driver, Henry C. Gregory, 35, of Houston, was one of those killed. . The bus driver, Jeff Blanken- underground organizations because of their inexperience. ' Sifi r w if j lli ! hs' foj- I ifX -1'-: German in an auto accident. Wilbraham was picked up this month on suspicion of helping refugees. Whitehall and Thwaites crossed into West Berlin terrk tory at the U.S. Army's Checkpoint Charlie about 1:30 a.m. , (In Tulsa, Whitehall'i mother, said, "We had faith that our son would be released. We never lost faith In 'Whitey' ... We are thrilled to death.") Whitehall and Thwaites told officials of this historic Mississippi River town have until Wednesday to meet their demands for equal rights. Charles Evers, Mississippi field secretary of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, appealed, meanwhile, to local Negroes to "try to attain your goals without getting in the streets with bricks and guns." Racial tensions flared here Friday when the local chapter president of the NAACP was wounded in the booby-trap bombing of his car. FBI agents visited George Metcalfe, the NAACP official, in his police-guarded hospital room yesterday as they pressed their investigation. After an open-air rally last night in front of Metcalfe's home, a rock was hurled at a police car, shattering a side window. Four city policemen, carrying Western officials they were in nocent of the Communist charges. They said they had not Illlllliiliillllllllllllllllllllllllllilllliiilllllllllllillllllll helped any refugee's escape. The two had been held on suspicion for 16 days. They were Washington attorney R i c e y released through the efforts of; Trains Collide In Fog; 12 Die PONT D'HERY, France (UPI) The Milan - to - Paris New flew to Berlin to help arrange Whitehall's release with Vogel. A West Berlin attorney, Juergen S t a n g e, represented Thwaites. Western officials said both young men were in good health and good spirits. They said the two had been well treated in jail hast uerman lawyer Wolfgang Vogel, who served as intermediary in the exchange of American U2 pilot Gary Francis Powers for Soviet spy Col. Rudolf Abel. Both Whitehall and Thwaites quickly boarded planes for return flights home. sleeper express train smashed into the rear of another passenger train in dense fog early yesterday in this tiny station in shotguns, jumped out of the vehicle and faced a sullen crowd eastern France. of Negroes for more than 10 Police said 12 persons were known dead and 28 hospitalized, minutes. Coll ision Takes Sailor's Life The Negroes drifted away including four m critical condi when some leaders appealed for AP wlr.photo truck on tion and others listed as serious collision with a lumber reason, and the police left. WHERE 11 DEED This is what re-mained of a Greyhound bus after ship of Houston, was seriously injured. He spent several hours in surgery at a Beaumont, Tex., hospital. First reports that he ly hurt. The dead included eight Highway 90 near Vinton, La. On 1 1 l-Fated Navy Destroyer NAPLES, Italy (UPI) Thejwest of Naples. Mayor John Nosser termed children returning from sum mer camp in Italy. One of the prize winners, C, the bombing a "dastardly Navy revealed yesterday the was dead later proved erro neous. The train from Milan was P. Broussard, Port Arthur, Carrier Shangri-La had collided crime" and offered a $2,000 re ward for those responsible. jammed with vacationers return the bus. He had to be restrained by police from re-entering the wreckage in search of his brother Terry, 12. Terry's body later was recovered. police said. Few of the passengers many of whom were asleep had any warning. Some of them, winners in a photo-service pro in the Mediterranean with the Tex., was among the dead. Six other winners were among the injured. The injured passengers were Natchez Democrat publisher ing home from Italy. The other train was the Lombardy Express ill - fated 6th Fleet destroy taken to hospitals in Lake James W. Lambert, in a front motion contest, anticipated a er Newman K. Perry, killing one seaman and injuring another. On Aug. 11, Capt. Robert R. happy, expense-paid weekend in New Orleans. Mariner 4 Still Sending Signals page editorial, urged authorities "to spare no expense" to solve it. "There can be and are no reasons or excuses for such an attempt on the life of Metcalfe "I was sitting about the mid from Venice, Milan, Lausanne and other cities in Switzerland and Italy. The accident happened after the Lombardy Express made an unscheduled 4:40 a.m. stop at Pont d'Hery when the engineer discovered the brakes of the big Carter, newly - appointed com PASADENA, Calif. (UPI) - The dead sailor was Identified as Seaman Appren. Fred L. Greene Jr., son of Mr. and Mrs. F. L. Greene of North Reading," Mass. The injured man was identified as Seaman Apprep. John S. Ryals Jr., son of Mrg. Bernice Steed of Kennedy, Tex. Both were crew members of the destroyer. Boat Skipper's Body ; Found Afloat in Bay : OAKLAND (AP) - The body of Charles R. Alexander, skip, per of the tug boat missing dle of the bus, and it seemed or any other person in this com mander of Navy Destroyer Squadron 20, disappeared from the Perry at sea 350 miles north like all of a sudden the bus was trying to stop," recalled of its Canopus star tracker for continued stabilization. The spacecraft uses Canopus and the sun for attitude control and as reference points in space. munity," he wrote. Charles and Sulphur, La., and Orange, Tex. The three most seriously injured appeared to be Mott Musgrove, 13, of New Orleans, whose mother was among the dead; Ernest Campbell, 45, Port Arthur, Tex.; and Juanita Vyes, 35, Birmingham, Ala. The wreck occurred on the Old - Spanish Trail heavily traveled U.S. 90 near the Louisiana-Texas border. The two vehicles met in the center of the highway, state Roy K. Moore, special agent The Mariner 4 space - craft which took the first "close up" pictures of Mars six weeks ago continues to transmit sipals to earth from nearly 170 million miles in space. of Bermuda. A search turned up Willard Coleman, 47, Lake Charles. "Somebody hollered, electric locomotive were lock in charge of the FBI s Mississippi field office at Jackson, no trace of Carter and the Navy 'Watch out.' From that point, I JPL spokesmen said they to lose the signal from Ma declined to speculate how he disappeared from his flagship. don't remember too much of ing. About 15 minutes later, the Milan-Paris express comprised of sleeping cars and box took charge of investigation. Metcalfe's right arm and Jet Propulsion Laboratory anything.'' The Perry was en route to its riner about Oct. 1, but will try to resume contact in about 15 months. (JPL) scientists ordered Man-, Danny Daniels, 18, of Pasca- since Thursday on an eight-mile ner to change the field of view goula, Miss., was thrown from post in the Mediterranean when Carter disappeared. He had been named to his command cars for transporting automobiles rumbled through t h e fog along the same track. Witnesses said the engineer tried right leg were broken in the blast and his right eye appeared to be injured. He suffered multiple cuts on the face and chest. Metcalfe, about 55, worked at the Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co. until noon Friday. When he trip across San Francisco Bay; was found floating in the bay, off Oakland airport yesterday," the Coast Guard reported. y post Aug. 3. The collision between the 42,- desperately to halt the train and managed to slow it to about 12 000-ton Shangri-La and the 3,- miles an hour when it slammed There was no trace of the tug Encinal nor signs ol wreckage,' the Coast Guard said. " started his- car in the plant 500-ton destroyer occurred Friday night about 115 miles south' into the parked express. parking lot the bomb went off. rnrr color nim rilLL by KODAK ONE ROLL FREE WITH EACH ROLL BROUGHT IN FOR DEVELOPING AND PRINTING SIZES 127, 120. 620 SILF-IIWVICI PRUOSTOHtS ampamw'-.".wii.' MkWMW Open 7 Days a Week 9 A.M. to 1 0 P.M. Sun., Mon., Tues., Wed., Aug. 29, 30, 31, Sept. I SECOND STREET SHOPPING CENTER BRING YOUR FILM Sunset Pools Sunset Poob if- Reg. $1.00 rTw I Tnl Mv g' 98e 6IANT P3L Ban Roll-on ADD UP W r-- SNBffl S,ZE : fM Deodorant nxiWGTm PTf Ifi P0LI' Kiuwf cleanser 55,5 fcfo' I Bo,"e Children's I Iji1 T I lunch $I ekes I BAND-AID fVyc GaSsST, uv lCLm STRIPS 3? fl Wizard Charcoal BUW J "VEVVIRE I VAPO f P LIGHTER WJ COMPOSITION j RUB li W pr FLUID HM "" 3ffC 4 200 COUNT H 0 Co,0rS 10-lb. Bag Reg. S9c wide or HKShM 10 RoII CHARCOAL mr 1 1 miS'Vhou l ' L or BRIQUETS SILK w HftC Regilr or Low Calorie VtSZ Lt 1 H 8ii?l!S3 Wytf s '"'ftAcH vtr Il2. is Light, Filter, Pump end Motor; Automatic Skimmer; Steps in Shallow End; 3 to 8 Ft Deep; Safety Grip Coping; Rock-steps Poob Steel Reinforced Gunite; Plaster Finish ... also . . . Diving Board; 3' of Decking Around Pool; Complete Pool-Recdy-to-Swim! ALSO INCLUDED WITH THIS POOL ... anyone that calls Sunday or Monday August 29th or 30th, will receive a . . . FREE AUTOMATIC CHLORINATOR l - - - - - -- - j.j 1 00 FINANCING o 7 to 1 0 YEARS TO PAY WH A Flavri ! PIN CAS U n k3A Sparkling iilH C AJJV, ---'''rT?D Reg. 29c 400 COUNT PINK OR WHITE FIRST QUALITY SILK InksJ SHASTA WMm-JL c . i r FACIAL TISSUE 2 fJ1.00 SOFT DRINKS ) coLiPLrnon Bonos available SMALLER POOLS AVAILABLE from '1895 I Afore than 10,000 pools built during the past 12 years! Coupon Worth 66c on Purchase For a Real Taste Treat SWIFTS PARK LANE ICE CREAM TOUR CHOICE OF FLAVORS ICE CREAM SUR FAMILY SIZE "POH y Ontol Worft Larv Pod BtHct , 7 SUNSET OFFERS MORE! MORI Structural StMl MORE Cm Strug MORE Swimming Arta SAN BERNARDINO & RIVERSIDE COUNTY OFFICES ONTARIO SAN BERNARDINO RIVERSIDE Vanilla, Strawberry, Chocolate, Neapolitan, Marbled Fudge, etc. CREST ... 'Phone for Svitwt' 1097 Magnolia Av.. 125 W. Holt Blvd. YU 3-1777 PALM DESERT TUnicr 5-3271 OVtriand 1-5284 72958 Highway 11 Pkeiw Firsld 4-1184 U Coupon Exoires Sepr. 1 Tops in Quality HALF GALLON LZTZTIZ CROWN DRUGS