Muslim community in the Catskills faces right-wing fear, threats
On Saturday, anti-Muslim groups staged a rally outside a small religious community in Upstate New York called Islamberg. State police formed a protective cordon outside the settlement's gates to prevent a confrontation.

Islamberg has existed since the 1980s without any history of violence or criminal activity, but the community has become a fixation for hate groups and the right-wing media, who say it's being used as a terrorist training camp. That's a claim that law enforcement and Islamberg's neighbors reject.

After decades, Islamberg accepted by neighbors

On a dusty dirt road in the Western foothills of the Catskill Mountains, birds chatter in the trees. And faintly in the distance, you can hear the Muslim call to prayer. Islamberg is a deeply private community of mostly African-American Muslim families established in the 1980s.

About 200 people live here. Like a lot of religious communities in America, it was conceived as a place for families to live and worship apart from mainstream society. The residents of Islamberg declined repeated requests to talk to NCPR. They say they just prefer to be left alone. Neighbors on this country road say after so many decades, the people of Islamberg are completely accepted.

"They've always been pretty friendly with us," said Tony Smith who has lived next door to Islamberg for 15 years. "They wave when they go by. And I have no problems with them. They don't have no problems with me."

Jessica Veccione is a local photographer who's been inside Islamberg over the years. She said the place feels like a normal small mountain town that just happens to have a mosque. "The people here are families that work and live in the community with children. There are lots of children."

Fear and the far-right media

But this portrait of Islamberg - as a peaceful community of devout Muslims - is rejected by many far-right activists across the country. A 10-minute drive from Islamberg, dozens of people gathered before the rally on Saturday to prepare, many of them wearing militia-style uniforms, fatigues and flak jackets with anti-Muslim slogans and symbols.

We will not tolerate ISIS training camps, militant-style training camps

"We will not tolerate ISIS training camps, militant-style training camps, radicalized training camps," said Lisa Joseph from Syracuse, who describes herself as an anti-sharia activist, a reference to Muslim religious law.

She stood next to Joseph Laury, who came all the way from Maine for this rally. They believe Islamberg is a kind of beachhead for Muslim jihadists. "There's all kinds of videos being shown on Fox News. It's all over the Internet," Laury said.

In recent years, right-wing media sites like Alex Jones' InfoWars, which regularly promotes conspiracy theories, have turned more of their attention to Islamberg. "Potential radical jihadist training camps within the United States," warned one of Infowars' webcasts. "I mean, we're talking right here in our own backyards."

Islamberg threatened

In 2015, a man from Tennessee was caught preparing to attack Islamberg. Robert Doggart schemed to burn down the mosque here and the children's school. Last month, he was sentenced to nearly 20 years in prison for civil rights violations and for trying to recruit people to help him commit arson.

"No hint of truth" to terrorism fears

On Saturday, there was no threat of that kind of violence. The activist's cars and motorcycles rumbled past the gate of Islamberg and passed dozens of state police standing guard. One of the community's leaders speaking on background told NCPR that this kind of display is terrifying to the people inside.

State Police Captain Scott Heggelke says it's also based on Internet hokum. "There is no hint of truth to that," he said. Heggelke pointed out that his investigators have looked repeatedly at claims and theories about Islamberg and none turned out to be real. "We have an ongoing open relationship with the community that's located in Islamberg."

State and federal authorities do maintain a heightened presence here. They keep a close watch on Islamberg and go inside regularly. Not because it's a threat, they say, but because the people who live here have faced serious threats of violence in the past.