State helps Lexington company upgrade facility, positioning it to compete and retain strong employment
JEFFERSON CITY, Mo. ---- Today, the Missouri Department of Economic Development (DED) announced that it is supporting equipment and machinery upgrades at Remington Arms Company, LLC, located in Lexington, Mo., through a Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) of up to $1.6 million. The modern equipment will help the company enhance the efficiency and safety of its manufacturing facility, positioning Remington for future growth in the community. As part of the project, the company will maintain a minimum employment level of 80 existing jobs.

“Supporting our state's existing businesses is the surest way to grow our economy,” said Rob Dixon, Acting Director of the Department of Economic Development. “We are proud to work with communities to make it easier for companies to do business in rural Missouri. These upgrades will allow Remington to compete in the global marketplace and pave the way for growth opportunities in the future.”

As one of America’s oldest and largest manufacturers, Remington Arms Company has been making firearms and ammunition for more than 200 years. It’s commitment to excellence requires constant improvement of its facilities and reinvestment for the benefit of its employees and customers.

“Remington is proud to be a part of the Lexington community, where Remington makes wood components for many of the world’s most popular firearms, including the iconic Model 870 pump shotgun and Model 700 bolt-action rifle,” said Senior Vice President of Remington Leland Nichols. “The safety and efficiency of our Lexington workforce is a primary concern for the Company. This CDBG grant will make it possible for Remington to address these concerns and ensure its continued operation in Lexington. Remington very much appreciates the support of Governor Greitens, the Department of Economic Development and Mayor Jerry Brown, who has been instrumental in moving this vital project forward.”

"This CDBG award means more than 80 full time jobs were saved in Lexington and 240 full-time jobs were saved across the state of Missouri," said Lexington Mayor Jerry Brown.

"The state has empowered our rural community to retain a great company and a quality workforce. It has been a pleasure for Mayor Brown and me to work closely with the staff at the Missouri Department of Economic Development along with Mike Press, President of Scout Economics and Emile Buzaid, Associate General Counsel of Remington Arms Company to secure this crucial funding,” said Lexington City Administrator Mark Rounds. “Without everyone's cooperation, the project would not have been possible. This collaboration demonstrates how valuable public/private partnerships are in today's world and it serves as a success story that other smaller cities can learn from."

The CDBG program, administered by the Missouri Department of Economic Development, provides grants and loan funds to cities with a population under 50,000 and counties under 200,000 to assist in a variety of public works and economic development projects.

For other community development programs, visit www.ded.mo.gov.

###