Inmate deaths sometimes go uncounted at Orleans Parish Prison
Two deputies stood guard over the Vietnam War veteran, as he lay handcuffed to a hospital bed, comatose and brain dead. A day earlier, Oscar Fuselier had been arrested for missing traffic court.

He was placed in a cell at Orleans Parish Prison with violent offenders. A teenager, being held on an armed robbery charge, harassed him for smelling like urine, then stomped him in the head.

Fuselier lost consciousness at the jail and never woke up.

On his third day at the hospital, nurses told the family to prepare for his death. Sheriff Marlin Gusman's office released him from custody. The guards left. Fuselier's son was glad to see them go, but he didn't know that the consequences of the sheriff's office's release would later torment him.

Fuselier, 59, died a week later, on Aug. 7, 2007, in a hospice, where a doctor listed the cause of death as lung cancer.

Because the sheriff's office no longer considered Fuselier in its custody, investigators did not seek an autopsy. And despite a confession from the teen and numerous witnesses, no one was prosecuted.

"It's like my dad fell through the cracks," Daniel Fuselier said.

Oscar Fuselier is one of seven OPP inmates since Hurricane Katrina whose deaths are not counted by Gusman's office. Those seven inmate names don't appear on any official count of the jail's dead because Gusman's office had them released from custody after they were transferred to a hospital, a practice that critics say is an intentional circumvention of the public reporting requirements for in-custody deaths.

About this series Why are families Why are families not notified until days or weeks after inmates die? Why does the lockup investigate its own deaths instead of calling in an outside agency? And when sick or injured inmates die at the hospital, why do those deaths go uncounted, and sometimes fail to get a proper investigation? A NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune investigation into OPP inmate deaths exposed institutional failings and institutional indifference that persist despite a court-ordered overhaul of the long-troubled New Orleans jail. This is the latest in the multi-part series.

Those seven deaths raise the OPP death toll since 2006 to 44, a number that increases the jail's already high death rate.

NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune identified the seven additional deaths through an extensive review of autopsy reports, jail and court records and after interviews with attorneys who represent the families of dead inmates.

The sheriff's office says it has good reasons for releasing dying inmates. That way, relatives have full visitation rights and the understaffed sheriff's office doesn't have to deploy guards at the hospital.

Once the sheriff's office takes an inmate off its rolls, however, a death is subject to less scrutiny and there may be lapses in notification of families. Critics say it also misrepresents death statistics. And in at least one case, a gravely ill inmate's release never reached the family, sending them on a frantic search for a week.

THE 7 UNCOUNTED John Michael Williams, 53

Arrested on charge of cocaine possession. Released from OPP custody on Nov. 4, 2013, after transfer to hospital. Died Dec. 4, 2013, of HIV-related complications. Izell Henderson, 67

Charged with cocaine possession. Released from OPP custody June 4, 2010, after transfer to hospital. Died of liver disease June 4, 2010. Cayne Miceli, 43

Arrested after on misdemeanor charges for biting hospital security guard. Released from OPP custody on Jan. 5, 2009, after transfer to hospital. Died on Jan. 6, 2009 of asthma complications after being placed in five-point restraints by jail staff. Patrick Bell, 47

Arrested on theft charge. Released him from OPP custody after transfer to hospital on Oct. 15, 2008. Died of HIV-related complications on Oct. 15, 2008. Christopher Trepagnier, 52

Serving sentence at OPP for attempted manslaughter. Suffered heart attack and died July 22, 2008, while a on a work-release assignment as an auto mechanic with State Police. The Sheriff's Office considered him in the custody of State Police, which State Police disputes. Guy Zarzana, 46

Charged with heroin possession. Released him from OPP custody after transfer to hospital on Dec. 12, 2007. Died on Jan. 1, 2008, of HIV-related complications. Oscar Fuselier, 59

Arrested for missing traffic court. Released from OPP custody on July 29, 2007, after transfer to hospital. Died Aug. 7. 2007, two weeks after a cellmate struck him in the head. Hospice doctor ruled death a result of lung cancer. No autopsy was performed, and no one was prosecuted.

Inmate advocates and corrections health-care officials say the practice also allows jails to manipulate death statistics and often prevents a thorough investigation into jail conditions that may have contributed to the inmate's death, even if it was of natural causes.

It's "disturbing and disingenuous" and "feels, frankly, like a cover-up," said Katie Schwartzmann, co-director of the MacArthur Justice Center and the lead attorney for OPP inmates whose lawsuit against the sheriff's office led to federal oversight through a consent decree with the U.S. Justice Department. "To release someone in hours or days prior to their dying, when it is clear the person is about to die, seems like intentional circumvention of the public reporting requirements and creates misleading death statistics."

Gusman did not respond to requests for interviews for this series. When asked about specific jail deaths, Gusman spokesman Phil Stelly issued a written statement.

"Sheriff Gusman and his staff do not want any inmate to die. We strive every day to prevent this. One inmate death is one too many," the statement read.

***

About a month after her brother went to jail for possession of cocaine, Bonita Williams got word from his social worker that he was free. She called the jail's automated line, which said that her brother, John Michael "Mike" Williams, had been released. She called enough times to finally get a person on the line, who again told her the computer said he had been released.

At 53, he was sickly. He had contracted HIV/AIDS. She called Interim LSU Hospital, where he went for treatment, and was told he was not there.

So Bonita Williams gathered up her relatives and they started searching for Mike.

For a week, they looked under bridges and combed the grassy areas near the jail. They visited homeless shelters and every hospital in the city, asking if anyone had seen or heard from him.

On day seven -- Nov. 8, 2013 -- Bonita Williams returned to Interim LSU Hospital and asked the receptionist in person whether her brother was there. "He's been in here," the woman said.

When she got to her brother's room, he was emaciated and could not speak. She learned that he had been taken to the hospital from the jail unresponsive a week before.

His condition took a turn for the worse, and he was moved into the intensive-care unit. That's the day the sheriff's office asked a judge to release the inmate from his custody.

The magistrate commissioner, Jonathan Friedman, said he honors the sheriff's office requests to release prisoners when they don't pose a threat to the public and are too sick to receive proper care in the jail. But the family says they were never notified by the jail or the hospital where he was. Read more about the pattern of mishandled death family notifications.

He died on Dec. 4, 2013.

"He was thrown away and they just didn't care," Bonita Williams said. "That hurts."

***

The jail's death rate has ticked up since Hurricane Katrina, when damage caused by flooding created starkly different jail conditions and inmate populations than before.

OPP's death rate exceeded the national and state averages in all but one year from 2006 through 2011, the most recent year for which data is available.

By another measure -- comparing OPP's death rate with itself - it has gotten worse since Katrina. There were 154 deaths per 100,000 inmates, on average, from 2006 through 2013, compared with 104 on average from 2000 to 2005.

That death rate is also higher than comparably sized jails. Data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics, an information-gathering arm of the U.S. Department of Justice, found about 140 inmates died per 100,000 on average from 2000 to 2007 at jails with at least 1,000 inmates. About 97 per 100,000 prisoners died in Louisiana jails during that time period on average.

Gusman's office says OPP should be compared with the country's 50 largest jails, which had an average mortality rate of 170 deaths per 100,000 from 2000 to 2007. By that measure, OPP was below that level every year since 2000, except for the years from 2007 to 2010.

However, OPP's inmate population level ranked sometimes near the bottom of the 50 largest category and sometimes didn't make it onto the list at all, said Margaret Noonan, a statistician with the Bureau of Justice Statistics.

The city's jail population has declined dramatically since before the storm. In 2004, the average daily inmate population was 6,143, compared to 2,474 last year.

Dr. Marc Stern, the former medical director of Washington's state prison system and a U.S. Justice Department consultant, said the jail appeared to have "excess deaths" during certain years after Katrina, which raises the question of whether some were preventable.

A federal judge agreed that conditions at OPP merited a court-ordered overhaul, or consent decree, in June 2013. The raft of reforms takes aim at problems that critics say contribute to deaths: shoddy medical care, inadequate suicide precautions and safety provisions, a lack of supervision and poor classification of inmates to separate potential predators from potential victims.

Of the 44 inmate deaths since 2006, most have been ruled a result of natural causes.

But that doesn't mean they weren't preventable, Stern said. That's why thorough reviews after deaths are critical to determine whether the root cause of the death was something fixable, like improving CPR response times or changing medicine administration policies.

"A well-functioning jail takes every death very seriously," Stern said.

In one example, Richard Scearce, 60, died in January 2010 of a urinary tract infection, which is a natural death. But the infection came after he starved himself and refused to drink water, telling staff that he wanted to die, according to testimony by Dr. Bruce Gage, a mental-health corrections expert who testified last year in consent decree hearings on behalf of the U.S. Justice Department and the MacArthur Justice Center, which represents inmates.

"For him to have died of dehydration and not eating and to be lying on the floor for days and then to not seek involuntary treatment for this individual is just egregious," Gage told a federal judge last April. "He repeatedly expressed his wish to be dead and to die and he made that happen and he was not stopped."

Two more inmates whose 2009 deaths were ruled natural could likely have been saved had staff checked on them sooner, Gage testified. More than an hour passed after the deaths of Raymond Martello, 49, who died of lung congestion, and John Sanchez, 54, who died of heart disease, before the guards noticed, he testified, which was "well beyond the time when they might have been able to be saved."

Gage said the jail should have learned upon investigating these deaths that staff needed to monitor inmates more closely in the intake and screening area.

But in April 2010, Michael Hitzman, 31, who told guards he had smoked heroin and ingested crack cocaine earlier that day, was not assessed by a mental-health professional. He was instead placed in an isolation holding cell in the intake and processing center. Within two hours of being booked, he tied his shirt to his cell door and hanged himself. He was not found until he had been dead for more than an hour, according to Gage's testimony.

"Had these people been detected earlier, it's possible that they could be alive today," he said of Hitzman, Martello and Sanchez.

Gusman's office says his staff investigates every death thoroughly to determine how to improve operations in the future. In its written statement, office spokesman Stelly said, "Our reviews will include security, medical and psychiatry staffers as well as the sheriff and his executive staff. We will review the circumstances as well as our procedures and take corrective actions with an eye toward preventing further occurrences."

The U.S. Justice Department and inmate advocates have criticized the review process, calling it inadequate. In some cases, the medical director has been in the position of evaluating his own performance.

The National Commission on Correctional Health Care, an accrediting agency, says in-custody death investigations should be conducted by an outside team, or at least a staff member who was not involved in the deceased person's care.

The commission recommends that reviews seek to answer questions regarding whether the medical response could be improved upon, as well as whether the jail operations, policies and procedures contributed to the death. Any changes that result from reviews should be communicated to all staff. "The intent of the standard is that preventable deaths are avoided," the document states.

After losing accreditation in 2008, OPP gained it again last year, a designation that lasts through 2016.

While the sheriff's office mortality reviews have been criticized, some deaths have not been investigated at all or lack key components of a thorough death probe.

There was no autopsy in two of the seven cases found. In six of the cases, there were no mortality reviews, detailed internal probes conducted separately from any administrative investigation or autopsy, which determine whether jail policies, procedures or staff misconduct contributed to the death.

Conducting mortality reviews is a national best practice aimed at preventing further deaths.

A public relations representative for the sheriff confirmed the lack of mortality reviews for the six deaths, and indicated a written statement on those cases was forthcoming. NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune sought more information on Aug. 13, Aug. 20, Oct. 8 and Oct. 13. Neither Gusman's office nor his outside public relations firm responded to inquiries.

***

The Bureau of Justice Statistics defines in-custody deaths as those that happen inside a physical lockup or elsewhere, like a hospital, when the patient is still in the custody of the jail.

There are gray areas when a sheriff's office can drop charges against an ill inmate or have them released through a court order as they're hospitalized, said Noonan, the statistician who authors an annual report on U.S. in-custody deaths.

"In cases of suicide, we ask them to count them because it basically started in the jail," she said. But in non-suicide cases where the patient is in the hospital for more than a few days, "it gets a little bit murkier" as to whether they should still be considered inmates.

Corrections offices submit their data to the bureau voluntarily and the agency does not audit the numbers. It does not have oversight or law-enforcement powers.

At OPP, the sheriff has the authority to release anyone being held on a misdemeanor charge without posting a financial bond. For those accused of felonies, he must seek a bond from a judge, which records show can be obtained without the signature of the obligated person.

In the case of Williams, Gusman's office secured a $2,500 bond to get him released from custody when his complications from HIV turned grave. But by the time the bond paperwork was drawn up, Williams was too sick to sign.

With his condition so grave it was clear he would not be able to walk out of the hospital, and his family unaware he was on his death bed, the bond arrangement only served to ensure Williams' death was not counted.

And while his death is undisputedly the result of natural causes, Williams' family fears he didn't have adequate access to medications, a pervasive problem at OPP, where inadequate health care was cited as one of the reasons the jail is under a federal court order mandating widespread reforms.

Whether there were any failures or mistakes on the part of jailers may never be known because an investigation was never undertaken.

Arranging an ill inmate's release is a practice that's common throughout the country, said Jeffrey Schwartz, a California-based national consultant on the corrections industry. "If the jail is saying they're released, if that person makes an unexpected recovery, could they walk out of that hospital and go about their lives? The answer is, 'Hell no,'" he said. "They'd go right back to jail to await trial. They are not released."

While the Bureau of Justice Statistics says in the interest of uniformity, it directs lockups not to count deaths that occur outside their custody - as with those inmates released while in the hospital - critics say the practice leads to undercounting and a lack of review.

Independent monitors appointed by the court to review the jail's compliance with the consent decree issued a scathing report in August, saying investigations remain flawed and mental-health-care is still "virtually non-existent."

The report highlights some disturbing cases of inmates' potentially life-threatening conditions being ignored by staff. One patient received no HIV medication for two months, despite a court order, the report notes, raising questions about whether jail conditions contributed to deaths that were ruled a result of natural causes.

"While appreciating that there is substantial work to gain compliance, the health and safety of more than 2,000 inmates are in peril today because of the lack of staff, wholly substandard medical care, absence of mental health care and deteriorated and unclean living environments," the monitors wrote. "Leadership is essential to solving problems."

Mary Howell, an attorney who has repeatedly sued the sheriff's office over inmate deaths, said, "There is no legitimate law enforcement reason to try and fudge these numbers."

She called it "unconscionable" that the sheriff's office does not count the death of Cayne Miceli. Miceli, 43, was tied down for hours in five-point restraints, despite the jail being aware that she had asthma. She complained of trouble breathing and lost consciousness. Within 12 hours of her Jan. 4, 2009 booking, she was taken by ambulance to the hospital and never woke up.

Unlike in other cases where inmates were released from custody, an autopsy was performed. A pathologist in former coroner Dr. Frank Minyard's office ruled the death drug-related after finding needle marks on her arms and later had to reverse himself, but a toxicology report later disproved that finding. The needle marks were from Miceli's medical treatment while she was on life support, a second independent autopsy conducted in Alabama found.

Because she was booked on a minor offense -- for biting a hospital guard's ankle when she thought she was being discharged too soon -- the sheriff's office released her from custody on its own Jan. 5, 2009, when she was on a ventilator at the hospital. She was taken off life support the next day.

"The final cause of death was bronchial asthma," which turned deadly when she was restrained for hours, Howell said in an email. "It is deeply troubling that there is even a question now being raised by the sheriff's office as to whether or not her death would be considered to be an 'in-custody' death at OPP."

In Fuselier's case, there was not only one criminal investigation by sheriff's deputies, but a second one later by a New Orleans police detective. Despite those probes - which included a confession by the inmate who kicked Fuselier and numerous witness statements -- no one was prosecuted, records obtained by NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune show.

The sheriff's office decision to release Fuselier from custody and then its failure to follow up with doctors about conducting an autopsy led to his death being deemed a result of natural causes.

So when an NOPD homicide detective reviewed the case - a month after Fuselier was cremated - he noted the hospice doctor's finding of lung cancer and closed the case.

Fuselier's family sued the sheriff's office, claiming he died of the beating after he was "thrown to the wolves." The sheriff's office argued he died of lung cancer. After both sides secured medical experts claiming they were correct, they reached a confidential financial settlement in 2010.

The lack of an autopsy stunned one longtime pathologist.

"If a case ever cried out to be autopsied it's this one," said Dr. Gregory Davis, a pathology professor and assistant state medical examiner in Kentucky. "There was a real failure of communication in this case."

Richard Jackson, 18, the cellmate who told deputies he kicked Fuselier, was initially rebooked on a battery charge. But prosecutors later refused the charge, and declined to bring a homicide case, citing the doctor's finding of a natural death. So he was released from OPP.

"What this kid did, and they ended up just cutting him loose," Fuselier's son, Daniel Fuselier, 42, said. "I didn't know how to feel, just hopeless."

---

Richard A. Webster of NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune contributed to this report.