Mrs. Chesimard, on Stand, Denies Having Weapon in Turnpike Shooting
Clark E. Squire, another of Mrs. Chesi mard's companions, was convicted of murder in 1974 in connection with the incident and is serving a life sentence at Trenton State Prison. He is appealing that conviction. Mrs. Chesimard's case was severed from the earlier trial when she became pregnant.

Her testimony ended suddenly today when Mr. Ball asked her, “On that night of May 2d, did you shoot, kill, execute or have anything to do with the death of Trooper Werner Foerster?”

“No,” she replied, shaking her head. “Did you shoot or assault Trooper James Harper?”

“No.”

The state's case against Mrs. Chesi mard, presented over eight weeks through a number of witnesses including Trooper Harper, tells how the trooper stopped white Pontiac bearing Vermont license plates because it had a faulty tail light at about 12:30 A.M. on May 2, 1973.

Radioed for Assistance

Trooper Harper radioed for back‐up support and Trooper Foerster arrived as Mr. Harper began to question the occu pants of the car. Mr. Squire, who was driving, went to the back of the car with Mr. Foerster and soon began scuffling with the trooper.

Mr. Harper testified that Mrs. Chesi mard reached down toward the floor of the car and the next thing he knew he was shot through the left shoulder. He testified that he had exchanged shots with both occupants of the car and made his way on foot back to the turnpike headquarters nearby. Trooper Foerster's body was found about an hour later.

Mr. Squire drove Mr. Costan and Mrs. Chesimard five miles south on the toll road, carried them from the car to grassy spot off the road shoulder and fled when additional state troopers ar rived. He was captured the following day. Mrs. Chesimard was wounded and Mr. Costan was dead when the police arrived.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mrs. Chesimard testified today that she had been on her way to Baltimore for a job as a bar waitress that had been arranged by Mr. Costan when the incident began. She said she and her companions had stopped for supper at a Howard John son's restaurant on the turnpike shortly before the shootings, and she had noticed a gun butt sticking out of Mr. Squire's trousers.

She said she had not known until then that he was armed and she said Mr. Cos tan had told Mr. Squire, “You can't go in there like that,” and had persuaded Mr. Squire to allow Mr. Costan to put the gun on the floor of the car near the rear seat.

Mrs. Chesimard also testified that she had given Mr. Squire her billfold contain ing $500 so he could buy gas before they left the service area. She forgot, to get the billfold back, she said, and had no identification when Trooper Harper asked for it a few minutes later.

She testified she had heard a “shout or a noise like a shout” come from the rear of the car where Mr. Squire was standing with Trooper Foerster and then had seen Trooper Harper draw his revolv er and tell her and Mr. Costan, who was sitting in the rear seat, to “put your hands where I can see them.”

Mrs. Chesimard, who was wearing two — piece floor — length African print dress, demonstrated for the jury how she had held her arms outstretched toward the trooper.

“Zayd pushed my seat forward,” she said, “and at that moment I was shot under the right arm: I turned to get out of the car and was shot again in the left shoulder. I was knocked out of the car onto the ground.”

“How did you feel or what was your condition at that time?” Mr. Ball asked. “Scared,” she replied.

Mrs. Chesimard testified that she had managed to crawl into the back seat of the car a few moments later and heard Mr. Squire and Mr. Costan get in the front and felt the car drive off down the road. She was unable to respond when Mr. Squire stopped a few minutes later and ordered her out of the car and to “run.” He had to carry her over his shoul der to the grassy spot, she said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

No Explanation Offered

Under cross‐examination by Mr. Ba rone, Mrs. Chesimard was unable to ex plain how three clips of ammunition and an eyeglass containing 16 live shells hid got into her shoulder bag. She also admit ted knowing that Mr. Costan carried a gun at times.

“You knew that two persons you were with in that car carried guns and it didn't shock you?” Mr. Barone asked.

“No,” she answered, “I had seen other people with guns.”

Mr. Barone got Mrs. Chesimard to adnlit that the only identification in her billfold the night of the shooting was that of “Justine Henderson,” but she denied using any of a long list of aliases read by Mr. Barone.