Italy Moves to Stem Wave of Albanians
ROME, Friday, Aug. 9— Another huge wave of Albanian migrants washed onto Italy's Adriatic shores on Thursday seeking an economic haven, but instead finding edgy police officers and a hard-line Government determined to send them back home. The police opened fire in clashes with the emigres on Thursday night.

The latest in a recent series of exoduses from the impoverished Balkan country involved several ships, with the largest group, estimated at 10,000 people, forcing their way into the port of Bari, on the heel of the Italian boot.

Most of the Albanians were taken to a local soccer stadium, where they tried to break free Thursday night while being kept under police guard. Nervous security forces said they had opened fire after some of the Albanians threw rocks at them. Early reports said two or three Albanians had been taken to a hospital with gunshot wounds.

The circumstances of the shootings were not clear early today. The authorities in Bari claimed that at least two of the wounded had been shot by other Albanians inside the stadium before the broader disturbance began. Help of Army Is Asked

Saying that nearly a dozen of their own officers were hurt, some with head injuries, the police reinforced their patrols at the stadium and asked for help from the army.

The Albanians arrived on a rusty freighter called the Vlora, young men for the most part who said they were looking for work and who filled every inch of available space from deck to mast.

Italian ships had tried to keep them out, but the Vlora ran the blockade nonetheless. As it entered the harbor, hundreds of men wearing nothing but shorts or underwear jumped into the water and swam to shore. Even after mooring, Albanians continued to leap from the freighter and to climb down ropes to the dock, afraid that if they stayed put the Italians would turn them right around. Begging for Food

Reporters at the scene said many of them were pleading for food and water. On the dock, dozens were treated for exhaustion.

At least four other Albanian ships were reported to be lying off the coast of southern Italy, which is about a half-day's sail from Albania across the Adriatic. One person reportedly drowned trying to reach the small Italian port of Otranto, at the base of the boot heel.

Several hundred refugees aboard two other ships tried unsuccessfully to land at ports in Sicily and were diverted to the island country of Malta. In addition, an Italian ferry on Thursday took back nearly 1,000 Albanians who had managed to land Wednesday at San Foca, a small town on the Adriatic, where many of them also leaped into the water in a vain effort to obtain asylum.

In Tirana, the Albanian capital, Reuters reported that Albania had put its ports under military control and had halted all passenger trains in an attempt to end this latest flight of thousands of its citizens seeking a better life elsewhere. Deaths in Albania Reported

There were reports of several people having been killed in clashes at the port of Durres between the police and crowds trying to force their way onto ships. Some accounts said that as many as a dozen had died, but others put the death toll at only two.

It was clear that the exodus was an embarrassment to the Albanian Government, slowly emerging from decades of Stalinist repression, and also a serious headache for the Italian authorities, who want the desperate migrants to stop regarding this as the promised land.

There have been four such outpourings of Albanians in little over a year, and this is the second one of enormous proportions. In March, 24,000 people flooded into the southern Italian port of Brindisi aboard ships and makeshift rafts, and about half of them are still in this country in camps and shelters. Italy had given them until mid-July to leave, but the deadline was allowed to lapse without mass deportations.

There is no shortage of sympathy here for the Albanians, many of whom watch Italian television and its visions of an opulence that is alien to them. One man in the March exodus told of having seen a commercial in which a cat was served dinner on a silver tray. Unfamiliar with the rhetorical excesses of the advertising world, he assumed that if cats ate in such lavish style, then surely the streets of Rome must be paved with gold.

But personal sympathies aside, the official Italian position is that nearly all the Albanian migrants are seekers of economic betterment and not political refuge, and so the Government has refused to throw out a welcome mat. Return Fleet Assembled

Nothing has changed in the official stand, and the authorities began Thursday night to assemble a small fleet of ships and aircraft to return the newcomers in Bari to their homeland over the next few days.

Italy has promised to help Albania though its economic crisis, and a Deputy Foreign Minister, Claudio Vitalone, said in Tirana Thursday that his Government was ready to provide $9 million in food and medicine. But according to Reuters, Mr. Vitalone also insisted that the Albanian Government give a commitment that it would help bring home the new migrants.

"We don't want to bully anyone, but we have rules that must be respected," he was quoted as saying.

Photos: Thousands of Albanians swamped a pier yesterday in the port of Bari, Italy, after arriving in a rusty freighter, the Vlora, which ran a blockade of Italian ships. Sick children who were among the migrants, below, were carried by relatives to a hospital in Bari after being taken off the ship. (Photographs by Associated Press) Map of Italy showing location of Bari.