Witness to Iran Flight 655
The lengthy discussion of the downing of Iran Air Flight 655 by the Navy cruiser Vincennes has missed one fascinating development: for the first time, we have an electronic recording of a naval clash. The computerized Aegis defensive system -whatever its military merits - has revolutionized our ability to piece together what has happened. Without it, the Navy's investigation of the tragic incident might well have reached radically different conclusions.

With data tapes from the Vincennes, investigators are able to recreate the digital displays the crew saw that day. Like Sunday afternoon football, the action can be played back in real time or slow motion. You can see every move made at every one of the 17 consoles in the command information center. You know precisely what happened and the order in which events occurred.

Reporters, detectives, criminal lawyers and others who have tried to recreate a moment of trauma by interviewing witnesses know how unreliable such accounts can be. The Vincennes tapes, however, bring this fact of life into vivid focus. For some of the facts, the memory of every witness was corrected.

The report of the Navy investigation summarizes the testimony of the crew and inserts the data obtained from the tapes in italics. Here is one part of the report:

'' [ One crewman ] observed TN 4131 (the Iranian airliner) at 445 knots at an altitude of 7,800 feet and descending during engagement. He recalled it being a minute from [ missile ] launch. USS Vincennes's system information showed TN 4131 at an altitude of 12,000 feet, ascending and at 380 knots.''

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The interviews show that a few crewmen on the U.S.S. Sides, operating several miles away, recalled that the Iranian plane was ascending. But several crewmen from the Vincennes told investigators they either saw on the computer or heard another crewman state that the plane was descending. Given that more people recalled the plane descending, that the crew on the Sides was not as intently focused on the plane as was the Vincennes's crew, and that the Sides was equipped with a less sophisticated radar, the logical conclusion from the interviews would have been that the plane was descending.