BROOKE SHIELDS LOSES COURT CASE
ALBANY, March 29— The state's highest court ruled today that a photographer who took nude pictures of the actress-model Brooke Shields when she was 10 years old could continue to market the photos as long as he did not sell them to pornographic publications.

In a 4-to-3 decision, the Court of Appeals said the 17-year-old Miss Shields could not break a contract signed in 1975 by her mother, Teri Shields, which allowed a New York City photographer, Garry Gross, to take the pictures.

Miss Shields could not be reached for comment on the decision. The photos were made for a Playboy Press publication.

Charges Invasion of Privacy

The photo session brought Miss Shields and her mother $450 and was arranged by the Ford Model Agency, according to the court. In her lawsuit, Miss Shields had attempted to block any further sale of the photos by Mr. Gross, contending they were an invasion of her privacy and caused her embarrassment. Mr. Gross said the contract signed by the actress-model's mother gave him a free hand to market the photos.

The Court of Appeals decision allowing Mr. Gross to continue his sale of the pictures reversed an earlier ruling by a middle-level state appeals court that had granted Miss Shields a permanent injunction blocking further sale of the photos.

That injunction was granted after lawyers for Miss Shields appealed a 1981 ruling by a State Supreme Court justice in Manhattan, Edward J. Greenfield. Justice's Ruling Is Upheld

In his ruling, Justice Greenfield had said Mr. Gross could continue marketing the photos except to ''pornographic magazines or publications whose appeal is of a predominately prurient nature.''

The Court of Appeals ruling upheld Justice Greenfield's decision, including the stipulation that the photos could not be sold to pornographic magazines.

Lawyers for Miss Shields had argued that Justice Greenfield's limited restriction had not gone far enough to protect Miss Shields. The middle-level appeals court had agreed with that contention.

Judge Matthew J. Jasen, in the minority opinion for the Court of Appeals, wrote, ''I see no reason why the child must continue to bear the burden imposed by her mother's bad judgment.''