‘I Thought They Were Playing Dead’: Officers Are Haunted by Scene at Orlando Club
ORLANDO — A scene keeps flashing through Officer Omar Delgado’s mind, sneaking into his slumber every time he closes his eyes to sleep.

It is of his first look inside the Pulse nightclub. Dozens of people were motionless on the blood-soaked dance floor, and the Eatonville police officer had just burst through the club’s patio door for a rescue.

“I yelled: ‘Hey, come on, get up! Let’s go! We have cover for you. Police! We’re here,’” Officer Delgado said.

Nobody budged.

It took a moment for Officer Delgado, 44, to realize that the “signal 43” he had responded to — Orange County police code for “Rush! Officer needs help” — was not an officer down, but a massacre of civilians.

Officer Delgado, who had been working the night shift in a small town eight miles north of Orlando, was in the second wave of officers who responded after the initial shooting. He wound up spending hours inside, saving a few people and watching over the many dead.

“I thought they were playing dead so they would not get hit,” he said. “It wasn’t until I got my flashlight and scanned the room and saw so much blood from where all these bodies were lying. I looked to my left, to a guy who I guess got the worst end of it, and that’s when it hit me: ‘Wow, these people are all dead.’”

He arrived at the beginning of a three-hour standoff. Officer Delgado dragged some of the wounded to safety and took cover behind a wall.

Officer Delgado recounted a harrowing night of watching club patrons trip over corpses and writhe in agony as their bullet-ridden bodies were pulled across broken glass. The image of Brenda Lee Marquez McCool, with her shock of cropped white hair and tattoos, haunts him. He is among the group of responders who are likely to require counseling to find the will to return to work.

Officer James Hyland of the Orlando police is another. Officer Hyland, who did two tours in Afghanistan, said what he saw at Pulse was worse. “It makes me forget about a lot of the stuff that happened in the military,” he said. “The situation was worse than being in a war zone.”

At a debriefing held at a local high school shortly after the shooting, many officers sat and cried, said Joseph Imburgio, one of the Orlando police officers who was on the scene at Pulse.

Officers from Newtown, Conn., to San Bernardino, Calif., have already learned these lessons, as they mustered the courage to ask for help.