A Doctor’s Assessment of Whether Donald Trump’s Health Is ‘Excellent’
According to an algorithm developed by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and known as MESA (for multiethnic study of atherosclerosis), his risk of a heart attack is 0.7 percent for each of the next 10 years. That measure is higher than the less than 0.2 percent for Mrs. Clinton. Because Mr. Trump is taking a statin, another algorithm developed by the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association does not apply to his case and so cannot be compared with his rival’s.

Dr. Bornstein has described Mr. Trump’s physical strength and stamina as “extraordinary.” But he has provided no objective measurements to support the opinion.

Neurological Assessment

Because Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton are in the age range of increased risk for Alzheimer’s disease and other forms of dementia, many experts have urged that they take neuro-cognitive tests and mental status tests that can detect early clues to dementia. Neither Mr. Trump nor Mrs. Clinton has said whether they have taken such tests.

Mr. Trump has said he was “blessed with great genes — both of my parents had very long and productive lives.” Dr. Bornstein wrote that Mr. Trump’s father, Fred Trump, lived into his 90s and his mother into her late 80s. But Dr. Bornstein did not mention that Fred Trump developed Alzheimer’s disease beginning in his late 80s. The genetics of most forms of Alzheimer’s and dementia are not known with certainty. Doctors consider it prudent to be aware of such a risk, and for patients to be checked if specific signs become apparent.

Dr. Bornstein did not mention Mr. Trump’s mental status or summarize a neurological examination. Mrs. Clinton’s physician, Dr. Lisa Bardack of Mt. Kisco, N.Y., described her patient’s mental condition as “excellent.”

Orthopedic Issues

Dr. Bornstein did not mention any orthopedic problems. Mr. Trump received a draft deferment during the Vietnam War because of a bone spur in his foot. When asked about it last year by reporters, Mr. Trump said he could not recall which foot was afflicted.

Medication and Immunizations

Beyond the aspirin and the statin Mr. Trump takes regularly, he is not on any other medication. Dr. Bornstein did not state whether Mr. Trump is up to date on a standard schedule of immunizations against pneumococcal pneumonia, influenza or other infections.