Make Them Fit, Please!
He also has coined the Perfect 10! (aesthetic toe-shortening — once administered, he said, to a 17-year-old fashion model, so she could wear the shoes her career demanded); Model T (toe-lengthening); and Foot Tuck, a fat-pad augmentation that he said helps with high heels.

And he is not the only doctor changing the face, as it were, of foot surgery.

Dr. Neal Blitz, a podiatrist who specializes in aesthetic and reconstructive procedures (including a Bunionplasty) at his private practice in Manhattan, and operates at Mount Sinai Hospital, calls this body part “the final frontier” for those who have had work done on their faces. “My practice has exploded because of Manolo Blahnik, Christian Louboutin and Nicholas Kirkwood,” he said in a recent phone interview. “There’s nothing like opening a shoe closet that’s been closed to somebody for years.”

Perish all thought of Dr. Scholl’s or Birkenstocks in these waiting rooms. Dr. Oliver Zong, founder of NYC Footcare and self-proclaimed “originator of the foot face-lift and toe tuck,” routinely corrects such conditions as High Heel Foot (a term he coined to describe a deformed foot that’s conformed to the shape of a stiletto), and Hitchhiker’s Toe, (an abnormally large big toe that sticks out like the thumb of a hitchhiker). He recently introduced the phrase “Toebesity,” which he plans to describe on his site, where flashing text promises: “Designer feet for designer shoes.”

One designer, Cathy Hardwick, who gave Tom Ford his first assistant job, had bilateral bunion surgery from Dr. Richard Frankel, the founder of Park 56 Podiatry, in 2008. “He didn’t want to operate, it was so little,” she said of the bump. But, she added: “It was unsightly and it hurt when I wore certain shoes. A few years later he operated. My foot is perfect now. And I can wear sandals I couldn’t wear before.”

Indeed, it’s not unusual for patients to walk into Dr. Suzanne Levine’s Institute Beauté, a podiatry clinic and medical spa on Park Avenue, with a bag full of shoes they can’t wear because of bunions and hammertoes. Victorian boots, Jimmy Choos and Manolo Blahniks are some of the examples on floor-to-ceiling glass shelves. Dr. Levine consults with patients on the designer high heels best suited to their particular feet, knowing, for example that both Prada and Michael Kors make a wider-than-average shoe last. “Some people won’t go to the beach or the pool, they’re so embarrassed about their feet,” said Dr. Levine, who was wearing chunky-heeled Michael Kors bootees during a recent interview.