Brooklyn Man Recalls 2013 Beating and His Pleas for Help
A few days after Thanksgiving 2013, a woman was driving down Flushing Avenue in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, when suddenly, lurching from the street, a man ran toward her car, banging on her window and hollering for help. It was nearly 4:30 a.m. The man was young, black, terrified. The woman kept driving but quickly placed a call to 911.

On Wednesday, the young man who had begged for her assistance, a former college student named Taj Patterson, told a judge what had happened just before the encounter and what happened after. Sitting on the witness stand in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, Mr. Patterson said he had been out at a birthday party the night before with friends. Early in the morning, he said, while walking home alone, he was set upon by a group of 15 or 20 Hasidic Jews. He testified that they beat and kicked him so badly that he eventually lost sight in one of his eyes.

“I started getting punched in the face,” Mr. Patterson said, adding that at one point he managed to get in a couple of punches himself. “I got punched more, I was knocked down to the ground, I was tripped — they were kicking me.” In an almost distant tone, he went on: “I was kicked in the face. I was dragged. I was being held between cars. Fifteen other people were blocking my view from cars driving by.”

Image Mr. Patterson after the attack in 2013, which occurred while he was walking home through Williamsburg in Brooklyn.

Mr. Patterson, 25, gave this account at the trial of Mayer Herskovic, a member of Williamsburg’s Orthodox Jewish community and the only man so far to have stood trial in connection with the assault. A few months after the attack, prosecutors charged four other men along with Mr. Herskovic. Two of the men, Pinchas Braver and Abraham Winkler, pleaded guilty in May to a lesser charge of unlawful imprisonment and were sentenced to probation and community service. Two others, Aharon Hollender and Joseph Fried, had the charges against them dismissed after witnesses who had initially identified them changed their minds.