Friday Mailbag: A Patriots Photo Lets Trump Score a Point
Last Friday, The Times ran a story on the dismissals of two Georgia police officers two days after they assaulted a man, punching him in the face and kicking him in the head, during a traffic stop. The top of the story featured the professional photographs of the police officers.

The booking photo of the victim, Demetrius Bryan Hollins, was included near the end.

Several readers wrote in to protest the photo choices for the article.

The news story uses professional, smiling photos of the two perpetrators and a mug shot of the (African American) victim. This perpetuates the stereotype of African Americans as violent criminals, even when they are the victims of crimes. I am sure that the Times would have been able to find a more appropriate photo of Mr. Hollins to use for this story. Beth Davidson, Washington, D.C.

We brought the concern to Beth Flynn, the deputy photo editor, for a response.

The only photos readily available for this piece were the handouts of the police officers and the booking mug of Mr. Hollins. That said, I think there were a few missed opportunities here. One, both (civilian) videos showing the horrific behavior by the police officers during the arrest were accessible online, and we should have made the effort to track down usage rights and add one to the top of the piece. Two, the (smiling) handout images of the officers should never have been the top of the article art. And three, the booking mug of Mr. Hollins, if that is all we had access to, could have been captioned to say he was kicked in the head by officers during the arrest (and then seeing his bleeding face in this picture would have added value). Thanks for sending the note along, this is a good post mortem conversation for our editors.

Image Credit Gwinnett County Sheriff’s Office, via Associated Press

The public editor’s take: Another thanks to an editor with candor and clarity, in this case about how the photo selection process works.

One reader wrote in this week to ask why The Times, in a story on a Michigan doctor who is accused of performing female genital mutilation on two 7-year-old girls referred to the practice as “genital cutting.”

We asked Celia Dugger, the editor of Health and Science, to explain the reasoning behind the decision.

I began writing about this back in 1996 when I was an immigration reporter on the Metro desk covering the asylum case of Fauziya Kassindja. I decided in the course of reporting that case — especially after a reporting trip to Togo, her home country, and the Ivory Coast — to call it genital cutting rather than mutilation. I never minced words in describing exactly what form of cutting was involved, and there are many gradations of severity, and the terrible damage it did, and stayed away from the euphemistic circumcision, but chose to use the less culturally loaded term, genital cutting. There’s a gulf between the Western (and some African) advocates who campaign against the practice and the people who follow the rite, and I felt the language used widened that chasm.

During the presidential campaign, conservative readers intermittently wrote in to complain that The Times referred to Melania Trump as “Ms.” rather than “Mrs.” The public editor addressed the question then — the first lady took the default courtesy title “Ms.” because she hadn’t expressed a preference — and in January we noted that the first lady had since expressed that she would prefer to be called Mrs. Trump.

This week a reader wrote in to ask The Times to drop the courtesy title “Mrs.” for women altogether.

The more I encounter it lately, the more disturbed I am by the paper’s continued use of the title “Mrs.” to refer to married women. It strikes me that, say, Theresa May’s marital status has no bearing on her decision to call an early election in Britain, and that Jacqueline Kimmelstiel’s marital status is irrelevant to her childhood experience fleeing the Nazis. For one, the practice is anachronistic, which I believe does damage to the Times’s readability and relevance. For another, it’s insulting to women who’ve worked hard to overcome the idea that their marital status should determine the way they’re perceived by society to see that attitude reflected so casually, every single day, in the Paper of Record. I would suggest that the Times adopt the style of most other newspapers and omit titles on second reference, or else switch to the maritally neutral “Ms.” Jillian Goodman, New York City

We asked Phil Corbett, the associate managing editor for standards, to address the question.

Our style guidelines call for “Ms.” as the regular courtesy title for a woman, unless the woman specifically expresses her preference for “Mrs.” (or, rarely, “Miss”). So, for example, in the case of Theresa May, we had actually been referring to her as “Ms. May” until we learned from her aides that she prefers “Mrs. May.” Her Parliament webpage even makes this explicit. This approach is in keeping with our general practice of referring to people and organizations as they prefer. I realize, though, that the Ms./Mrs. distinction troubles many readers — and I think the use of “Mrs.” has grown less and less common, in The Times as well as everywhere else.

The public editor’s take: I’m on the record as an advocate for discarding courtesy titles altogether. As The Times tries to reach a younger audience, referring to Mrs. or Ms. or Mr. seems stuck in the past. But if we can do it only one at a time, let’s start with Mrs.

Finally, several readers wondered if an article recommending “moody film noir classics” on Amazon Prime was actually a paid placement by Amazon.

I just read the article in tonight’s online edition about great old film noir classics now available to Amazon Prime subscribers, complete with in-story links to their pages on Amazon Prime. Is this a paid placement paid for by Amazon Prime meant to encourage readers to subscribe to Amazon Prime, and if so shouldn’t that fact be noted? Christopher Ho, San Francisco

We went to Gilbert Cruz, the editor of Watching, for a reply.

The article is not paid placement from Amazon Prime. That list ran on Watching, The New York Times’s new film and TV recommendation site. Given that there’s more to watch than ever before — and more outlets on which to watch that content — we often try to direct Times readers toward great movies and series on specific streaming services. The idea for the list that Christopher points to came from the editorial staff, the films mentioned were chosen by me and the writer and there was not — and never is — any communication with Amazon about such things. Given the topics we write about on Watching, we often hope to provide value to readers by focusing on specific genres or streaming services. If you’re interested in film noir, this list is for you. If you’re not, there are other genre specific lists that might be. If you are already a subscriber to Amazon Prime, we hope to point you to movies that you may not have come across yet. Same can be said for lists we do that pertain to Netflix or Hulu or other streaming services. The goal in each of those cases is to dig into large and scattershot catalogs and tell readers what is worth their time.

As for our recommendation for what to watch on Amazon Prime, though it’s not a moody film noir classic, we highly endorse “The Americans.” Well, one of us does, at least, if you can guess who.