Calls to Investigate State Senator Persist. But Will It Happen?
The senator’s pushback began even before Ms. Vladimer’s story was published, with a pre-emptive conference call with reporters last week alongside his girlfriend, Senator Diane J. Savino of Staten Island. Mr. Klein’s lawyer then offered an investigative memo, accusing Ms. Vladimer of acting unusually and drinking heavily the night of the incident, during a post-budget celebration in Albany. (In her statement, Ms. Vladimer characterized Mr. Klein’s campaign against her claims as “all-too-familiar gaslighting methods,” which help to compel “victims of abuse to remain silent, particularly when abuse comes from men in positions of high authority.”)

Asked about the motivation for the letters of support, a spokeswoman for the I.D.C., Barbara Brancaccio, said, “Individuals who currently and have formerly worked with, and for, Jeff Klein throughout his 30 years in public service have every right to stand up for his character, just as Senator Klein has the right to defend himself.”

Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who has worked closely with the Independent Democratic Conference, and has been accused of facilitating the group’s partnership with Mr. Flanagan, has twice called for an investigation, but has offered no details on who would handle it.

That has not satisfied some activists and protesters who feel that the governor should be more outspoken, particularly considering the national reckoning over sexual harassment in the workplace — something Mr. Cuomo has promised will be a major part of his 2018 agenda.

“He has said the bare minimum to slip away from any responsibility,” said Heather Stewart, of the group Empire State Indivisible, calling Mr. Cuomo a “poor champion for justice.”

The governor’s office flatly rejects that assertion, noting the governor’s call for an independent probe into Mr. Klein’s actions, and saying on Monday that Mr. Cuomo will include a raft of measures aimed at fighting sexual harassment in his budget presentation on Tuesday, effectively forcing the issue into immediate negotiations. Melissa DeRosa, the secretary to the governor, said that the issue would be Mr. Cuomo’s highest priority. “He recognizes it’s a moment for change,” she said on Monday. “And he wants to seize upon it.”

Ms. Vladimer said in an interview on Sunday that she appreciated the governor’s call for an investigation, though “what that means to him remains to be seen.” She also said she understood that Mr. Cuomo and Mr. Klein had a working relationship. “You cannot overlook that the I.D.C. has, in some ways, been helpful to him,” she said, of the governor.