House Expands Domestic Violence Gun Controls in Rebuke to N.R.A.
“This wasn’t a gun bill — this is a bill to protect women,” said Lisette Johnson, a member of the Everytown Survivor Network and a survivor of domestic abuse. “This passing today is really a huge support for women and keeping them safer.”

Republicans had advocated a clean one-year extension of the current law, which expired in February, arguing that new elements of the legislation were controversial and overreached — in particular, the gun restrictions and language offering additional protections to transgender people.

“Can we stop playing political games at the expense of vulnerable women?” asked Representative Elise Stefanik, Republican of New York, before the vote, arguing that the bill put forward by Democrats would “collect dust in the Senate.” (Democrats, who booed vigorously during her speech, rejected her motion.)

The vote highlighted the stark contrasts between the new Democratic majority, with its historic number of women, and the Republican minority, which has struggled to attract female voters and to increase the number of conservative women holding office on Capitol Hill. Democrats framed opposition to the legislation’s renewal as a denial of protections for survivors of abuse, efforts to prevent domestic violence and support for law enforcement.

Representative Sharice Davids, Democrat of Kansas and one of the first two Native American women elected to Congress in November, presided over the final vote on the measure, which contains a number of protections for women on tribal lands — including a new provision that would allow tribal courts to prosecute nonnative people accused of domestic crimes or dating violence on tribal lands.

A number of Democrats, including Ms. Dingell and Representative Katie Porter of California, offered passionate defenses of the legislation, repeatedly drawing on their own experiences as survivors of domestic abuse.

“I know that fear, I know that terror and I just want to try to save another family from going through that terror,” Ms. Dingell said at a news conference on Wednesday, recalling being afraid as a child that her father, who had mental illness and owned a gun, would harm her mother or her siblings. “Why would you not close that loophole?”