The Turnover at the Top of the Trump Administration
Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, who presided over the demise of the daily news briefing, will step down at the end of the month. President Trump made the announcement on Twitter.

Cabinet/federal agency White House Forced out Resigned

Mr. Trump “has the record for White House staff turnover, for cabinet turnover and now for the highest turnover within a single department,” said Ms. Tenpas, who wrote a presidential staff turnover study.

Several of Mr. Trump’s cabinet agencies are now led by “acting” secretaries rather than by people who were confirmed by the Senate. The White House chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, also serves in an acting capacity.

Some roles have been more volatile than others. For example, there have been five White House communications chiefs, with stints ranging from less than a week (Anthony Scaramucci) to about eight months (Bill Shine, the former Fox News executive). Sean Spicer, while serving as press secretary, filled the position twice — once in an acting capacity after Michael Dubke resigned.

Communications chief 6 Resigned 5 Resigned 4 Fired 3 Interim 2 Resigned 1 Secretary of health and human services 4 Current 3 Interim 2 Interim 1 Forced out Secretary of veterans affairs 4 Current 3 Withdrew 2 Interim 1 Fired National security adviser 4 Current 3 Forced out 2 Interim 1 Fired Secretary of homeland security 4 Acting 3 Forced out 2 Interim 1 Moved Attorney general 3 Current 2 Interim 1 Forced out Chief of staff 3 Acting 2 Forced out 1 Forced out Secretary of Interior 2 Current 1 Resigned E.P.A. administrator 2 Current 1 Forced out Secretary of Defense 2 Acting 1 Resigned Budget director 2 Acting 1 Moved Administrator of Small Business Administration 2 Announced 1 Resigned Secretary of state 2 Current 1 Fired C.I.A. director 2 Current 1 Moved Chief economic adviser 2 Current 1 Resigned Press secretary 2 Current 1 Resigned

“The disruption is highly consequential,” Max Stier, the president and chief executive of the Partnership for Public Service, a nonprofit organization that specializes in federal government management issues. “When you lose a leader, it has a cascade effect throughout the organization.”

A New York Times analysis of 21 top White House and cabinet positions back to President Bill Clinton’s first term shows how unusual the Trump administration’s upheaval was through the first 14 months of a presidency. Nine of these positions had turned over at least once during the Trump administration, compared with three at the same point of the Clinton administration, two under President Barack Obama and one under President George W. Bush.

Turnover in Each Administration’s First 14th MonthsNumber of people who held a position

Donald J. Trump (through March 2018)

Barack Obama

George W. Bush

Bill Clinton

On several occasions, Mr. Trump has filled newly open positions with officials already in his administration. He chose Mike Pompeo, the C.I.A. director, to replace Mr. Tillerson, and Mr. Pompeo’s deputy, Gina Haspel, to replace Mr. Pompeo. Ms. Hicks, a longtime aide and confidant, took over communications after Mr. Scaramucci’s disastrous tenure. And Kirstjen Nielsen, who just resigned as secretary of homeland security, crisscrossed from that department to the White House and then back again.

“There’s a pull to fill from within, but that’s often a bad idea,” Mr. Stier said. “Not only does it create a new vacancy but you’re also not expanding the talent pool. One of the primary leadership challenges is getting information from outside the bubble you exist in.”