Reductions in Force
Learning About the RIF Regulations

One of the most difficult situations in any worker's life is being laid off.

In the Federal Government, layoffs are called reduction in force (RIF) actions. When an agency must abolish positions, the RIF regulations determine whether an employee keeps his or her present position, or whether the employee has a right to a different position.

This summary discusses the procedures in the RIF regulations. With this summary, employees, managers, collective bargaining representatives, and others will have an overview of both the agency's and its employees' rights in a restructuring situation.

The appropriate human resource office in the agency can provide additional information on specific questions relating to RIF policies, options, and entitlements.

Legal Basis for the RIF Regulations

The RIF regulations are derived from section 12 of the Veterans' Preference Act of 1944 and other statutes. These laws are codified in sections 3501 through 3503 of title 5, United States Code (5 U.S.C. 3501-3503). OPM implements these statutory requirements through regulations published in part 351 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (5 C.F.R. part 351).

The law provides that the RIF regulations must give effect to four retention factors:

Tenure of employment (i.e., type of appointment); Veterans' preference; Total creditable Federal civilian and uniformed service; and Performance ratings.

This summary will cover each factor in more detail.

The Agency's Right to Make RIF Decisions

Each agency has the right to decide what positions are abolished, whether a RIF is necessary, and when the RIF will take place. Once the agency makes these decisions, the retention regulations then determine which employee is actually reached for a RIF action.

Actions Covered by the RIF Regulations

An agency must use the RIF regulations before separating or demoting an employee because of an organizational reason such as reorganization, including lack of work, shortage of funds, insufficient personnel ceiling, or the exercise of certain reemployment or restoration rights. In fact, virtually all RIF actions are the result of a reorganization (e.g., the agency reorganizes as the result of a shortage of funds, lack of work, restructuring, etc.).

A furlough of more than 30 calendar days, or of more than 22 discontinuous workdays, is also a RIF action. (A furlough of 30 or fewer calendar days, or of 22 or fewer discontinuous workdays, is an adverse action.)

An agency may not use the RIF regulations to separate or demote an employee for a personal reason, such as problems with the employee's performance or conduct.

The Agency's Right to Reassign Employees

The abolishment of a position does not always require the use of RIF procedures. The agency has the right to avoid a RIF action by simply reassigning an employee to a vacant position at the same grade or pay without regard to the employee's rights under the RIF regulations. The vacant position may be in the same or in a different classification series, line of work, and/or geographic location. The "Summary of Reassignment Under the Regulations" includes additional information on reassignment.

Defining the Competitive Area

When preparing for a RIF, the agency defines the "Competitive Area" that establishes the geographical and organizational limits for RIF competition.

A competitive area may consist of all or part of an agency. The minimum competitive area is an organization in a local commuting area that is separate from other agency organizations because of differences in operation, work function, staff, and personnel administration. Separate personnel administration is the authority of managers to authorize personnel actions (i.e., establishing positions, abolishing positions, etc.), not just process personnel actions. For example, a single personnel office may potentially process actions for multiple competitive areas.

At its option, an agency may establish a competitive area larger than the minimum standard. The regulations do not define the maximum size of a competitive area (e.g., a competitive area may potentially be nationwide or even worldwide).

An Inspector General activity covered by the Inspector General Act of 1978 is always defined as a separate competitive area.

If an agency wants to redefine a competitive area within 90 days of the RIF effective date, the agency must obtain OPM's approval for the change.

Back to Top

Defining the Local Commuting Area

While defining its competitive area, the agency also defines the appropriate "Local Commuting Area(s)" for the competitive area.

A local commuting area usually includes one population center in which employees live and reasonably travel back and forth to work. The regulations do not define a mileage standard for local commuting area. Instead, the agency must apply the regulations and determine what is reasonable for a specific geographic location.

Back to Top

Establishing Competitive Levels

Within each competitive area, the agency groups interchangeable positions into "Competitive Levels."

Each competitive level includes positions with the same grade, classification series, and official tour of duty (e.g., full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent). For example, otherwise identical full-time and seasonal positions are placed in separate competitive levels even when the agency conducts a RIF while the seasonal employee happens to be working a full-time tour of duty.

All positions in a competitive level have interchangeable qualifications, duties, and responsibilities. The agency establishes a competitive level based on employees' official position descriptions, not on the employees' personal qualifications.

The agency establishes separate competitive levels for positions filled as part of a formally designated trainee or developmental program. The agency also establishes separate competitive levels for positions filled on competitive service appointments, and for positions filled on excepted service appointments.

The agency places two similar positions (e.g., same grade, classification series, work schedule, etc.), in the same competitive level when the position descriptions for the two positions show that an employee in either one of the positions needs no more than 90 days to be able to perform the key tasks of the other position.

The agency does not include employees with competitive service temporary appointments in the competitive level because these employees serve at the will of the agency. The agency includes excepted employees with temporary appointments of 1 year or less in the competitive level only after the employee completes more than 1 year of current continuous service under the same type of appointment.

Back to Top

Establishing Retention Registers

After grouping interchangeable positions into competitive levels, the agency applies the four retention factors in establishing separate "Retention Registers" for each competitive level that may be involved in the RIF. The terms "Competitive Level" and "Retention Register" generally have the same meaning. "Retention Register" is the ranking of employees in the competitive level after the agency applies the four retention factors.

The agency lists the name of each employee on the retention register in the order of the employee's relative retention standing. For example, the employee with the highest standing is at the top of the register, and the employee with the lowest standing is at the bottom of the register.

Back to Top

Determining Retention Standing-Tenure

Beginning with Group I, the agency ranks competitive service employees on a retention register in three groups according to their types of appointment:

Group I - Includes career employees who are not serving on probation. A new supervisor or manager who is serving a probationary period that is required on initial appointment to that type of position is not considered to be serving on probation if the employee previously completed a probationary period.

Group II - Includes career‑conditional employees, and career employees who are serving a probationary period because of a new appointment.

Group III - Includes employees serving under term and similar non‑status appointments.

Retention registers for excepted positions use similar tenure groups.

Back to Top

Determining Retention Standing-Veterans' Preference

The agency divides each of the three tenure groups into three subgroups based upon employees' entitlement to veterans' preference for RIF purposes:

Subgroup AD - Includes veterans who are eligible for RIF preference and who have a compensable service‑connected disability of 30% or more Subgroup A - Includes veterans eligible for RIF preference who are not eligible for subgroup AD (including eligible spouses, widowers or widowers, and mothers of veterans). Subgroup B - Includes nonveterans and others not eligible for RIF preference in subgroups AD and A.

OPM's publication "Vet Guide" has additional information on eligibility for veterans' preference. Vet Guide is available on the OPM website.

Back to Top

Determining Retention Standing-Veterans' Preference for Retired Members of the Armed Forces

By law (i.e., the Dual Compensation Act of 1964, as presently codified in section 3501(a) of title 5, United States Code), a retired member of the Armed Forces is a veteran under the RIF regulations only if the employee meets one of the following three conditions:

The Armed Forces retirement (without regard to benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs) is directly based upon a combat‑incurred disability or injury; or The Armed Forces retirement is based upon less than 20 years of active duty; or The employee has been working for the Government since November 30, 1964, without a break in service of more than 30 days.

Back to Top

Determining Retention Standing-Total Creditable Service

Within each subgroup, the agency ranks employees by their respective service dates. For example, the agency places the employee with the most service at the top of the subgroup, and places the employee with the least service at the bottom of the subgroup.

Retention service credit includes all creditable Federal civilian and military service.

A retired member of the Armed Forces with 20 or more years of military service who is not eligible for veterans' preference under the RIF regulations receives retention credit only for Armed Forces service during a war, or service performed in a campaign or expedition for which the individual received a badge.

Back to Top

Determining Retention Standing-Performance

Employees receive extra retention service credit for performance based upon the average of their last three annual performance ratings of record received during the 4‑year period prior to the date the agency either (1) issues specific RIF notices, or (2) at its option, freezes ratings before issuing RIF notices. If an employee received more than three ratings during the 4‑year period, the agency uses the three most recent annual ratings of record.

Most employees receive performance ratings of record under one of eight possible summary rating patterns required by paragraph 5 C.F.R. 430.208(d) of the performance appraisal regulations (e.g., a two-level "Pass/Fail" pattern, a traditional five-level pattern, etc.) The RIF regulations cover situations when all employees in the competitive area are covered by a single rating pattern (e.g., all employees are covered by a five-level pattern), as well as situations when employees in the competitive area are covered by more than one summary rating pattern (e.g., some employees are covered by a five level pattern, while other employees are covered by a two-level "Pass/Fail" pattern).

Single Rating Pattern. An agency has a single rating pattern when all employees in the competitive area received performance ratings of record under only one of the eight possible summary rating patterns. For example, all of the employees in the competitive area have ratings of record only under a five-level pattern, or only under a two-level pattern, or under the same three-level pattern, etc. The amount of extra retention service credit with a single rating pattern is: 20 additional years for each performance rating of " Outstanding " or equivalent (i.e., Level V); 16 additional years for each performance rating of " Exceeds Fully Successful " or equivalent (i.e., Level IV); and, 12 additional years for each performance rating of " Fully Successful " or equivalent (i.e., Level III). The agency does not give any additional service credit for performance ratings below Fully Successful or equivalent (i.e., no additional retention service credit for a rating of record below Level 3). For example, an employee with 3 years of Federal service has one Outstanding rating of record, (20), and two Exceeds Fully Successful (16) ratings of record. The employee would receive additional reduction in force service credit based upon the three actual ratings of record: 20 + 16 + 16 = 52, divided by 3 = 17.3, rounded up to 18 years of additional retention credit for performance. The agency always rounds up a fraction (e.g., 17.3 years) to the next whole number (e.g., 18 years) for the final value of the employee's additional retention credit for performance.

An agency has a single rating pattern when all employees in the competitive area received performance ratings of record under only one of the eight possible summary rating patterns. For example, all of the employees in the competitive area have ratings of record only under a five-level pattern, or only under a two-level pattern, or under the same three-level pattern, etc. The amount of extra retention service credit with a single rating pattern is: Multiple Rating Patterns . If an agency has employees in a competitive area who have performance ratings of record under more than one of the eight possible summary rating patterns, at its option the agency may provide different amounts of additional retention service credit for employees who have the same summary level, but are under different patterns. The range of additional service credit is still limited from 12 to 20 years. For example, the agency may elect to provide employees who have a Level 3 (Fully Successful or equivalent) rating of record under a two-level Pass/Fail pattern with 18 years of additional retention service credit, while electing to continue providing employees who have a Level 4 (Exceeds Fully Successful or equivalent) rating of record under a five-level pattern with 16 years of additional retention service credit.

. If an agency has employees in a competitive area who have performance ratings of record under more than one of the eight possible summary rating patterns, at its option the agency may provide different amounts of additional retention service credit for employees who have the same summary level, but are under different patterns. The range of additional service credit is still limited from 12 to 20 years. Less Than Three Ratings of Record . If an employee received one or two, but not three ratings of record during the applicable 4‑year period, the agency gives credit for performance on the basis of the actual rating(s) of record divided by the number of actual ratings received.

Modal Rating. If an employee did not receive any ratings of record during the applicable 4‑year period, the agency gives retention credit on the basis of a single "Modal Rating" for the employee's summary level pattern. The modal rating is the summary rating level given most frequently to the summary rating pattern that applies to the employee's position. For example, if Level 4 (Exceeds Fully Successful) is the most frequent rating of record for employees covered by a five-level pattern, Level 4 is the modal rating for an employee under that pattern who did not receive any ratings of record.

The agency determines the modal rating on the basis of its most recently completed available ratings.

The agency also decides whether to base the modal rating upon ratings finalized throughout the agency, or upon ratings finalized in a smaller agency organization (such as the competitive area).

Back to Top

Two Rounds of RIF Competition

In "First Round RIF Competition," the agency applies the four retention factors to a competitive level to identify which employee has the lowest retention factor. The agency may use RIF procedures to release the lowest-standing employee from the competitive level.

In "Second Round RIF Competition," the agency again applies the four retention factors, this time to determine whether a released employee has a bump or retreat right to a position in a different competitive level that is held by an employee with even lower retention standing.

Back to Top

Sample Retention Register

This sample retention register, including additional credit for performance in the "RIF SCD," is a competitive level for GS-343-12 (Management Analyst) full-time employees holding competitive service appointments:

GS-343-12 Group/Subgroup Employee Name SCD RIF SCD I-AD Smith, Joseph O. 04-02-73 04-02-57 I-A Brown, Nathanial T. 11-14-66 11-14-50 Wilson, William A. 07-31-65 07-31-53 I-B Downs, Christopher G. 06-17-64 06-17-44 Wright, Mary S. 03-28-94 03-28-74 Finn, Charles N. 04-15-93 03-28-77 White, Beatrice L. 08-22-95 08-22-79 II-A Robinson, John H. 08-21-01 08-21-81 II-B Keane, Susan M. 03-13-02 03-13-82

Back to Top

Release From the Competitive Level

The agency releases employees from the retention register in the inverse order of their retention standing. For example, the agency begins with the employee who has the lowest standing in releasing employees from the competitive level as a reduction in force action.

The agency releases all employees in group III before releasing employees in group II, and releases all employees in group II before releasing employees in group I.

Then within subgroups, the agency releases all employees in subgroup B before releasing employees in subgroup A, and releases all employees in subgroup A before releasing employees in subgroup AD.

The agency must notify any employees reached for release out of this regular order (such as under a temporary or a continuing exception in order to retain an employee with special skills) of the reasons for the exception.

Back to Top

Sample Release From the Competitive Level

This sample retention register is a competitive level for GS-343-12 full-time employees holding competitive service appointments:

GS-343-12 Group/Subgroup Employee Name SCD RIF SCD Action I-AD Smith, Joseph O. 04-02-73 04-02-57 I-A Brown, Nathanial T. 11-14-66 11-14-50 Wilson, William A. 07-31-65 07-31-53 Position abolished; displaces White I-B Downs, Christopher G. 06-17-64 06-17-44 Wright, Mary S. 03-28-94 03-28-74 Finn, Charles N. 04-15-93 03-28-77 Transfers to different agency White, Beatrice L. 08-22-95 08-22-79 Displaced by Wilson; lowest standing; released; retreats to GS-560-11 II-A Robinson, John H. 08-21-01 08-21-81 Position abolished; lowest standing; released; bumps to GS-346-9 II-B Keane, Susan M. 03-13-02 03-13-82 Position abolished; lowest standing; released; separated

Explanation - Based solely upon organizational needs, the agency abolished four positions, held by Wilson, Finn, Robinson and Keane.

Finn transferred to a different agency before the RIF effective date.

In the RIF, Robinson and Keane had the lowest retention standing, and are released from the competitive level.

In other RIF-related actions, Wilson (in tenure group and subgroup I-A) displaced White (in tenure group and subgroup I-B). White is released from the competitive level because of lowest retention standing. Wilson retains the same I-A status after entering into White's former position. Wilson's displacement of White is not a RIF action because Wilson was not released from the competitive level.

Unless White, Robinson, and Keane have bump or retreat rights to another position, the agency may separate each employee by RIF.

Keane has no assignment right to another position and separates by RIF. Robinson has a bump right to another position, while White has a retreat right. This summary will cover both the bump and the retreat actions in more detail.

Back to Top

Possible Right to Bump or Retreat to an Available Position

An employee who the agency releases from a competitive level may have bump or retreat rights to a continuing position on a different competitive level held by another employee with lower retention standing.

A released competitive service employee in tenure groups I or II has Bump or Retreat rights to an "Available Position" in the same competitive area if the agency would otherwise separate or demote the released employee by RIF, and the released employee has a current performance rating of record equivalent to Minimally Successful (Level II) or higher.

Available Position. The existence of an "available position" does not oblige an agency to offer an employee a particular position. However, an available position does establish the employee's right to be offered a position at the same grade of the available position.

An "Available Position" must:

Last at least 3 months; Not be a temporary time‑limited position; Be in the competitive service; Be a position that the released employee qualifies for; Have a pay rate that requires no reduction, or the least possible reduction, in the released employee's present grade (but not to a higher grade than the employee's present position.); Have the same type of work schedule (full‑time, part‑time, seasonal, intermittent, on‑call) as the released employee's present position; Be within three grades or grade‑intervals of the employee's present position ("Grade‑Intervals" are discussed below); and Be held by an employee: In a lower retention subgroup who is subject to bump rights, or In the same subgroup, but with less service, and who holds a position which the employee formerly occupied on a permanent basis (or an essentially identical position) that is subject to retreat rights.

Promotion potential is not a consideration in filling a position under the RIF regulations. A RIF offer may have less, more, or the same promotion potential as the released employee's present position.

An employee with an excepted service appointment has no assignment rights under the RIF regulations. However, an agency may elect to provide its excepted employees with RIF assignment rights to other excepted positions under the same appointment authority.

To determine employees' potential qualifications to bump or retreat into another position, before the agency issues RIF notices the agency may ask employees to submit a qualifications update by a designated freeze date.

Back to Top

Bumping Rights

"Bumping" means displacing an employee on a different competitive level who is in a lower tenure group, or in a lower subgroup within the released employee's own tenure group.

For example, an otherwise eligible subgroup I-A employee could potentially bump a lower-standing employee on a different competitive level in subgroup I-B, in tenure Group II, or in tenure Group III. For another example, an otherwise eligible subgroup I-B employee could potentially bump a lower-standing employee in tenure Group II, or tenure Group III.

Although the released employee must be qualified for the position, the bump right may be to a position that the released employee never held.

At its option, the agency may consider employees' total service in determining an employee's bumping rights. This option provides the first offer to the otherwise eligible released employee with the most service.

Back to Top

Sample Bump Right to a Different Competitive Level

This sample retention register is a competitive level for GS-346-9 (Logistics Management) full-time employees holding competitive service appointments. In this example, John Robinson (from the example in Section 18), who was released from the GS-343-12 competitive level by RIF, has a bump right to a position in the GS-343-9 competitive level because his II-A group and subgroup tenure is higher than the II-B tenure of Samuel Wills, and he is qualified for the position. The agency then determines whether Samuel Wills has a bump or retreat right to another position on a different retention register.

This is the best offer available to John Robinson. No higher-standing employee in RIF competition has a greater right than John Robinson to this GS-346-9 position:

GS-346-9 Group/Subgroup Employee Name SCD RIF SCD Action I-A Lawrence, Patrick F. 01-19-79 01-19-65 I-B Jones, Bertha M. 05-01-94 05-01-74 Walsh, Charles N. 08-13-93 08-13 77 Hughes, Sheila C. 11-22-96 11-22-80 II-B Wills, Samuel H. 06-13-01 06/13/81 Bumped by Robinson from GS-343-12 retention register; lowest standing; released; separated

After John Robinson bumps Samuel Wills, John Robinson retains the same II-A group and subgroup tenure from the former GS-343-12 position. After the displacement of Samuel Wills, the retention register for the GS-346-9 positions looks like this:

GS-346-9 Group/Subgroup Employee Name SCD RIF SCD I-A Lawrence, Patrick F. 01-19-79 01-19-65 I-B Jones, Bertha M. 05-01-94 05-01-74 Walsh, Charles N. 08-13-93 08-13-77 Hughes, Sheila C. 11-22-96 11-22-80 II-A Robinson, John H. 08-21-01 08-21-81

Back to Top

Retreating Rights

"Retreating" means displacing an employee on a different competitive level with less service within the released employee's own tenure group and subgroup.

The position may be up to five grades (or grade‑intervals) lower than the position held by the released employee if he or she is a disabled veteran in Subgroup AD.

The position must also be the same position or essentially identical to a position held by the released employee in any Federal agency on a permanent basis.

An employee with a current annual performance rating of record of Minimally Successful (Level II) has retreat rights only to positions held by an employee with the same or a lower performance rating of record.

Back to Top

Sample Retreat Right to a Different Competitive Level

This sample retention register is a competitive level for GS-560-11 full-time employees holding competitive service appointments.

Beatrice White (from the example in Section 18), who was released from the GS-343-12 competitive level by RIF, has the right to retreat to a position held by Charles Gabriel in the GS-560-11 competitive level. This is the best offer available to Beatrice White, who is qualified for the position. The agency then determines whether Charles Gabriel has a bump or retreat right to another position on a different retention register. No higher-standing employee has a right to this GS-560-11 position:

GS-560-11 Group/Subgroup Employee Name SCD RIF SCD Action I-AD Malone, Michael M. 01-19-79 01-19-65 I-B Cook, Joseph G. 05-01-94 05-01-74 Gabriel, Charles N. 08-13-93 08-13-81 Displaced by White; lowest retention standing; released; separated

After Beatrice White retreats to the position held by Charles Gabriel, the retention register for the GS-560-11 positions looks like this:

GS-560-11 Group/Subgroup Employee Name SCD RIF SCD I-AD Malone, Michael M. 01-19-79 01-19-65 I-B Cook, Joseph G. 05-01-94 05-01-74 White, Beatrice L. 08-22-95 08/22/79

Back to Top

Grade Intervals in Assignment Rights

The agency determines the grade limits of a released employee's assignment rights on the basis of the position the employee holds on the RIF effective date, regardless of how the employee progressed to the position.

For example, an employee released from a GS‑11 position that progresses GS‑5‑7‑9‑11 has potential bump and retreat rights to available positions from GS-11 through GS‑5. An employee released from a GS‑9 position that progresses GS-5-6-7-8-9 has potential bump and retreat rights to available positions from GS-9 through GS‑6.

The difference between successive grades in a one‑grade occupation is a grade difference, and the difference between successive grades in a multi‑grade occupation is a grade‑interval difference.

Back to Top

Offers of Assignment to Vacant Positions

An agency is not required to offer vacant positions in a reduction in force, but may choose to fill all, some, or none of the vacancies.

When an agency chooses to fill a vacancy with an employee reached for release from the competitive level by RIF, the agency must consider the relative retention standing of all the released employees. For example, the agency must offer a position to the released employee in the highest group and subgroup before offering a position to an employee in a lower group and subgroup. This is consistent with a bump offer to an occupied position.

The agency is not required to consider total service in offering positions to employees in the same group and subgroup unless the employee with the most service also formerly held the position on a permanent basis. This is consistent with a retreat offer of an occupied position.

The agency satisfies a released employee's right to RIF assignment rights if the agency offers the employee a vacant position at the grade to which the employee has bump or retreat rights.

An agency may choose to waive qualifications in offering an employee RIF assignment to a vacant position. However, the agency may not waive a minimum educational requirement. (An agency may never waive qualifications in offering assignment to an occupied position.)

An agency may make a RIF offer of a vacant position to a released employee only if the vacancy is in the same competitive area, and within three grades (or grade‑intervals) of the employee's present position.

Back to Top

RIF Notices

An agency must give an employee at least 60 days specific written notice before the employee is released from the competitive level by a RIF action.

If faced with an unforeseeable situation (e.g., a natural disaster), the agency may, with OPM approval, give the employee a specific RIF notice of less than 60 days, but at least 30 days, before the effective date of the RIF.

Back to Top

RIF Appeals and Grievances

An employee who has been separated, downgraded, or furloughed for more than 30 days by RIF has the right to appeal the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) if the employee believes that the agency did not properly follow the RIF regulations. The released employee must file the appeal during the 30‑day period beginning the day after the effective date of the RIF action.

An employee in a bargaining unit covered by a negotiated grievance procedure that does not exclude RIF must use the negotiated grievance procedure. The employee may not appeal the RIF action to the Board unless the employee alleges the action was based upon discrimination. The collective bargaining agreement covers the time limits for filing a grievance under a negotiated grievance procedure.

Back to Top

Additional Information from the Agency

The agency's human resources office can provide both employees and managers with additional information on the RIF regulations. The office can also provide information on potential benefits, such as eligibility for:

Career transition assistance, Separation incentives (if available), Rehiring selection priority, Severance pay, Retirement, Retraining, Unemployment compensation, and Relocation allowances.

Back to Top