Free parking for some Pico Rivera city officials
PICO RIVERA – While the city has stepped up parking enforcement on its residents, some city officials have been given a free pass.

A city public safety employee said the city’s four full-time and two part-time parking enforcement officers in March were told not to ticket vehicles belonging to certain elected officials and an administrator.

“We were told that the parking enforcement hand-helds would be programmed with license plate numbers that belonged to City Council members and the city manager and their family members,” the employee, who asked their name not be used for fear of retribution, said.

“We would know a particular vehicle was on that list because a pop-up warning would come up that said `exempted vehicle, do not cite.”‘

The employee said the list of “exempted vehicles” contained about 15 to 20 license plates of multiple vehicles.

Enforcement officers saw the vehicles were parked outside homes after hours, during street sweeping or in red zones, but could not issue tickets, the employee said.

Officials said the policy started in April as a courtesy to the City Council and the city manager to prevent them from being ticketed while on city business.

“Why should we penalize our City Council when they are doing (city) business,” said City Manager Chuck Fuentes at Tuesday’s council meeting. “I think it is very legitimate.”

Fuentes did not return calls this week seeking comment.

Meanwhile, parking citations citywide have increased by about 1,500 compared to last year, officials said, prompting complaints from residents.

Assistant City Manager Jeff Prang said the parking policy for officials was intended to give parking enforcement officers “pause” before issuing a ticket, in case officials were indeed on city business.

“The policy does not relieve the officials of their responsibility to obey posted parking restrictions, and they are subject to being cited for violations,” he said. “But if (parking enforcement officers) need to issue a ticket they must issue a manual ticket instead of an automated one.”

The employee said parking enforcement officers were told not to issue citations, but could give warnings.

“It was not so much a policy,” the employee said. “They said, `This is how it’s going to be.”‘

No parking citations have been given to any city official whose plates were programmed into the devices since the policy commenced, city spokesman Mike Maxfield said.

City officials said all five City Council members and Fuentes was initially put on the list, but the employee said Councilman Gregory Salcido was not, because his plate could be entered for an automated ticket.

Councilman David Armenta said he didn’t know about the policy until it was brought to light at Tuesday’s council meeting.

“No one’s ever asked me if I ever wanted to be on a list or anything like that,” he said Thursday. “If I’m on the list now they probably added me because they didn’t want to look bad.”

No one should be above the law, he said.

“We are supposed to set the standard and be an example,” Armenta said. “We’re just like anyone else, we’re no one special.”

Mayor Bob Archuleta also said he did not know about the policy until Tuesday, and suggested city officials should simply use a parking placard to give enforcement officers a heads-up when they are on city business.

Salcido slammed the policy, calling it illegal.

“When did we ever vote on this,” he said. “It’s an illegal policy and the fact that they’re trying to defend this is laughable.”

City Attorney Arnold Glasman said Tuesday the policy isn’t legitimate.

“The law applies equally to all,” he said.

If someone is parking illegally, the law must apply equally across the board, he said.

But City Councilman Ron Beilke said Tuesday not all city officials are equal.

“Council members are different from one another,” he said. “Some of us do more city business than others.”

But Beilke recanted on Wednesday and said he did not know about the policy, or that his car could not be ticketed by an automated machine.

“I hardly consider it to be a cardinal sin or a major issue,” he said.

“If you’re out at 150-plus community events a year, you’re more likely to find yourself in a situation where quite possibly you could be in violation of some parking infraction. When you’re a council member that attends virtually nothing in the city, obviously your chances are diminished.”

Officials from surrounding cities including Whittier, Santa Fe Springs and La Mirada said they had no similar exemption policies.

On-duty police officers and sheriff’s deputies can be ticketed when they park illegally except in emergency situations, said Pico Rivera sheriff’s Capt. Michael Rothans.

“We don’t have a system that blocks license plate numbers, and we don’t have a policy that exempts anyone from receiving the citation,” he said.

Kathay Feng, executive director of California Common Cause, an open government advocacy group, said altering parking enforcement devices so they cannot give tickets to certain people is an obstruction of justice, akin to lawmakers giving themselves a “get out of jail free” card.

“This is not rampant or widespread, but there are lawmakers that get it into their heads that they are above the law,” she said. “There’s a conspiracy here to rig a device and circumvent law enforcement. I think there’s no question the laws have been violated and this is very unethical behavior.”

Salcido said elected officials should be subject to the same laws as everyone.

“If John Q. Public has to face these intensified efforts to protect and promote quality of life, so should the council,” he said. “Why would we have license to break the law?”

bethania.palma@sgvn.com

(562) 698-0955, Ext. 3028