Spot Report by Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM): The SMM monitored the security situation on day of reported “elections” in non-government-controlled areas
The Mission saw buildings with signs that read “polling stations”. It noted a slight increase in the presence of armed formations in some areas of non-government controlled Donetsk city centre. Some civilians expressed concern to the SMM about “voting”.

The SMM gathered information on the security situation on the day of reported “elections” announced for 11 November in non-government-controlled areas of Luhansk and Donetsk regions.

Before 11 November, the SMM had observed billboards in non-government-controlled areas, encouraging participation in and providing information on “elections” on 11 November.

At the entry-exit checkpoint in government-controlled Stanytsia Luhanska, the SMM saw a billboard warning people against participating in the “elections”. (See SMM Daily Report 5 November 2018)

On 11 November, in non-government-controlled Donetsk city, the SMM observed a slight increase in the presence of armed formations members in some areas of the city centre. It saw buildings with signs that read “polling stations”, with two to four people in full combat gear and with assault rifles present outside most of them. In the vicinity, the SMM saw stalls similar to market ones. The SMM also noted that mobile phone networks (Vodafone and Phoenix) were unavailable for a period of time.

From 9 to 11 November, several people in different settlements in non-government-controlled areas of Luhansk region separately told the SMM that they had “voted”. Others told the SMM that they were not “voting” and some said that they were aware of the “elections”.

In non-government-controlled areas of both regions, civilians expressed concern to the SMM about possible consequences for people who would “vote” and then travel to government-controlled areas. Other civilians separately shared concerns that people felt compelled “to vote”, as otherwise they would face interruption of salaries or health care in non-government-controlled areas.