Press Releases
Press Release Article

PORT AUTHORITY TO SHOWCASE SCULPTURES BY FRENCH ARTIST TO MARK HOLIDAY SEASON AT WORLD TRADE CENTER

Date: Dec 10, 2018

Press Release Number: 190-2018

In its continuing efforts to transform the World Trade Center site into a dynamic space in Lower Manhattan, the Port Authority announced that beginning today it will showcase famous candy sculptures around the World Trade Center campus crafted by renowned French artist Laurence Jenkell.



The exhibit, known as “Candy Nations”, will feature the unique candy sculptures in various locations around the site, including One World Observatory/West Plaza, Liberty Park, Oculus Plaza, the West Concourse, and the Tower 2 Plaza. Each of the sculptures features flags from countries in the G20 summit, and the art work was commissioned by companies and organizations including the Chanel Foundation, the International Olympic Committee and Coca-Cola.



The Jenkell exhibit has toured the world and been shown in more than 25 countries, and will remain on the World Trade Center campus through February 28, 2019.



The art exhibit will supplement ongoing holiday programming managed by The Westfield Group – the shopping mall company that oversees the Oculus space and retail on the World Trade Center campus – including the pop-up holiday market and the daily musical performances in the Oculus.



“This special art exhibit continues our ongoing efforts to provide a strong bond between the World Trade Center campus and the Lower Manhattan community, and advance our mission of making this campus a dynamic hub for creative, cultural and community activities,” said Port Authority Executive Director Rick Cotton. “We strongly recommend that those who work or live in Lower Manhattan as well as those who visit the site this holiday season take time to view these unique works of art.”



The work of Ms. Jenkell was first featured in the United States earlier this year in the Port Authority Bus Terminal, where more than 80 pieces of her work were on display. Most recently, her art work was on display in Manhattan’s Garment District.



The art exhibit is the most recent public initiative to be held on the site, following the successful three-day Smorgasburg event in November, at which 20 vendors from the Brooklyn-based outdoor weekly food market set up shop on the campus.



In addition to the recent Smorgasburg event, the Port Authority has undertaken numerous initiatives this year to enhance the campus/ aesthetics, public space activations and connections in the downtown community through transit and pedestrian streets. They include:

The Port Authority and Silverstein Properties completed a project where local artists displayed their work on the corrugated metal barriers that surround the future 2 World Trade Center site. Seating and painted planters also have been installed around the campus.

The opening for the second season of the World Trade Center Farmer’s Market, providing farmers from throughout New York State with the opportunity to sell fresh fruits and vegetables and other artisanal items. The market’s final day for the season will be on November 27.

The opening of the pedestrian streets at Dey Street and Cortlandt Way, providing connectivity between the site, Greenwich Street and Church Street.

The reopening of the MTA 1 train re-opened at the World Trade Center Station for the first time since September 11th.

The repaving of Liberty Street and the installation of informational wrappings around the Site 5 area, which now houses PAPD trailers.

Contact:

The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey

212-435-7777



Founded in 1921, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey builds, operates, and maintains many of the most important transportation and trade infrastructure assets in the country. The agency’s network of aviation, ground, rail, and seaport facilities is among the busiest in the country, supports more than 550,000 regional jobs, and generates more than $23 billion in annual wages and $80 billion in annual economic activity. The Port Authority also owns and manages the 16-acre World Trade Center site, where the 1,776-foot-tall One World Trade Center is now the tallest skyscraper in the Western Hemisphere. The Port Authority receives no tax revenue from either the State of New York or New Jersey or from the City of New York. The agency raises the necessary funds for the improvement, construction or acquisition of its facilities primarily on its own credit. For more information, please visit http://www.panynj.gov.