The crime of "anti-Soviet agitation" in the Soviet Union in the 1930's
SARAH DAVIES

THE CRIME OF " ANTI-SOVIET AGITATION" IN THE SOVIET UNION IN THE 1930's

One of the most notorious features of the Soviet regime was its attempt to curtail political opposition by creating a new species of crime: "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda."1 Although it is clear that this was an important weapon in the state's armoury of repression, particularly at the height of the "Great Terror," we know relatively little about the principles underlying the definition and prosecution of the crime. How did the regime determine what constituted anti-Soviet agitation, did this definition change, and if so, why and in what way? This study considers these questions in relation to the 1930's, a period which witnessed the repression of unprecedently large numbers for anti- Soviet agitation. The investigation raises some general questions about the nature of the Stalinist regime; in particular, it paints a picture of a regime ridden with conflicts: between individuals, between institutions, and between center and periphery.

In order to understand the interpretation of the crime of anti-Soviet agitation in the 1930's, it is necessary to sketch out briefly the origins and evolution of the offense in Soviet law. Like many of the institutions of Stalinism, this one has its origins in the early years of Bolshevik rule. As early as 1917, the Soviet regime sought to restrict the freedom of speech by criminalizing statements perceived as harmful to the new state. A decree of the People's Commissariat of Justice (Narodnyi Komissariat Iustitsii RSFSR — NKIu) of December 1917 "On the revolutionary tribunal of the press" made it an offense for newspapers to print "all false reports and distorted information about social life, since they are an infringement of the rights and interests of the revolutionary people." This was followed in November 1919 by "Statutes on the revolutionary military tribunals" which made liable to prosecution agitation and propaganda advocating the overthrow of the state and (under a separate offense) "the spreading of false information and rumours about Soviet power, the Red Army and the enemy."2

The 1922 Criminal Code of the RSFSR defined the understanding of what constituted anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda in three separate articles, 69, 70, and 72. Article 69 referred to propaganda and agitation expressing a "call to overthrow the power of the Soviets..." Article 70 discussed propaganda and agitation aimed at helping the international bourgeoisie, and article 72 covered the preparation and possession of counter-revolutionary literature.

Cahiers du Monde russe, 39 (1-2), janvier-juin 1998, pp. 149-168.