REPORT: Taxpayers stuck with lion’s share of costs for LeBron James’ public charity school
GET the DML NEWS APP (FREE) Click Here

Click here to read more about our rating system.

Below is a report that DML News gives a 4 OUT OF 4 STARS trustworthiness rating. We base this rating on the following criteria:

As the most reliable and balanced news aggregation service on the internet, DML News offers the following information published by DailyMail:

The I Promise public school that LeBron James opened for disadvantaged youngsters in his hometown of Akron, Ohio, will eventually end up costing district taxpayers roughly $8 million each year.

Akron school district spokesman Mark Williamson said: ‘The coverage made it look like the whole thing is his. He did a lot, but taxpayers should know it’s their investment too.’

Taxpayers will foot the bill because the school is a joint effort between Akron Public Schools, which covers the daily running of the school, and LeBron’s foundation.

The article goes on to state the following:

It is the product of a decade’s worth of work and as a public school it is not run for profit.

District officials are still trying to finalize the contract details for the school, Cleveland.com reports.

The NBA star was widely praised and received national media coverage for his support of at-risk children when the school officially opened last month.

He personally donated millions through his LeBron James Family Foundation, worked to secure sponsorship and will ultimately have a huge influence on the school program.

But the Akron district will actually end up paying around 75 percent of costs – $8 million – once it is fully established.

The district will hire and pay the teachers and administration and pupils will ride district buses to school.

The costs will mostly be covered by moving teachers, students and funds from other schools, according to the district.

LeBron’s foundation will contribute $2 million a year when the school is functioning at full capacity with all eight grades. Currently, it is only catering for third and fourth graders.

To weigh in on this information provided by DailyMail, engage in our LIVE CHAT below. Scroll down.