Planned Parenthood Great Plains Midtown KC Health Center Receives Abortion License For Immediate Release: Sept. 11, 2017 (Updated: Sept. 11, 2017, 8:06 a.m.) Share This Twitter Facebook Tumblr Pinterest Google Plus

Overland Park – Comprehensive Health of Planned Parenthood Great Plains (PPGP) is thrilled to announce Missouri is no longer a so-called one abortion provider state. The Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services (DHSS) issued PPGP’s license to provide abortion services at the Midtown Kansas City health center located at 1001 Emanuel Cleaver II Blvd in Kansas City, Missouri, giving Missourians one more safe and legal place to turn to for abortion counseling and services in the state.

“Today marks a hard fought victory for Missourians who, for far too long, faced insurmountable challenges to accessing safe, legal abortion. PPGP believed and the courts affirmed, medically unnecessary laws like admitting privileges and ambulatory surgical center (ASC) requirements are unconstitutional. We celebrate this win for our patients who deserve greater access to comprehensive sexual and reproductive health care including safe, legal abortion,” Planned Parenthood Great Plains Interim President and CEO, Aaron Samulcek said.

“This is truly a full-circle moment for PPGP. We promised Missourians in 2015, that extreme ideologues who worked so hard to chip away at our patients’ constitutional rights, would not get the last word. PPGP is proud to have the final say – that access to safe, legal abortion is more accessible today than it was yesterday and we will continue to work towards a tomorrow where every patient has the ability to make the best choice for their future.”

The Federal District judge blocked Missouri’s medically unnecessary restrictions in April on the heels of the United States Supreme Court’s 2016 ruling in Whole Woman’s Health v Hellerstedt, which struck down the same medically unnecessary restrictions in Texas. The Supreme Court clearly ruled admitting privileges and ASC requirements create an undue burden, which violate the constitutional rights of a patient seeking safe, legal abortion.

The Midtown KC health center is now taking appointments for medication abortion services. The health center is centrally located near public transportation, streamlining access for metro area patients. PPGP looks forward to restoring abortion access in Columbia, Missouri in the coming days.