FDA issues update on recovery efforts in Puerto Rico and efforts to mitigate I.V. saline and amino acid drug shortages
FDA posted Thursday an update on the ongoing recovery efforts in Puerto Rico, which was devastated by Hurricane Maria in September 2017. FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said a key area of focus is addressing the I.V. saline shortage, which has affected patients, health care providers, and hospitals. He noted that, based on information from the companies, the shortage of I.V. saline fluids is expected to improve early this year. Baxter, a leading product of I.V. saline fluids, announced just before the holidays that all their facilities on Puerto Rico are back on the commercial power grid. Additionally, Gottlieb added that "all the other companies that manufacture products that were on our initial list of drugs that we considered critical and at risk of potential shortages—because the drugs were largely or entirely manufactured in Puerto Rico—are now on the power grid. Many of these companies report to us that their production is increasing." He said there are still many challenges, but "these developments reduce the risk of any future shortages resulting from the impact of the storm on the island's manufacturing sector." FDA is also taking additional steps to identify other supply sources for saline and is urging companies to submit data to extend expiration dates for these essential drugs. "We understand that some product that remains at the hospital level is nearing expiry and could continue to be used if the expiration dates can be safely extended," Gottlieb said. The FDA commissioner noted that the return of power to Baxter's facilities means that the shortage situation for pediatric and adult formulations of I.V. amino acids is also expected to continue to improve in the coming weeks. While Gottlieb said he is "optimistic that supplies of I.V. saline and amino acids will increase over the next few weeks and the stress of the shortage will begin to abate, even if the shortages will not be fully resolved immediately," he noted the production situation on the island is fragile, with many risks and challenges remaining and shortages still affecting patient care. "We're fully committed to Puerto Rico's recovery and its return as a vital and robust base for the skilled manufacturing of medical products," Gottlieb said. "Based on the progress made so far and what we expect to see in the coming weeks, I'm confident we'll continue to make progress toward that goal in the new year."