Who We Are
“We aim to empower individuals to determine their own sexual health and reproductive futures”

Planned Parenthood Hudson Peconic (PPHP) provides reproductive health care at 10 health centers in Suffolk, Westchester, and Rockland counties, New York. We offer a wide-range of reproductive health care services regardless of the individual's age, race, ethnicity, religion, gender, sexual orientation, gender-identity, immigration status, and ability to pay.

For 86 years, we have provided exceptional health services, accurate information and education, and fearless advocacy for reproductive rights and justice.



In 2018, services were provided to more than 33,300 patients in more than 56,800 visits. Our education and training programs reached nearly 14,000 people and our Patient Relations Center answered 135,000 calls.



Trusted health care provider

PPHP’s ten health centers offer nonjudgmental, professional treatment, confidentiality, and affordable quality care. Health centers offer services such as lifesaving cancer screenings; birth control; emergency contraception; prevention, testing, and treatment for sexually transmitted infections; HIV testing and counseling; PrEP and PEP; prenatal care; gynecological care; HPV vaccination; abortion care; menopausal management care; and more.

Learn more about health care services.

Informed educator

Our education and training department offers programs providing accurate, unbiased information about human sexuality. We conduct programs for high schools, colleges, residential facilities, civic associations, and parents, as well as trainings for professionals and child care providers.

Learn more about education and training.

Passionate advocate

PPHP keeps up on issues related to family planning, sexuality education, and reproductive health and sends legislative updates and alerts. We have a strong advocacy program which works at the county, state, and federal level on issues related to reproductive health care. We also assist people with registering to vote so their voice is heard on Election Day, and work with student groups on college campuses and community partners who share an interest in our issues

Learn more about advocacy.

Learn More About PPHP

2018 Year in Review

2017 Annual Report

Guide to Our Services

For Teens

Events

History

Choice News newsletter