Bachelor studies

The 180 credit point qualification qualifies a person to the positions of police officer, such as a Senior Constable.

It takes about three years to complete the studies. Students learn practical knowledge and skills needed in police work. Upon graduation, the student has the skills to act as an expert in police work both independently and as a member of multiprofessional teams and has the necessary skills to develop police operations.

» Admission criteriapdf, 567,6 kB

» Curriculumpdf, 1,4 MB

» Degree regulationspdf, 248,2 kB

Applications and requirements

Applications for the degree programme are accepted all year round. Police studies can be conducted in Finnish or Swedish. The applicant must master the teaching language.

The Police University College is not part of the national joint application procedure for higher education establishments.

Entrance requirements:

Finnish citizenship

Educational background : general upper secondary syllabus / matriculation examination / vocational upper secondary qualification / vocational qualification referred to in the vocational adult education act / further or specialist vocational qualification / a foreign education giving eligibility to higher education

Suitable state of health : no illness or injury that would prevent the applicant from working as a police officer E.g. the applicants' sight and hearing are tested

Honesty and trustworthiness : a way of living that meets professional standards A background check by the Finnish Security Intelligence Service

Category B driving licence

Entrance examination

The entrance examination consists of two phases:

phase 1: fitness test, written examination, psychological tests

phase 2: psychological tests, individual and group assignment, personal interview

Final score breakdown of entrance exam:

written examination 30%

fitness test 20%

aptitude assessment 50%

There is also a health check, a drug test, a standard security clearance and proof of swimming skills.

Further information: Police University College’s Student Admissions: valinnat.polamk(at)poliisi.fi.