Embattled Hyde-Smith posted photo of herself in Confederate hat
Several companies, including Walmart, requested that their donations to Sen. Cindy Hyde-Smith's campaign be refunded because of her "public hanging" comment, which she said was made in jest. | Sarah Warnock/The Clarion-Ledger via AP Elections Embattled Hyde-Smith posted photo of herself in Confederate hat 'Mississippi history at its best,' she said after a 2014 visit to a Mississippi museum where she posed for a picture she put on Facebook.

Mississippi Sen. Cindy Hyde-Smith posed for a photo wearing a Confederate soldier's hat and holding a rifle in a Facebook post that surfaced Tuesday.

Hyde-Smith took the photo during a 2014 visit to the Jefferson Davis Home and Presidential Library. "Mississippi history at its best!" Hyde-Smith exclaimed.

Story Continued Below

Davis was the president of the Confederacy during the Civil War, and his former estate now includes a library and museum in his honor.

"I enjoyed my tour of Beauvoir. The Jefferson Davis Home and Presidential Library located in Biloxi," Hyde-Smith wrote. "This is a must see. Currently on display are artifacts connected to the daily life of the Confederate Soldier including weapons. Mississippi history at its best!"

The photo comes as Hyde-Smith is under fire after saying during a campaign stop earlier this month that she would gladly attend a "public hanging" if one of her supporters invited her. She is running against Democrat Mike Espy, who is African-American, in a Nov. 27 runoff.

Morning Score newsletter Your guide to the permanent campaign — weekday mornings, in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

President Donald Trump defended the senator Tuesday, dismissing her comments as a joke. Responding to reporters as he left the White House for Florida, Trump said he was still confident Hyde-Smith would win.

"She made a statement, which I know she feels badly about it, and it was just sort of said in jest," Trump said. "She is a tremendous woman and it is a shame that she has to go through this."

Hyde-Smith shared four photos from the museum visit, including her posing in the Confederate hat, and other photos of her holding a rifle and sword from the museum.

Several companies, including Walmart, have requested that their donations to Hyde-Smith's campaign be refunded because of her "public hanging" comment, which she said was a joke. Walmart donated $2,000 to Hyde-Smith's campaign on Nov. 18.

"Sen. Hyde-Smith’s recent comments clearly do not reflect the values of our company and associates," the retail giant tweeted Tuesday morning. "As a result, we are withdrawing our support and requesting a refund of all campaign donations."