Waters scares Democrats with call for all-out war on Trump
Rep. Maxine Waters has won over a whole new generation of adoring fans in the Trump era who have rechristened the Los Angeles Democrat as the Resistance hero “Auntie Maxine.”

But with her constant calls for President Donald Trump to be impeached — and her comments this weekend urging Democrats to challenge Cabinet members when they see them in public — Waters is making even members of her own party anxious.

Story Continued Below

She urged her supporters at a rally to confront administration officials face-to-face in response to the separation of parents and children at the border. That was after a Virginia restaurant refused to serve White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders and protesters confronted Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen during a dinner at a Mexican restaurant in Washington last week.

"If you see anybody from that Cabinet in a restaurant, in a department store, at a gasoline station, you get out and you create a crowd and you push back on them and you tell them they're not welcome anymore, anywhere," Waters said Saturday in Los Angeles.

That remark earned an implied rebuke from House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi on Twitter on Monday. And Republicans are seizing on it as they try to make the case to GOP voters that it's critical for the party to keep control of the House.

Sign up here for POLITICO Huddle A daily play-by-play of congressional news in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Trump himself viciously assailed Waters.

"Congresswoman Maxine Waters, an extraordinarily low IQ person, has become, together with Nancy Pelosi, the Face of the Democrat Party," he said on Twitter Monday. "She has just called for harm to supporters, of which there are many, of the Make America Great Again movement. Be careful what you wish for Max!"

Fueling the concern over Waters is a division among Democrats over how hard to go after Trump. If voters view their attacks as excessive, that could provide ammunition to Republicans for the midterm elections. Others say impeachment talk is premature.

"I'm very much of the view that until there is a clear crime, we better be pretty quiet about impeachment," said Rep. Jim Himes (D-Conn.), a House Financial Services Committee member and chairman of the moderate New Democrat Coalition. "Politically, and for the good of the republic, I think that's a glass box you only break in the case of an emergency."

Some Democrats say she should focus on financial issues important to consumers. “This Trump scandal stuff is a distraction from real change that we need,” one Waters ally said. “I do feel she’ll get distracted by that.”

Waters stands to take the gavel of the powerful Financial Services Committee if the chamber flips next year. But even without being in the majority, she has used her position on the panel to slam Trump and his Cabinet.

She was among the first Democrats to call for Trump’s ouster, saying just two weeks after his inauguration that "my greatest desire is to lead him right into impeachment." She has taken advantage of her post as the committee's top Democrat to investigate Trump's ties to Russia, repeatedly highlighting them in Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin's appearances before the panel.

A particularly acrimonious exchange in her Russia-Trump inquiry led to one of her most viral moments, in which she repeatedly cut off Mnuchin with the meme-worthy "reclaiming my time."

Those debates have led Committee Chairman Jeb Hensarling (R-Texas) to dub the panel "impeachment central.”

Trump's supporters say her attacks will help the GOP.

"I challenge Maxine Waters to say impeachment," Rudy Giuliani, Trump's personal attorney and the former mayor of New York City, said last month. "Say impeachment, sweetheart, just say it. ... Your colleagues are going to go down."

And Democratic leadership is also leery of taking an aggressive approach toward Trump and his administration.

"In the crucial months ahead, we must strive to make America beautiful again," Pelosi said in her tweet Monday. "Trump’s daily lack of civility has provoked responses that are predictable but unacceptable. As we go forward, we must conduct elections in a way that achieves unity from sea to shining sea."

Yet Waters is playing to her party's base: A CNN poll released last week found that 42 percent of Americans said Trump should be impeached — including 77 percent of Democrats.

On the Financial Services Committee, Waters has Democrats who are sympathetic to her view, including Rep. Al Green of Texas, who introduced articles of impeachment of the president that most House Democrats voted with Republicans to block.

But even some of Waters’ backers on many of the biggest policy issues before the committee are privately concerned about the extent to which the committee under her leadership would focus on hounding Trump and detract from a watershed moment to advance pro-consumer policies that will hold Wall Street accountable. As chairwoman, she would have the power to investigate the administration, including the authority to issue subpoenas.

Other sources close to Waters say she can handle it all: continuing to manage a sometimes fractious caucus that she has led in the minority for five years, holding the administration to account and continuing to advance policy issues that she has championed for decades — affordable housing and poverty.

"Her race and gender have always subjected her to a level of suspicion of her experience and talent,” said Bill Zavarello, her former legislative director. "It's unfair.”

As the Financial Services Committee’s ranking member, Waters has led Democrats' efforts to oppose Republican regulatory rollbacks. During this Congress, she has introduced a series of bills that would shutter megabanks that repeatedly harm consumers, direct billions of dollars to fight homelessness and overhaul the credit reporting system.

Waters said in a statement that she is "focused on making sure that our financial system is fair.”

"I look forward to continuing to work with members both sides of the aisle on sensible solutions to benefit hardworking Americans and strengthen our nation’s economy,” she said.

In an interview, former Rep. Barney Frank (D-Mass.), the previous Democratic chairman of the committee, described Waters as a “very serious legislator."

Regarding her views on impeachment, he said, “If you’re on the committee, you don’t care what the chairman says about non-committee matters.”

"She's used to being attacked," Frank said. "She will fight back against Trump by demonstrating her seriousness and her thoughtfulness."