Melania Trump expands her East Wing staff
First lady Melania Trump’s staff remains smaller at this point in her White House tenure than the one maintained by former first lady Michelle Obama. | Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images Melania Trump expands her East Wing staff

First Lady Melania Trump is beefing up her East Wing staff, adding three new hires.

The former model, who has maintained a limited public profile and political portfolio since her husband President Donald Trump entered the West Wing last January, announced Thursday she’d filled the roles of director of policy, director of operations and communications coordinator.

Story Continued Below

The additions signal one of the largest expansions of her East Wing staff to date.

Reagan Thompson, a former staffer for the National Security Council, was named director of policy under Melania Trump, tasked with overseeing the first lady's “policies and initiatives,” according to a White House statement. Thompson, a Facebook alum, focused on Middle Eastern foreign policy at the NSC. She also worked in the congressional office of now-CIA director Mike Pompeo, who previously represented Kansas.

POLITICO Playbook newsletter Sign up today to receive the #1-rated newsletter in politics Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

The first lady selected Justin Caporale, who worked on outreach and advance operations for the Trump campaign, for the role of director of operations. Caporale’s duties, the White House said, will “include managing the day-to-day logistical operations of the East Wing, focusing on events, and planning foreign and domestic travel.”

Annie LeHardy will also move from the West Wing press office to serve as Melania Trump’s communications coordinator.

“I am very excited to add these quality professionals to my already stellar team,” Melania Trump said in a statement. “Each person filling their respective and vital role has shown true professionalism in their chosen career, and I am confident they will enhance my work on behalf of children everywhere, while helping me further expand my role as First Lady of the United States.”

Trump’s staff remains smaller at this point in her White House tenure than the one maintained by former first lady Michelle Obama, who listed 16 people under her payroll in her first year according to an analysis by Fox News, though some officials said the total was closer to 24.