Responding to racial bias, Roosevelt shuts down Mississippi Post Office, Jan. 3, 1903
AP Photo Responding to racial bias, Roosevelt shuts down Mississippi Post Office, Jan. 3, 1903

In 1891, President Benjamin Harrison named Minnie Cox (1869–1933) as postmaster of Indianola, Miss. She was the first African-American woman to hold such a position. Cox lost her job in 1892 under Democratic President Grover Cleveland, but she was reappointed in 1897 by President William McKinley and continued to serve under President Theodore Roosevelt, both Republicans.

As post-Civil War Reconstruction policies, which had helped blacks find work in the deep South, faded in the early 20th century, some white residents of Indianola signed a petition calling on Cox to resign. When the campaign to oust her began to gain traction, the Indianola postmaster‘s position was one of the most lucrative public posts in the area, serving some 3,000 patrons. It paid $1,100 annually, a large sum at that time.

Story Continued Below

Beginning in the fall of 1902, James K. Vardaman, editor of the Greenwood Commonwealth, wrote editorials reproaching the white people of Indianola for “tolerating a negro [sic] wench as a postmaster.” Vardaman, a future Mississippi governor and U.S. senator, was known as “The Great White Chief.” “If it is necessary,” Vardaman said, “every Negro in the state will be lynched; it will be done to maintain white supremacy.”

In this combustible climate, most white citizens voted to order Cox to resign by Jan. 1, 1903, even though her commission wasn’t due to expire for another year. At first, she refused to step down while making it known she wouldn’t seek to be reappointed. But as the threats escalated and both the mayor and sheriff refused to protect her, she changed her mind and offered her resignation, effective Jan. 1, 1903.

When word of the situation reached the White House, Roosevelt voiced outrage at the way Cox had been treated. On this day in 1903, he refused to accept her resignation and ordered that mail service to Indianola be halted until its citizens relented and allowed her back on the job. The president also ordered Philander Chase Knox, the U.S. attorney general, to prosecute Indianola citizens who had threatened violence against Cox.

Nevertheless, two days later, fearing for her safety, Cox moved away.

When Cox's appointment expired in 1904, the Indianola post office reopened with a white postmaster. Cox and her husband returned to Indianola, where they opened the Delta Penny Savings Bank, one of the earliest black-owned banks in the state.

The controversy made headlines across the country. The Senate held a four-hour debate on the issue. On Feb. 7, 1903, the Cleveland Gazette ran the headline, “Mrs. Minnie Cox, Postmistress of Indianola- A Faithful and Efficient Official Driven from Office by Southern White Brutes.”

In 2008, the modern-style U.S. Post Office in Indianola, built in 1935, was renamed the “Minnie Cox Post Office Building in tribute to all that she accomplished by breaking barriers.”

SOURCE: “This Day in Presidential History,” by Paul Brandus (2008)