It's Official: Atiku names Peter Obi as running mate
Related News

A former Anambra State Governor, Peter Obi, has been named as the vice presidential candidate of the Peoples Democratic Party for the 2019 presidential election.

Former Vice President Atiku Abubakar who emerged the presidential flag-bearer of the main opposition party made the appointment on Friday, his campaign office said in a statement.

The statement formally confirmed reports from sources inside the campaign who earlier informed PREMIUM TIMES that Mr Obi has emerged the running mate.

Our sources said a statement confirming the development was already being drafted Friday evening.

Gbenga Daniel, the director-general of the campaign, confirmed in the statement that Mr Obi was the ultimate choice, hours after congratulatory messages had already poured in for the former Anambra governor.

Read the campaign’s full statement below:

*Atiku chooses Peter Obi as running mate*

The Presidential candidate of the Peoples Democratic Party, Atiku Abubakar, has chosen former Chairman of Fidelity Bank Plc and former Governor of Anambra State, Mr. Peter Obi, as his running mate for the 2019 presidential election.

Born 19th July, 1961, Peter Obi attended the Christ the King College, Onitsha and later proceeded to the University of Nigeria, Nsukka where he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in Philosophy.

He is also a graduate of several international and national institutions such as the Lagos Business School, Harvard Business School, London School of Economics, Columbia Business School, Institute of Management, Switzerland, Kellogg Graduate School, Oxford University and Cambridge University.

In public service, he has led various divisions some of which includes: Member, Presidential Economic Management Team; Vice-Chairman, Nigeria Governors’ Forum; Chairman, South-East Governors’ Forum, and the Governor of Anambra State.

Peter Obi is an astute professional who has laid his footprints across the corporate world. He was the Chairman, Board of Security and Exchange Commission (SEC); former Chairman, Fidelity Bank PLC; former Chairman, Guardian Express Mortgage Bank; former Chairman, Future Views Securities; former Chairman, Paymaster Nigeria; former Chairman, Next International Nigeria; former Director, Guardian Express Bank PLC; former Director, Chams Nigeria PLC; former Director, Emerging Capital: former Director, Card Centre PLC.

He is a member of the British Institute of Directors (IOD), Nigerian Chartered Institute of Bankers and Nigerian Economic Summit Group (NESG).

Mr. Obi’s choice was largely influenced by his youthfulness, vast knowledge of global and local economics as well as being a financial expert, all experience which Nigeria is in great need at this point in time.

This ticket will be able to steer our nation back on the path of progress, economic prosperity and unity.

Signed

His Excellency,

Otunba (Engr.) Gbenga Daniel, FNSE, FNAEng

Director General,

Atiku Presidential Campaign Organization (APCO)