School Shootings and Gun Control: A Focus on Suicide
As we argued in our book, Death by : Preventing the Murders and Murder-Suicides, the underlying cause of these homicides, which typically take place following a partner break-up, is suicide. Men who commit these crimes, and the perpetrators are 93% men and 93% use guns, have a history of violence, see no future for themselves, have access to a gun and use it, sometimes to wipe out the whole family.

In school shootings, such as the one in Parkland, Florida, the dynamics of the killing rampage are somewhat the same. Nikolas Cruz at age 19, was an extremely troubled young man with a history of violent threats to his mother before she died of the flu, school expulsion, and extensive behavioral complaints to authorities. Fascinated with guns, Cruz was an active member of JROTC and an NRA-sponsored rifle club, and owner of a gun collection including an AR-15 semi-automatic rifle designed to fire a round of bullets at a time. A school "peer counselor" reported to a sheriff’s deputy at his school that Cruz had possibly ingested gasoline in a suicide attempt, cut himself, and wanted to buy a gun. Against the odds, Nikolas Cruz who went on a killing spree, wearing his JROTC shirt, was taken alive; he reportedly was then placed on suicide watch in jail.

In the case of Nikolas Cruz as most mass shooters, the red flags were obvious. But nothing could be done to confiscate his guns under Florida law at that time. Fortunately, plans are under way to pass laws restricting gun sales to persons under age 21 along with so-called Red Flag laws. Hopefully, the focus will be on high-risk behavior rather than on mental illness. A mental disorder, such as organic or may figure in suicidal behavior as may a , such as or meth addiction. Families would be advised not to have guns in the home if family members have these conditions in the interests of suicide prevention.

Since 2012, 138 children and teachers have been killed in school shootings and many more injured. Workable Red Flag Laws can do much to stymie this bloodshed. Red Flag Laws are policies increasingly being adopted by states to empower family members and law enforcement to seek an Extreme Risk Protection Order, a court order temporarily restricting a person’s access to guns when they pose a danger to self or others. Five states have Red Flag Laws in place—and bills are currently pending in 18 other states. These “red flags” include, but are not limited to recent acts, attempted acts, or threats of violence towards oneself or others; a violation of a protective order; and/or evidence of ongoing in conjunction with threatening behavior. In the past, with seriously disturbed children, often grown children living at home, could get no help. Under these new laws, their child can be detained for short-term observation and weapons, if there are any, can be seized.

Many lives can now be saved, whether on a small scale or large. Take Connecticut, for example, which passed a Red Flag Law to allow for the confiscation of weapons owned by persons who were seen to be a danger to themselves or others. A 2016 study by Jeffrey Swanson, a professor at Duke University’s School of Medicine, and his colleagues, showed how in Connecticut, where over 700 restraints were issued in conjunction with this law, the gun removals from high-risk people may have prevented up to 100 suicides in persons of all ages. A 2017 study of the results documented that the law prevented at least 72 suicides from taking place. Homicides draw more , yet about 60 percent of gun deaths in the U.S. are suicides. Suicide prevention was an unintended consequence of the law. The same phenomenon has occurred in Australia when handguns were widely outlawed after a mass school shooting in 1996.

Red Flag laws should not be directed toward persons with mental illness. Referencing mental illness in the context of mass shootings tends to mislead the public into believing that hundreds of thousands of mentally ill people are dangerous. Mental health advocates suggest that policies linking mental disorders with the prediction of gun violence will do more harm than good in preventing persons with mental disorders from seeking treatment, since their records would now be shared with authorities. A breach of client-therapist confidentiality. The mandated reporting of mental health records to the National Instant Background Check System (NICS) that was signed into law by President Obama was rescinded by President Trump with the support of the ACLU on the basis of . A focus on suicide and other high-risk behavior would have been more relevant.

Suicide is relevant to this discussion because the shooters clearly set out to get themselves killed as the end result of their killing rampage. Research of mass shootings conducted by the FBI in 2014 tells us that of the 160 mass shootings (or shootings directed against public populations) around 53% ended in suicide with an additional 34% of the perpetrators killed or wounded by the police. Death is the expectation. The argument therefore that shooters look for gun-free zones to avoid being deterred by armed guards or teachers is fallacious.

Statistics on Suicide

The media focus on homicide regarding gun control ignores the fact that most of the gun deaths are suicides rather than homicides. Youth suicide can be perceived as a form of escape from difficulty that seems overwhelming at the time. According to the research organization, Child Trends, mood disorders, such as depression, , and bipolar disease, are major risk factors for suicide among children and adolescents. One study found that more than 90 percent of children and adolescents who committed suicide had some type of mental disorder, probably depression. Statistics from research on mass shootings and suicide by Everytown for Gun Safety, an organization which conducts research on mass shootings and suicides, reveal that:

500 US children die by gun suicide each year; the majority kill themselves at home.

80% of children who die by suicide with a gun use one found in their own home.

Among teens, in almost half of the cases of firearm death, the cause was suicide.

Gun suicide risk in the US is 8 times that of other high-income countries.

Suicide an impulsive act, often decided upon within 10 minutes. Access to a gun increases the risk considerably. Research shows that children who attempt suicide by less lethal means, generally go on to leave productive lives.

Research from the Children’s Defense Fund, 2016, states that:

The gun death rate for Black children and teens was nearly four times that for White children and teens and more than 8 times that for Asian and Pacific Islander children and teens.

Over 2,500 children are killed by guns each year on average; 1,335 Black children and teens were killed by guns in 2016.

Most gun deaths among Black children and teens are by homicide. For white children and teens, the majority of deaths are by suicide.

Each time a gun in the home injures or kills in self-defense, there are 11 completed and attempted gun suicides.

Imagine how many children’s lives could be saved if Red Flag laws were enacted and enforced everywhere.

Among my recommendations based on this research are the following: