"Hillary Clinton Visits Bosnia, Thanks U.S. Peacekeepers" by Ap - St Louis Post-Dispatch (MO), March 26, 1996
Protected by sharpshooters, Hillary Rodham Clinton swooped into a military zone by Black Hawk helicopter Monday to deliver a personal "thank you, thank you, thank you" to U.S. troops.

"They're making a difference," she said, referring to the 18,500 A merican peacekeepers in Bosnia.

Mrs. Clinton became the first presidential spouse since Eleanor Roosevelt to make such an extensive trip into what can be considered a hostile area, although others have visited hot spots.

She was proud of the distinction.

"To be here on the ground is something I wanted to do so that maybe people back home would see it - not through the eyes of the secretary of the Army or someone in a position in the military - but like Eleanor Roosevelt, who has always done everything first, to visit the troops to say thank you."

Accompanied by her teen-age daughter, Chelsea, Mrs. Clinton plunged into a grueling goodwill tour designed to boost troop morale in Bosnia and highlight efforts by Bosnians, Croats and Muslims to resolve deeply held differences.

Standing on a dusty, makeshift boardwalk near an out-of-the-way military hospital, Mrs. Clinton said: "For the first time, children are playing again. Farmers are in their fields. People are moving into their homes."

`Feelings Very Deep'

She acknowledged several "bumps in the road," a point underscored just three days ago when a U.S. soldier was killed in a vehicle accident. Mrs. Clinton visited the soldier's driving companion in the military hospital.

"It's not going to be easy," she said, pointing to the flight of Serbs from areas of Sarajevo they held as the city came under Bosnian control. "Feelings are very deep. There is a lot of pain. There is a lot to get over - a lot to forgive if there's going to be reconstruction and reconciliation."

But this was a day of celebration and celebrities - a day for the U.S. troops helping to uphold the Bosnian peace accord. Mrs. Clinton played host to a USO show with comedian Sinbad and singer Sheryl Crow and briefly addressed the gathering.

Under a hard, gray sky, she told 1,000 cheering soldiers, "The first thing I want to say on behalf of the president and everybody else is thank you, thank you, thank you."

She applauded their efforts to keep the peace. "We know we can lead in war," she said. "We are leading in peace."

Clicking Cameras

But the highlight of her trip was the visits she made to two fortified posts outside the U.S. base in Tuzla. Even President Bill Clinton, restricted to the base by bad weather in January, did not see as much of this war-ravaged region as Mrs. Clinton did Monday.

The troops seemed to appreciate it. Cameras chirped like a thousand crickets as she chatted with mine-disposal experts, examined huge tanks and met a hero or two. Chelsea, 16, kept her usual low profile but remained constantly at her mother's side, posing for soldiers or talking softly with them. …