Budget a Back Door to `Clintoncare': Children's Health Insurance Is Similar to Coverage Pushed by Hillary in '93" by Bedard, Paul - The Washington Times (Washington, DC), August 6, 1997
Bedard, Paul, The Washington Times (Washington, DC)

The $23.4 billion "Kid Care" health insurance program included in the budget package was to be the "precursor" to universal health care sought by first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton in a secret White House fallback plan prepared in April 1993, according to internal administration documents.

As an option drawn up by the first lady's health care task force, the White House plotted to push a "Kids First" insurance program as the start of a universal health care program if Mrs. Clinton's grander effort failed, as it did.

"This is absolutely their fallback position and it gets them gradually to where they wanted to be all along. The `Kids First' scheme is a template for what the president signed into law," said attorney Kent Masterson Brown, whose suit to open up the secret 1993 working group's files helped to kill the first lady's drive for universal health care.

"This is the first step toward universal health care. They are creating `Clintoncare' body part by body part," added Robert M. Goldberg, a health care reform expert for George Washington University Medical School.

Papers from Mrs. Clinton's Health Care Interdepartmental Working Group detailed the plan to phase in the broader universal coverage. One, dated April 9, 1993, said, "Kids First is really a precursor to the new system."

It called for "other populations" to be added in the effort to build universal health care. "Under this approach, health care reform is phased in by population, beginning with children," said the memo provided to The Washington Times.

The new "Kid Care" program, heralded yesterday by President Clinton as "the largest expansion in health care for children since the Medicaid program 32 years ago," is a carbon copy of the working group's plan with one exception - the Clinton plan is paid for by taxes instead of employer contributions as originally envisioned.

The "Kids First" plan first interested the Clintons in the 1992 presidential campaign when they mined the Lyndon Baines Johnson Presidential Library for ideas, according to health care working group documents. …