There is a conspiracy theory which claims that the LHC at CERN is reponsible for triggering various recent earthquakes (Japan, Nepal, etc.). My gut instinct tells me this must be nonsense. How do you
The individual particles have an extraordinary amount of energy. But on a human scale, let alone a geological scale, the energy of each particle is still tiny.But as Simon Stahli has pointed out, the ~10^11 particles in the machine each have that energy, and the full beams are dumped into the ground at the end of each run, or when something goes wrong. This is not usually with the peak energy content since the number of particles and hence total energy reduce during each of the 8 hour machine runs, but is a substantial amount of energy going to one place. The LHC has a very sophisticated beam dump system for this purpose, including magmetic steering to avoid dumping the whole beam into a microscopic region of the dump system: seeand the nicearticle in Symmetry which describes various LHC safety systems accessibly and in good detail.One nifty thing about the beam dumps is that they avoid focusing all the energy of the dumped beam into a single line through the huge (8m x 1m x 1m) graphite absorber. The operational beam width is roughly 0.01 mm, and dumping the whole "high speed train at 200 km/h" beam energy into that pin-point would definitely melt, cut and generally obliterate whatever it was dumped into. So the dump system first dilutes the beam spread out to a few mm, reducing the energy/unit area by a factor of 100,000. Then a special magnet system rapidly "sweeps" the dumped beam across the absorber during the dump process to spread the heating through the block and avoid melting/cutting. You can see from the plot below that it manages to turn the 2mm "point" into a curve more like 600mm long, giving another intensity reduction factor of ~300. Every little helps -- the block still gets very hot, but doesn't burn/melt/explode :-)Now, let's compare the beam energy to earthquakes. The total amount of energy in the LHC beams, from the link above, is 350 MJ. Let's compare that to the Richter scale energy equivalents () -- 11 MJ is a small construction site blast, 89 MJ is a large conventional explosion. Significant earthquakes and major explosive events like volcanic eruptions are on the TJ to PJ scale -- a million to a billion times larger.You could argue that an explosive event on the MJ scale could set off a TJ earthquake, and I don't know enough about geology to disprove that statement. But it already seems unlikely that a large near-surface blast in a tectonic zone (such as Nepal or Japan) could trigger a major earthquake -- so how much less likely is it for a similar one, half-way round the world in Geneva to do so?UPDATE: added a bit more about the LHC beam dump procedure.