How do Westerns (films) compare to historical Wild West in actuality?
Well it appears that the people of the time looked a good deal different than we commonly depict in Western movies including the movies made only 40 to 50 years after the end of the Old West era. The photographs we have depict Western men wearing many of the same clothes we see in the photographs of the Eastern United States taken at the same time. Most men wore hats but the hats were commonly bowler and Derbys, not Stetsons. Stetsons were rare.

Moreover, very few of them were clean shaven. It was the style of the time to have, at minimum a moustache. Wyatt Earp, Bat Mastermasterson, Vermillion Jack, John Wesley Harden and almost every other male adult had a moustache or moustache and beard in the Old West, just as they had in the Eastern sections of the United States at the same time.

Formal QuickDraw gunfights were rare and almost non-existent. Although there were probably several, the only historically recorded one was Bill Hickock and Dave Tutt. However he also had more formal duels that contained elements of a fast draw duel and rapid firing. In 1867, two years after killing Tutt, Hickock was involved in a count down duel with 4 drunken Cowboys, killing 3 and wounding the 4th.

Gunfights were so rare that the Shootout at the OK Correl has become famous as the epitome of the Old West gunfight by a town or city Marshall force and a gang of outlaws, and mostly because it was recorded through trial transcripts.

Another common misconception concerns Doc Holiday, Wyatt Earps close friend. Holiday who was a genuinely tragic figure, did indeed become famous as a gunfighter during his lifetime, especially after the OK Correl shootout. However, in reality he was a terrible shot, mostly because of his constant alcohol consumption. Frequently but not always, the safest place to be in a gunfight with Doc Holiday was standing straight in front of him.

Judge Roy Bean, who advertised himself as the law west of the Pecos, is commonly depicted as a more or less self-appointed hanging judge. He was a Justice of the Peace. He was neither completely self-appointed nor is there any record that he ever hanged anyone, although there is evidence that he commonly threatened to do so.

Lastly there is a very common misconception about the Indians. They are depicted today as noble savages who’s land and cultures were stolen by White American Settlers. In reality, the Comanches and Sioux and certain other groups and tribe were hated, feared and forced out because they were indeed vicious and brutal. They commonly murdered raped and tortured the people they captured and at one time had the entire Southwest in fear. They were the real reason for the formation of the Texas Rangers.