Where is Hillary Clinton's new scandal WikiLeaks just revealed about her implication in selling weapons to ISIS and how it was covered up by Obama?
That’s no new scandal, and in reality no actual scandal, period. It’s just Assange making false allegations again (as he has done many times against U.S. officials, none of which amount to squat). Julian Assange, in case you forgot is currently a ward of the state in Putin’s Russia.

Here is Assange’s latest accusation:

So, for example, the disastrous, absolutely disastrous intervention in Libya, the destruction of the Gaddafi government, which led to the occupation of ISIS of large segments of that country, weapons flows going over to Syria, being pushed by Hillary Clinton, into jihadists within Syria, including ISIS, that’s there in those emails.

It’s a non-story in a yellow-journalism blog/site about Julian Assange making unsubstantiated accusations. Note that "businessman" Trump now takes his talking terms ("disastrous") from Assange!? Okay, so doesn’t that tell you something about Donald Trump?

You can get yourself all whipped into a froth like Trump’s hairdo, but at no time will you be able to connect anything other than wild speculation dots, as Assange's theories have zero more weight than Trump's phony rumors courtesy of the RNC smear team. There is no smoking gun, no actual wrongdoing, nor for that matter any glaring mistakes or incompetency in Clinton’s handling of our foreign policy 2010–2014. Creative writing can be persuasive if you assign it undue importance.

For real mastery of this genre, one need only to visit Breitbart News Network where this exact tactic grew from a cottage industry (a là Infowars - Alex Jones' Infowars: There's a war on for your mind!) into a many-tentacled web of wild claims and prescriptions for panic. Breitbart uses the Randian model of hammering lies into life (not into the ignoble deaths they deserve, because there isn't a shred of truth in any of them).

If at first your audience doesn't believe, lie, lie again!

This Quora question itself is part of the RNC disinformation front. I answered it because I know what it is, but I’ll downvote it, too.