What is with the meme of a girl saying "cash me outside"? : OutOfTheLoop
/r/OutOfTheLoop — Have you ever seen a whole bunch of news stories/reddit posts/videos or anything else about some topic and you had no idea what everyone was going on about? Did you feel out of the loop? This subreddit is dedicated to helping you get up to speed with the recent trends and news.

Links to view before submitting

Rules

1. Post title must be a current, unbiased, and coherent question

The title is the most important aspect to creating a post. If it's hard for other users to understand what you are asking then it will be hard to get an answer. Current - The topic of the post you are creating must be a trending event that has happened recently. Unbiased - Don't put your own twist on it to make it come off negative or positive. Try to be as neutral as possible. Coherent - Write a complete question that is clear about what you are trying to ask. Don't simply put one word and a question mark. Format - Include the format listed here



2. Post must include context and resources in the body of the text

Context is key when trying to find a proper answer. The more we know about what you are asking, the better we can answer with more information. Context - Add some words to your post so there is more to work with than a title. Words such as; what you saw, where you saw it, how often you saw it. Resources - You obviously saw it somewhere; link to the thing that made you ask. Or include a screenshot.





3. No ad nauseum, recently reposted, or retired questions

Often times what you are asking has already been answered. Be sure to search the subreddit, Google, and KnowYourMeme before creating a new post. Ad nauseum - The topic in question has been discussed extensively, and that those involved in the discussion have grown tired of it. Recently reposted - A topic is popular and is posted multiple times within a short period of time. Retired - The 'Big List of Retired Questions' is a wiki page created by the mods that lists overly asked questions that have been thoroughly answered. Duplicates of retired questions may be removed.



4. Top-level comments must be a genuine, unbiased, and coherent answer

People are here to find answers for their questions. If top-level comments are riddled with memes or non-answers then no one wins. Genuine - Attempt to answer with words; don't pop in to tell users to search or drop a link without explanation. Unbiased - Answer without putting your own twist of bias towards the answer. However, after you leave an unbiased response, you can add your own opinion as long as it's clearly marked, starting with "Biased:". Coherent - Write in complete sentences that are clear about what you are trying to say.



5. Be nice, follow etiquette

This subreddit is supposed to be a helpful place for confused redditors. Be nice - Be polite in your exchanges, vote based on whether a comment contributes to the discussion and not on whether you agree with the opinion, etc. Follow etiquette - When in doubt, refer to reddiquette .



Flairs + Filters

Answered Unanswered

Recap Thread Megathread

Once you post a question and it's answered, please click the flair button under your post and change the flair to "Answered".

You can also comment with the phrase [answered] to flair your post.

Mod note

Failure to follow these rules will result in posts or comments being removed, and may result in bans, the length of which to be determined by the nature of the infraction.

Meta threads about OOTL itself should be asked via sending us a message in modmail. Otherwise meta threads may be removed.

Tag spoilers: [This](#s) will become This

Interesting subreddits