Malcolm X agreed with Hitler? : conspiracy
"...I told him that, yes I give the Jew credit for being among all other whites the most active, and most vocal, financier, "leader" and "liberal" in the negro civil rights movement. But I said at the same time I knew that the Jew played these roles for a very careful strategic reason: the more prejudiced in America could be focused upon the Negro, then the more the white gentiles' prejudice would keep diverted off the Jew. I said that to me, one proof that all the civil rights posturing of so many Jews wasn't sincere was that so often in the North, the quickest segregationist, were Jews themselves" - Malcolm X Autobiography - Statements made before Assassination.

Follows in line to what Hitler said

‎>Hitler‬ said even in his death that he will start World War 3. One of his soldiers asked, “how?” Hitler replied, “The day mankind finds out that I was trying to defend this nation, Germany, from then that is the day ‪#‎WorldWar3‬ will start. For on that day, mankind will learn that I was trying to save my Nation from the Free Masons, the Illuminati, and the Jews. For if the Americans wins the war, then they will conquer the world and forever be a slave to the Jews, and they will try to conquer God. Do you know who America has in its possession?“ he asked. .“No”, the solider replied. The Americans have the Jewels Of God. The Americans have stolen God’s Precious Jewels.” he said. “What Do You Mean His Precious Jewels?” the soldier asked. Hitler replied, “America has stolen the Jews. The Jews Of God. His Jewelry. The ‪#‎Negroes‬. They are the true ‪#‎Hebrew‬’s. What a foolish move and a direct challenge to God, and they plan on moving these false white Jews into a state of Israel.” Zechariah Chapter 9 “And a BASTARD shall dwell in Ashdod, (City in Israel) and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines. (The original Palestinians)” - Adolf Hitler - "The Nazis World War II", by Robert Edwin Herzstein, punlished by Time Life Books.

Revelation 2:9 says, “I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan.”