Justin Trudeau Is Actually Fidel Castro's Son : The
Pierre Trudeau and Fidel Castro have always been close. Fidel even attended his funeral

The Trudeaus have visited Cuba on several occasions. Here's Justin's mother with Fidel, happily allowing the tyrant to hold her 4 month old baby.

Here she is... well you can see for yourself

Justin and Fidel have maintained this close relationship over time. He was one of the very, very few to sing the dictator's praises when he died.

And of course you've already seen Trudeau's remarks on Castro's death

So with that established, here's the fun part.

I've

made

some

comparison

images.

So now that we've established the similar appearance, we need to figure out if it's even possible that Fidel met with Margaret before Justin's conception. Turns out he did - in fact, Pierre and Fidel met for the first time one year before Justin was born.

http://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/castro-and-trudeau-a-famous-but-also-fraught-friendship/article33058005/

Pierre Trudeau’s and Fidel Castro’s paths crossed for the first time in 1970, when the Canadian government sought to negotiate the exile of members of the FLQ, who had kidnapped British trade commissioner James Cross. Fidel Castro obliged the Canadian PM by providing a refuge, and in a private letter Mr. Trudeau later extended his heartfelt gratitude.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Justin_Trudeau

Born December 25, 1971 (age 44)

Now, let's talk about Justin's mother, Margaret Trudeau. She's a fucking hoe. I'm not going to post her nudes here, but you can easily find them with a quick search. Margaret is also know to be a drug addict who possibly(probably) had a gangbang with The Rolling Stones. She was no stranger to sex scandals.

http://www.macleans.ca/society/life/8-canadian-political-sex-scandals-and-one-maybe/

1977: Margaret Trudeau and the Rolling Stones. Margaret Trudeau spent her sixth wedding anniversary without her prime minister husband, instead partying with the Rolling Stones at a Toronto nightclub and later in Mick Jagger’s limousine. The rendezvous sparked rumours that she was having an affair with the band’s front man. She later disappeared to New York. The scandal signalled the end of the couple’s tumultuous marriage, but Margaret Trudeau denied having affairs with any members of the Rolling Stones, later telling a conference on mental health, “I should have slept with every single one of them.”

My conclusion is that at some point in 1971, Fidel and Margaret hooked up, most likely with Pierre's consent. Given the decade and her drug habits, it wouldn't be unusual. It's also no surprise that a globalist cuck like Pierre would also be a literal cuck, tolerant enough to raise his wife's son. There are still some timeline issues - anything that would place them together around the time of conception would seal the deal, but I'm confident in what I've found so far.

AND NOW FOR THE MOST DAMNING EVIDENCE

PART 2

Edit: More evidence (thanks /u/y67u57654et35b)

Edit 2: Another one (/u/Honeymakers)