0915 loganpftexas

Email, Justin Logan, director of Foreign Policy Studies, Cato Institute, Sept. 8, 2015

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, September 08, 2015 3:22 PM

To: Justin Logan

Subject: PolitiFact Texas inquiry

Good afternoon.

I write because I’m starting to fact-check a claim by Sen. Ted Cruz about the Iran “deal.” Cruz said the other day that the deal is flawed in part because it “trusts the Iranians to inspect themselves.”

Does this seem accurate? Why or why not?

What resources would you otherwise suggest we consider?

THANKS.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

3:36 p.m.

Sept. 8, 2015

It does not seem accurate because it is not accurate.

A sufficient stockpile of fissile material is a big portion of what people worry about as regards nuclear programs. It is a necessary condition for acquiring a nuclear weapon, and it requires large infrastructure. At Iran’s known facilities, where uranium enrichment is taking/has taken place--the plutonium path is blocked completely in the JCPOA by closing Arak—IAEA inspectors will be present and have access on a daily basis.

The claim that Iran can “self-inspect” stems from a story published by the Associated Press. At the military facility at Parchin, where nuclear research took place in the late 1990s into the early 2000s, the IAEA has worked out with Iran, bilaterally, an agreement that is confidential, as are the terms of all such agreements. IAEA Director Amano responded to the AP story with the following:

I am disturbed by statements suggesting that the IAEA has given responsibility for nuclear inspections to Iran. Such statements misrepresent the way in which we will undertake this important verification work. The separate arrangements under the Road-map agreed between the IAEA and Iran in July are confidential and I have a legal obligation not to make them public – the same obligation I have for hundreds of such arrangements made with other IAEA Member States.

However, I can state that the arrangements are technically sound and consistent with our long-established practices. They do not compromise our safeguards standards in any way. The Road-map between Iran and the IAEA is a very robust agreement, with strict timelines, which will help us to clarify past and present outstanding issues regarding Iran’s nuclear programme.

The IAEA has a number of ways in which it works around these issues. The question is solely whether the swipes are tampered with or not, and there are ways to ensure that they are not. The other point that bears mentioning is that nothing has been going on at Parchin for over 10 years, so it is very much open to question what Republicans hope the IAEA will find there. Further, nothing they would find there would bear on Iran’s breakout timeline, because of the extreme cuts to Iran’s enrichment capability, which provide the basis for breakout timelines in any event.

It is unfortunate, but perhaps an indication of the quality of the deal, that Republican elites have repeatedly resorted to demagoguery and nonsense in trying to criticize it. The deal does not promise to defend Iran from Israel, it does not allow Iran 24 days to hide enrichment, it will not allow Iran to dominate the Middle East, it will not “give Iran the bomb.” But all of these claims have become stock talking points.

...

Justin Logan

Director of Foreign Policy Studies

Cato Institute