0316 usdoepftexas

Email, Dawn Selak, press secretary, U.S. Department of Energy, March 23, 2016

9:51 a.m.

We have not yet published the 2015 Wind Technology Market report but we are working on it and expect to publish it later this year.

On page 60, the “Important Note” does caution against a comparison—to match the long-term, levelized wind PPA prices against the shorter-term, fluctuating cost of wholesale electricity prices with fossil fuels like coal. But what we are talking about here is “right now”, which clearly shows a lower wind cost than coal in Texas. And the note concludes by saying: “Nonetheless, these comparisons still provide some sense for the short-term competitive environment facing wind energy, and how that environment has shifted with time.” The President’s quote was about the short-term competitive environment, and one could also clearly argue that the market environment has shifted with time more towards wind as price-competitive with coal in Texas (and other fuels in other regions as well). The note was also intended to make the point that there are a number of other costs, benefits and impacts of renewable wind that a simple cost comparison of levelized long-term wind PPA prices with either yearly wholesale electricity prices or forecasts of the fuel costs of natural gas-fired generation naturally can’t quantify - such as the inherent benefit of a constant price for wind established by a long-term PPA as opposed to fluctuating costs of natural gas, coal and other fossil fuels as the markets are affected by a variety of factors.

As Frank noted, the average executed price of wind power purchase agreements was $23.50 / MWh in 2014. And average nationwide wind costs are often even significantly higher than the costs in Texas, given higher wind speeds that drive down the cost of wind energy. You will see on page 57 of the Wind Technology Market Report that the average levelized PPA price for wind in the Interior region (which includes Texas, among other states, and is where much of U.S. wind project development occurs) was just $22.40 /MWh in 2014. Comparing both of these figures with the estimated cost of coal around $59/MWh (according to the 2015 BNEF and other sources), the cost of wind (including in Texas) is less than the cost of coal even with the $23 / MWh PTC factored into the mix.