0416geepftexas

Emails, Carol G. Gee Ph.D., associate professor of Mathematics, St. Edward’s University, April 14, 2016

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin

Sent: Wednesday, April 13, 2016 5:47 PM

Subject: Urgent inquiry for a PolitiFact Texas fact check

Good afternoon. I just left a brief voice mail because we seek your insights for a fact check.

Specifically, we are reviewing a claim by Austin City Council Member Ellen Troxclair. She recently said statistics show "you are about nine times more likely to be assaulted by a taxi driver" in Austin than a driver for a ride-hailing service.

Her office tells us her basis for this claim was the attached document indicating complaints lodged in connection with taxi cabs or ride-hailed rides since 2014.

Michael Searle, her chief of staff, told us: “If the estimate is that there are 15,000 TNC” ride-hailed “drivers, subject to name-based background checks, and there are 913 cab permits, subject to fingerprint background check, then you are 9 times more likely to be assaulted by a cab driver than a TNC driver in Austin.”

Thoughts for our story?

I would be happy to hear back by email or phone. I am trying to complete our review Thursday.

THANKS.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

11:43 a.m.

This is an interesting question. The most likely calculation that would have led to the statement “nine times more likely to be assaulted by a taxi driver” is comparing incidents per driver over the time period 2014-date. Based on the data provided, the incidents per taxi driver were .0153 during this time frame, and per ride-share driver were .00153. HOWEVER, two things suggest that the data is not being used appropriately here:

(a) the number of incidents for ride-share drivers in 2014 is zero, which perhaps indicates that ride-share services had not yet taken off in the area and the 2014 data is inappropriate to include in the claim. Using only data from 2015-date, the number of incidents per driver is only 4.3 times higher for taxi drivers.

(b) from the perspective of a passenger is looking to hail a safe ride, it is likely more appropriate to measure safety by the number of incidents per trip, rather than the number of incidents per driver. Data for the number of trips provided by taxis and ride-shares in this time frame were not provided.

I hope this is helpful.

Carol G. Gee, Ph.D.

Associate Professor of Mathematics

Mathematics Department Chair

St. Edward’s University

Austin, Texas

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, April 14, 2016 12:00 PM

To: Carol Gee

Subject: RE: Urgent inquiry for a PolitiFact Texas fact check

THANKS.

Does the council member’s original calculation tell us anything useful?

g.

12:00 p.m.

In my professional opinion, no.