Watching Dreamwork's "Home" with the kid today, mouth wide open the whole time. I had to do some digging. : pizzagate
I had the morning off and decided to browse Netflix to find a movie for the kiddo and I to watch. We had seen the movie Home before, but it had been several months. Watching it again for the second time almost made me ill. Now that he is taking his nap, I have gone and looked at many background elements of the movie that caught my attention.

The "O" in Home has the same spiral imagery, along with the same spiral on the chest of every one of the characters

That was the first thing that caught my attention. There are many illusions throughout the movie, including the main character, O, saying that his people "do not kidnap and abduct, we liberate and befriend" when talking to Rhianna's character from the small island of Barbados. Once I got to the specifics of my dig, I found some interesting things.

At one point in the movie, the two main characters are running from the authorities in the dark streets of New York. There are several neon company signs in the background, which made me curious. One of the signs was not lit, a Ximonox Inc

Typing in Ximonox Inc in google search yields Two articles titled PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE

Actual Link to sec.gov text file

JPMORG&Chase handling securities

Interestingly enough, within the first one is about tax codes on securities regarding a banking firm Credit Suisse First Boston, which was shut down in 2006 for tax evasion practices. The man in charge was Frank Quattrone, who never faced prison time for his multi charges of tax evasion. He was caught bribing jurors and the judge and still got off the hook.

More digging reveals that he is chairman of the Northern California Innocence Project. You would never guess what type of people he has saved from conviction!.

Quattrone is a known supporter of the Clinton Foundation, and public enemy #2 right behind HRC of James Comey, director of FBI.

I will dig for more things hidden in the Movie, but this is a start for now.