1016 levypftexas

Email, Michael R. Levy, treasurer, Sensible Transportation Solutions for Austin PAC, Oct. 26, 2016

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, October 26, 2016 11:55 AM

Subject: Sharing a pro-proposition analysis and a news story published Oct. 1, 2016

Jim Wick, who’s working for a group in favor of Proposition 1, emailed me this morning with the comments below. Does what he says add up? If not, why not?

I’ve also found potentially helpful this Oct. 1 American-Statesman news story, which includes a list of lane counts.

Keep in mind we’re checking the claim that the mayor’s plan call for removing 27+ miles of traffic lanes, replacing them with lanes dedicated to buses and bicycles.

ALSO: Could you send me a PDF of the ad that ran Sunday? Feel free to share the revised ad too.

Thanks.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Jim Wick

Sent: Wednesday, October 26, 2016 11:32 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com>

Subject: Information

Hi Gardner,

I'm writing in regards to the statement that the Mayor's plan would remove 27+ miles of vehicle lanes and replace them with lanes for bicycles and buses.

I took a very hard look at the corridor plans and can say with absolute certainty that there is no way that number is correct.

First, there is no vehicle lane loss for buses on any corridor except for potentially Riverside and Guadalupe.

There is no vehicle lane loss for bicycles in this plan.

The plan does call for replacing some two way left turn lanes with medians and turning bays, so I went through the corridor schematics and calculated how many feet of vehicle lanes we would be "losing" to medians. Here are my calculations:

South Lamar is a 3.3 mile corridor that would lose 1.6 miles of TWLTL to medians. The remaining 1.7 miles would still be TWLTL or turning bays, along with sections of the roadway that already have a raised median.

Airport Blvd is a 6.5 mile corridor that would lose 3 miles of TWLTL to medians. The remaining 3.5 miles would still be TWLTL or turning bays, along with sections that already have a median.

North Lamar is a 6 mile corridor that would lose about 4 miles of TWLTL to medians. The remaining 2 miles would be turning bays or already has a median.

Burnet is a 5 mile corridor that would lose 3.2 miles of TWLTL to medians. The remaining 1.8 miles would be turning bays or already has a median.

Riverside is a 3.7 mile corridor that would lose .5 miles of TWLTL to medians. The remaining 3.2 miles would be turning bays or already has a median.

East MLK (city portion) is a 3.5 mile corridor that would lose 2.5 miles of TWLTL to medians. The remaining 1 mile would be turning bays.

By my calculation, we'd lose 14.8 miles of TWLTL to raised medians, but not to bikes or buses.

...

2:36 p.m.

I stand by our 27+ miles of lost vehicular lanes estimate because it focused only on lanes in the mayor’s “corridors” (Guadalupe, Airport Blvd., Burnet Rd., North Lamar, South Lamar, Martin Luther King, Jr., and East Riverside). This was not clear in our ads, and has been changed. The mayor now claiming miles of lost vehicular lanes are offset by the miles dedicated to usage by bicycles and lots of increasingly empty buses is wrong. The bike and bus lanes cannot be counted as offsets to lost vehicle lanes because they do not reduce congestion, they compound it. These lost vehicle lanes will have an enormous negative impact on vehicular traffic in the mayor’s corridors. Example: 2 of the 4 lanes on Guadalupe being replaced with dedicated bus lanes. If the mayor’s campaign staff challenges the statement that most of the 27+ miles are not being used for new bike and bus lanes, then for what purpose are the lanes being removed? We did not measure lane addition/reduction on 360/620/2222 because the designs are moving targets, with no one on the mayor’s staff claiming they are final.