No Bible: Rashida Tlaib Becomes First Congresswoman to Swear in on a Quran, & it Wasn’t Jefferson’s
The political landscape is definitely changing.

On Thursday, Democratic Minnesota Rep. Rashida Tlaib was sworn in with her hand on the Quran instead of a Bible.

I previously covered Rashida with an August 15th article about her expressed hope to deny further aid to Israel. See that story here.

She made RedState headlines on Friday (courtesy of Brandon Morse), thanks to the previous day’s post-swearing-in speech, which included an absolutely stunning “expletive-filled Trump impeachment comment”:

“We’re going to impeach that motherf***er!”

The crowd cheered.

Cheered.

This is where we are.

The civility and class of politics continues down a muddy hill. And more rain is surely on the way (see here and especially here).

As are, no doubt, more erroneous reports: Despite online posts to the contrary, Tlaib has denied she took her congressional oath on former President Thomas Jefferson’s 18th-century Quran:

Congresswoman @RashidaTlaib is wearing a traditional embroidered Palestinian thobe as she’s sworn into office today on Thomas Jefferson’s Quran. A proud and historic moment. #tweetyourthobe pic.twitter.com/XaOCOGLIEA — Dena Takruri (@Dena) January 3, 2019

“I used my own *personal Quran* that my best friend of 25 years gifted me to use for the ceremonial swear in (basically a photo with Speaker Pelosi). *Note: I did not use Jefferson’s Quran as reported. I wanted it to be more personal (and my own).”

I used my own *personal Quran* that my best friend of 25 years gifted me to use for the ceremonial swear in (basically a photo with Speaker Pelosi). *Note: I did not use Jefferson's Quran as reported. I wanted it to be more personal (and my own). pic.twitter.com/DRTn3EuB8y — Rashida Tlaib (@RashidaTlaib) January 6, 2019

That “photo with Speaker Pelosi” was likely none too warm — as I noted on August 10th, the nation’s first Muslim congresswoman told CNN she wasn’t planning to endorse Nancy as Speaker, suggesting the left-wing Armegeddon-proclaiming goof was a corrupt “sellout” (here and here).

Guess Rashida wanted to oust that mother****er, too.

Meanwhile, the political climate is changing like a mother****er.

For the proud-as-a-peacock vulgarity, see the uncensored tweet below.

-Alex

Relevant RedState links in this article: here, here, here, here, and here.

See 3 more pieces from me: Alyssa Milano vs. height, Maxine madness, and a murderous “Fair Lady.”

Find all my RedState work here.

And please follow Alex Parker on Twitter and Facebook.

Thank you for reading! Please sound off in the Comments section below. For iPhone instructions, see the bottom of this page.

We got congresspeople out here calling the president a mother fucker pic.twitter.com/GCXSPQbPb8 — Barstool News Network (@BarstoolNewsN) January 4, 2019

﻿

If you have an iPhone and want to comment, select the box with the upward arrow at the bottom of your screen; swipe left and choose “Request Desktop Site.” You may have to do this several times before the page reloads. Scroll down to the red horizontal bar that says “Show Comments.”