SALGA
Office Hours Mon-Fri: 08:00-16:30 | Call Center +27 12 369 8000











Gauteng Municipalities Urged To Continue Prioritising Service Delivery And To Serve Communities Diligently Posted: 05 September 2018 Municipalities in the Gauteng Province convened at the South African Local Government Associations (SALGA) two-day Provincial Members Assembly (PMA) which commenced on the 4th of September 2018 and concluded today, 5th September 2018. Read More

Heritage Month: Advancing transformation of South Africa’s Heritage and landscape Posted: 03 September 2018 Heritage month recognises aspects of South African culture which are both tangible and intangible: creative expression such as music and performances, our historical inheritance, language, the food we eat as well as the popular memory. Read More

The Building Inclusive Green Municipalities Project holds annual steering committee meeting Posted: 30 August 2018 The objectives of this PSC sitting were to review and approve the project's annual work plan, budget and provide strategic guidance based on achievements, progress and challenges faced during the implementation phase of the project from 2017 to now. Read More

SALGA Western Cape Succesfully Hosted Its 2018 Provincial Members Assembly Posted: 27 August 2018 Local government continues to be plagued by both service delivery and developmental challenges which call for Organised Local Government to develop strategies that are aimed at supporting member municipalities to curb these challenges. Read More

President Of Salga Parks Tau’s Remarks At The Municipal Wage Collective Agreement Joint Media Briefing, Bloemfontein Posted: 23 August 2018 The South African Local Government Association (SALGA) National Executive Committee (NEC) meeting concluded its meeting on Thursday, 23 August 2018, in Bloemfontein, Free State following engagements with Mangaung Metro, Xhariep District Municipalities and its local municipalities. Read More

SALGA roundup its Free State two-day visits and notes areas of serious concern and progress Posted: 23 August 2018 The South African Local Government Association (SALGA) National Executive Committee (NEC) meeting concluded its meeting on Thursday, 23 August 2018, in Bloemfontein, Free State following engagements with Mangaung Metro, Xhariep District Municipalities and its local municipalities. Read More

Declarations from the 2018 SALGA Women’s Commission National Summit Posted: 23 August 2018 Following the successful hosting of the SALGA Women’s Commission National Summit in East London International Convention Centre in Eastern Cape, on 13- 15 August, women leadership on behalf of 257 South African municipalities... Read More

SALGA rolls up sleeves to deal with challenges facing local government Posted: 22 August 2018 The South African Local Government Association National Executive Meeting began in earnest this morning in Bloemfontein. Over the two-days, SALGA intends to interact with a select few member municipalities in the Free State Province and... Read More

Delegates at SALGA Women's Commission National Summit shut down East London streets during Women Awareness Campaign Posted: 14 August 2018 As part of commemorating women’s month, delegates attending the SALGA Women's Commission National Summit on Monday 13 August, took to the street during a women... Read More

SALGA Women Commission calls for the strengthening of all women structures in local government Posted: 14 August 2018 Women leaders in local government are attending a three-day SALGA Women’s Commission (SWC) National Summit from the 13-15 August at the East London International Convention Centre... Read More

SALGA Effects Changes To The Provincial Executive Committee Posted: 08 August 2018 SALGA wishes to particularly thank Cllr Thembi Nkadimeng and Cllr Keamotseng Ramaila for all their work done during their tenure as Provincial Chairperson and 1st Deputy Provincial Chairperson respectively. We wish them well in their new responsibilities as respectively... Read More