San Domenico School
Kindergarten Literacy

Our kindergarten literacy program is a “balanced literacy” program with a focus on these core concepts:

READING

WRITING

WORD STUDY

LISTENING & SPEAKING

All four areas are guided by ASSESSMENT both summative and formative. This allows for best teaching and learning practices.

The Core Instructional Programs used to teach Literacy in kindergarten are:

Houghton Mifflin Reading, A Legacy of Literacy

Fundations, Wilson Language Basics

Lucy Calkins Writing

Handwriting Without Tears

Supplemental Instructional programs used are:

Fountas & Pinnell

Soundabet

Primary Phonics Decodable Readers

SRA, Basic Reading Series, A Pig Can Jig

Explode The Code

Flyleaf Publishing Authentic Decodable Literature Series

Kid Writing

Our Literacy Classroom

The kindergarten literacy classroom also known as the “ABC Room” is set-up and designed to be an interactive learning environment. On a daily basis students are engaged in hands-on and multi-sensory activities. Students are surrounded by a print rich environment which include books at varied reading levels and genres. Students are taught to work collaboratively in small groups as partners and individually.

Literacy Centers

After the group “mini lesson” is taught at morning circle, the students extend their learning by rotating through four literacy centers on a weekly basis. The centers vary from teacher guided to independent.

The activities change weekly to support the target lessons taught each week.

Literacy Centers are designed for learning to be:

Fun

Differentiated

Multi-sensory

Reinforcement and extension of new concepts taught

Independent, partner or collaborative with peers

Hands-on

READING IN KINDERGARTEN

The five essential components of reading begins in kindergarten and continues throughout the primary grades. It is important to understand that “learning to read” is a continuum of stages that are acquired developmentally, not by age or grade level.

The Five Essential Components of Reading

Phonemic Awareness: The knowledge and manipulation of sounds(phonemes) in spoken words.

The knowledge and manipulation of sounds(phonemes) in spoken words. Phonics: The relationship between written and spoken letters and sounds

The relationship between written and spoken letters and sounds Fluency: The ability to read with accuracy, appropriate rate , expression and fluency

The ability to read with accuracy, appropriate rate expression and fluency Vocabulary: The knowledge of words, their definitions, and context.

The knowledge of words, their definitions, and context. Comprehension: The understanding of the meaning in text.

Reading is taught in kindergarten by:

Reading “to” students

Reading “with” students

Reading “by” students

Reading “to” students using the “READ ALOUD” model of reading is the most important reading activity in kindergarten. This style of reading is integrated throughout the daily curriculum to include Math, Science, Social Studies and Art curriculum.

READ ALOUD teaches and models many literacy concepts to include:

Fluency of a proficient reader

Story structure (beginning/middle/end)

Vocabulary concepts

Prediction skills

Comprehension strategies

Phonemic awareness

Genres: fiction and non-fiction

Reading “with” students models and teaches “THINK ALOUD” and “SHARED READING”.

This style of reading teaches and models many literacy skills to include:

Directionality (Left to Right/Top to Bottom)

Voice to print match using a “reading finger”

Comprehension skills (visualize/infer)

Plot/story elements (setting, main characters, conflict/resolution)

Print concepts

Reading high frequency/sight words

Phonics/word study skills integrated

Reading “by” students models and teaches “GUIDED READING” and “INDEPENDENT READING.” This style of reading teaches and models many literacy skills to include:

Independent/guided fluency

Correct phrasing and expression

Reading strategies

Print concepts

Sentence structure

Reading for meaning

WORD STUDY IN KINDERGARTEN

Building a foundation for reading (decoding) and writing (encoding) is key to success for our Primary School students. All students in kindergarten, first and second grades will be instructed using a program called, Fundations.

Fundations is as integrated, explicit and systematic program that teaches word study and spelling at all grade levels. The kindergarten level focuses on:

Letter formation

Print knowledge

Alphabetic awareness

Phonemic awareness

Phonological awareness

Spelling

Grammar

Word Study concepts and skills taught in kindergarten include:

Recognizing and producing rhyming words

Sequence letters of the alphabet

Naming all the letters of the alphabet

Recognize and produce beginning, middle and ending sounds

Fluently produce constant and vowel sounds

Produce sounds of basic digraphs (wh,sh,ch,th,ck)

Read and spell CVC (consonant, vowel, consonant) words

(consonant, vowel, consonant) words Identify the difference between a letter/ word/ sentence

Segmenting words into syllables

Fluently reading (no sounding out) 25-30 high frequency words

WRITING IN KINDERGARTEN

Writer’s Workshop: We are all Writers!

The kindergarten writing program develops confidence in writing, supports reading development, integrates handwriting instruction and provides practice in different types of writing styles as taught by Lucy Calkins, Unit of Study :

Narrative Writing

Opinion Writing

Information Writing

The teaching model in writing is similar to reading:

Writing “for” students is Modeled Writing

Writing “with” students is Shared & Interactive Writing

Writing “by” students is Independent Writing

Writing concepts modeled and taught in kindergarten include: