Obama endorses Campa-Najjar, Levin for Congress
Former President Barack Obama on Wednesday endorsed numerous candidates across the country, including Democrats Ammar Campa-Najjar and Mike Levin for San Diego County congressional seats.

The announcement follows reports earlier this year that Obama plans to hit the campaign trail this fall as Democrats seek to take over Congress from Republicans. The endorsements, which included candidates for state offices, were expected.

Winning several congressional districts in California currently held by Republicans is considered a key to success for Democrats, though it’s unknown publicly where Obama will make campaign appearances.

In California, the former president endorsed Lt. Gov. Gavin Newsom for governor and Eleni Kounalakis, a former U.S. ambassador to Hungary, for lieutenant governor. He endorsed eight congressional candidates, including Levin and Campa-Najjar.

“I’m confident that, together, they’ll strengthen this country we love by restoring opportunity, repairing our alliances and standing in the world, and upholding our fundamental commitment to justice, fairness, responsibility, and the rule of law,” Obama said on Twitter. “But first, they need our votes.”

Levin, an environmental attorney and former executive director of the Democratic Party of Orange County, faces Board of Equalization member Diane Harkey, a Republican and former state legislator. They are running in the coastal 49th Congressional District, which straddles north San Diego and southern Orange counties.

Harkey finished atop a crowded field in the June primary with 25.5 percent of the vote, with Levin second at 17.5 percent.

Incumbent Republican Darrell Issa decided not to run for re-election after narrowly avoiding defeat in 2016 and facing weekly protests outside his Vista office because of his support for President Donald Trump and efforts to dismantle the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare.

Campa-Najjar served in various roles within the Obama administration, including a public relations position in the Employment & Training Administration. He’s running against Rep. Duncan Hunter, R-Alpine, in the 50th Congressional District, which includes much of east and north inland San Diego County and stretches into Riverside County.

Hunter, who is under federal investigation for personal use of campaign funds, gained 47 percent of the vote in June to Campa-Najjar’s 17 percent.