0816 hammadpftexas

Email, Hanan Hammad, associate professor of history, director of the Middle East Studies, Texas Christian University, Aug. 26, 2016

-----Original Message-----

From: Hammad, Hanan

Sent: Friday, August 26, 2016 2:08 PM

To: 'Garfield, Seth W'

Subject: RE: invitation to UT-Austin

Dear Professor Garfield,

With deep regret I have to rescind my acceptance of your very kind invitation. I sincerely apologize to you and to all colleagues in the Institute for Historical Studies. I am still so appreciative of your invitation, and want to express my thanks to all for considering me as a visitor, but with campus carry now in full effect at UT, I just cannot come. I'm always proud to be a UT alumnus and I owe my mentors and teachers great deal, but I'm in full solidarity with all UT faculty, staff, and students whose health and lives are in danger due to campus carry. I believe open or conceal carry on campus is wrong and dangerous.

Again, thanks for the invitation and apology for not accepting it.

Feel free to publish all or part or a summary of this note if it will be helpful in any way.

Sincerely,

Hanan Hammad

Associate Professor of History

Director of the Middle East Studies

Texas Christian University

-----Original Message-----

From: Garfield, Seth W

Sent: Tuesday, August 02, 2016 9:40 AM

To: Hammad, Hanan

Subject: invitation to UT-Austin

Dear Hanan,

As Director of the Institute for Historical Studies, I would like to invite you to participate in an academic panel that the Institute will be organizing to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Suez crisis.

The event will take place on Thursday, October 13, from 3:00-5:00, and will also feature UT faculty Roger Louis and Yoav Di-Capua, and possibly another historian.

The panel is part of a series that commemorates landmark historical events on their anniversaries. These events are open to the public and typically draw a crowd of about forty people, including faculty, graduate students, and alumni. Each speaker would have about 15-20 minutes to present. Given your expertise in Egyptian history, we would be very pleased if you could participate. Please note that you would not be expected to speak about the Suez crisis per se, if you do not wish; in the past, panelists have used these venues to provide broader context regarding the historical event or to reflect on its legacies.

The Institute will be happy to pay for your travel and lodging expenses. I look forward to hearing from you.

Best

Seth