NorCal blanks Nevada to reach West final; Idaho also advances
SAN BERNARDINO >> Once again, Northern California’s Tri City All-Star baseball team of Rocklin received a gem of a pitching performance at Al Houghton Stadium.

Three days after its pitchers combined for a perfect game, Tri City shut out Nevada’s Silverado West 11-0 on Friday to advance to the Little League Western Regional championship game.

Aiden Weissenberg-Frost, who caught the perfect game Tuesday night, threw 5 1/3 innings on Friday, getting lifted when he hit his pitch limit of 86 pitches after getting the first out of the sixth. Tanner Dykstra, who also took part in the perfect game, completed the shutout.

Weissenberg-Frost struck out eight of the first nine batters he faced and finished with 11 overall strikeouts. He surrendering three base hits and two other base runners. He did a good job of getting the Nevada batters to chase his pitches on the corner of the plate.

“We changed the game plan,” Tri City manager Dave Ueltzen said. “We weren’t trying to hit black as we called it, hitting zones instead. We were trying to keep the pitch count down a little bit. So I didn’t want Aiden to paint the very, very edge, just hit an area.

“He throws hard enough that if he hits the area, we’re pretty good. Keep his pitch count down. If they hit it, they hit it.”

Weissenberg-Frost was afforded the chance to relax a bit, thanks to a five-run third inning, started on a bunt by Trajan Rogowski.

Tri City made it 8-0 in the fourth, thanks to a three-run home run hit by Tyler Allen. Shortstop Nathan Erickson, who threw 5 2/3 innings in the perfect game, credited Weissenberg-Frost for pumping up the the squad before the third-inning rally with a pep talk.

“I had them circle around me and I was talking about momentum swings,” Weissenberg-Frost said. “And I said the first team that scores, the momentum is going to stay on their side the entire game. I didn’t want them to score, because I felt like they would have the edge. So, I got them together.”

Northern California will take on Hawaii for the West Regional championship at 6 p.m. tonight.

If Tri City wins, it would be just the third team from Northern California Section 4 since 1959 to go to the Little League World Series.

“We try not to talk about (the possibility of advancing to the World Series),” Ueltzen said. “We’re trying to stay as low key as we can.”

Northwest

IDAHO 8, OREGON 3 >> Avery Cherry and Christopher Reynolds each went 2-for-3 with two RBIs apiece to help the Coeur d’Alene advance to win its Northwest Regional semifinal over Murrayville Little League of Beaverton.

Idaho will get a rematch with Montana in the championship game this afternoon at noon. On Thursday afternoon, Montana knocked off Idaho 5-2 in the winner’s bracket semifinal game.

Idaho scored a run in each of the first two innings and never trailed in the game.