San Domenico School
The San Domenico School math program is designed to help students develop their understanding of mathematical concepts and apply those principles to real world situations.



We encourage all students to:

Develop a solid foundation of math skills and procedures

Look for patterns and develop an understanding of mathematics

as the science of patterns

as the science of patterns Communicate math ideas and questions effectively

Use critical thinking and mathematical reasoning to solve

routine and non-routine math problems

routine and non-routine math problems Answer higher order thinking questions where problem solving is the focus

Make connections within math, and between math and other subjects

Maximize their curiosity, tenacity, and appreciation for math

Take responsibility for their learning and be resourceful in

seeking help when they need it

Mathematics: Twelve Thinking Behaviors

Through the math program at San Domenico Middle School, we endeavor to teach the following thinking behaviors:



1. Persistence

2. Overcoming impulsivity

3. Listening to others

4. Flexibility in thinking

5. Metacognition

6. Checking for accuracy & precision

7. Questioning and problem posing

8. Drawing on past knowledge applying it to new situations

9. Precision of language and thought

10. Using all the senses (includes sense of humor)

11. Ingenuity, originality, and insightfulness: creativity and metaphors

12. Wonderment, inquisitiveness, curiosity, and the enjoyment of problem solving

What is Mathematics? Why Study It?

From a presentation at the 2006 National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Conference in St. Louis, MO by Jim Rubillo, President of National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Mathematics is not simply a set of rules, skills, and procedures.

Rather, mathematics is characterized by the type of questions explored. Mathematics explores "life's questions" from a logical and quantitative point of view.

People, in every field of endeavor, need mathematical skills and abilities to help them deal with questions similar to the following:

A Non-Exhaustive List of Life’s Key Questions:



How can this information be sorted, organized, grouped, compared, and visualized?

What is the result of this series of actions? Are the steps reversible?

Does it follow? Can you verify that fact? How can we be sure?

Have we reached a maximum or minimum? Can things get better or worse? What's best?

What are the possibilities? Have we missed something?

What strategies are available? Is there a different way to look at the situation?

What are the chances? What are the risks?

Can we simulate or model the situation?

A small part of the situation is visible, but what is "actually" there?



Does a “representative” sample tell you as much about a population as a census? Is a sip as good as a gulp? Can you believe the Gallup Poll?

Have We Reached the Maximum or Minimum? Can Things Get Better or Worse?



The Fundamentals of Medicinal Dosage: A person takes one (1) unit of medicine every day. The medicine mixes quickly into the body's "water supply." The body replaces 25% of its water each day. How many units of the medicine are in the body after: one day? two days? 14 days?



Why does this work?

Are these figures accurate? Do the books balance?

What's missing? What's extra?

Is that result reasonable? Do I have enough resources to solve the problem?

Are these two things related? Does one factor influence the other?

What are the extremes? What is most likely? How much variation can we expect?

What are the ground rules? What limits and opportunities do they impose?

How is the situation changing? How much time will it take?



Spreading, peaking and ending of a flu epidemic:

Every flu epidemic has a "population of opportunity." The epidemic is spread "randomly" until the maximum number of susceptible people contract the flu and the “epidemic is over." Everyone does not contract the flu. Only the “susceptible” people in the “population of opportunity” get sick. We take actions that attempt to reduce this "population of opportunity." Sample actions: immunization shots, isolation of infected people, sanitation, education on risk factors. How can we detect when the "growth of an uncontrolled epidemic" has peaked? How can we predict the maximum number of susceptible persons that will be infected?

Will the proposed change really make a difference? How can we tell? What is our test?

Is there a shortcut or a procedure (algorithm) to perform this task?

What have we learned from our experiences? How can we improve the outcome?

How precise must our work be?

What does this table (or graph) say? How can we present this information?

Is there a pattern here? What's next? Will this trend continue?

How much is necessary to complete this task?

Math Success Skills

Get a “can do” attitude: If you can do it in sports, music, dance, etc., you can do it in math! Try not to let fear or negative experiences turn you off to math.

Take responsibility for studying and recognizing what you do and don't know. Get help early, not just before a test!

Try not to miss class. If you do miss class be sure to get a copy of the notes you missed from another student or your teacher, and check in with your teacher about what you missed.

Pay attention in class or you may miss important steps to learning concepts. Ask questions in class! There are usually other students wanting to know the answers to the same questions you have.

A word of warning

Most lessons build on the previous ones, all year long. You must keep up with the class: attend class, take notes and do homework every day. Falling a day behind puts you at a disadvantage. Falling a week behind puts you in deep trouble.

A word of encouragement

Most lessons build on the previous ones, all semester long. You will always review previous material as you learn new material. Many of the ideas fit together. Paying attention in class and understanding the concepts and connections mean you don't have to memorize as much! These habits will not only give you an advantage on upcoming lessons but in high school, college, and beyond.