San Domenico School
Dear San Domenico Community,

What you read today is the result of several years of study and reflection by our entire SD community. SD2021 is a strategic plan that builds upon the richness of our 168-year history and guides us for the next five years.

The process of developing SD2021 reflects our commitment to inclusivity and our core values of study, reflection, community, and service. This round of strategic planning began in 2012 with extensive demographic and market research, along with surveys and interviews of current parents, alumni, students, employees, board members, and Dominican Sisters. This foundational work led to extending coeducation through to our Upper School in 2013, as well as a thorough self-study to articulate the essential nature of our identity.

In 2014, the Board retained planning consultant Kathy Hanson, who leads the Independent Schools division for the international advancement firm Marts & Lundy, to work with our full Board of Trustees to complete the Strategic Planning Process. Over the course of these past two years, the Strategic Planning Committee, chaired by Board member and current parent Graham Weaver, has worked diligently to complete this plan which will guide our School during this pivotal time in our history.

During the 2015-16 school year, the Strategic Planning Committee and Ms. Hanson surveyed additional current parents, past parents, alumni, faculty, staff, and Dominican Sisters. We conducted interviews and meetings with members of the same constituent groups and we reflected on how to best serve our local community and the greater world. In addition, our Board’s Marketing Committee and Mission Enhancement Committee provided commentary, perspective, and review. The Board of Trustees was also kept apprised of and reviewed developments at regular intervals. We are grateful for the many contributions each of these community members made toward the development of the final plan. Through our collaborative and inclusive process, we gathered the thoughts and opinions of more than 500 community members. After two years conferring, analyzing, synthesizing, and planning, the San Domenico Board of Trustees voted to approve this Strategic Plan on Monday, June 6, 2016, and SD2021 was established.

With SD2021 our community has come together to establish a solid and exciting vision for the future of San Domenico. Key areas of focus include commitments to:

Provide an increasingly vibrant educational experience by ensuring our core values of study, reflection, community, and service inform all of our programs. Strengthen San Domenico’s identity as an Independent School and clearly articulate our inclusive spiritual foundation. Create a cohesive educational experience across all grades, inspiring families to remain at San Domenico through high school graduation. Attract, develop, and retain exceptional faculty who embody and support the mission and vision of San Domenico. Ensure San Domenico’s long-term success through inspired governance and leadership, prudent financial management, dynamic student recruitment, bold philanthropic initiatives, and investment in facilities.

The goals and strategies of SD2021 will serve as the roadmap by which our Board will set policies and measure progress and effectiveness. The implementation measures that our administrative team will develop within the framework of the adopted strategies will be fluid and responsive in order to reflect best practices in strategic planning.



In January of this year, the Harvard Graduate School of Education released Turning the Tide, a report from a coalition of colleges including Harvard, Stanford, MIT, and Yale calling for a reconsideration of the college admissions process. The report emphasizes the need for a process that inspires concern for others, reduces achievement pressures, and creates greater equity for economically-diverse students, all hallmarks of a San Domenico education. SD’s long-held commitment to social-emotional learning, service, stewardship, and social justice is perhaps more valuable than ever. We stand as leaders during this time of great change in the field of education and we thank all of you who help guide us along the way. As always, we welcome your questions and ideas.



We move forward together.



Amy Skewes-Cox ’71

2016-2017 Board Chair

Cecily Stock, ’77, M.A., J.D.

Head of School

SD2021 STRATEGIC PLAN LEADERSHIP

Thank you to the more than 500 San Domenico community members who informed this Plan.

SD2021 Planning Committee Graham Weaver,

Committee Chair, BOD Treasurer,

and parent

Sister Susan Allbritton, O.P.,

BOD, Mission Holding, ex officio

Janet Reilly,

BOD Vice Chair

Richard E. Goldman, BOD and parent

Amy Skewes-Cox ’71, BOD



Dan Babior, Director of High School Admissions

Cindy Bollini, PSA President and parent

Kimberly Pinkson,

Director of Marketing and Communications

Kate Reeser, Director of Teaching and Learning

Paul P. “Skip” Spaulding, III, BOD Chair, ex officio

and parent

Cecily Stock ’77, Head of School, ex officio

David Wise, Chief Financial Officer 2015-2016 Board of Trustees Paul P. “Skip” Spaulding, III

Board Chair

Janet Reilly

Vice Chair

Graham Weaver

Treasurer

June Sullivan

Secretary

Sister Susan Allbritton, O.P.

Mission Holding, ex officio

Joseph T. Arsenio, II

Richard P. Bollini, II

James F. Buckley, Jr.

Mary Buie

Colin Bruce Campbell

Philip Bernet Clark, II

Sister Margaret Diener, O.P.

Christopher Doerschlag

Kelly Fogarty

Sandra Gerner

Richard E. Goldman

Patricia Grubb

Christopher S. Lane

Jeffrey F. Ludlow

Sister Susannah Malarkey, O.P. ’48

James L. O’Hara

Mary-Peck Peters ’77

Leslie Reese ’87

Elizabeth Wilhelm Schott ’75

Amy Skewes-Cox ’71

Cathie Bennett Warner Additional thanks to SD English teachers Sonya Evans and Kaitlyn Gallagher Mission Enhancement Committee June Sullivan, Chair

Sister Susan Allbritton, O.P.

Patricia Grubb

Sister Susannah Malarkey, O.P. ’48

Elizabeth Wilhelm Schott

Paul P. “Skip” Spaulding, III, ex officio

Kathleen Toney

STAFF

John Berry

Shelley Flint

Sally Jaeger

Mirza Khan

LeaAnne Parlette

Kate Reeser

Carrie Robley

Cecily Stock

Sister Gervaise Valpey, O.P. Marketing Committee Janet Reilly, Chair

Christopher Doerschlag

Kelly Fogarty

Richard E. Goldman

James Gassel

Lisa Hilgers

Paul P. “Skip” Spaulding, III, ex officio

Cathie Bennett Warner

STAFF

Dan Babior

Jennie Nash

Kimberly Pinkson

Cecily Stock

Laura Volovski

MISSION STATEMENT

Dedicated to being California’s leading independent school, serving Kindergarten through twelfth grade students of all faiths, San Domenico is committed to excellence in education, preparing the next generation of global leaders.

Founded in 1850 by the Dominican Sisters, San Domenico reflects our Dominican Catholic heritage which calls us to uphold the values of study, reflection, service and community.

In the Dominican tradition of Veritas (truth),

We inspire inquiry and provide a strong academic

foundation for lifelong intellectual growth.

We explore and develop the unique gifts of each

individual in mind, heart, body, and spirit.

We celebrate diversity, recognizing God's presence

in ourselves and in all of creation.

We recognize what it means to be human in a global

community and respond with integrity to the needs

and challenges of our time.