Black Friday Predicted to be the Busiest Shopping Day of 2016
Share

Black Friday Predicted to be the Busiest Shopping Day of 2016

December 17 to be considered Super Saturday

CHICAGO – Oct. 19, 2016 – ShopperTrak, a Tyco Retail Solutions business unit, published its list of the anticipated busiest shopping days of 2016, with Friday, Nov. 25 (i.e., Black Friday) taking the top spot. Monday, Dec. 26 and Friday, Dec. 23 are expected to be the second and third busiest shopping days.

The full list of predicted busiest shopping days is as follows:

Friday, Nov. 25 Monday, Dec. 26 Friday, Dec. 23 Saturday, Dec. 17 Saturday, Dec. 10 Saturday, Nov. 26 Thursday, Dec. 22 Saturday, Dec. 3 Sunday, Dec. 18 Wednesday, Dec. 21

While reviewing historical trends, ShopperTrak found that the intensity of Super Saturday traffic increases in proximity to Christmas Day, unless Super Saturday falls directly on Christmas Eve. And because that is the case this year, shopper activity will remain consistent with those of past Christmas Eves. As a result, Saturday, Dec. 24 is not expected to be a top ten busiest day.

This shift will elevate the importance of Monday, Dec. 26 and Friday, Dec. 23, which are historically more significant shopping days when they either fall on a weekend or extend a weekend.

“This year, we are dubbing December 17 Super Saturday because we expect it to be the busiest Saturday of December,” said Brian Field, senior director of advisory services at ShopperTrak. “However, it will be no match for Black Friday, which will be the busiest shopping day of the holiday season.”

Additionally, ShopperTrak examined the impact of Thanksgiving Day store openings on retail traffic and found that operating on Thanksgiving Day impacts primarily the distribution of traffic, rather than the overall traffic count.

“Based on our findings, it’s clear that Thanksgiving Day openings may risk more in operating costs than in expanding sales opportunities. Not to mention, opening on Thanksgiving has serious implications on staff morale,” Field said. “This explains why certain retailers and malls, such as the Mall of America, are remaining closed on Thanksgiving Day and focusing their attention on Black Friday.”

To view ShopperTrak’s infographic on this subject, please visit our blog.