I'll say it again, abortion is a worse evil: Pell
"I feel a great sympathy for women who are pushed into abortion. I feel a great sympathy of course for the destruction of innocent life, and that is one of worst - it is the worst - of evils." Dr Pell has come under increasing criticism since his assertion at a World Youth Day event that abortion was a "worse moral scandal" than sex abuse perpetrated against young people by Catholic clergy. Attributing his jovial mood to a successful pilgrimage where he received a standing ovation, Dr Pell said his original statement had been quoted out of context because The Globe and Mail newspaper had not included an earlier condemnation of sex abuse in the church.



"I ... mentioned that the church is being attacked for [sex abuse] sometimes by elements that are a bit anti-Christian ... I said there are other scandals, such as abortion which are under-reported and because abortion destroys innocent life you could say it's a worse scandal." The Herald asked Dr Pell what he had to say to those who have lost offspring to suicide, as a result of being sexually abused by Catholic clergy.

"Well ... there's not too many of those," he said. "But that's ... terrible, that adds another dimension of evil to sex abuse." The president of the victims of sex abuse support group Broken Rites, described Dr Pell's comments as a disgrace. "One victim is one too many, and we're aware of at least 30 suicides in the last 10 years," Chris MacIssac said. "It's a disgrace to the Catholic Church."

The Opposition Leader, Simon Crean, who called on the Sydney Archdiocese earlier this week to clarify Dr Pell's comments made in Canada, yesterday criticised Dr Pell's apparent "hierarchy of evil". "Sexual abuse of children is one of the most repugnant and serious of crimes which can never be condoned, excused or reduced in severity by comparison to some other act," he said.

Late yesterday, Dr Pell issued a sober press release from his Sydney office, soundly condemning sex abuse. He said he had in recent months given three media conferences addressing the issue and worked for years to combat its evil. Dr Pell also acknowledged that many Australians did not share his uncompromising views on abortion. "A lot of people in our society don't see it that way, but we Christians see abortion as the destruction of innocent life," he told the Herald.

Christian leaders of other denominations yesterday distanced themselves from Dr Pell's interpretation of the Christian position on abortion, however. Representatives from the Uniting Church's Victorian office, the Baptists Union and Anglican church distanced themselves from Dr Pell's interpretations.

"The termination of a pregnancy is legal and allowable in certain defined circumstances, and ... not a sin," said a spokesman for the Anglican Primate of Australia, Peter Carnley.