0615 trudeaupftexas

Emails, Garry Trudeau, author, Doonesbury, June 17, 2015

On Jun 17, 2015, at 11:09 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

In this Doonesbury strip (also pasted below), a character says Texas Gov. Greg Abbott “activated the state guard to monitor” Jade Helm 15 “in case the troops try to impose martial law, disarm innocent Texans, and detain them in tunnels beneath closed Walmart stores.”

We are fact-checking this claim. I remember that Abbott told the State Guard to monitor the exercise. But I’m not sure the guard was activated or that Abbott acted in case the troops took the actions described in the strip.

Could you elaborate on the factual basis of this statement?

Appreciated,

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

10:57 a.m.

Governor Abbott, in his letter to Major General Betty, the Commander of the Texas State Guard, directed him to monitor Operation Jade Helm 15 "to address concerns of Texas citizens". Those "concerns", expressed in town meetings with the Army, came in the form of highly entertaining conspiracy theories. I included my favorite, although it's possible the Governor's actions were prompted by an even nuttier one.

As for timing, it's my understanding that Jade Helm 15 doesn't commence until July 15. I make no claim as to when or if Guardsmen will report for duty, just that Abbott directed the Guard to be activated for monitor duties, per his letter.

Regards,

Garry Trudeau

On Jun 17, 2015, at 4:54 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

I still haven’t found any sign of the Guard getting activated to monitor the operation. In contrast, then-Gov. Rick Perry activated 1,000 National Guard troops last summer for border-region duties.

Also, it looks to me so far like Abbott did not air a particular concern or concerns like the ones offered by Bernie in the strip as his rationale for telling the commander to monitor the operation.

Is there particular other factual information you recommend we consider?

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

4:30 p.m.

Abbott directed the Guard to monitor Jade Helm 15, so it's safe to assume he intended the Guard to be activated at the appropriate time (next month). While the governor didn't specify which "concerns" he was addressing, his letter was issued in the context of a contemporaneous, well-publicized swirl of conspiracy theories. What other concerns could he have been talking about?

You understand this is satire, right? Not that I mind the attention, but still. PolitiFact has vetted strips three times in the past, and fortunately for my street cred as a professional exaggerator, I've only made it up to the "Mostly True" level. If everything I wrote was flat-out true, I'd have to call myself a reporter.

Cheers,

GT