Carrying a Loaded Firearm
California Penal Code 25850 PC makes it a crime to carry a loaded firearm in a vehicle or public place. Though it is a misdemeanor in most cases, PC 25850 carrying a loaded firearm can be charged as a California felony if certain aggravating circumstances are present.

PC 25850 reads: “A person is guilty of carrying a loaded firearm when the person carries a loaded firearm on the person or in a vehicle while in any public place or on any public street in an incorporated city or in any public place or on any public street in a prohibited area of unincorporated territory."

PC 25850 carrying a loaded firearm is a separate and distinct offense from carrying a concealed firearm, which is prohibited under Penal Code 25400 PC.

Despite the fact that carrying a loaded weapon sounds like a very straight-forward offense, it's not. The code is filled with legal jargon, technicalities, and exceptions that make this seemingly obvious offense rather complex.

To help understand exactly what conduct is (and is not) prohibited by this California firearms law, our California criminal defense attorneys will address the following:

If, after reading this article, you would like more information, we invite you to contact us at Shouse Law Group.

1. What is the legal definition of “carrying a loaded firearm in a public place”?

Penal Code 25850(a) reads as follows:

“A person is guilty of carrying a loaded firearm when the person carries a loaded firearm on the person or in a vehicle while in any public place or on any public street in an incorporated city or in any public place or on any public street in a prohibited area of unincorporated territory.”

Let's take a look at some of these terms to gain a better understanding of their legal definitions.

"Loaded"

A firearm is “loaded” when there is:

an unexpended cartridge or shell, consisting of a case that holds a charge of powder and a bullet or shot, in, or attached in any manner to, the firearm…including, but not limited to, in the firing chamber, magazine, or clip thereof attached to the firearm.

A muzzle-loader firearm is considered loaded when:

it is capped or primed, and has a powder charge and ball or shot in the barrel or cylinder.

And although it may seem illogical, prosecutors can convict you of carrying a loaded firearm in a vehicle or public place even if the gun is inoperable.

In addition, if you carry a gun in public, a peace officer has the right to examine it to determine if it is loaded. Refusal constitutes probable cause for arrest for violation of Penal Code 25850.

"Firearm"

A “firearm” under California's gun laws means:

a device, designed to be used as a weapon, from which a projectile, is expelled through a barrel, by the force of an explosion or other form of combustion.

It also includes any:

rocket,

rocket propelled projectile launcher, or

similar device…

containing any explosive or incendiary material…whether or not the device is designed for emergency or distress signaling purposes.”

Examples: Examples of “firearms”…which are synonymously referred to as "guns"…include (but are not limited to):

pistols, revolvers, rifles, shotguns, and tasers.

Excluded from the definition of “firearms” under Penal Code 25850 PC are:

pellet guns, and BB guns.

"Public place"



A “public place” is any place which is open to common and general use and is readily accessible by anyone wishing to go there.

"Prohibited area"

A “prohibited area” refers to “any place where it is unlawful to discharge a weapon.”

2. How can I fight Penal Code 25850 PC charges?

There are a variety of legal defenses to this charge that a good California criminal defense attorney may present on to help you fight charges of carrying a loaded weapon. Below are examples of some of the most common.

2.1. You didn't realize you were carrying the firearm

If you don't know you are carrying a firearm, you aren't guilty of violating Penal Code 25850 PC. This is because carrying a loaded firearm in public necessarily requires that you know the firearm is present.

This defense works best when the gun is not actually on your person. For instance, it could be in your car or in a bag that you are carrying. If a gun is tucked inside your waistband, it's hard to argue you didn't know it was there.

Example: When security officers check your backpack at a Lakers game, they find a loaded handgun at the bottom. You accidentally grabbed your roommate's bag instead of yours and had no idea the gun was inside.

Because you weren't aware of the gun's presence, you should be acquitted of this charge.

2.2. The firearm wasn't loaded

The offense is carrying a loaded firearm in public. It therefore stands to reason that if the firearm wasn't loaded, you have not committed this offense. However, you may be guilty of violating California Penal Code Section 26350(a), carrying an unloaded firearm in public.

Example: Let's say you are carrying a shotgun. The shell or cartridge is in a storage compartment located in a separate area of the gun. Because the ammunition hasn't been placed in a “firing” position, you aren't carrying a loaded firearm.

Claiming that you didn't know the firearm was loaded will not serve as a legal defense to this crime. However, if you can prove more than sheer ignorance…that is, that you had a legitimate, reasonable reason to believe that the gun, in fact, was not loaded…you may be able to prevail based on a “mistake of fact” defense.

Example: You always carry your unloaded 22 in your glove compartment. Unbeknownst to you, your brother had loaded the gun without your permission. You get pulled over and the cops recover the loaded pistol. Nevertheless, you had a legitimate belief it was not loaded.

Again, however, you may be guilty of violating California Penal Code Section 26350(a), carrying an unloaded firearm in public.

2.3. You didn't carry the firearm in public

Penal Code 25850 PC applies when you are:

in any public place or on any public street in an incorporated city or, in any public place or on any public street in a prohibited area of any unincorporated territory.

Prohibited areas include government offices, schools, and post offices.

If you weren't arrested in a public place or street, you should be acquitted of the charge. You can't legally be convicted unless the prosecutor independently proves each “element” of the crime.

Example: Officers approach you while you are parked in your car on a street. They see ammunition on the floor and ask whether you have any weapons in the car. You tell them that you have a shotgun in the backseat and they arrest you for violating Penal Code 25850 PC.

At your trial, your California criminal defense lawyer asks the officer if the street you were parked on was in an incorporated city. The officer replies that he doesn't know. Your attorney then asks the officer if there are any county ordinances that prohibit discharging a firearm in that area. Again, the officer replies that he doesn't know.

Given these facts, the officer (as part of the prosecution team) hasn't established a necessary element of the crime. He can't prove that he arrested you on a public street in an incorporated city or in a prohibited area of an unincorporated territory. As a result, you should be acquitted of this charge.

2.4. Police misconduct

Unfortunately, police officers, like anyone else, are often driven by unethical motives that compel them to do unjust acts. Some of these acts might include:

“planting” or “fabricating” evidence,

creating a false report alleging you carried a gun on your person (turning in someone else's gun at the station),

violating your Fourth Amendment right against unreasonable searches,

coercing your confession.

And despite how reprehensible police misconduct is, it's not uncommon.

As Rancho Cucamonga criminal defense attorney John Murray explains:

“Cops are just as capable as anyone to succumbing to anger, revenge, humiliation, or even a power trip to get control over another person. With our team's former law enforcement experience, we know the best ways to investigate this outrageous conduct and how to convince the judge/jury that it took place.”

2.5. You were carrying a gun in self-defense

California's self-defense law… specifically addressed under Penal Code 26045 PC… allows you to carry a gun under two circumstances:

1. under otherwise lawful circumstances where you reasonably believe that:

any person… or the property of any person…

is in immediate, grave danger, and

the carrying of the weapon is necessary for the preservation of that person or property; or

2. you reasonably believe

that you are in grave danger…

because of circumstances forming the basis of a current restraining order issued by a court…

against another person who has been found to pose a threat to your life or safety.

Whether your belief of grave danger is reasonable is an objective standard. A judge and/or jury will decide how a reasonable person would have acted in your situation.

3. Am I exempt from prosecution under Penal Code 25850 PC?

Certain people are exempt from the prohibitions of California Penal Code 25850 PC.

If you are fall into one of the below categories, you have not unlawfully carried a loaded firearm in public.

3.1. Penal Code 25900 and 26020 PC -- Peace officers and federal agents

California Penal Code 25900 PC states that you may carry a loaded firearm in a public place if you are:

A California peace officer, whether active or honorably retired, A full-time paid peace officer of another state or the federal government who is carrying out official duties while in California, or Any person summoned by any of these officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while the person is actually engaged in assisting that officer.

You may carry a loaded firearm under California Penal Code 26020 PC if:

you are an honorably retired federal officer or agent of any federal law enforcement agency, and you have the approval of the sheriff of the county in which you reside.

Federal law enforcement agencies include (but are not limited to):

the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),

the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF),

the United States Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), and

the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).

3.2. Penal Code 26000 PC – members of the military

California Penal Code 26000 states that 25850 does not apply to members of the military.

The exemption applies to members of the forces of California or of the United States engaged in the performance of their duties.

3.3. Penal Code 26025 PC -- POST certification

California Penal Code 26025 PC exempts specific individuals who have completed a “regular course in firearms training approved by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training”.

Examples of individuals included in this group are:

animal control police or zookeepers, and

harbor patrol police officers.

3.4. Penal Code 26005 and 26040 PC – recreational shooters

California Penal Code 26005 allows you to carry a loaded gun:

if you are using a target range for the purpose of practice shooting with a firearm, or

while hunting on the premises of a shooting club of which you are a member.

Additionally, California Penal Code 26040 permits people to carry a loaded firearm while engaged in hunting. This exemption is subject to hunting at that place and time not being prohibited by the city council.

You must, however, carry your gun to and from these places in a locked container.

3.5. Penal Code 26010 – People with concealed carry permits

People who have a California permit to carry a concealed firearm are exempt from the prohibition against carrying a loaded gun.

3.6. Penal Code 26015 and 26030 PC – Armored vehicle guards, security guards and private investigators

California Penal Code sections 26015 and 26030 PC allow other specified individuals to carry a gun as long as certain conditions are met. These individuals include:

armored vehicle guards, security guards, and private investigators.

3.7. Penal Code 26035 -- Business owners and private property owners

California Penal Code 26035 PC states that the crime of carrying a loaded firearm in a public place doesn't apply to:

people who are engaged in a lawful business who have a loaded firearm in that place of business, or people in lawful possession of private property who have a loaded firearm on that property.

But notice that this exclusion applies to having a loaded firearm. California courts have held that “having” a loaded firearm is not the same as “carrying” a loaded firearm. “Having” is synonymous with possession; “carrying” involves a physical act.

So while you may be allowed to have a loaded gun in your place of business or in your home, absent another lawful exception or the need for self-defense, you are not allowed to carry it, unless you have an immediate need for self-defense.

And even all of the above subdivisions have caveats and exclusions…which is why it is important to consult with a criminal defense attorney who understands the complex nature of California's firearm laws.

4. What are the penalties for PC 25850 carrying a loaded firearm in public?

4.1. Misdemeanor violations of Penal Code 25850 PC

Absent aggravating circumstances, carrying a loaded firearm in a vehicle or on your person is a misdemeanor. If convicted of this offense, you face:

informal (otherwise known as “summary”) probation, up to one (1) year in a county jail, and/or a maximum $1,000 fine.

4.2. “Wobbler” provisions of Penal Code 25850 PC

When there are aggravating factors, those circumstances elevate a 25850 PC violation to a “wobbler” or a “straight” felony. A “wobbler” is an offense that prosecutors can file as either a misdemeanor or a felony, depending on:

the circumstances of the offense, and your criminal history.

A Penal Code 25850 violation becomes a wobbler when…in addition to carrying a loaded firearm in a public place or in a car…you:

were previously convicted of a misdemeanor crime against a person or property, or of a narcotics or dangerous California drug crime law, or are not listed as the registered owner of the loaded handgun with the Department of Justice.

If you are convicted of carrying a firearm in a public place or in a vehicle as a misdemeanor under one of these wobbler subdivisions, you face the same misdemeanor penalties listed above.

If you are convicted of this offense as a felony, you face:

16 months, or two (2) or three (3) years in county jail, and

a fine of up to $1,000.

4.3. Straight felonies under Penal Code 25850 PC

There are four remaining sentencing schemes that are outlined in Penal Code 25850 PC. All of these are straight felonies (meaning they cannot be reduced to misdemeanors).

If you are convicted of carrying a loaded firearm on your person or in your car…and any of the certain conditions apply…you face:

up to one-year county jail or 16 months, or two (2) or three (3) years in county jail, and/or a maximum $10,000 fine.

These conditions include:

previously being convicted of a felony or any other offense under California gun laws,

situations in which the loaded firearm is stolen and you know or have reasonable cause to believe that the gun is stolen,

unlawfully possessing the firearm or otherwise being prohibited from owning or possessing a firearm, and

being an active participant in a criminal street gang.

Note that you may be found guilty of active participation in a gang even if your PC 25850 carrying a loaded firearm isn't connected to your involvement with the gang.

And keep in mind that just because prosecutors charge you as a felony doesn't mean that the jury will convict you of the felony offense. If the jury believes that you carried a loaded gun in public or in your car…but doesn't believe that you fall within one of the categories that elevates the offense to a felony…it could alternatively convict you of only a misdemeanor.

4.4. Violation of Penal Code 25850 after prior firearm convictions

If you are convicted of any Penal Code 25850 PC violation…and have previously been convicted of:

you must serve a minimum three (3) month county jail sentence.

5. What are the collateral consequences of a Penal Code 25850 conviction?

5.1. What are the immigration consequences of a PC 25850 conviction?

If you are a legal immigrant or legal alien, a Penal Code 25850 PC conviction could additionally result in deportation. For more information about how California's firearm laws affect aliens, please visit our article on California crimes that lead to deportation.

5.2. Can I expunge my California Penal Code 25850 PC conviction?

If you are granted probation in a misdemeanor or felony Penal Code 25850 PC case, you may expunge your California criminal record once you successfully complete the probationary period. However, the judge can deny you an expungement if you suffer a probation violation or fail to adhere to all the terms and conditions of probation.

And if you are charged with carrying a loaded firearm in public as a felony, the court may be willing to reduce the wobbler from a felony to a misdemeanor. The court may also grant an early termination of probation if you comply with all the terms and conditions of probation for the first year or two.

5.3. Can I own firearms after a PC 25850 conviction?

A misdemeanor conviction for carrying a loaded firearm in public won't by itself revoke your right to own or possess a firearm. That said, if you are adjudged a ward of the juvenile court based on a Penal Code 25850 PC misdemeanor conviction, you will be prohibited from owning or possessing a firearm until you are 30 years old.

But if you get convicted as a felony, you will be prohibited from purchasing, receiving, owning, or possessing a firearm for life. For a more detailed discussion, visit our page on California's “Felon with a Firearm” law, Penal Code 29800 PC.

If you are convicted of a felony under one of the “wobbler” subdivisions of Penal Code 25850 PC…and you successfully have the felony reduced to a misdemeanor…your gun rights will be restored. Absent that, there are very few avenues of firearm rights restoration.

Typically, a certificate of rehabilitation and/or a governor's pardon would restore your California gun rights. But even those remedies don't apply to offenses that involve the use of a dangerous weapon.

California law defines “dangerous weapon” as any weapon, instrument, or object that is capable of being used to inflict great bodily injury or death. A loaded firearm under PC 25850 therefore qualifies as a dangerous weapon.

Call us for help…

Call us for help

If you or loved one is charged with Penal Code 25850 PC carrying a loaded firearm and you are looking to hire an attorney for representation, we invite you to contact us at Shouse Law Group. We can provide a free consultation in office or by phone. We have local offices in Los Angeles, the San Fernando Valley, Pasadena, Long Beach, Orange County, Ventura, San Bernardino, Rancho Cucamonga, Riverside, San Diego, Sacramento, Oakland, San Francisco, San Jose and throughout California.

Additionally, our Las Vegas Nevada criminal defense attorneys represent clients accused of violating Nevada's firearm laws. For more information, we invite you to contact our local attorneys at one of our Nevada law offices, located in Reno and Las Vegas.

Legal References: