0117 steklerpftexas

Email, Paul Stekler, professor of public affairs, LBJ School of Public Affairs, University of Texas, Jan. 5, 2017

Lt. Governor Patrick invoked Dr. Martin Luther King, in introducing the Texas Privacy Act being filed today, saying that “Martin Luther King said our lives begin to end the day we become silent on things that matter. This legislation, the Texas Privacy Act, that Sen. Kolkhorst is filing today, is unquestionably one of the things that matters. It’s the right thing to do. I know it, Texans know it and Sen. Kolkhorst knows it.”

If you go back to quote Dr. King, using similar phrases during the Southern Christian Leadership's civil rights campaign in Selma, Alabama in 1965, King says "A man dies when he refuses to stand up for what is right. A man dies when he refuses to stand up for justice. A man dies when he refuses to stand up for to take a stand for what is true."

The difference here is the context, what each man is actually talking about. King was in Selma to try and force federal action to ensure voting rights, a campaign that was successful with the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 in the aftermath of the police riot on the Edmund Pettus Bridge. He was advocating the expansion of rights for African-Americans in the South where they had been and were largely disenfranchised.

Patrick, on the other hand, is using his quote in support of SB8, a bill that essentially reduces the rights of transgender people from using bathrooms according to their gender identity and that bans local governments from permitting that access.

One use of the quote uses it in support of the expansion of rights, the other in restricting rights.

Conservatives have appropriated other quotes of Dr. King out of context before. For example, King's line about people being judged by the content of their character and not the color their skin, in his 1963 I Have a Dream Speech, has been used to oppose affirmative action over the years.

A better quote to understand King by is his use of "the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice”, originally used Rev Theodore Parker. a Unitarian minister and prominent American Transcendentalist, who used it in calling for the abolition of slavery.

In using this quote, what King is saying is that in time, justice and the expansion of rights is inevitable. Using any quote by him in defense of restricting rights is a total misunderstanding of King and what he stood for in his life.