Golden State Warriors: NBA champs White House visit
The Golden State Warriors say they have not yet been invited to the White House for the visit that honors sports champions.

"Today is about celebrating our championship. We have not received an invitation to the White House, but will make those decisions, when and if necessary," the team said in a statement.

That statement contradicts earlier rumors that the team had already decided not to go the White House.

The issue of teams visiting the White House has become prevalent since Donald Trump's surprise victory in the U.S. presidential election in November.

Warriors head coach Steve Kerr was asked multiple times about President Trump this season, with Kerr last month calling him a “blowhard” and said he was “ill-suited” for the presidency.

"To be a great leader, there have to be some qualities in there," Kerr said. "Has anyone ever thought that Donald Trump was a great leader?”

Several other members of the Warriors have also criticized Trump.

After winning Super Bowl LI, the New England Patriots visited Trump in April, though more than 30 players elected not to join the rest of the team. Not everyone considered politics in their decision, however.

• Get SI's commemorative Warriors championship package

Former Patriots tight end Martellus Bennett, safety Devin McCourty, linebacker Dont'a Hightower, defensive end Chris Long, running back LeGarrette Blount and defensive tackle Alan Branch were among the Patriots to skip the ceremony, with some citing Trump as a reason. Tom Brady also decided to skip it at the last moment because of "family matters."

Clemson visited the White House this week after winning the College Football Playoff championship in January.

The Chicago Cubs went to White House just four days before former President Barack Obama left office following the team's World Series victory against the Cleveland Indians.

Last year's NBA champion the Cleveland Cavaliers also visited the White House before Obama's term ended.