ShopperTrak Ranks Black Friday No. 1 for Highest Anticipated Sales and Shopper Visits During 2015 Holiday Season
Share

ShopperTrak Ranks Black Friday No. 1 for Highest Anticipated Sales and Shopper Visits During 2015 Holiday Season

CHICAGO – October 20, 2015 – ShopperTrak, the leading global provider of consumer behavior insights and location-based analytics, today released its rankings of the top ten sales and the top ten busiest days of the 2015 holiday season, and Black Friday is anticipated to take the top spot in both categories.

Despite coming in second (behind Super Saturday) for sales in 2014, Black Friday is predicted to take first this year due to a price-conscious shopper that is motivated by sales, coupled with the growing tendency toward earlier shopping. In addition, an early Hanukkah, which begins ten days sooner this year than in 2014, will generate November sales at the expense of December.

“This year, there are a number of retailers that are choosing to remain closed on Thanksgiving, and we expect that to compliment current trends and return Black Friday to the top spot for both sales and shopper visits,” said Kevin Kearns, ShopperTrak chief revenue officer.

Greatest Number of Shopper Visits:

Nov. 27 – Black Friday Dec. 19 – Super Saturday Dec. 26 – Day after Christmas Dec. 12 – Second Saturday before Christmas Nov. 28 – Saturday after Thanksgiving Dec. 20 – Sunday before Christmas Dec. 5 – Saturday after Cyber Monday / First Saturday in December Dec. 21 – Monday before Christmas Dec. 13 – Second Sunday before Christmas Nov. 29 – Sunday after Black Friday

Greatest Number of Sales Dollars:

Nov. 27 – Black Friday Dec. 19 – Super Saturday Dec. 12 – Second Saturday before Christmas Nov. 28 – Saturday after Thanksgiving Dec. 5 – Saturday after Cyber Monday / First Saturday in December Dec. 20 – Sunday before Christmas Dec. 13 – Second Sunday before Christmas Dec. 21 – Monday before Christmas Nov. 21 – Saturday before Thanksgiving Dec. 26 – Day after Christmas

“While our rankings illustrate the most impactful days of the holiday season, it’s important that retailers don’t lose sight of the other days,” added Kearns. “As we saw in 2014, a significant portion of sales are generated throughout the entire holiday season, and it’s vital that retailers optimize their operations and marketing in order to make the most of each and every day.”

Following an increase in sales during the 2015 back-to-school season, ShopperTrak estimates a 2.4 percent increase for the 2015 holiday season.

About ShopperTrak

ShopperTrak is the leading global provider of location-based analytics, offering insights into consumer behavior to improve profitability and effectiveness. Through the use of analytics, ShopperTrak enables clients to better understand their customers, enhance the shopping experience, and ultimately increase traffic, conversion and transaction size.

ShopperTrak is now part of Tyco Retail Solutions, the leader in retail performance and security solutions. Find out more at http://www.shoppertrak.com.