Foundation for a Smoke-Free World
Our task is urgent. More than a billion people still smoke worldwide, and more than seven million smokers die each year.

Ending smoking means eliminating the use of cigarettes and other forms of combustible tobacco worldwide. As we pursue this goal, we will also identify and provide support to address the unique needs of the developing world associated with global efforts to end smoking.

The purpose of the Foundation for a Smoke-Free World is to improve global health by ending smoking in this generation .

Our Path

The Foundation will fund research, promote innovation and support collaborative initiatives to accelerate progress in reducing harm and deaths from smoking worldwide.

Our areas of focus include smoking cessation and harm reduction, as supported by new technologies, therapies, alternative products, behavioral science, and other approaches. Our efforts are based on investigated methods to assist smokers in quitting, which could have an effective impact in reducing health dangers and deaths connected to this addiction.

In addition, the Foundation will explore and look for solutions to address unique challenges facing developing countries as we aim to eliminate smoking around the globe. For example, we look to help farmers who currently rely on tobacco to transition toward other sustainable livelihoods and to ensure that the developing world also has equitable access to new technologies and approaches for the purpose of smoking cessation.

Our Story

The Foundation for a Smoke-Free World (FSFW) is an independent, non-profit organization. FSFW was established in 2017 to accelerate global efforts to reduce health impacts and deaths from smoking, with the goal of eliminating smoking worldwide as soon as possible.

The Foundation was established and is led by Dr. Derek Yach, a global health expert and anti-smoking advocate for more than 30 years. The organization was founded on the belief that we need to explore, test, and embrace new ideas and approaches if we want to accelerate progress toward an end to smoking.

We are committed to the urgent need of ending the world’s billion smokers’ addiction to cigarettes and other forms of tobacco use. Toward this end, we also support the use of alternative products/methods that may reduce their current health risks and perhaps help them to stop smoking entirely in the future.

We know most smokers want to quit, but many struggle, with typical success rates at <10%. We also know that the number of smokers worldwide is virtually the same as it was 15 years ago, despite well-coordinated and sustained global tobacco control policy and educational efforts to reduce and prevent smoking. We need new and better solutions, applied nimbly and rapidly, to end smoking.

The Foundation collaborates with other non-profit, advocacy and government organizations to advance smoking cessation and harm-reduction science and technology. It also serves as a convener of research, dialogue and ideas to reduce smoking globally, while monitoring, evaluating and helping to address the impact of reduced smoking rates on agriculture and economics.