0416 cityaustinpftexas

Emails, Cheyenne Krause, senior public information specialist, City of Austin Transportation Department, April 27-29, 2016

11:44 a.m.

From: Krause, Cheyenne

Sent: Wednesday, April 27, 2016 11:44 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Re: Urgent fact-check inquiry, PolitiFact Texas

Gardner, to your questions about the authenticity of the two memos - here are the links to the original memos. One was distributed in March 2015, and the other in August 2015 and they are accessible to the public through the City's website.

1. Transportation Network Companies, final staff recommendation; response to Resolution 20140515-024 and CIUR 1311 (March 2015)

http://www.austintexas.gov/edims/pio/document.cfm?id=228184

2. Transportation Network Companies – ATD Staff Recommendation Update (Aug. 2015)

http://www.austintexas.gov/edims/pio/document.cfm?id=235537

We're working on the rest of the information for you.

Cheyenne Krause

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, April 28, 2016 10:46 AM

Subject: RE: Urgent fact-check inquiry, PolitiFact Texas

To whom and with what title should I attribute the provided replies?

(Krause)

11:06 a.m.

April 28, 2016

Gordon Derr, Assistant Director, Austin Transportation Department

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com>

Sent: Thursday, April 28, 2016 3:58:40 PM

Subject: RE: Following up

Thanks. Are you saying the flex would entail the five additional professional staff to pitch in with the 8.5 administrative personnel?

4:04 p.m.

Yes, we have five people who could assist the other administrative personnel as needed.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, April 29, 2016 9:43:50 AM

To: Dean, Alicia; Krause, Cheyenne

Subject: Following up, Friday

Thanks for the replies to this moment. I write afresh to share my read of what you have shared per the accuracy of the claim we’re checking.

The group says that if the proposition fails to pass, a completely new city-run background check process will cost millions in processing fees, additional staff and bureaucracy with taxpayers getting sent the bill.

I haven’t heard directly from the city if it agrees its review of such checks will be completely new.

I am unaware of an estimate of the cost to the city for the review of such checks. Is there one? What does the department or city expect to be the additional costs, if any?

Your previous reply talked about possibly needing additional staff. Elaborate on that likelihood? What factors would drive the expansion decision?

Your reply also indicated that however there are costs, it’ll be covered by enterprise fund money, which I take to mean fees. Is that correct? How much revenue does the city expect to raise from each of the approved 1 percent fees?

4:58 p.m.

April 29, 2016

The answers to your most recent questions are below.

All of the information you’ve received is the best and most accurate we can provide at this point.

We understand and truly appreciate your goal to fact check claims circulating in the media. However, it is irresponsible for City staff to speculate on what might happen in any number of hypothetical situations before Austin residents have exercised their right to choose the option they feel is best.

Whatever is decided the City of Austin will be prepared to move forward and implement the will of the residents it serves.

The group says that if the proposition fails to pass, a completely new city-run background check process will cost millions in processing fees, additional staff and bureaucracy with taxpayers getting sent the bill.

It would not be a new process, the drivers would use the same process we currently use for all other vehicle-for-hire drivers.

I haven’t heard directly from the city if it agrees its review of such checks will be completely new.

It would not be different from other permits.

I am unaware of an estimate of the cost to the city for the review of such checks. Is there one? What does the department or city expect to be the additional costs, if any? The cost is $39.95 per person for the background check and it has not been determined who will pay for the background check. Further, the companies have not provided us with the number of drivers that they have, so we do not know what will be required and cannot speculate as to the number of background checks that the City will review or the resources that will be required to review the checks. Any potential costs to the City are purely speculative.

Your previous reply talked about possibly needing additional staff. Elaborate on that likelihood? What factors would drive the expansion decision? We cannot speculate on the likelihood of adding additional staff. We have designated staff available and can add to that if needed. Again, without the data about the number of drivers, we cannot speculate as to the need.

Your reply also indicated that however there are costs, it’ll be covered by enterprise fund money, which I take to mean fees. Is that correct? How much revenue does the city expect to raise from each of the approved 1 percent fees? The Transportation Department’s enterprise fund is made up of parking revenue, fees paid by ground transportation service companies and drivers, and is where money from the fees on the TNC gross revenue would land. In terms of ground transportation regulation, we use that fund to pay for staff and administration. Based on Council action, the funds could be expended to support drivers paying for background checks if the drivers were required to pay for the background check themselves. We cannot project the potential fee amount that would be paid to the City of Austin because we do not have the gross income data from the Transportation Network Companies.