0714 rmartinezpftexas

Emails, Ramiro Martinez, Jr. PhD, Northeastern University, professor of Criminology and Criminal Justice, July 22, 2014

On Jul 22, 2014, at 4:23 PM, "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)" <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

Dr. Martinez:

Good afternoon.

…

Gov. Rick Perry said recently that over "3,000 homicides" were committed "by illegal aliens over the" last six years. The state of Texas stakes this claim to this web page.

Excerpt:

“From October 2008 through July 1, 2014, Texas has identified a total of 203,685 unique criminal alien defendants booked into Texas county jails. Over their criminal careers, these defendants are responsible for at least 642,564 individual criminal charges mostly consisting of Class B misdemeanors or higher, including 3,070 homicides and 7,964 sexual assaults.”

...

?

Much appreciated.

Thanks.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

PolitiFact Texas

www.politifact.com/texas

Austin American-Statesman

4:40 p.m.

I am not sure how "Criminal Alien" is defined or what that means in this context. It could be a long term resident but not citizen? Student or tourist that overstayed visa? Someone crossing the border. Not really sure what means here.

With that said it is not clear to me how those data correspond to what is reported below.

Notice the 2012 Texas Index Crime by Volume. It reports 1,144 homicides in 2012 and 1,089 in 2011. If you take the average of both years, extrapolate to over 6 years, we have about 6699 homicides across the state of Texas. If that is the case, based on the 3070"alien" figure around 46% of all homicides across the state were committed by "illegal aliens"? That makes no sense at all to me. First, I don't know of any police department or homicide unit that collected data in that manner or where legality status is document. Second, homicides are intra-racial. Black on black, white on white, Latino on Latino. I am not sure what the percent of Latinos is across the state but its not clear what the "alien" percent corresponds to. In fact its not clear to how the "alien" data were generated.

http://www.txdps.state.tx.us/crimereports/12/citCh2.pdf

5:07 p.m.

So they could have committed a homicide two months ago or twenty years ago? Or 2 or 3 "aliens" were charged for killing one person? Nevertheless it doesnt correspond to Perry's last six years claim. And compare to data state reports in link below. It just boggles the imagination that level of "aliens" were involved to that extent over time and nobdoy noticed.

Ramiro Martinez, Jr. PhD.

Northeastern University

Professor in the School of Criminology and Criminal Justice and the Department of Sociology and Anthropology

Boston, Massachusetts

5:31 p.m.

And again this has very little do with legality status. The "alien" page notes that it is define as "regardless of immigration status" so it could be someone that came over from Cuba in 1962, committed or charged with a crime or homicide, noted in criminal history but not relevant to comtemporary crime counts.

Ramiro Martinez, Jr. PhD.