0715 kmiecpftexas

Email, Douglas Kmiec, professor of Constitutional Law and Caruso Family Chair in Constitutional Law, Pepperdine University School of Law, July 22, 2015

12:31 p.m.

July 22, 2015

Sorry Senator, that is not true. The Constitution is the Supreme Law; as a law, those serving in the presidency have an obligation to “take Care” that the law is faithfully executed. Faithful execution is not defiant noncompliance. Every member of the US Supreme Court signed the opinion in Cooper v. Aaron to that effect. The same is true for the recent same sex opinions. The Constitution was framed to ensure a “more perfect union”; those failing to understand that, or who seek disunion, are no friend of the Constitution.

(responding to)

For a PolitiFact Texas fact check, I write today seeking your best analysis of a claim by Sen. Ted Cruz to the effect of states not directly party to the gay marriage lawsuits don’t have to comply with the Supreme Court’s ruling.

My questions: Does this hold up? Why or why not? Are there any other legal authorities you recommend we consult?

A reader asked us to look into this, sharing excerpts from the transcript of a June 28 NPR interview of Cruz.

INSKEEP: Which is a great story. But did I just understand you to suggest that state officials should feel no particular obligation to follow the court ruling if they feel it's illegitimate?

CRUZ: They should feel no obligation to agree that the court ruling is right or is consistent with the Constitution.

This ruling...

INSKEEP: But does that mean they can ignore?

CRUZ: They cannot ignore a direct judicial order. The parties to a case cannot ignore a direct judicial order. But it does not mean that those who are not parties to case are bound by a judicial order.

Later in the interview, Inskeep asks again:

INSKEEP: I really want to get to other views in the — other issues in the book, but I feel it's important to clarify this one thing.

Did I understand you to say just now that as you read the law, as you read our system, this decision is not binding on the entire country, only to the specific states that were named in the — in the suit.

CRUZ: Article III of the Constitution gives the court the authority to resolve cases and controversies. Those cases and controversies, when they're resolved, when you're facing a judicial order, the parties to that suit are bound it. Those who are not parties to the suit are not bound by it.

Now, in subsequent litigation, other courts will follow the precedence of the court, but a judicial order only binds those to whom it is directed, those who are parties to the suit. That's the way our litigation system works.

FROM: http://www.npr.org/about-npr/418600824/complete-transcript-senator-ted-cruz-interview-with-npr-news

Thanks very much.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas