FACT CHECK: Lebanese Loop ATM Theft
[Collected via e-mail, 2001]

For all of you who use HSBC or an ATM. Just wanted to warn you about something that happened to me the other day.

I was getting some cash out at the cash point outside at HSBC – Saint George Street, Hanover Square. I put my card in and a message came up on the screen saying the machine was temporarily out of order.

A lady approached me and told me that this had happened to her the other day and what I needed to do was key my pin number in and then press cancel twice. I did this and of course no card was returned. I left the machine thinking that it had swallowed my card. But when I returned to HSBC the following morning, my card wasn’t there.

According to the police this method of stealing bankcards is called the “Lebanese loop”. A plastic envelope is made up that fits the hole in the machine perfectly. When you put your card in, the machine knows it is there but cannot read it and therefore the message comes up on the screen.

Once the pin number has been given away and the card left in the machine, it is then ‘looped’ out and the spending starts!

I had 500 taken from my account before I realized what had happened and cancelled it. The women who approached me at the cash point was late 40’s in age, 5.3 in height, dark hair and eyes. The way she was dressed was smart as if she had just left work.

Please pass this information on to all your friends.

[Collected via e-mail, 2002]

The Association of Chief Police Officers ATM Working Group has asked that the

following information be circulated:

For your information, please be advised of the following ATM scam:

Beware the next time you use an ATM. Criminals are inventing ever more ingenious methods of relieving you of your cash.

The latest scam involves thieves putting a thin, clear, rigid plastic ‘sleeve’ into the ATM card slot. When you insert your card, the machine can’t read the strip, so it keeps asking you to re-enter your PIN number. Meanwhile, someone behind you watches as you tap in your number. Eventually you give up, thinking the machine has swallowed your card and you walk away. The thieves then remove the plastic sleeve complete with card, and empty your account.

The way to avoid this is to run your finger along the card slot before you put your card in. The sleeve has a couple of tiny prongs that the thieves need to get the sleeve out of the slot, and you’ll be able to feel them.

The police would like as many people as possible to be aware of this scam, so pass this on to your family and friends.

[Collected via e-mail, 2002]

Thieves are putting a thin clear, rigid plastic “sleeve” into the ATM card slot. When you insert your card, the machine can’t read the strip so, it keeps asking you to re-enter your pin number. Meanwhile, someone behind you watches as you enter and re-enters your number. Eventually you give up, thinking the machine has captured your card and walk away. The thieves then remove the plastic sleeve complete with card, and empty your account.

The way to avoid this is to run your finger along the card slot before you put your card in. The sleeve has a couple of tiny prongs that the thieves need to get it out of the slot, and you will be able to feel them.

The police would like as many people as possible to be aware of this scam, so please pass this information on to your friends and family.