0616 tellespftexas

Email, Reyne Christopher Telles, executive director, Department of Communications and Community Engagement, Austin Independent School District, June 7, 2016

5:40 p.m.

You asked how we decided to use "Austin ISD has the highest graduation rate of every major city in Texas" during the 2016 AISD commencement exercises. While I did speak with you about the matter, several other people have also communicated with you on the matter and I thought it was best to wrap up the communication into this email.

The phrase you are asking about was formulated during a marketing brain-storming meeting with members of the AISD Communications and Community Engagement team. The question was asked, “How do our graduation rates compare to those of other Texas cities?”

We decided to compare the city namesake ISD associated with “the big five”—Houston, San Antonio, Dallas, Austin and Fort Worth. These are urban school districts that serve the core of each municipality and that often face the same challenges as Austin ISD, such as increasing gentrification and serving high-poverty, at-risk students. Those factors made us comfortable that our comparison was a strong one.

We confirmed on several websites what the largest municipalities in Texas are (sites similar to and including this one: https://www.census.gov/popest/data/cities/totals/2014/index.html) and then compared Austin ISD's

federal graduation rates to those districts through the Accountability Research data found on TEA’s website: http://tea.texas.gov/acctres/completion/2014/level.html.

As I mentioned when we talked, while we did not screenshot the original verification, we have replicated the results in the graph below. The results show that AISD’s graduation rate had indeed exceeded those of school districts in the major Texas cities, as we had defined them.

For background purposes, know that we also discussed our comparisons to other ISDs such as El Paso, Corpus Christi or Northside. Our determination was that while our graduation rates still exceeded those of El Paso and Corpus Christi, for our marketing message, we were not considering them for our "big five" comparison. Further, the AISD Office of Accountability and Assessment pointed out that North East, Northside and Socorro do not match the demographic makeup of the "big five" as fewer than 50 percent of their students are deemed at-risk under the state definition (a screenshot of that data is below).

Thanks again for the inquiry, and I hope this clarifies our approach.

Respectfully submitted,

Reyne Christopher Telles

Executive Director

Department of Communications and Community Engagement

Austin Independent School District