Will McDonald’s Halloween Happy Meals Contain Ouija Boards?
Claim: McDonald’s Halloween Happy Meals will contain Ouija boards this year.

FALSE

In August 2014, rumors began to swirl that McDonald’s would be offering a different Halloween-themed Happy Meal this year. Instead of the standard treat bucket Halloween Happy Meal, a Ouija board would be the season’s McDonald’s toy selection.

Pretty quickly, interest in the idea of a Happy Meal Ouija board picked up. While Ouija boards are readily available in toy stores, some people find them distasteful, occult-related, or otherwise offensive and inappropriate for children.

As it turns out, McDonald’s Happy Meal Ouija boards started as a joke. It didn’t take all that long to trace the rumor back to SyFy’s Amy Bruni, who tweeted:

Lesson learned. Do not joke on Facebook that McDonalds is releasing a Ouija Board Happy Meal. ;) — Amy Bruni (@amybruni) August 27, 2014

Bruni was making reference to this Facebook post from 26 August 2014 – later edited to emphasize a “winky face” emoticon:

Bruni’s post on Facebook rapidly garnered nearly 4,000 shares, and she quickly addressed the escalating confusion:

Ummm, hey…guys? Hey? Hi. This is a JOKE. Sarcasm. Satire. Hence the winky face…and the clear ridiculousness of there being a ouija board Happy Meal. And even crazier than that, that I would ever eat at McDonalds. Ok, all done? Phew. Goodnight!

Despite Bruni’s quick action and continual assertion that the McDonald’s Happy Meal Ouija board was a joke, several posters were unsettled by the notion. Many expressed concern that Ouija boards used “irresponsibly” could cause danger to children, while others were simply frightened by the idea of having a Ouija board in the house.

One commenter reported having had “bad experiences” with Ouija boards, and replied:

Sorry Amy but I so totally disagree with this … how many times have ANY Ghost show programs (be it yours GH or GA) and tell people that Ouija boards are dangerous … Dangerous cannot be stressed enough on this thing … What [mild expletive] at McD’s thought that this was such a neat idea and for it to be giving to young children no less!!

Current and upcoming McDonald’s Happy Meal toy offerings are posted to the brand’s Happy Meal subsite.