0117 carsonpftexas

Emails, Clayborne Carson, Martin Luther King, Jr., Centennial Professor of history, Ronnie Lott founding director, The Martin Luther King, Jr., Research and Education Institute, Stanford University, Jan. 5-6, 2017

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, January 5, 2017 11:40:01 AM

To: Clayborne Carson

Subject: Texas newspaper reporter, urgent query

Dr. Carson:

I write seeking your comment and expertise because a Texas leader today quoted the Rev. King saying: “Our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things that matter.”

My web search suggests, per the New York Daily News, that Dr. King said as much from the pulpit in March 1965. Can you and the center help us pin down precisely what King said when and where and in what context? I ask because I’d like to share as much with readers.

I need to write this afternoon.

Appreciating any help,

g.

From: Clayborne Carson

Sent: Thursday, January 05, 2017 3:13 PM

Sorry, but we don't yet have the ability to search through all the texts of the King Papers volumes.

Clayborne Carson

Martin Luther King, Jr., Centennial Professor of history

Ronnie Lott Founding Director

The Martin Luther King, Jr., Research and Education Institute

Stanford University

From: Selby, Gardner

Sent: Friday, January 6, 2017 8:45:19 AM

To: Clayborne Carson

Subject: Texas reporter following up

Dr. Carson:

First, my thanks to you for being so responsive Thursday.

This is one tough fact check.

Today I wanted to share with you a new turn. By phone, the Rev. Erika Hewitt, who wrote this 2016 web post describing the King quotation in question as a paraphrase, told me that when she inquired into the authenticity of the King statement she heard back from the Beacon Press, which in 2009 announced an exclusive deal with King's descendants to republish and compile King's writings, that there’s no documentation that King made the statement.

Hewitt elaborated that it's more likely in her view that someone later smoothed down what King said at the chapel in Selma on March 8, 1965, to make it less sexist (the original remark said repeatedly "a man") and more direct.

To rehash, here is what King said at the chapel on March 8, 1965: “A man dies when he refuses to stand up for that which is right. A man dies when he refuses to stand up for justice. A man dies when he refuses to take a stand for that which is true.” And here is what Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick of Texas says King said: “Our lives begin to end the day we become silent on things that matter.”

Further thoughts for our story?

With gratitude,

G.

1:26 p.m.

Jan. 6, 2017

Rev. Hewitt may be right, although I'm not persuaded by her inquiry to Beacon Press, because the Press does not have a database of all of King's recorded statements. The King Institute has the largest database of King documents, but we don't current have the capability of searching the texts of every document. it's easier to prove what King said on a particular occasion than to prove that he never said the quote in question on any occasion.

Clayborne Carson