FACT CHECK: Police Arresting Voters with Outstanding Warrants
Recently, at school, an Obama supported approached me during a rock the vote assembly. He informed that on the day of the election there will be undercover officers to execute warrants on those who come to vote based on the anticipated turnout. He advised me if I had any outstanding warrants or traffic offenses I should clear them up prior to voting. They assume this to be an opportunity for those who normally go by fake names and addresses, to give their real names and id’s. Allowing them to place name and face together and walla, gotcha! Arrested on the spot. So if you have one or the other take care of it.

Due to the electronic genius of wireless technology this can and will take place all around the nation from LA to New York. Why hasn’t this been done before? This seems to be a great way to arrest of just be able to identify criminals in the area. I applaud the new efforts of local and state authorities and hope to see a great success rate. I’m sorry to say but I don’t think they should be able to vote anyway! Question? Are convicted felons allowed to vote?

He also said that both Obama and McCain support this idea but that he, “Obama”, does not want the public to see any of his supporters get locked up showing their support or illegally voting for him. An incentive to avoid the legal dilemmas, but still participate in the vote is being put in place. This would allow individuals to turn themselves in, prior to voting, without legal penalty. This type of incentive recently took place at a South Philadelphia church with an outstanding turnout. Is this taking away from the true freedom of voting? Is this legal?

He had also learned that at the polling sites local authorites will not only be checking for “scoff law” traffic ticket offenders inside, but this will also take place outside. There will be vehicles equipped with plate identification computers. Upon identification cars will be locked with an immobilization feature locked to its tire then towed.

I think this November will be a November to remember. I love technology.

Anonymous