0515 lichtnerpftexas

Responses to PolitiFact Texas, Jason J. Fichtner, senior fellow, Mercatus Center, George Mason University, (received by email from Camille Walsh, media relations associate, Mercatus Center, May 11, 2015)

From: Camille Walsh

Sent: Monday, May 11, 2015 2:58 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: RE: Seeking help/interview with Jason J. Fichtner for a fact check

Hi Gardner,

Here’s Dr. Fichtner’s answers. Thanks!

Camille

Camille Walsh

Media Relations Associate

-----------------------------------------

Mercatus Center at George Mason University

1. The study you oversaw presents a huge range of costs. What precisely would he consider just the compliance costs alone—and why?

Point estimates are very difficult to accurately measure for tax compliance costs – and costs related to lobbying, opportunity costs, etc. The purpose of my research paper is to use the rele­vant scholarly literature to document the cost of the US tax system at large. Obviously, based on the different data sources and survey data available, a range of estimates is more useful and gives a sense of the low- and high-, where a point estimate wouldn’t necessarily be accurate.

I’ve not read Senator Cruz’s remarks, and cannot speak specifically on the estimate you cited. My research was/is more broadly interested in documenting the entire cost of the US tax system including, but not limited to, compliance costs. I also look at lobbying costs, etc.

2. Are you aware of other more recent research that stands up well?

My paper was completed in 2013 and my co-author and I did a comprehensive literature review at that time. While I can’t guarantee that my paper covers all of the research available on tax compliance costs, we were very thorough and documented the existing literature up until publication.

3. Sen. Cruz has said tax compliance costs are roughly $500 billion a year. This is what we are fact-checking. In contrast, the National Taxpayers Union said the 2014 compliance costs were about $225 billion. What do you think and why?

My understanding of the National Taxpayers Union study is that the economy lost $234 billion due to time lost complying with the tax code ($202 billion) and other out-of pocket costs ($32 billion). Clearly, however, this is a question you’ll want to ask directly from the source.

http://www.ntu.org/foundation/detail/taxpayers-tab-issue-13-6

As far as my research: I chose to give a range based on the different methodologies that I found in the research literature. It’s not that one method is better than another – or right versus wrong. All the measures have different assumptions for the time value of an hour of lost work/productivity as well as time spent.

In my paper, you’ll see in Table 1 that I give a range for the very reason that a point estimate is hard. I want to give both a low- and high- estimate. Again, from the table, you’ll see that if you add accounting costs and economic costs you get a low estimate of $215 billion and a high estimate of $987 billion (almost $1 trillion!). A middle value would be $601 billion.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, May 07, 2015 2:40 PM

To: Camille Walsh

Subject: RE: Seeking help/interview with Jason J. Fichtner for a fact check

OK; questions below:

1. The study you oversaw presents a huge range of costs. What precisely would he consider just the compliance costs alone—and why?

2. Are you aware of other more recent research that stands up well?

3. Sen. Cruz has said tax compliance costs are roughly $500 billion a year. This is what we are fact-checking. In contrast, the National Taxpayers Union said the 2014 compliance costs were about $225 billion. What do you think and why?

g.