101614 ttipftexas

Emails, Ginger Goodin, P.E., director, Transportation Policy Research Center, Texas A&M Transportation Institute, Oct. 16, 2014

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)" <wgselby@statesman.com>

Date: October 13, 2014 at 12:26:35 PM CDT

Subject: Inquiry for a fact check

Thanks for taking my call and looking over this.

Here is the claim we’re fact-checking: None of $400 million the City of Austin proposes to spend on road projects “will be used to add new lanes to congested roadways.”

The City of Austin and TxDOT each say about 15 miles of lanes are to be funded from the $400 million.

The city has its 2014 Austin Strategic Mobility Plan which includes a chart listing how money would be spent. A TxDOT spokeswoman also sent me this:

includes roughly 15 miles of new or extended lane miles and provides substantial operational and safety benefits to segments and intersections of very congested roadways. Here is the back-up for that statement.

Additional lane mileage for I-35:

- Intersection at Riverside: 2.46 lane miles

- Intersection at Oltorf: 3.48 lane miles

- Intersection at William Cannon: 4.62 lane miles

- Total: approximately 10.50 lane miles (see details below)

For I-35 projects:

- William Cannon to Stassney project SB extends the 4th mainlane from the current transition where the DC ties in to the exit ramp for Slaughter Lane

- William Cannon to Stassney project SB extends 3rd frontage road lane from north of Williamson Creek to the entrance ramp from Ben White

- William Cannon to Stassney project adds operational lanes at intersections, adds lanes on cross street structures and adds U-Turn structures at both William Cannon and Stassney

- William Cannon to Stassney project NB adds a 4th lane between entrance ramp from William Cannon to exit ramp to Ben White

- Oltorf project SB adds 4th mainlane SB from Woodland to south of Woodward and 5th lane SB between entrance ramp from Woodward to exit ramp to Woodland

- Oltorf project NB extends 4th mainlane from near Woodward to Woodland and 5th lane between entrance from Woodward to exit ramp for Woodland

- Oltorf project adds operational lanes at intersections, adds lanes on cross street structure and adds U-Turn structures at Oltorf

- Riverside NB project adds 1 and 2 lane collector-distributor

- Riverside SB project adds 2 lane collector-distributor

- Riverside project adds operational lanes at intersection, adds lanes on cross street structure and adds SB to NB U-Turn structure at Riverside

Additional lane mileage for SH 71 EB DC-CD (into ABIA):

- Includes 2-3 added lanes which would increase capacity on EB SH 71

- Total: around 3.9 miles (see chart below)

Length (mi) Number of Lanes Total Length SH 71 DC 0.53 1 0.53 US 183 DC 0.42 1 0.42 Collector-distributor 0.66 3 1.99 Spirit of Texas (overpass) to Presidential 0.47 2 0.95 Total lane miles 3.88

Additional lane mileage for FM 1826:

- Would add at least one new lane, if not more

- Total: approximately 1 mile

I would be interested in your analysis of these plans in comparison to the claim we’re checking.

Thanks again.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

5:49 p.m.

Oct. 16, 2014

I believe you had two questions for me.

1. Is this really 15 miles of lanes? Using the measure “lane-miles”, which is a measure of area (like square feet or square yards), the addition of new pavement can be measured by the width of one lane --about 12’ -- and the length of the new lane. The cumulative total of the individual improvements using lanes-miles is a legitimate measure in the transportation industry.

2. Are these improvements on congested roadways? IH-35 is definitely congested and #2 on the state’s top 100 list http://www.txdot.gov/inside-txdot/projects/100-congested-roadways.html. Others on the top 100 list and proposed in the bond program are Loop 360 and North Lamar. Although I’m not clear on the specific details, the improvements that are described in your email below represent proven congestion mitigation strategies. Please see http://mobility.tamu.edu/mip/strategies.php, which provides information on over 60 congestion strategies, both traditional and non-traditional . As stated on our website, “the size of the congestion problem in the largest metropolitan areas is more significant than these actions will be able to address alone, but they do represent a part of the solution.”

More specifically:

a. Intersection improvements at Riverside, Oltorf, William Cannon, and Stassney

i. http://mobility.tamu.edu/mip/strategies-pdfs/system-modification/executive-summary/intersection-improvements-1-pg.pdf

ii. http://mobility.tamu.edu/mip/strategies-pdfs/system-modification/executive-summary/intersection-turn-lanes-1-pg.pdf

b. Auxiliary lanes on I-35 between ramps (various locations)

i. http://mobility.tamu.edu/mip/strategies-pdfs/system-modification/executive-summary/acceleration-deceleration-lanes-1-pg.pdf

c. Collector-distributor lanes at Riverside, on SH 71 into ABIA

i. http://mobility.tamu.edu/mip/strategies-pdfs/system-modification/executive-summary/Collector-Distributor-Roads-1-Pg.pdf

d. Adding lanes to FM 1826

i. http://mobility.tamu.edu/mip/strategies-pdfs/added-capacity/executive-summary/adding-new-lanes-or-roads-1-pg.pdf

Ginger Goodin, P.E.

Director, Transportation Policy Research Center

Texas A&M Transportation Institute

On Oct 16, 2014, at 5:53 PM, "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)" <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

If you could, how would you rate the accuracy of the group’s claim that none of the $400 million the City of Austin proposes to spend on road projects “will be used to add new lanes to congested roadways.” Solid or misleading in any way?

Thanks.

g.

6:29 p.m.

Oct. 16, 2014

I would say misleading. A portion of the funding will go toward adding lanes to IH-35, the most congested roadway in the region.