091714 wdavistvadbackupsurgeon
Fort Worth - Today, the Wendy Davis campaign launched a new TV ad calling out Greg Abbott for siding with hospital bureaucrats and a sadistic surgeon against the patients the surgeon maimed and even killed - weeks after he took a quarter million dollar campaign contribution from the hospital's chairman. Greg Abbott used his Attorney General's office to side against victims in court, proving once again that he's just another insider not working for you. Today's TV ad will be running in multiple media markets throughout the state and comes after the targeted-market release of "Time Went By" TV ad earlier this week. "Operation" SCRIPT FACTS VO: He was a Texas surgeon. Performing operations while reportedly using cocaine. SUPER: Dallas Morning News, 3/2/14 Patient Left Paralyzed By The Doctor Claimed He & Duntsch Were Doing "Eight-Balls" Of Cocaine The Night Before The Surgery. The Dallas Morning News reported, "On Feb. 2, 2012, Duntsch performed a cervical fusion on his friend at Baylor Plano. The procedure should have been routine. But [Jerry] Summers lost more than 2 liters of blood, Texas Medical Board records say, and in the recovery room he could not move his arms or legs...Summers claimed that he and Duntsch had been doing 'eight-balls' - slang for 3.5 grams - of cocaine the night before the surgery...Summers, 43, has returned to Memphis, and remains a quadriplegic."" [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14] Nurse Who Worked With Dunstch Said She Witnessed The Doctor Using Cocaine Both The Night Before & In The Morning Before Going To The Hospital To Perform A Surgery. According to the plaintiffs complaint in Morguloff v. Baylor Health Care System, "a nurse at the hospital where Duntsch worked witnessed him using cocaine both the night before and in the early morning before going to the hospital to perform surgery. This nurse questioned Duntsch about the cocaine use and operating under the influence; he told her not to worry, as he regularly used cocaine before operating on patients." [Plaintiffs Original Complaint, Case: 3:14-cv-01065, U.S. District Court, Northern District of Texas Dallas Division, 3/25/14] Duntsch's Friend Testified That The Doctor Used Cocaine & LSD. In June 2013, NBC reported, "According to lawsuits, two patients died after Duntsch operated on them. In a recent deposition, one of Duntsch's assistants testified the doctor often drank at work and stashed vodka under his desk. Another witness, a friend, described Duntsch's drug use. 'There's been LSD; there's been cocaine,' the friend said in the deposition." [Today Show, NBC, 6/16/13] Plaintiffs Lawsuit Claimed Duntsch Was Previously Sent To An Impaired Physician Problem After He Suspected Of Using Cocaine. According to the plaintiffs complaint in Morguloff v. Baylor Health Care System, "[Duntsch] purportedly completed a six-year residency and fellowship in Tennessee in 2010; however, during his residency, he was suspected of cocaine use during his fourth year and sent to an impaired physician program." [Plaintiffs Original Complaint, Case: 3:14-cv-01065, U.S. District Court, Northern District of Texas Dallas Division, 3/25/14] VO: Two patients died.... SUPER: "two of his patients died" CBS DFW, 7/22/13 Two Of Duntch's Patients Died Between January 2012 & June 2013. In July 2013, CBS DFW reported, "A Plano neurosurgeon's medical license has been temporarily suspended by the state after two of his patients died under his care. The Texas Medical Board reviewed Dr. Christopher Duntsch's treatment of four patients from January 2012 to June 2013, including one who bled to death after an unnecessary surgery in which it was determined Dr. Duntsch injured an artery. Another of Duntsch's patient died of an abdominal hemorrhage following a procedure. Duntsch left a surgical sponge inside the chest of another patient, according to the board." [CBS DFW, 7/22/13] March 2012: Three Hours After Dunstch Operated On A Herniated Disc, Patient Died. The Dallas Morning News reported, "On March 12, 2012, with his suspension lifted, Duntsch prepared to operate on Kellie Martin, 54, a Garland elementary schoolteacher, for a herniated disc. 'The surgery went perfect,' Duntsch said. Immediately afterward, 'she looked good, she sounded good, she felt good.' But her blood pressure began dropping and she had trouble breathing. Within three hours, the mother of two was pronounced dead... But other doctors at Baylor who examined the case record suspected that Duntsch had penetrated a blood vessel with his drill, according to Collin County medical examiner's records. An autopsy found evidence of internal bleeding 'adjacent to the operative site' but 'no obvious source for this blood.'" [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14] Medical Examiner Listed Cause Of Death As "Hemorrhagic Shock During Spine Surgery" Caused By "Therapeutic Misadventure." The Dallas Morning News reported, "Medical examiner William B. Rohr listed [Kellie Martin's] cause of death as 'hemorrhagic shock during spine surgery' caused by 'therapeutic misadventure.'" [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14 ] July 2012: During Routine Procedure, Duntsch Left A Patient Brain Dead. The Dallas Morning News reported, "Duntsch prepared for a routine surgery at Dallas Medical on July 24, 2012. Like so many others, this one did not end well. Floella Brown was a 63-year-old woman with a history of back and shoulder pain. Medical records noted she also was at risk for stroke. Duntsch performed a disc removal and fusion on her. 'The surgery more or less went fine,' Duntsch said. 'I got the job done. I got the graft in. There were no issues.' Texas Medical Board records dispute that. They say that Duntsch 'removed bone from an area that was not required by any clinical or anatomical standards, resulting in injury to the vertebral artery.'... The next day...[Brown] suffered a brain-stem stroke in Dallas Medical's intensive care unit... They transferred Brown to Zale-Lipshy, where emergency surgery failed to save her. She was brain dead." [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14] VO: ...others were paralyzed. SUPER: NBC, Today Show, 6/16/14 NBC: A Dozen Patients "Allege Duntsch Botched Their Surgeries...Turning Some Into Paraplegics & Others Into Quadriplegics, Confining Them To Wheelchairs." In June 2013,NBC reported, "A dozen other patients allege Duntsch botched their surgeries, too, turning some into paraplegics and others into quadriplegics, confining them to wheelchairs." [Today Show, NBC, 6/16/13] VO: Doctors spoke out... SUPER: "A sociopath" "A serial killer"Dallas Morning News, 3/2/14 Doctors Who Worked With Duntsch Wrote To The Texas Medical Board, Describing Him As A "Sociopath" & "A Serial Killer." The Dallas Morning News reported after learning he was practicing medicine at University General, Dr. Randall Kirby filed a complaint against Duntsch with the Texas Medical Board. "The TMB must stop this sociopath Duntsch immediately or he will continue to maim and kill innocent patients," Kirby wrote. "Dr. Duntsch is a clear and present danger to the citizens of Texas." Dr. Robert Henderson also reported Duntsch to the TMB, "This is a serial killer," he wrote. [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14] VO: ...but the hospital did nothing to stop him. "While At Baylor Plano, Duntsch Was Accused Of Maiming Several Patients & Causing The Death Of Another." In March 2014, The Dallas Morning News reported, "While at Baylor Plano, Duntsch was accused of maiming several patients and causing the death of another. One patient - his roommate and closest friend - claimed that Duntsch operated on him after a night of using cocaine, which Duntsch denied. The roommate emerged from the surgery a quadriplegic." [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14] Baylor Plano Did Not Report Duntsch To The Texas Medical Board. The Dallas Morning News reported "that Baylor Plano did not report Duntsch to the Texas Medical Board." [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14] Baylor Plano Provided Duntsch With A Clearance Letter Stating That His Record Was Clean. The Dallas Morning News reported that after leaving Baylor Plano, Dunstch hired a lawyer that negotiated a clearance letter from the hospital. "Duntsch provided The News with a copy of the letter. It was dated April 20, 2012, and signed by Baylor Plano's director of medical staff services. Its message: Duntsch's record was clean." [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14] Baylor Plano Wrote Letter For Duntsch Stating, "As Of This Date, There Have Been No Summary Or Administrative Restrictions Or Suspensions Of Dr. Duntsch's Medical Staff Membership Or Clinical Privileges." According to an editorial in The Dallas Morning News, "After leaving the hospital, Duntsch hired a lawyer who extracted a letter from the [Baylor Plano] hospital stating, 'As of this date, there have been no summary or administrative restrictions or suspensions of Dr. Duntsch's Medical Staff membership or clinical privileges.'" [Editorial, The Dallas Morning News, 3/07/14 ] Duntsch Used Declaration From Baylor Plano Stating His Record Was Clean To Secure Privileges At Two Dallas Hospitals. In March 2014, The Dallas Morning News reported that Duntsch used a letter from Baylor Plain stating that his record was clean "to secure privileges at two Dallas hospitals. There, doctors and others allege, he seriously harmed additional patients." [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14 ] Baylor Plano Would Not Comment On Whether It Reported Duntsch To The National Practitioner Data Bank, As Required. The Dallas Morning News reported, "Baylor [Plano] would not comment on whether it reported Duntsch to the National Practitioner Data Bank, a health care information clearinghouse created by Congress. Hospitals are required to report physicians whose privileges are restricted while under investigation." [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14] VO: Families and victims sued the hospital. Baylor Plano's Actions Were The Target Of Federal Lawsuits Brought By Duntsch's Former Patients. In March 2014, The Dallas Morning News reported, "Baylor's actions are now the target of three federal lawsuits by Duntsch's former patients, with more likely on the way." According to The Dallas Morning News, "A fourth federal suit [against Baylor Plano], on behalf of former Duntsch patient Barry Morguloff, is expected to be filed this week." [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14; The Dallas Morning News, 3/26/14] Lawsuits Brought Against Baylor Plano Argued That The Hospital Should Have Stopped Duntsch When They Had Him & Prevented Him From Moving Elsewhere. In March 2014, The Dallas Morning News reported, "The three patients who have filed federal actions argue that Baylor Plano should have stopped Duntsch when it had him, and should have prevented him from moving elsewhere." [The Dallas Morning News, 3/02/14] VO: Then weeks after accepting a quarter million dollar campaign contribution from the hospital's chairman, Greg Abbott got involved. SUPER: Greg Abbott received $250,000 from the hospital's Chairman. Texas Ethics Commission; Dallas Morning News, 7/30/14 Abbott Accepted $250,000 From The Chairman Of Baylor Scott & White Hospital System In January 2014; Abbott Intervened In Lawsuits On Behalf Of A Baylor Hospital In March 2014. In July 2014, The Dallas Morning News reported, "When Baylor Regional Medical Center in Plano was accused of protecting a neurosurgeon whose patients died or were maimed, it got some outside help from Attorney General Greg Abbott. Abbott has intervened in three federal cases on the hospital's side...In March, Abbott...filed motions to intervene in federal court against former patients who sued the doctor claiming botched spinal surgeries...Baylor Regional is part of the Baylor Scott & White Health hospital system. The chairman of the system's board of trustees is Drayton McLane... Abbott received $100,000 from McLane in June 2013 and another $250,000 in January." [Dallas Morning News,7/30/14] January 23, 2014: Abbott Accepted $250,000 From Drayton McLane Jr. According to the Texas Ethics Commission, on January 23, 2014, Greg Abbott accepted $250,000 from Drayton McLane Jr. [Texas Ethics Commission] March 2014: Abbott Filed Motions To Intervene In Three Separate Suits Brought Against Baylor Plano. In March 2014, The Dallas Morning News reported, "Abbott filed motions to intervene in three separate federal court suits brought against Baylor Plano by former patients of Dr. Christopher Duntsch...The suits challenge the constitutionality of a state law that requires the plaintiffs to prove that Baylor acted with actual intent to harm patients. Abbott seeks court permission to defend the statute." [The Dallas Morning News, 3/26/14 ] VO: Using his office to go to court, against the victims. SUPER: Greg Abbott sides with hospital in lawsuit. Dallas Morning News, 3/26/14 The Dallas Morning News: "Abbott sides with hospital in lawsuit" [Headline, The Dallas Morning News, 3/26/14] "The Baylor Regional Medical Center At Plano, Accused Of Protecting A Neurosurgeon Who Allegedly Killed & Maimed Patients, Gained An Ally This Week In Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott." In March 2014, The Dallas Morning News reported, "The Baylor Regional Medical Center at Plano, accused of protecting a neurosurgeon who allegedly killed and maimed patients, gained an ally this week in Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott." [The Dallas Morning News, 3/26/14] The Dallas Morning News: "Abbott Didn't Need To Intervene But Chose To, Disregarding The Many Opportunities Baylor Had To Yank The Doctor's Privileges..." An editorial in The Dallas Morning News stated, "Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott has discretion when it comes to taking sides in controversial cases. He made a bad decision in coming to the defense of Baylor Regional Medical Center at Plano as it faces three lawsuits in federal court for allowing a neurosurgeon to operate despite allegations the doctor had maimed patients. Baylor invoked a Texas law, now under challenge, that requires plaintiffs to prove that the hospital intentionally inflicted harm when it allowed neurosurgeon Christopher Duntsch to conduct surgeries. Abbott didn't need to intervene but chose to, disregarding the many opportunities Baylor had to yank the doctor's privileges as documented complaints against him mounted." [Editorial, The Dallas Morning News, 3/29/14] VO: Greg Abbott. Another insider. Not working for you. SUPER: Greg Abbott. Another insider. Not working for you. The Dallas Morning News: "If Abbott's Position Is Upheld, The Patients Would Have A Much Harder Time Winning A Suit Against Baylor."According to The Dallas Morning News, "If Abbott's position is upheld, the patients would have a much harder time winning a suit against Baylor." [The Dallas Morning News, 3/26/14]