0816 lisamoorepftexas

Emails (excerpted), Lisa Moore, Archibald A. Hill professor in American and English Literature, Department of English, professor, Center for Women's and Gender Studies, The University of Texas at Austin. Aug. 12 and Aug. 22, 2016

8:21 p.m.

From: "Lisa Moore"

Date: Fri, Aug 12, 2016 at 8:21 PM -0500

Subject: Re: PolitiFact Texas

Some faculty have publicly discussed their decisions to leave UT, partly as a response to campus carry. Some prospective administrators have also disclosed that campus carry was a factor in their decision not to pursue a career at UT Austin. Students have also told bloggers and journalists that campus carry will affect their college choices. We are aware of several additional cases not reported in the media, but professional, ethical and legal barriers prevent us from disclosing information about specific faculty, administrators, and (especially) students whose decisions have been influenced by Texas's campus carry law. As a journalist, you might find it worthwhile to ask the UT Office of Admissions whether there have been changes in the total number of applications to UT Austin this year--I cannot provide that information to you.

As a gauge of faculty and staff attitudes nationwide about campus carry and how it influences career decisions, you could view any one of several listservs or discussion forums for career academics. Here, for example, you can read comments from faculty and staff throughout the country talking about how they would never work in a college that allows guns in classrooms.

Lisa

4:27 p.m.

Aug. 22, 2016

I checked with Paloma and she's willing to talk to you:

…

She initially posted that their invited speaker did not want to come because of campus carry. Just now she told me that after a lot of back and forth, they were able to convince the person to come. I did not know that (and maybe it had not happened) when I was on NPR.

I just forwarded you something from my friend whose son did not apply.

Robin Bernstein is willing to talk to you.