0715 vanduynepftexas

Emails, Beth Van Duyne, Irving’s mayor, July 9-10, 2015

9:49 p.m.

The City of Irving does, indeed, have a mosque located within our city limits, much like other Texas cities. On February 2nd of this year, CBS 11 news in Dallas ran a news report about what they said was “believed to be the first official Islamic Tribunal that follows Sharia Law” and identified the City of Irving as its home: http://dfw.cbslocal.com/2015/02/02/north-texas-home-to-first-islamic-tribunal-in-u-s/.

As you can imagine, this caused a rapid and almost entirely negative reaction from the general public who are very concerned about Sharia laws being used in our court system and believed the City of Irving was somehow involved with the establishment of this “court.” I felt it was important to release a statement clarifying that the City of Irving had not sanctioned, condoned or was party to this “court” operating within the city AS REPORTED in the news item above. My complete statement from February 4th (on my Facebook page) is as follows:

Sharia Law Court was NOT approved or enacted by the City of Irving. Recently, there have been rumors suggesting that the City of Irving has somehow condoned, approved or enacted the implementation of a Sharia Law Court in our City. Let me be clear, neither the City of Irving, our elected officials or city staff have anything to do with the decision of the mosque that has been identified as starting a Sharia Court.

As Mayor of the City of Irving, I took an oath to uphold the laws of the State of Texas and the Constitution of the United States. I respect the freedoms guaranteed under the First Amendment and believe that protecting fundamental constitutional rights and ensuring that individual rights are not violated or denied is essential.

Currently, Texas Supreme Court precedent does not allow the application of foreign law that violates public policy, statutory, or federal laws. However, now that this issue has emerged in our community, I am working with our State Representatives on legislation to clarify and strengthen existing prohibitions on the application of foreign law in violation of constitutional or statutory rights.

American citizens need to remember that their rights are guaranteed by the Constitution and I believe no one should subjugate themselves to anything less. While I am working to better understand how this “court” will function and whom will be subject to its decisions, please know if it is determined that there are violations of basic rights occurring, I will not stand idle and will fight with every fiber of my being against this action. Our nation cannot be so overly sensitive in defending other cultures that we stop protecting our own. The American Constitution and our guaranteed rights reigns supreme in our nation and may that ever be the case.

I hope this helps answer your question about how many folks came to understand that Irving was home to a Sharia court.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, July 10, 2015 10:04 AM

To: Beth Van Duyne

Subject: RE: Austin reporter, PolitiFact Texas

I had seen that news report and your post.

What do you think: Is it accurate that Muslims tried to establish a court like this in Irving?

News stories seem to indicate that four Muslim individuals are (or were) offering tribunal services in the Dallas-Fort Worth area from an office in Dallas.

?

g.

11:05 a.m.

July 10, 2015

I think it is accurate to say a tribunal has been formed in the greater DFW-area and they have indicated it functions in various locations such as Dallas, Richardson, Arlington and Irving. My understanding is they don’t operate in a single fixed location since the tribunal is essentially four men and they could be conducting their “court” from an office, a mosque or elsewhere.

12:14 p.m.

I thought this might be helpful, as well. You will see in the attached document screenshots of the IslamicTribunal.org Website (as it existed back in February), these individuals were representing themselves as judges and attorneys, despite none of them having a law degree or being licensed by the State Bar, thereby suggesting they were conducting their operations as a court. It is against the law in Texas to represent yourself as a judge or attorney unless you actually are one – a point these individuals chose to ignore for some time.

On page three of the document, you will see their address as listed in Dallas. Page 5 shows the drop down menu of “Practice Areas” they claimed to render judgment about. Page 7 and 8 discuss how they will be using Islamic Law and Sharia in order to decide matters that are brought before them. While they also stipulate their decisions must be made in accordance with local, state, and federal law, strict adherence to Islamic Law creates unavoidable instances where women will be discriminated against and not afforded the full Constitutional rights of our nation.

I hope this is useful in your reporting.

Beth