040713 peterharbageemailresponsepftexas

Email, response to PolitiFact Texas, Peter Harbage, president, Harbage Consulting, April 7, 2013

April 7, 2013

4:56 pm

I wanted to re-visit one of the points made on the call. I described that one of the key differences in the estimates is that the Hadley et al analysis asserts a broad range of programs cover costs for the uninsured, while that’s not true. On our call, one example I used was for Medicare medical education (IME and GME). The analysis you cite, for example, asserts that those dollars are used for the uninsured because physician training typically involves new physicians working with the uninsured. However, those dollars are actually used to train and educate physicians along with administrative costs and everything that goes into that. That’s why the programs are call Indirect Medical Education and Graduate Medical Education.

As I look through their materials, Hadley et all also apply this concepts to the $19B Medicaid DSH program, the large-sized Medicare DSH program, and the Upper Payment Limit (UPL) programs. They assume all those dollars help the uninsured when the use of the programs use varies from state to state, including California where Medicaid DSH dollars are primarily used to reduce the cost of low Medicaid payments (it’s well established that California has some of the lowest Medicaid payments in the country). Hospitals use those DSH dollars to offset low Medicaid payments as well as other purposes (including education), and not cover the uninsured as assumed by Hadley (NAPH has written on this). The same is true for the UPL payments listed in the Hadley report. You can easily find reports of DSH and UPL payments going to other uses (again, NAPH, as well as GAO and HHS Inspector General Reports on this matter).

Hadley assumes all those dollars go to the uninsured; the evidence is that is not true. That’s why in the paper Len Nichols and I wrote for the New America Foundation talks about a cost-shift amount as the maximum possible.