0715 cpapftexas

Emails, Lauren Willis, director of communications, Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts, July 14, 2015

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, July 14, 2015 4:00 PM

To: Lauren Willis

I haven’t found evidence the federal government needs state permission to open a park in Texas. Across the country, perhaps, one needs a deed or other agreement to convey land; that wouldn’t be unique to Texas?

As I looked into this, I’ve shared what seems relevant with Liz. Would you like me to forward the last email I sent her?

The original source offered as backup was footnoted to what turned out to be a children’s book that did not have any mention of the claim by the comptroller.

g.

4:08 p.m.

Have you found evidence that the federal government does not need state permission to open a park in Texas? I’d like to see that.

I believe Liz did share your emails with me. However, she is out on vacation beginning today so if you sent anything today, I would also like to see that. Thanks for offering to share.

Lauren

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, July 14, 2015 4:12 PM

To: Lauren Willis

Subject: FW: Following up

Below is the latest substantive email from me to her.

We rely on individuals and groups that make claim for factual backup. Of course, we also research the accuracy of each claim (separately). But our sense is it’s on whoever or whatever makes a statement to have a factual basis. I expect we’ll complete this fact check soon, perhaps Wednesday.

g.

PASTING:

Sharing here. Sutton is the chief historian for the National Park Service.

From: Sutton, Robert

Sent: Monday, July 13, 2015 10:54 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Re: Austin reporter who just called you

Dear Mr. Selby,

Your question intrigued me, so I did a little digging. Here is the legislation that brought Texas into the Union: http://thetexasrepublic.com/history-of-this-republic/1845-annexation-agreement/. If you look at the second section, under "Second" you will find the piece about Texas land. There isn't anything there that says the federal government must ask for permission to use Texas owned land for any purpose. I also did a little digging into the Texas "readmission" legislation, after it seceded from the Union during the Civil War, and there isn't anything there that is helpful.

So, and I'm certainly not a constitutional lawyer, but I would say that the claim that the feds need to ask for permission is incorrect.

Bob Sutton

Robert K. Sutton, Ph.D.

Chief Historian, National Park Service

From: Lauren Willis

Sent: Tuesday, July 14, 2015 4:15 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: RE: Following up

So to be clear, you have found no evidence that would dispute what the Comptroller said, correct?

On: 14 July 2015 16:52, "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)" wrote:

To the contrary. See below (Sutton). Again, if you have evidence for the claim, now is the time to share.

8:43 p.m.

I don't see where Sutton provided any evidence that clears this up. He says it isn't addressed anywhere that he can find and then makes his own interpretation. Again, if you have information that disputes the claim, we'd like to see it. This is merely one historian's opinion. The State Comptroller's opinion happens to be different. From what I understand, former Land Commissioner Jerry Patterson shares the same interpretation of the issue as the Comptroller. So does that suffice as evidence for the claim in the same was Sutton's opinion does?