1215 daskalpftexas

Email, Jennifer Daskal, assistant professor of law, Washington College of Law, American University, Dec. 14 and 16, 2015

4:03 p.m.

It is not a presidential determination. Rather it is a joint AG, Sec of DHS, and Sec of State decision. See 8 USC 1182 (d)(3)(B)(i).

To put this in context, the waiver was designed to protect groups, such as Montagnards and Hmong, who fought alongside the US during the Vietnam War from being denied visas as “material supporters of terrorism.” And to protect rape victims who were forced into servitude by groups like the Lord’s Resistance Army in Uganda from being denied visas based on terrorism grounds as well. And to protect Burmese resistance fighters from being labeled terrorists.

It does not authorize a waiver for any alien that is engaged in or deemed likely to engage in terrorist activity, has received military training from any designated terrorist organization, or is part of a group that engages in terrorist activity directed at civilians. Rather, it was designed to ameliorate the problems associated with a definition of support for terrorism that is so broad to include support (whether coerced or not) for two or more people that unlawfully use firearms — even if supported by the US in their efforts to protect themselves from a repressive regime.

...

Jen

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)"

Date: Wednesday, December 16, 2015 at 12:25 AM

To: Jennifer Daskal

Got it. Could you tell me the significance of this 2014 move by the Obama administration? Judicial Watch has said the administration unilaterally changed federal law.

?

g.

2:14 a.m.

Dec. 16, 2015

This is not unilaterally changing the law. This is an exercise of discretionary waiver authority that was granted by Congress, pursuant to a bipartisan amendment to the law, under the Bush administration. It also follows several uses of waiver authority by the Bush administration.

As the substance, it is important to understand how the scheme operates. The terrorism related bars are incredibly broad. They cover aliens who provide support to designated terrorist groups or otherwise support of engage in violent terrorist activity — as they should. But they also prohibit support to any organization of two or more people who unlawfully use firearms, even if the group is not a designated group, even if the group is essentially controlling territory and demanding taxes, and even if the individual who pays up has no intent (or even knowledge) that the dollars are being support a group that is deemed by US law to be a terrorist organization. Terrorist activity is also defined to include things that we would all think of terrorism, such as assassinations, hijacking, and indiscriminate targeting of civilians, but it also includes the unlawful use of a firearm by a thug. As I wrote earlier, laws are so broad that those who support Burmese resistance fighters, rape victims forced into servitude by the Lord’s Resistance Army, and Hmong and Montagnards who fought alongside the US in the Vietnam war are defined as “material supporters of terrorism” under US law.

This exemption applies only to those who provide humanitarian assistance, routine commercial transactions (like sale of food), or provides support under substantial pressure (like paying an effective tax) and does not have the intent to support terrorist activity or a terrorist organization. Each alien has to be individually vetted. An alien is not eligible , knowingly participated in or materially supported any violent terrorist activity, any terrorist activity directed against U.S. Interests, is subject to any of the many other security and criminal law bars on admission, or many other reasons for excluding the alien.