112014 kochpftexas

Emails, Rob Tappan, director, External Relations, Koch Companies Public Sector, LLC, Koch Industries, Nov. 12-13, 2014

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Wednesday, November 12, 2014 4:32 PM

To: Tappan, Rob

Subject: Inquiry for a fact check in Texas

Hello again.

I write because we’re checking this claim made today by Austin mayoral candidate Mike Martinez about his foe in a December runoff: “Last night, Steve Adler admitted his law firm worked with Koch Industries for nearly a decade.”

Adler is co-founder of Barron & Adler, LLP, which at one time listed Koch as a representative client, a local TV station reported last night.

At any rate, I am seeking any information that bears on the accuracy of this claim. I’d be happy to visit by phone (just left a message) if that’s easier.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Tappan, Rob

Sent: Wednesday, November 12, 2014 5:02 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: RE: Inquiry for a fact check in Texas

Dear Gardner:

Thanks for your note.

Koch has used Mr. Adler’s law firm in the past, but Mr. Adler himself has never been engaged by Koch nor ever represented the company.

Sincerely,

--Rob Tappan

Robert A. Tappan

Director, External Relations

Koch Companies Public Sector, LLC

Koch Industries

Washington, DC 20005

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, November 13, 2014 10:12 AM

To: 'Tappan, Rob'

Subject: Following up

Got it.

Can you elaborate about when Koch Industries employed the firm and for what purpose? I am all about details. I also just left a voice message as well.

I hope to complete this story today.

g.

-----Original Message-----

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Thursday, November 13, 2014 11:01 AM Central Standard Time

To: Tappan, Rob

Subject: More information

I just spoke with Mike Barron of the Barron & Adler firm. He said by his recollection, Koch Industries paid a small retainer while the firm advised KI on acquiring right-of-way for a jet-fuel pipeline running from the Corpus Christi area to San Antonio, Austin, Waco and Dallas in 1984-85 or 1985-86. Is any of this confirmed at your end (including Koch building that pipeline)?

g.

11:44 a.m.

Nov. 13, 2014

Gardner:

I can confirm this, with these two clarifications/corrections:

The pipeline was built in the late 1980s, and Mike Barron was the only person we worked with at the law firm.

--Rob Tappan

Robert Tappan

Director, External Relations

Koch Companies Public Sector

Koch Industries

3:18 p.m.

The line carries gasoline, diesel and jet fuel.

From: Tappan, Rob

Sent: Thursday, November 13, 2014 4:18 PM

To: 'Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)'

Subject: RE: More information

Gardner:

The pipeline involved is a refined products pipeline that starts in Corpus Christi and ends in the Dallas/Ft. Worth area, with terminals at San Antonio, Austin and Waco.