122015 sivautexasemails
Dear Siva: We are delighted to share with you the exciting news that the Search Committee for the next Dean of the Moody School of Communication was extremely impressed with your interview. As such, they have enthusiastically decided to advance your candidacy to the next stage of the process. The Committee would like to invite you back for an extended visit and a dinner. The visit will include meetings with President Fenves, Interim-Provost Langlois, Deans of other UT Schools and Colleges, and faculty and staff from within the Moody College. We are working to identify possible dates in late January and early February for a campus visit and will be in touch soon to discuss scheduling. To facilitate the next steps in this process, we ask that you submit to us, as soon as possible: 1) A list of 5 suggested references with contact information, especially email addresses; and 2) An email reply to this message giving Russell Reynolds Associates and representatives of the University of Texas permission to contact your references, both those you suggest and others, not on your list, who we may choose to contact, in confidence. As before, the University of Texas will pay for all travel-related expenses. If you have any questions or require further assistance, please contact our office. Otherwise, we look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible. To the extent possible, we ask that you continue to maintain confidentiality, and share this news only with your spouse/partner and if you so desire, with those on the reference list you suggest we call. We will not make “off list” reference calls until we have your express permission in writing. If you prefer that we defer making “off-list” calls until after your visit to campus, please so indicate. Please note that we can no longer guarantee confidentiality once you visit campus. Again, we extend to you our congratulations. We are extremely proud to have been able to present your distinguished credentials and experience to the committee. We are pleased to be able to pass along this exciting news. We very much look forward to hearing from you. Ilene, Nate & Charlie