0815 icepftexas

Email, Carl Rusnok, director of communications, Central Region, U.S. Immigration & Customs Enforcement, Aug. 24 and 27, 2015

3:41 p.m.

The following ICE news release provides follow-up information on this issue:

http://www.ice.gov/news/releases/ice-announces-enhanced-oversight-and-release-procedures-custody-determinations

BACKGROUND INFORMATION ONLY:

Following are existing data regarding aliens released from ICE custody in 2013. Note, however, that ICE cannot react to remarks from each political candidate.

In FY 13, 36,007 criminal aliens were released from ICE custody.

As a matter of law, ICE detains foreign citizens only to effect their removal from the United States. Criminal aliens who enter the agency’s custody have already completed their prison sentences, and their detention under immigration law is solely for the purpose of removal. While the U.S. Supreme Court’s ruling in Zadvydas vs. Davis provides a strong legal framework for ICE’s detention programs, it is not the only court case guiding agency policies for custody determination. There were 3,652 aliens released FY 13 that are officially attributed to the Zadvydas decision.

In addition to these Zadvydas releases, many criminal aliens are released on an ICE Order of Supervision because there is no significant likelihood of removal in the reasonably foreseeable future. While not strictly attributed to Zadvydas, these releases are inextricably linked to limits placed on the use of immigration detention under U.S. law and related court rulings. In FY 13, 21,199 criminal aliens were released under an ICE Order of Supervision.

Another significant factor in the release of criminal aliens includes immigration bonds issued by a judge. In FY 13, 10,532 criminal aliens were granted bonds by an immigration judge.

The small number of remaining releases are attributed to prosecutorial discretion, parole and the agency’s inability to obtain a travel document.

A majority of the Level 1 offenders released from ICE custody were prompted by court decisions, such as Zadvydas vs. Davis. In FY 13, the agency released 169 homicide convicts.

Carl Rusnok

Director of Communications, Central Region (Spokesman)

based in Dallas, TX

U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Thursday, August 27, 2015 1:49 PM

To: Rusnok, Carl

Subject: RE: Urgent follow-up

I am still interested in how ICE has explained the 68,000 individuals it came across in 2013 that its agents did not act against, if I read right.

1:54 p.m.

Aug. 27, 2015

This was a statement/background released in March 2014:

“ICE is focused on the removal of criminal aliens. In Fiscal Year 2013 the agency removed 216,000 convicted criminals. The percentage of criminals removed continues to rise. Nearly 60 percent of ICE’s total removals had been previously convicted of a criminal offense, and that number rises to 82 percent for individuals removed from the interior of the U.S. The removal of criminal individuals is and will remain ICE’s highest priority.”

Background Information:

The flawed math employed by the Center for Immigration Studies was obtained by subtracting the number of charging documents issued from the number of criminal aliens encountered. The flaws of this approach include:

• At time of encounter, individuals are classified as criminal for charges and convictions, not just for convictions – these could include LPRs, those later determined to be US citizens, and aliens charged with or convicted of minor traffic offenses

• If an individual receives a serious criminal conviction and lengthy sentence, a charging document would not be issued in the same year as arrest but would be issued at a later date

Carl Rusnok

Director of Communications, Central Region (Spokesman)

based in Dallas, TX

U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) www.ice.gov