Multiple States Implement a 'Two Pet Maximum' Ordinance
Residents of multiple states will be asked to surrender their ‘third pet’ to the Humane Society to remain in compliance with a newly passed ordinance.

The ordinance was officially passed this week by state politicians in Texas, Arizona, and Missouri. According to statistics gathered and published by The Humane Society of the United States, abandoned pet rates have sky-rocketed in Texas, Arizona, and Missouri over the past 2 years.

State representatives from Texas, Arizona, and Missouri are hopeful that this new ordinance will drastically reduce the amount of abandoned pets within their respective states.

Statistics continue to show that local Humane Society shelters throughout Texas, Arizona, and Missouri, do not have the proper size of facilities to house the animals at the high rate they are receiving them. This leads to thousands of animals being euthanized almost immediately, which in-turn is costly for the tax-payer.

State officials from Texas, Arizona, and Missouri have partnered with The Humane Society of the United States, to re-locate all surrendered or displaced pets to shelters throughout the country including Humane Society shelters in New Mexico, Utah, California, Oklahoma, and Kansas, where they will be included and involved in special adopt-a-pet campaigns.

According to state representatives, pet owners within Texas, Arizona, and Missouri are expected to be in compliance with the new ordinance by September 2016. All pet owners are expected to surrender any pets in excess of the mandatory ‘2-pet maximum’ to their local Humane Society shelter by the compliance date of September 3rd 2016.

State officials are classifying a ‘pet’ as a “domestic animal the size of a cat or larger”. This means that if a family has 2 dogs and 1 cat, they must choose between housing the 2 dogs or housing 1 dog and 1 cat. They then must surrender the 3rd pet to their local Humane Society shelter.

According to representatives involved with the initiative, a state funded, mandatory ‘pet registration’ process will be implemented as early as January 2017. This process will require all pet owners to register their pets with the state. If a pet owner is found with an unregistered pet or pets in excess of the mandatory ‘2 pet maximum’, the pet will be immediately removed from the home and the homeowner will be required to pay a fine in excess of $500.

In addition to state officials relying on its citizens to report any instances of neighbors that fail to remain compliant with the ordinance (according to representatives, an incentive program may be implemented to encourage citizens to report those out of compliance), The Humane Society of the United States is planning to hire an additional 1,300 employees within Texas, Arizona, and Missouri to patrol and enforce the ordinance.

As the September 3rd 2017 compliance date approaches, state officials are asking impacted pet owners to begin thinking about which 2 animals they wish to continue housing.