0814 alonzoppftexas

Email (excerpted), Alonzo Peña, president, DMEP, Aug. 8, 2014

From: Alonzo Pena

Sent: Friday, August 08, 2014 5:17 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Follow up to our call

Here are a few quick links demonstrate how the cartels use social media for their messaging:

http://www.nydailynews.com/news/world/mexican-drug-cartel-thugs-post-atrocities-social-media-article-1.1515860

But it's not all darkness and destruction. Drug lords also use the Internet as a public relations tool.

http://www.vice.com/read/mexicos-drug-cartels-are-using-the-internet-to-get-up-to-mischief

The first point Antoine touched on was how cartels have utilized cyberspace in much the same way as a TV company's PR department might: "They advertise their activities, they conduct public relations initiatives, and they have basically turned themselves into their own media company," he explained. "Colombia's cartel groups or drug traffickers in Myanmar in the 1990s were very sophisticated at public relations, but they didn't have this massive broadcasting platform."

http://www.nbcnews.com/tech/social-media/twitter-guns-money-mexicos-cartels-live-large-social-media-n130886

"You have seen an increase in this kind of thing as Mexico has become more wired," Shannon O'Neil, a senior fellow in Latin American studies for the Council on Foreign Relations, told NBC News. "In general, the members of the drug cartels are younger. It's a demographic that is very comfortable being online."

In regards to my sources, I have approximately 28 years of law enforcement experience and retired as Deputy Director of ICE.

It is my opinion that the Congressman speaks not only from what I have told him, what he and everyone else reads in open source media, and what he is briefed by DHS because of his position on the committee.

…

On Aug 8, 2014, at 5:27 PM, "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)" <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

I’ll look at those stories.

If you have information that bears on what the congressman said in that interview – cartels using social media to offer rebates so children bring other children – now is the time to share it.

I don’t see anything immediately on point to that in your note...

g.

6:02 p.m.

Revealing sources would serve no purpose other than to put those sources at risk and give away valuable intelligence and investigatory methods. If you intent is to name someone, you will likely not get what you seek. But from my experience I can tell you that what the congressman said is not at all outside the realm of possibility or incredible."