0416 uberpftexas

Emails, Jaime Moore, communications and public affairs manager, Uber, Austin, April 14, 2016

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, April 14, 2016 11:46 AM

Subject: TNC drivers and a safety claim

Good morning.

I write because we are fact-checking a couple claims in advance of the May 7 vote in Austin and would welcome Uber data/analysis. I hope to complete these checks today.

For starters, we are gauging a statement last weekend by Austin City Council Member Ellen Troxclair. At a forum, she said statistics show "you are about nine times more likely to be assaulted by a taxi driver" in Austin than a driver for a ride-hailing service.

Her office tells us her basis for this claim was the attached document indicating complaints lodged in connection with taxi cabs or ride-hailed rides since 2014. Michael Searle, her chief of staff, told us: “If the estimate is that there are 15,000 TNC” ride-hailed “drivers, subject to name-based background checks, and there are 913 cab permits, subject to fingerprint background check, then you are 9 times more likely to be assaulted by a cab driver than a TNC driver in Austin.”

Searle suggested we contact you about the accuracy of the 15,000 count; does it have a basis?

How many Uber drivers are there in Austin or the Austin area?

Does Uber have data indicating safety levels in comparison to rides in taxi cabs?

One key indicator for comparative purposes might be the number of trips taken on Uber or other ride-hailing services. How many trips did Austin residents take via Uber in 2015? Any other relevant metrics?

ALSO, we are checking a claim in a fund-raising letter for Our City, Our Safety, Our Choice stating Austin’s Stop Abuse for Everyone (SAFE) has seen in its offices “sexual assault survivors that report being attacked by their ridesharing drivers, at a rate of one per month.” I’m told this claim is based on a similar statement here.

Does Uber have data or other analysis that bears on the accuracy of this claim?

Thanks for quick feedback.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

On Thu, Apr 14, 2016 at 11:49 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

I should have asked too if Uber finds accurate the council member’s analysis. Why or why not?

On Thu, Apr 14, 2016 at 11:55 AM, Jennifer Mullin wrote:

Hi Gardner,

Cc'ing my colleague Jaime who will get back to you ASAP.

Jen

Jennifer Mullin | Public Affairs, Uber Central |

(Jaime Moore)

1:31 p.m.

As for number of TNC drivers, I can confirm that more than 15,000 Austinites drive on the Uber platform. I cannot speak for our competitors.

On Thu, Apr 14, 2016 at 1:35 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Any info/data on all my other questions? It would be helpful to know trips taken and more.

2:12 p.m.

As for trip numbers, it is not public.

On Thu, Apr 14, 2016 at 3:50 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Is 10,000 the most accurate figure for Uber drivers in Austin?

From: Jaime Moore

Sent: Thursday, April 14, 2016 4:13 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Re: See the slide indicating 10,000 Uber drivers in Austin

As for this stat, in the deck it should be "more than 10K," but both are accurate.

On Thu, Apr 14, 2016 at 4:45 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Which is the most accurate driver count and why? We’re at risk of reader confusion based on what Uber is providing.

5:06 p.m.

There is variability, depending on how you quantify active drivers.

The reason this number changes is because folks are constantly coming onto the platform. Many sign up to drive between jobs, to save money for holiday presents, or because they know it will be really busy during SXSW. Some drivers drive 5 days a week, many drive once a week, or once a month. There are many people that only drive for large events, sometimes every day for a week, three times a year. Does that make sense?