1015 dfriedmanpftexas

Email, Daryl P. Friedman, chief industry, government & member relations officer, The Recording Academy/GRAMMYs, Oct. 27, 2015

4:47 p.m.

Thank you for your interest in the topic of performance rights on terrestrial radio. While I am unable to connect with you via phone today, I did want to provide additional details about the statement Kevin made: “In almost every other country in the world, artists and musicians are paid when their music is played on the radio. In fact, the only countries besides the U.S. who do not have a radio-performance right are China, Iran and North Korea.”

While this statement is correct in that the U.S., China, Iran and North Korea do not provide radio-performance rights, there are a few countries that were left out of this list. Those other countries are Bangladesh, Congo, Gabon, Indonesia, Kuwait, Micronesia, Niger, Oman, Qatar, Rwanda, Seychelles, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Uganda and Zimbabwe. I think you get the point the writer was making. The U.S. stands out in that list.

More precisely, the U.S. is the only country that is a member of the OECD (Organisation for Economic and Co-operation and Development—modern, free-market nations), that does not provide a performance right on terrestrial radio. All of the other countries included in this organization that do provide performance rights are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the United Kingdom. Again, the U.S. is alone among modern economies not providing this right to artists.

This information is compiled by the RIAA and is verified by other industry organizations including SoundExchange, Inc. As part of the conversation of music licensing, SoundExchange, Inc. filed comments before the U.S. Copyright Office on May 23, 2014 detailing some of its concerns, which includes this information and additional sources. The filing can be found here, please reference page 17 for additional citations.

Let reply if you have any additional questions.

Daryl

-----------------------------------------------

Daryl P. Friedman

Chief Industry, Government & Member Relations Officer

The Recording Academy/GRAMMYs