012517 edpcpftexas

Email, Danny Court, principal, senior economist, Elliott D. Pollack & Company, Jan. 25, 2017

5:02 p.m.

Thank you for sending this over. As it reads in its current form, the interpretation of data produced by our firm referenced by the author is misleading the reader. We were given a very narrow scope to assess the potential impacts of lost convention business due to an anti-immigration law referred to as SB 1070. Our report had nothing to do with issues pertaining to religious freedom policies. I believe attempts were made to point out similarities in likely outcomes of a bill such as SB 1062 (boycotts, reduced travel, etc.) and so the report on SB 1070 was likely referred to.

We are somewhat confused as to why the author decided to use $140 million as the reported impact. It concerns me that the author of this report did not read our report, but perhaps only a news article referencing the report. $140 million represented one estimate of direct spending losses which then equated to $253 million in total losses when considering multiplier effects. This should also be carefully explained as economic impacts and not tax revenue. There were also additional calculations for potential lost business on a going forward basis that don’t appear to have been a consideration or perhaps never seen if nobody read the actual report.

In terms of extrapolating figures from our study to Texas, it is impossible from the information provided in the report to tell if their methodology is sound. Again, our scope was narrow and only represented a portion of potential economic losses. The focus was on lost tourism from meetings and conventions. It did not consider any implications of leisure travel. The assumption in the report you sent us uses the metric that the entire travel and tourism industry of Texas is over three times as large as Arizona and so the author justified multiplying the $140 million by that factor.

In short, our report had nothing to do with the impacts of SB 1062, rather we attempted to estimate the scale of lost tourism relating to conventions and meetings due to anti-immigration legislation known as SB 1070. It is unclear, but likely that the $140 million figure was not the correct figure to base an extrapolation from, and the methodology to perform the extrapolation seems, at best, oversimplified and at risk of scrutiny to a trained eye.

Please let me know if you would like to discuss.

Danny Court | Principal, Senior Economist

Elliott D. Pollack & Company | www.edpco.com