012017 commentsstedstudy

Emails commenting on methodology for economic impact study, Jan. 12-23, 2017

Timothy Werner, assistant professor of business, government & society, McCombs School of Business, University of Texas

5:15 p.m.

Jan. 12, 2017

I’ve provided some on-the-record comments below, as well as links to the webpages of two other professors who may be willing to comment.

Best,

Tim

How would you analyze this report?

I think the report represents a basic, first cut at estimating a range of the potential economic impact of a “bathroom bill.” The range of the negative impact in the report runs from $964 million to $8.5 billion, which is a very wide. Some parts of the report are dated now and suggest fallout from the bill that we know ill not occur now—i.e., that Super Bowl is not going to pull out of Houston between now and February. Thus, I’d view this report as being correct in that the economic impact in Texas will be negative if this bill passes, but I’m skeptical about the specific estimates it includes.

Is it methodologically solid? Why or why not?

The methodology is atypical for an economic impact analysis. It simply examines the estimated potential costs in other states when they considered similar legislation and then applies those percentage changes to the same economic categories in Texas. For example, the report suggests that the cost of the NFL’s Super Bowl leaving Houston would be $500 million, which another group estimated would have been the cost had the event left Phoenix when Arizona considered a bathroom bill. This example, as well as the report’s extrapolations from other states, require us to make a lot of assumptions that may not hold. These include a) that the estimated impacts in the other states were correct and b) that these states and their economies are comparable to Texas’. One of the biggest challenges faced by this sort of study is that we don’t have a lot of data on the actual effects of these bills, as only one (in North Carolina) has gone into effect, and it has only been in place since March 2016.

Other recommended authorities for us to consult?

U Penn Law Prof. Tobia Barrington Wolff (https://www.law.upenn.edu/cf/faculty/twolff/)

Wharton Prof. Maurice Schweitzer (https://oid.wharton.upenn.edu/profile/schweitz/)

John Gnuschke, director, Sparks Bureau of Business and Economic Research (SBBER) and the Center for Manpower Studies (CMS), professor of economics, the University of Memphis

6:24 p.m.

Jan. 12, 2017

The methodology looks fine. State to state impact comparisons are widely used for studies of this kind but are difficult given the wide range of policy variations and economic conditions in each state. Individual states find it difficult to assess the impact of any policy. The study found that 8.5 billion and 185,000 jobs might be lost but that was the high end estimate. Lower estimates with higher probabilities are more likely and less damaging but economic losses will happen at some level. No state that was reviewed experienced economic gains from passing the legislation and every state experienced losses or potential losses. The cost benefit ratio, one measure frequently cited by legislators, will be amazingly high for this initiative.

Craig Depken, professor of economics, Belk College of Business, University of North Carolina-Charlotte, Jan. 23, 2017

9:10 p.m.

Jan. 23, 2017

I read over the discussion of Study 1. The extrapolation-type study is not uncommon when looking at a problem for which there is not a lot of observations of the phenomenon that is desired. The downside to the methodology is that it makes assumptions that are all based on scale - that is, say, Texas is 1.5 times the size of State A in terms of GDP or tourism spending or employment, and therefore it is assumed that the impact in Texas will be 1.5 times that of State A.

The assumption is made but there is no way of knowing if the impact in Texas would be more or less than the 1.5x scale effect.

It also assumes that the original studies in the states to which Texas is being compared were correct. In the case of direct estimates, most studies in other areas tend to do rough calculations that are often found to be overstated (e.g., the net impacts of sports events, political conventions, and so forth). Depending on the multipliers used in the studies in other states, the total impacts can be dramatically overstated.

The problem with the extrapolation methodology in this dimension is that any overstatement in the original study is magnified again in the extrapolation.

For example, say the direct effects in the original study were overstated by 30%, the multiplier used is 3 rather than the more conservative 1.5. The the total effects in the original study could be overstated by almost 200%! The real culprit here is the multiplier effect but the over-estimation of the direct (and indirect) effects is no small contribution.

Any overstatement (or understatement, for that matter) in the original state study is then magnified (or diluted) even further when scaling up for the disparate size of the Texas economy or tourism industry.

A more specific concern was the estimation of the impact on the Houston convention industry. The Louisiana study said that 85% of the top conventions would leave New Orleans. This percentage was then applied to, it appears, the entire convention business of Houston. I would rather use the top 85% of conventions in Houston as the appropriate comparison group, but perhaps those data were not available.

Overall, the Study 1 methodology is not outside of the norm for case studies but the particular point values are not terribly reliable in my experience. Perhaps these studies are more appropriate as general guides, e.g., that there would be an impact and that it would be noticeable on local economies (especially) and perhaps noticeable on the state economy.

Hope that helps. Feel free to reach out if you have any further questions or requests.

Cheers,

Craig Depken

Professor of Economics

UNC Charlotte

Don Hoyte, owner, TexasTrustFunds.com

9:21 a.m.

Jan. 21, 2017

Thanks for the opportunity to review this study. I think there are many levels through which the findings of this study could be examined.

The first is from the 50,000 foot level---does the report provide sufficient data to merit the overall conclusion that passing anti-LGBT legislation now before Texas Reps and Senators would be detrimental to the Texas economy? The answer to that is yes.

Some data sources cited are very solid and based on actions actually taken as a direct result of other states passing similar legislation. The cancellation of a $40 million investment by Angie's List leading to the potential loss of 1,000 jobs in Indiana is clearly attributable to the passage of similar legislation in that state. As such, that data is direct, sizable and concrete. Strong and directly-linked actions are also cited from PayPal and Deutsche Bank expansion cancellations in North Carolina along with the loss of several national events being removed from North Carolina because of passage of legislation in that state.

This sort of data cannot be discounted and because it is so strong that in my opinion similar actions in Texas would be likely.

Other data cited in this report are probably less definitive. For example, the projection based on what the impacts on New Orleans might have been had Louisiana seen full implementation of their legislation are somewhat speculative since that implementation never actually occurred. That said, projections from a city such as New Orleans which has hosted numerous major national events cannot be simply dismissed either. The problem of citing the experience in New Orleans is that the resulting impact projected to Texas based on that experience is very, very high. I would put that particular impact more towards the speculative end of the spectrum.

I think there are two other points on which this study seems weak. One is the discussion of the survey of businesses in Texas. From the data presented about the effects of similar legislation in other states it is fairly clear that what matters in this entire debate is how the business community outside the state passing the legislation sees the actions, not the opinions of business community inside the state. So it is really pretty much irrelevant how businesses (particularly small businesses) who have their markets and operations predominantly in Texas view the prospects of passing this type of social legislation because the decisions that would affect the state's economy because of the legislation will be made by businesses outside Texas.

But where this study entirely fails in my opinion is on framing the basic question the study seeks to address---what is the potential impact of this legislation on the Texas economy?

In a very real sense there is no "Texas economy." Instead, the "Texas economy" is the sum of the Dallas economy, the Lubbock economy, the San Antonio economy, the Houston economy, the Laredo economy....

Where this is crucial is because the effects of this proposed legislation is likely to fall very differently on various local economies in the state.

On a proportionate basis, San Antonio is the most tourism-dependent economy in the state with the River Walk, the Alamo, Sea World and other attractions. Each year San Antonio hosts hundreds of national conventions and meetings. Legislation that harms tourism in Texas will harm San Antonio the most.

Dallas and Houston have been the site of several Super Bowls, NCAA Final Fours, MLB and NBA all-star games. These are huge, high-profile, highly-mobile events very sensitive to public perceptions. To the extent that social legislation affects decisions about where such events go, this legislation will hurt the Dallas and Houston economies. In that same category and for the same reason we must place Arlington and Frisco as well.

Finally, from the experience in other states, this sort of social legislation tends to be most challenged by companies in the high-tech or related "information-based" industries. As such, areas of Texas that are home to these industries are also most likely to be negatively affected. This means Austin, Dallas-Fort Worth and Houston.

So in a very real sense a vote for this sort of social legislation is not really a vote to harm the Texas economy. Instead, a vote for anti-LGBT legislation is a vote to harm the economies of San Antonio, Houston, Dallas, Fort Worth, Arlington, Austin and Frisco. This report should have been more specific in that regard.

Don

Maurice Schweitzer, Cecilia Yen Koo professor of Operations, Information and Decisions, the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Jan. 25, 2017

4:41 p.m.

Jan. 25, 2017

The report lacked enough detail for me to verify the exact figures. The $8.5b is high, but it was the extreme end of their range. These figures are difficult to forecast, because the effects can snowball—once one company or sporting event boycotts a state, others are more likely to follow.

Though I cannot forecast the exact amount, I am positive that a measure limiting transgender bathroom choices will harm the Texas economy.

-Maurice

------------------------------------

Maurice Schweitzer, Ph.D.

Cecilia Yen Koo Professor, Wharton School