0417 rlpftexas

Email, Rehka Lakshmanan, director of advocacy and policy, the Immunization Partnership, April 28, 2017

3:39 p.m.

The section to focus on is VAERS. Please see highlighted sections in your transcription below. I included the supporting information to the statements Dr. McGee made in response to the Representative. The blue highlighted statements come directly from the VAERS website. I have included links to VAERS. Additionally, the example that anyone can report anything came directly from the 2008 VAERs data. The file is too big to include, but you can go to the data link (provided below) and look up 2008 and search by ID #.

Source of highlighted info: https://vaers.hhs.gov/data/index

Access to VAERS reports- https://vaers.hhs.gov/data/data

Please let me know if you have any questions.

Thank you.

Rekha

Rekha Lakshmanan|Director, Advocacy and Policy|The Immunization Partnership

immunizeusa.org

Immunize. Prevent What's Preventable.a

Begin forwarded message:

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)"

Date: April 28, 2017 at 1:27:45 PM CDT

Subject: Zedler

Lindy Magee, opposition to HB 1124 (by Krause), reps self, the Immunization Partnership, Tx Chilcren’s Hospita. Whee i work, general pediatrician, dedicated pf life to educ and research on vaccine safety\

No bill has ever terrified me to the extent that this one does.

Study shows if exemptions easier to obtain, vaccination rates decline.

Blank Kaplan Constable. Also new study, Whittington.

Why: Studies, compare states, two reasons: fams sign out of convenience… second… when you make exemption so easy, losing contact with their physician (and opportunity to ask questions)...

There is so much unreliable information, we know…

The redux in doc visits, pub health consequences…

Most recent measles outbreak, source case lacked booster shot; 21 other cases, 16 unvaccinated.

Zedler: Yeah, let me ask you this. How many measles deaths?

M: Zero…

Z: But the thing about it is, have you ever looked at the Veers comparison of the number of people that died due to vaccines versus the CDC report of the number of people that died due to the disease?

M: Veers does not report causality. People report to that system what they’ve seen. So I can report if I get hit by a truck after I’ve gotten a vaccine and that would be reported as associated with a vaccine. It does not make any implication of causality. That’s just the way it is.

Z: If you go to the vaers.hhs.gov--

M: Correct, correct. So that is just everyone reporting any time they’ve had an adverse event, any time within a certain amount of period from having a vaccine. It does not make any implications about causality. That’s the way it’s set up.

Z: So in other words, all you’ve got to do is just think it could be.

M: Yes. That’s exactly what it is. So I could break my arm the next day and I can report that to that reporting system. And I want the reporting system, it’s meant to be set up that way because that’s how we can figure out if vaccines cause injury.

We have had cases of vaccines that have been pulled from the market because people have reported into that system; they’ve noticed trends and we’ve pulled vaccines from that market, most notably, the rotovirus vaccine in the early 2000s. The system works. It works.

Z: And when you go down the V report, there’s only one vaccine where more people died due to the disease than--

M: --Once again, the Veers report does not have a statement of causality so it’s not saying that those people died from the vaccine.

When evaluating data from VAERS, it is important to note that for any reported event, no cause-and-effect relationship has been established.

Therefore, VAERS collects data on any adverse event following vaccination, be it coincidental or truly caused by a vaccine. The report of an adverse event to VAERS is not documentation that a vaccine caused the event.

Z: No no no no, are you going to tell me that if somebody got a vaccine, and within hours to days had died, that it’s not due to the vaccine?

M: It’s not necessarily due to the vaccine, no, absolutely not. I could have a vaccine and I could get hit by a truck tomorrow and die. I could have a vaccine and I could commit suicide tomorrow and die. I could have a vaccine and have a heart attack tomorrow.

source:https://vaers.hhs.gov/data/index (2008 data)

Z: Woah, stop, stop. Nobody puts that down.

S: Yes they do.

Z: No they don’t.

S: Yes they do.

Z: Let me tell you, that is patently false and you know it.

S: It’s not. You can look at it. You can look at the reports.

Z: So they put on there and they say oh, just any death, and we don’t have to prove causality?

A report to VAERS generally does not prove that the identified vaccine(s) caused the adverse event described. It only confirms that the reported event occurred sometime after vaccine was given. No proof that the event was caused by the vaccine is required in order for VAERS to accept the report. VAERS accepts all reports without judging whether the event was caused by the vaccine.

Note that the inclusion of events in VAERS data does not imply causality.

Does VAERS have reporting deadlines?

There are no deadlines for the submission of an adverse event report. You are encourage to submit a report promptly after an adverse event occurs to facilitate surveillance and review.

source: https://vaers.hhs.gov/professionals/index#DVH1

S: Yes. It’s not a system to prove causality. It’s a system to track data and then the physicians or researchers at the CDC go and determine causality after that. It is not a system that could determine causality, it’s not.

VAERS has demonstrated its public health importance by providing health scientists with signals about possible adverse events following immunization. In one instance, VAERS detected reports for intussusception over that what would be expected to occur by chance alone after the RotaShield rotavirus vaccine in 1999. Epidemiologic studies confirmed an increased risk, and these data contributed to the product's removal from the US market. In another example, VAERS determined that there may be a potential for a small increase in risk for Guillain-Barre' syndrome (GBS) after the meningococcal conjugate vaccine, Menactra. As a result of this finding, a history of GBS became a contraindication to the vaccine and further controlled studies are currently underway to research this issue.

Z: … For you to get up and tell this committee that in essence they can put anything down there they want is quite a dishonest.

Look up Dr. James Laidler. He tested the system by reporting he turned into the incredible hulk after receiving a vaccine. The report was removed after Ladler gave permission to remove it. The paragraphs below come directly from Dr. Laidler.

Source: http://web.archive.org/web/20130419004549/http://neurodiversity.com/weblog/article/14/chelation-autism

http://scienceblogs.com/insolence/2008/01/18/how-vaccine-litigation-distorts-the-vaer/