100413 imoschenpftexas

Emails, Isabella Moschen, researcher for Gail Collins, oped columnist, the New York Times, Oct. 4, 2013

9:46 am

Thank you for your query. In regards to the George Washington comparison, I would point you to this New York Times story:

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/09/world/middleeast/three-us-lawmakers-visit-egypt-to-praise-crackdown.html

And for the Judeo-Christian reference, please see this CBS News account:

http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-503544_162-57476790-503544/gop-rep-links-shooting-to-attacks-on-judeo-christian-beliefs-/

Please let me know if I can provide any other information.

Best regards,

Isabella

--

Isabella Moschen

The New York Times

On Fri, Oct 4, 2013, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

...I have read the CBS News report that Isabella emailed me this morning. Also, I listened to the audio excerpt of the Gohmert interview as posted by the Huffington Post in July 2012.

Is there any other evidence you considered before making the claim about the shootings?

g.

From: Moschen, Isabella

Sent: Friday, October 04, 2013 2:47 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: back to you

Hi Gardner,

Please see the following excerpt from the Gohmert interview. We feel Gail's characterization of these remarks fall well within the bounds of commentary.

ISTOOK: We were going to talk about other things but since you are a former judge and you dealt with criminal cases on the bench…. I don’t know if you ever had something that was such a crime that is senseless as we seem to be seeing with this theatre shooting with at least a dozen people killed evidently in Aurora, Colorado. What? What is your experience, with the way we have so many twisted people in our society?

GOHMERT: Well it… some of us happen to believe that when our founders talked about guarding our virtue and freedoms that it was important … you know… whether it was John Adams saying that our Constitution was only for people with ‘moral and religious people’ and ‘wholly inadequate to the governments of any others.’ Ben Franklin, ‘Only a virtuous people are capable of freedom, as nations become more corrupt and vicious they have more need of masters’. I mean it goes on and on… you know… George Washington, ‘of all the disposition and habits that lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable supports.’ We have been at war with the very pillars, the very foundation of this country… and when… you know… what really gets me as a Christian, is to see the ongoing attacks on Judeo- Christian beliefs and then a sensele

ss crazy act of terror like this takes place.

(http://gohmert.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=303954)

On Fri, Oct 4, 2013 at 4:31 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

Are you saying it’s her opinion?

3:34 pm

We're saying it's fair commentary.

best,

Isabella

On Fri, Oct 4, 2013 at 4:35 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

She pretty directly wrote that Gohmert blamed x for y, at least as I read it. If you are saying that is her opinion, I would be happy to say as much.

3:41 pm

No, we're saying that based on what Mr. Gohmert said, it's a fair comment.