0115 transcanadapftexas

Emails, Matthew John, communications specialist, Media Relations and Issues Management, TransCanada Pipelines Limited, Jan. 21-22, 2015

6:14 p.m.

Jan. 21, 2015

To us it appears Senator Cornyn was referring to the jobs associated with construction of the pipeline. The statement took place at an event celebrating the one-year in-service of the Gulf Coast Pipeline and the positive impacts the construction of the pipeline has had in Texas.

Here is the quote we have (from the same event) on our blog from Senator Cornyn, “The Gulf Coast leg of Keystone XL has been good for local businesses, good for the 4,800 individuals who found work as a result of its construction, and good for the long-term economy in the region.” I recognize that’s not the quote you’re checking but thought it might be helpful for context.

Here are the facts:

The Gulf Coast Project (southern leg of the Keystone System) generated more than 11 million hours of labor completed by 4,844 workers over a 15-month period. These jobs are related to the construction of the pipeline itself. Those jobs did not exist prior to construction pipeline.

This is a general breakdown of what labor is required on a pipeline spread.

4800 does not reflect the manufacturing jobs or service jobs associated with that portion of the pipeline system which involved more than 50 contracts with U.S. manufacturers and companies. Jobs related to that include the manufacturing of more than 485 miles of high-strength, advanced oil pipeline (36-inch diameter); hundreds of large valves; thousands of fittings; thousands of pieces of equipment used to build transformers, meters, electric motors, cabling and electrical equipment; and piping assembling and structural steel for supports.

Nor does it reflect the economic impacts related to the construction of the project which were substantial. These results below are from an economic impact analysis from SMU economist Bud Weinstein.

Texas

Total Economic Activity: $3,638,561,905

Labor Income: $1,696,054,834

Direct Business Taxes: $144,992,343

Indirect Business Taxes: $112,533,584

Judging the merits of these projects on jobs alone doesn’t really do it justice. The Gulf Coast Pipeline will provide southeast Texas refineries with a long-term, stable, secure supply of North American crude oil. That allows U.S. refiners to decouple themselves from higher-priced, less-stable providers of crude oil such as Venezuela and Iraq.

If you need anything clarified just shoot me an email.

Cheers,

Matt.

Matthew John

Communications Specialist

Media Relations and Issues Management

matthew_john@transcanada.com

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Thursday, January 22, 2015 9:04 AM

To: Matthew John

Subject: Following up

What was the 15-month period?

Do the recapped 4,000-plus jobs continue?

If not, what changed and when?

How many people were employed by the pipeline in Texas at the time Cornyn made his statement?

g.

4:14 p.m.

Jan. 22, 2015

Here are the responses to you questions.

What was the 15-month period?

The Gulf Coast Pipeline went into service Jan 22, 2014 – so the 15 months leading up to that.

Do the recapped 4,000-plus jobs continue?

No.

A welder who worked on the Gulf Coast Pipeline in 2013 is likely still a welder today and with the training received working on this project they are undoubtedly more skilled. Construction workers work their entire lives going project to project collecting hours to qualify for their health and retirement benefits while earning a very good wage. A multi-billion dollar project like Gulf Coast Project required more than 11 million hours of labor. Projects like this are critical to the economy, to the construction workers and to public safety.

Laborers work themselves out of a job every time they clock in. Like any infrastructure project, the majority of jobs are created during construction. This doesn’t mean those jobs never existed or didn’t have any lasting impact on the economy or the lives the American men and women that work those jobs to support their families.

More than 4800 people found work on this project directly.

I think putting that statement in the context of the event where it was made should make it clearer for you. But if you’re still wondering what the intent of the statement is I’d refer you to the Senator’s office.

If not, what changed and when?

The construction ended.

Again, what we need to clarify here is that construction eventually ends. It takes highly-skilled laborers and other professionals a period of time, in this case 15 months to build a pipeline. It then goes into service to do the job it is designed to do.

It obviously doesn’t take 4800 people to maintain and operate one pipeline. The United States has more than 2.5 million miles of pipeline in operation, if that were the case you’d need 12 billion people to operate the existing pipeline infrastructure in the U.S. alone.

Pipelines, dams, electrical facilities, or the proposed Lone Star Regional rail service in Austin and other cities in Texas all require more labor to build than to operate and manage. The number jobs associated with them vary but in every case its take less people to operate, manage and maintain than to build.

Pipeline projects the size of Gulf Coast Project or Keystone XL are some of the biggest private infrastructure projects on the books in the U.S. today.

How many people were employed by the pipeline in Texas at the time Cornyn made his statement?

TransCanada has approximately 6000 employees in North America about a third are located throughout the U.S. across 32 states.

In-service pipelines require maintenance, monitoring and operations jobs that may be directly supplied by TransCanada. However we spend millions of dollars every year with third party contractors that provide services, (road repair, snow removal, inspectors etc.) in the communities where our infrastructure exists.

The economy, thousands of jobs (in refining and petrochemical manufacturing) and millions of people depend on the safe, reliable transportation of oil and gas every day.

...

Matt.