0315 tclawsonpftexas

Emails, Terry L. Clawson, manager, Media Relations, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, March 12-13, 2015

6:46 p.m.

1. Are there any water systems in texas that are out of water and having to have water trucked in

The TCEQ is not aware of any public water systems hauling water as of March 12, 2015. Note that Berry Oaks Water Company mentions water hauling intermittently, this is because they tend to have issues in the summer and require hauling to supplement their sole well. The Public Water System reports that the engineer is completing plans and specifications for a new ground storage tank, a second groundwater treatment plant and a 3rd well to be submitted by the end of March 2015. They anticipate having the new well and ground storage tank operational by mid-May 2015.

2. list of troubled water systems that we are working with.

See the attached the High Priority Water System List (As of March 6, 2015). This list is comprised of only self-reporting systems; meaning, the list only contains those systems that have reported their status for which the TCEQ has compiled information. Please note that this list should not be interpreted as an "All Inclusive List" of high priority systems. There may be systems that have either not reported their status or are not aware of their conditions. ​

Terry L. Clawson

Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ)

Manager, Media Relations

4:02 p.m.

March 13, 2015

As of March 13, 2015, TCEQ is not aware of any public water systems that are hauling potable water due to persistent drought conditions (except Berry Oaks, as previously discussed).

Weekly, the TCEQ contacts public water systems that are on the High Priority List to capture any updates from the system, while providing technical assistance to the affected systems. Status of public water systems are updated weekly.

However, several Public Water System have in past years reported to TCEQ having to haul potable water due to persistent drought conditions (attached spreadsheet provides more info on those systems, including resolutions):

LCRA Spicewood Beach WSC

Laurel Canyon Ranch Water System

Twin Buttes Water System

620 Oaks Office Park

Oak Trail Shores

Berry Oaks Water Company

Barton Creek Lakeside

SJWTX North Point Subdivision

Barnhart WSC

Cooley Point

Saddleridge Subdivision

Terry Clawson

Manager, Media Relations