History | SunTrust Park
Turner Field Vitals

Grand Opening: April 4, 1997... Braves defeat Cubs, 5-4.

Location: Between Ralph David Abernathy on the north, Hank Aaron Drive on the east, Bill Lucas Drive on the south and Pollard Boulevard on the west. It's near the junction of I-75-85 and I-20.

Seating: Three levels supported by four concourses. A cross-aisle walkway divides the lower concourse. Field-level and dugout seats are below the cross-aisle, the terrace level above it. The second level, the Club Level, includes 58 private suites, three party suites and the 755 Club, the ballpark's private membership club. The third, or upper, level does not go all around the park, providing the fans there with a view of the downtown Atlanta skyline.

Playing Field: Prescription Athletic Turf, featuring a state-of-the-art mechanical drainage system and hybrid Bermuda grass. The turf for the playing field is grown in an area below the scoreboard beyond the center-field wall.

Parking: 8,500 official spaces. The lot on the site of Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium contains an outline of the playing field, including markers for home plate, the bases and the location of Hank Aaron's record-breaking 715th home run.

Disabled Seating: The entire ballpark is wheelchair-accessible and compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act. More than one percent of the total seating capacity is allocated for disabled seating.

Ballpark Firsts: First pitch by Denny Neagle at 7:47 p.m.... The Cubs' Brian McRae was the first batter... Kenny Lofton was the first Braves' batter... First hit was by Chipper Jones... Michael Tucker had the first home run... Chipper Jones had the first stolen base... Brad Clontz secured the first victory and Mark Wohlers recorded the first save.... First error was by Fred McGriff.

Home of the 1996 Summer Olympic Games: Olympic Stadium, built just south of Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium, was retrofitted into a baseball-only, open-air, natural grass facility between September 1996 and April 1997. Grand Entry Plaza, the main entrance to Turner Field, was built after 35,000 seats and part of the track-and-field complex of the Olympic Stadium were removed. AFC Stadium was imploded in August of 1997 and the site is now a parking lot.