0417 heathpftexas

Emails, C. Robert Heath, attorney, Bickerstaff Heath Delgado Acosta LLP, April 18-19, 2017

1:27 p.m.

The issue is whether article III, § 11 of the Texas Constitution controls over the provisions of the Open Meetings Act. The Texas Constitution says that “Each House may determine the rules of its own proceedings.” Tex. Const. art. III, § 11. The provision is virtually identical to article I, § 5, c. 2, of the U.S. Constitution, and similar provisions are found in all or virtually all state constitutions.

The Legislature was obviously cognizant of this issue and enacted section 551.003 of the Government Code, which is part of the Open Meetings Act, saying

In this chapter, the legislature is exercising its powers to adopt rules to prohibit secret meetings of the legislature, committees of the legislature, and other bodies associated with the legislature, except as specifically permitted in the constitution.

Does the application of the Open Meetings Act to meetings of the Senate and House and their committees conflict with the requirement that each house is free to determine the rules of its own proceedings? Although the statute says that by adopting the statute the legislature is exercising its rule-making power, one can argue that by doing so in a statute, the House has given some of its rule-making power to the Senate and the Governor, when under the Constitution the House and Senate have complete autonomy of their own rules.

A similar issue came up in 2000 when the Senate elected a Lieutenant Governor to fill the vacancy in that office when Lt. Gov. Perry was sworn in as Governor following Gov. Bush’s election as President. The Senate sought to conduct the election by secret ballot of its members. The Supreme Court ruled that the Open Meetings Act requirements were superseded but relied on a different and more specific section of the Constitution—article III, section 41, which provided that “In all elections by the Senate and House of Representatives, jointly or separately, the vote shall be given viva voce, except in the election of their officers.” The Supreme Court held that the lieutenant governor was an officer of the Senate and that a secret ballot was permissible because the constitutional provision prevailed. In re Senate, 26 SW3d 119 (2000).

There was a Letter Advisory in 1974 relating the a possible conflict between a proposed Senate subcommittee rule and the Open Meetings Act. Although the Attorney General advised that the proposed rule would conflict with the Open Meetings Act, he stated that it was not necessary to consider whether the Act was unconstitutional to the extent it may have sought to control the rules of the Senate. Essentially, the Attorney General flagged the issue but did not decide it.

There is an AG opinion that does address the scope of article III, § 11 of the Constitution, albeit in the context of the Open Records Act rather than the Open Meetings Act. General Mattox concluded that a house resolution that conflicted with the provisions of the Open Records Act was invalid because the constitutional provision giving each house the authority to adopt its the rules of its own proceedings should be narrowly construed to “apply only to matters of procedure” and that dissemination of records in the custody of members was not a matter of procedure. Tex. Atty Gen’l Opin. No. JM-122 (1983).

While I am unaware of a ruling precisely on point, I believe rules relating to the conduct of committee hearings are very likely to be considered a matter of procedure that is entrusted to the House. While I was not there and do not have access to the complete facts and thus offer no view on the specific issue of whether the recording was disruptive, it is fair to say that there is a substantial constitutional argument that the Open Meetings Act prevails over a House rule governing the conduct of a committee hearing. Although there does not appear to be a case of opinion directly on point, there is a strong argument that the House rule governing the conduct of a committee meeting would control in light of the constitutional authority given to the House to enact the rules of its own proceedings. In other situations—e.g., whether legislative documents can be withheld from the scope of the Open Records Act—the argument might be much weaker.

I hope this is helpful. Let me know if you need anything else.

Bob

C. Robert Heath | Attorney | Bickerstaff Heath Delgado Acosta LLP

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, April 18, 2017 4:27 PM

To: Bob Heath

Subject: Following up for fact check

Thanks for all of this. I had come across some of the same detail during a visit to the State Law Library.

You wrote that “I am unaware of a ruling precisely on point, I believe rules relating to the conduct of committee hearings are very likely to be considered a matter of procedure that is entrusted to the House. While I was not there and do not have access to the complete facts and thus offer no view on the specific issue of whether the recording was disruptive, it is fair to say that there is a substantial constitutional argument that the Open Meetings Act prevails over a House rule governing the conduct of a committee hearing. Although there does not appear to be a case of opinion directly on point, there is a strong argument that the House rule governing the conduct of a committee meeting would control in light of the constitutional authority given to the House to enact the rules of its own proceedings. In other situations—e.g., whether legislative documents can be withheld from the scope of the Open Records Act—the argument might be much weaker.”

Maybe it’s my fault, but this reads like you’re saying both that the law permitting someone to tape a government meeting holds sway (the firt underscore above) and that the House has the ability, because how a committee is run is a procedural rule, to hold sway (second underscore). Do I misread?

If you were to advise a client on this matter, would you counsel that the issue hasn’t been litigated?

If not, what would be the right way to say that there’s not been a ruling on whether a person can tape a legislative meeting?

If the issue hasn’t been litigated, is it accurate to say it’s uncertain? If not, what would be accurate?

Any other experts you think we should consult? Other resources?

THANKS AGAIN.

g.

4:51 p.m.

Yikes. In typing this I made a mistake. The first underscore should have had the references reversed. What I intended to say—but certainly messed up—was that, due to article III, section 11, of the Texas Constitution, there is a substantial constitutional argument that the House Rule governing the conduct of a committee hearing prevails over the Open Meetings Act.

I would advise a client that the issue hasn’t been finally litigated so that there is no certainty regarding the outcome, but that, in the case of a rule governing the conduct of a house hearing, it is likely that the legislative rule would prevail.

I think it’s reasonable to say that because it hasn’t been litigated, the answer is not certain. The law is often uncertain, lower judges’ interpretation of the law is sometimes reversed, and the Supreme Court sometimes divides 5-4 on what a statute or the constitution means. With all that said, I think the stronger argument is that a House or Senate rule relating to the legislative body’s procedure would prevail over the OMA.

I apologize for flipping the references in the part you underscored, and I am glad that you caught it.

As far as other people who may have Open Meetings backgrounds, David Donaldson has a strong public information background generally representing the news media. Scott Houston at Texas Municipal League advised cities on their open meetings obligations. It might be awkward for Scott to get into a discussion as his organization deals so much with the legislature. I don’t know if David has ever had occasion to consider the impact of the constitutional issue regarding legislative rule making authority.

Bob

C. Robert Heath | Attorney | Bickerstaff Heath Delgado Acosta LLP

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, April 18, 2017 6:37 PM

To: Bob Heath

Subject: Bill Aleshire's analysis

Bob:

I am sharing below Bill Aleshire’s analysis, provided this evening after we asked him to comment. He seem solid, particularly about 551.003?

g.

From: Bill Aleshire

Sent: Tuesday, April 18, 2017 6:20 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: RE: Urgently seeking your on-the-record analysis for a fact check

Chairman Geren’s letter does not mention TOMA section 551.003. That section protects TOMA from the preemption by Legislative Rules that would apply to statutes because TOMA is itself an exercise of the legislature’s power to adopt rules. In other words, TOMA is a rule of the legislature that applies to the legislature. In adopting TOMA to apply to itself, the Legislature sets an example for all other governmental bodies in Texas to follow, and shows the seriousness with which the Legislature considers TOMA to be in letting the people see what goes on inside their government. They should be very proud of making themselves subject to TOMA.

Chairman Geren’s letter is correct in terms of potential conflict between the TOMA “Rules” and other House Rules, in that, if a conflict exists, they would need to be reconciled. But a presiding officer’s general authority to conduct the meeting is not in conflict with, and does not trump, the specific requirement of TOMA section 551.023 to let those in attendance make a recording of the proceedings, subject complying with reasonable rules so as to not disrupt the proceedings. If the Committee at issue has not adopted rules under 551.023, perhaps they should do so.

Notice that the Article III, section 11 does not say anything specifically about the Legislature having authority to outlaw recording of its proceedings. In other words, there is no direct conflict between TOMA section 551.023 and Art. III, section 11, the only constitutional provision cited in Chairman Geren’s letter. There has been one case where the issue was whether TOMA’s prohibition against secret voting superseded the Senate’s choice to elect a Senator by secret ballot to perform the duties of the Lt. Gov. when Rick Perry became Governor. That case (attached) was brought by my former law partner Jennifer Riggs in 2000. But that case involved a different constitutional provision, Article III, section 41 regarding election of legislative officers. The Supreme Court noted “Section 551.003 “prohibit[s] secret meetings of the legislature, committees of the legislature, and other bodies associated with the legislature, except as specifically provided in the constitution.” Then the Court noted, “Article III, section 41 of the Texas Constitution states: “In all elections by the Senate and House of Representatives, jointly or separately, the vote shall be given viva voce, except in the election of their officers.” (Emphasis added.) This provision authorizes the Senate to elect its officers by secret ballot, should it choose to do so.5 This specific provision is therefore an exception to section 551.003.”

Bottom line: TOMA, including section 551.023, applies to the Legislature because the Legislature has designated TOMA as an exercise of its rulemaking authority, as recognized in section 551.003. Unlike the constitutional provision involved in the In re Texas Senate case, nothing in article III, section 11 says anything about authority of the Legislature to prohibit recordings of its proceedings.

By the way, don’t legislative committee meeting have cameras pointing at people already (who are not apparently intimidated or distracted by them) and that are live-streamed and recorded and available on the internet? http://www.house.state.tx.us/video-audio/

Bill Aleshire

AleshireLAW PC

10:40 a.m.

April 19, 2017

As I indicated, there isn’t a case in point and judges (as well as lawyers) sometimes disagree over what the law is.

I believe that it’s not so easy to brush aside article III, section 11, as Bill does by relying on the language in section 551.003 that says that by enacting the OMA, the legislature is exercising its rule-making authority. In drafting that portion of the statute, the legislature was concerned with the article III, section 11, problem, but I don’t think it avoided the issue. Indeed, in 1974, the Hill Letter Advisory, LA-84 (1974), interpreting an earlier version of section 551.003, flagged the article III, section 11, issue but did not address it. [NOTE: I was on the AG’s opinion committee that approved LA-84. While I recall the issue, I don’t recall over the space of more than 40 years, exactly why it did not address the constitutional issue. I believe there was a general reluctance to address a constitutional issue if it could be avoided, but can’t recall what the specific thoughts were at the time.] Similarly, the Supreme Court in In re Senate was able to dodge the article II, section 11, issue by being able to rely on a different, more specific, provision of the constitution.

If we assume section 551.003 is an exercise of the legislature’s rule-making authority, I think there is a very substantial argument that it is unconstitutional. The Constitution says that each house of the legislature determines its own rules. Thus, for example, the Senate cannot write the rules of the House. But that is what happens if the rules are adopted by statute. Rather than the House determining its own rules, as required by the Constitution, this rule is established by the House, the Senate, and the Governor, acting in concert. The Constitution did not intend for the Senate or the Governor to have any say in what the house rules are. When Bill says that section 551.003 gets around the constitutional problem, I think he is not considering the issue of whether a statutory adoption of house rules improperly brings the other branch of the legislature and the governor into the equation.

There is always a reluctance to decide constitutional issues if they can be avoided, which is one reason the Supreme Court in In re Senate addressed the narrower, more specific constitutional issue rather than the broader one involving article III, section 11. Similarly, the 1974 Letter Advisory flagged the constitutional issue, but said it didn’t need to address it at that time. I think the reluctance is particularly great where, as here, a very beneficial statute is involved. Nonetheless, if the issue of whether the OMA can be considered a House or Senate rule is ever presented to a court, I think the more likely result would be that the statute could not prevail over the constitutional assignment of the rule-making authority to each house.

Bob

C. Robert Heath | Attorney | Bickerstaff Heath Delgado Acosta LLP