The Society of Actuaries Publishes Annual Update to Mortality Improvement Scale

Updated Scale includes the Latest Social Security Administration Mortality Data

SCHAUMBURG, Ill., Oct. 20, 2016 – The Society of Actuaries (SOA) today released its annually-updated mortality improvement scale for pension plans, MP-2016, incorporating three additional years of Social Security Administration (SSA) data on U.S. population mortality. The updated improvement scale suggests U.S. mortality continues to improve, but at a slower average rate of improvement than previous years, which may decrease pension plan obligations slightly.

MP-2016 incorporates SSA mortality data from 2012-2014 and a slight modification of two input values designed to improve the model’s year-over-year stability. The updated improvement scale indicates a slight decline in life expectancy as a result of the slower average rate of mortality improvement. For example, the life expectancy for a 65-year-old male declined to 85.8 years under the MP-2016 scale, compared to 86.2 years using the MP-2015 scale. Additionally, the life expectancy for a 65-year-old female is now 87.8 years under MP-2016, compared to 88.2 years based on the previous MP-2015 scale.

The updated scale can be used by pension plans to assist in making forward mortality assumptions in the valuation of pension payment obligations. Based on the SOA’s preliminary estimates, MP-2016 may reduce a pension plan’s current liabilities by 1.5-2.0 percent, depending on the individual characteristics of the plan.

“By releasing MP-2016, we are building on our commitment to regularly update the mortality improvement scale as new data becomes available,” said Dale Hall, managing director of research for the SOA. “The updated scale provides the latest information to help accurately measure pension obligations. However, it is up to pension plan sponsors, working with their plan actuaries, to determine how to incorporate emerging mortality improvement data into their plan valuations.”

The SOA’s MP-2015 improvement scale update, released in October of 2015, included SSA mortality data from 2010 and 2011. This year’s scale incorporates 2012 and 2013 SSA mortality data released since the previous update, and also includes preliminary 2014 SSA mortality data generated by the SOA using the SSA’s mortality rate analysis process. The SOA conducted this analysis in full cooperation with the SSA, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), and is releasing the 2014 mortality data publicly for the first time with the MP-2016 update.

The updated mortality improvement scale was developed by the SOA’s Retirement Plans Experience Committee (RPEC). For additional information, you can read the full Mortality Improvement Scale MP-2016 report here.

About the Society of Actuaries

With roots dating back to 1889, the Society of Actuaries (SOA) is the world’s largest actuarial professional organization with more than 27,000 actuaries as members. Through research and education, the SOA's mission is to advance actuarial knowledge and to enhance the ability of actuaries to provide expert advice and relevant solutions for financial, business and societal challenges. The SOA's vision is for actuaries to be the leading professionals in the measurement and management of risk. If you want to learn more about the SOA, please visit soa.org.