General Hate
Top Takeaways

With 44 total chapters, the big story in General Hate was the Proud Boys, who hit the streets — ostensibly in the name of “free speech” — to create combustible situations and provoke violence. At roughly a dozen political rallies this year they succeeded, resulting in the most relentless campaign of right-wing street violence in recent memory. In mid-November, a leaked document revealed that the FBI had quietly advised local law enforcement agencies that they considered the Proud Boys “an extremist group with ties to white nationalism.” A few days later Gavin McInnes announced he was disassociating himself from the group he founded. Another important ideology within general hate is male supremacy, and in 2018, male supremacy-inspired mass murders made headlines across North America. And pick-up artist and rape apologist Daryush “Roosh” Valizadeh shut down his website, the hate group Return of Kings. The site was rife with misogynistic content and occasionally embraced the talking points of the racist “alt-right.”

Key Moments

On April 28, a Toronto man used a van to run down and kill 10 people. Prior to the attack, the man accused of the murders, who was steeped in online subcultures that make up the manosphere and the ideology of male supremacy, wrote a post claiming “the Incel Rebellion has already begun!” A Proud Boys and Patriot Prayer rally in Portland, Oregon in June descended into a riot, and videos of the fighting went viral. The Proud Boys received a crush of new applicants in the wake of the violence. In early November, two women were murdered by a man at a yoga studio in Tallahassee, Florida. He had previously expressed sympathy for the plight of incel mass shooter Elliot Rodger. Incels,” or “involuntary celibates,” are part of the online male supremacist ecosystem. The Tallahassee killer’s alleged online profile and criminal record suggest a deep resentment of women and a past pattern of sexual misconduct.

What’s Ahead

Next year will likely see the Proud Boys attempt to pick up the pieces as they fight legal battles, regroup on alternative social media platforms and search for ways to keep themselves financially afloat. Male grievances nurtured by male supremacist actors and online forums remain all too accessible. Continued violence from men who pass through these spaces is likely.

Background

These groups espouse a variety of unique hateful doctrines and beliefs that are not easily categorized. This list includes a “Jewish” group that is rabidly anti-Arab, a “Christian” group that is anti-Catholic and a polygamous “Mormon” breakaway sect that is racist. Many of the groups are vendors that sell a miscellany of hate materials from several different sectors of the white supremacist movement.

2018 General Hate groups

View all groups by state and by ideology.

*Asterisk denotes headquarters.