042014 abbottprekpftexas

Email, Matt Hirsch, communications director, Greg Abbott campaign, April 30, 2014

12:25 p.m.

...see information below and let us know if you need anything else. I’m sure you already have it, but here’s a link to the full plan you’re asking about: http://abbotttownhall.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/EducatingTexansPreKThird.pdf

Greg Abbott’s plan does not impose standardized testing on 4-year-olds, and any statement to the contrary is absurd. It removes the mandates from Austin and gives genuine local control and flexibility to school districts to achieve the “gold-standard” for pre-K.

The gold standard pre-K program Greg Abbott is proposing leaves current state pre-K funding untouched, and offers additional opt-in funding for programs that choose to participate.

As we state in the plan, TEA would publish “a list of approved assessments that districts may use.”

Sen. Davis’ Attacks Have Been Debunked

Dallas Morning News: “The Problem With All This: It’s Just Not True.” “Those of us in the news business have been getting pounded with incendiary emails from the Wendy Davis campaign asserting that Greg Abbott plans to impose standardized tests on 4-year-olds in publicly funded pre-school…The problem with all this: It’s just not true.” (Rodger Jones, “Would Wendy Davis bar schools from doing pre-k assessments they already do? Dallas Morning News, 4/15/14)

Dallas Morning News: “Her Ploy Is Suggesting Abbott Would Add More [Testing]. That’s Not What He’s Saying.” “Davis appears to drawing on public sentiment that there’s too much testing in Texas schools already. Her ploy is suggesting Abbott would add more. That’s not what he’s saying, near as I can tell from the materials and news coverage. His pre-k plan says he would leave the ‘existing rules untouched’ and fund programs at a higher level if they met new criteria.” (Rodger Jones, “Would Wendy Davis bar schools from doing pre-k assessments they already do? Dallas Morning News, 4/15/14)

Texas Observer: “[W]hen You Read The Whole Thing, The Prospect Of Future 4-Year-Olds Filling In Answer Bubbles…Seems Pretty Distant.” “But the proposal notes that using tests is “in some views deficient because they do not capture the full spectrum of the students skill set [sic] and cannot truly be used to determine quality of the program.” Then the paper lays out two other methods, which have nothing to do with testing, and gives their pros and cons. The paper itself seems undecided about which is best. It’s not exactly a full-throated endorsement, and when you read the whole thing, the prospect of future 4-year-olds filling in answer bubbles with crayons seems pretty distant.” (Christopher Hooks, “Wendy Davis and the Curious Case of the Pre-Kindergarten STAAR,” Texas Observer, 4/14/14)

Texas Observer: “[Idea]…That Abbott Had Called For Mandated Standardized Tests For Four-Year-Olds…Wasn’t True.” “There was the idea, promulgated by the campaign, that Abbott had called for mandated standardized tests for four-year-olds in the same policy paper, which wasn’t true. (The paper called for a method of evaluating the effectiveness of pre-K programs, but a test was one of three possible evaluation methods—and the drawbacks of testing were diligently noted.)” (Christopher Hooks, “Why Wendy Davis Should be Talking About the Issues,” Texas Observer, 4/29/14)

Wendy Davis Has Not Answered Questions About Current Pre-K Assessments. “Question remains for the Davis camp: Does she criticize the Plano, Richardson and Garland districts for the Pre-K assessments they are now doing? Would she ridicule them as “Baby STAAR” tests or “standardized testing for 4-year-olds”?” (Rodger Jones, “Wendy Davis still ignores fact that school Pre-K programs already assess progress,” Dallas Morning News, 4/21/14)