Affidavit: Tanya McDowell offered to sell drugs, pimp out prostitutes to undercover cops

Tanya McDowell, right, confers with her attorney Darnell D. Crossland during her arraignment hearing on drug charges Monday June 13, 2011 in Norwalk Superior Court in Norwalk, Ct. McDowell, a homeless single mother accused of illegally enrolling her son in the wrong Connecticut school district, was arrested June 10 and charged with allegedly selling crack and marijuana to undercover officers in Norwalk, Ct. McDowell was charged in April with larceny for allegedly stealing education services for her young son by enrolling him in the wrong Connecticut school district. (AP Photo/Alex von Kleydorff, Pool) less Tanya McDowell, right, confers with her attorney Darnell D. Crossland during her arraignment hearing on drug charges Monday June 13, 2011 in Norwalk Superior Court in Norwalk, Ct. McDowell, a homeless single ... more Photo: Alex Von Kleydorff, AP Photo: Alex Von Kleydorff, AP Image 1 of / 10 Caption Close Affidavit: Tanya McDowell offered to sell drugs, pimp out prostitutes to undercover cops 1 / 10 Back to Gallery

NORWALK -- Tanya McDowell, who became a sympathetic national figure after being charged in April with stealing the education of her young son from the Norwalk school district, offered a Stamford undercover officer crack cocaine, marijuana and the use of prostitutes McDowell was pimping from her aunt's home in Bridgeport, according to warrants for her arrest.

Police sources told The Advocate that McDowell took a break from her son's birthday party in late May to sell drugs to an undercover officer at the home on Dover Street in Bridgeport.

According to three Norwalk arrest warrants, McDowell, who claimed to be homeless while sending her son to school in Norwalk, sold drugs to officers in Norwalk on three occasions between May 27 and June 3.

She also allegedly told the undercover officer she was living with her aunt on Dover Street, and he was welcome to party at the house and enjoy the services of two women McDowell was pimping out.

At her arraignment Monday at state Superior Court in Norwalk, Judge Bruce Hudock -- who signed the three warrants for her arrest -- kept McDowell's bond at $200,000.

Darnell Crosland, the attorney representing McDowell, complained during the arraignment that McDowell was "entrapped" by police because of her status in the larceny case, which generated an outpouring of support for McDowell, drawing civil rights activist Al Sharpton to Norwalk Tuesday to rally in her support.

Addressing nearly a dozen cameras outside the front of the Norwalk courthouse following McDowell's appearance, Crosland called the investigation that resulted in new charges for his client "retaliatory" because the community was embarrassed by McDowell's April 14 arrest for allegedly sending her son, A.J., to Norwalk's Brookside Elementary School while they lived in Bridgeport.

Crosland said he was "extremely disappointed" the McDowell's bond was not lowered

"The whole thing stinks," he said. ". . . I am outraged by this and I think the whole community should be disappointed."

Assistant State's Attorney Tiffany Lockshier disputed Crosland's account, arguing that police were following up on complaints they received that McDowell was dealing drugs on the street in South Norwalk.

Rilling said his officers were not acting in a retaliatory fashion nor did anything improper in their investigation of McDowell.

Speaking of Crosland Rilling said, "His statement is ridiculous, irresponsible and I am offended by it. No such thing happened. We handled this case like we handle any other case and the police officers were working on information provided by a variety of sources. The residents are starting to call us with information and several residents did call and report this information."

McDowell, 33, whose last known address is 66 Priscilla Circle, Bridgeport, was arrested at 4 p.m. Friday and charged with multiple counts of possession of narcotics and marijuana, sales of narcotics and marijuana and possession and sales within 1,500 feet of a school or public housing complex.

Norwalk Police Chief Harry Rilling said Friday that Bridgeport police also have two more arrest warrants charging McDowell with possession and sales of narcotics.

In court Monday, Crosland said the two Bridgeport warrants were for narcotics buys were identical to those Norwalk police orchestrated in Norwalk. It is not known when she will be arraigned in Bridgeport for those warrants or if the case files will be transferred to Norwalk.

In one of the Bridgeport warrants, McDowell, who kept her head bowed during the arraignment while wearing a purple top and tan cargo shorts, is alleged to have sold drugs to the undercover officer while she was giving a birthday party for her son, who turned 6 May 24, a Norwalk police source with knowledge of the investigation said.

According to the three Norwalk warrants written by veteran Special Services Unit officer Mark Suda, on May 27, the undercover officer from Stamford met McDowell at Marshall's discount clothing store on Westport Avenue and gave him six small knotted plastic baggies of crack cocaine and two small ziplog baggies of suspected marijuana for $110 of city of Norwalk funds.

During the meeting, the officer posing as a drug buyer recorded McDowell saying he, "Could come to see her at her house in Bridgeport and that it is safer there than down here in Norwalk. That she doesn't live in an apartment building, she lives in a house," the arrest affidavit said.

Four days later, on May 31, she met the same undercover officer on the New Haven-bound side of the South Norwalk railroad station, where she sold him seven small plastic baggies of crack cocaine for $100.

She allegedly told the officer she did not like to carry many drugs with her and she likes to keep them at home.

She also invited the officer to come to her home in Bridgeport, where she said if he wanted to "party and chill and didn't want to drive home she has some girls," the affidavit said.

On June 3, the undercover officer met McDowell at the South Norwalk railroad station, where she sold him six baggies of crack cocaine and two baggies of marijuana for $120, the affidavit said.

During that meeting McDowell said she had a black girl and a white girl she pimps out, the affidavit said.

The undercover officer said that during the buy, McDowell went to Merritt Street to buy the marijuana. When she brought the pot dealer to the car, she described the man as her son's baby-sitter.

When McDowell was picked up for the warrants on Friday, she was holding 30 small bags of marijuana and 23 small knotted baggies of crack cocaine, weighing 2.4 grams, Lockshier said.

In all -- not counting the Bridgeport warrants -- McDowell was slapped with 28 narcotics charges that include possession of narcotics, possession of narcotics with intent to sell, sales of narcotics and possession and sales within 1,500 feet of a school.

McDowell is to return to court July 25.

In November, McDowell was arrested in Norwalk for being in possession of marijuana and crack cocaine.

Because police found her in possession of dozens of individually packaged baggies containing the drugs, she was charged with possession with intent to sell. She has pleaded not guilty to those charges.

Ten years ago, McDowell, was convicted of robbing a Trumbull bank, and in a separate incident, of being in possession of a pistol. She was sentenced to 18 months in prison.

Staff Writer John Nickerson can be reached at john.nickerson@scni.com or 203-964-2320.