About Dr. Covey
About Stephen R. Covey Personal Bio Over his lifetime, Stephen inspired millions with the power of universal principles. As he traveled the globe many times over, his message was a simple one: for true success and meaning in life, we must be principle-centered in all areas of life. A teacher at heart, he often taught: "there are three constants in life: change, choice and principles."



From the oval office, the board room, community halls and to the school house and family room, Stephen taught the mindset, skillset and toolset found in the 7 habits of Highly effective people, his seminal work. His legacy is woven in the 7 habits, and, just as these habits are universal and timeless, so is Stephen r. Covey, who is admired around the world for his simple, yet powerful, universal, timeless teachings.



Recognized as one of Time magazine’s 25 most influential Americans, Stephen R. Covey was one of the world’s foremost leadership authorities, organizational experts, and thought leaders.



Covey was the author of acclaimed books, including the international best seller, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, which has sold more than 25 million copies in 40 languages throughout the world. Other best sellers authored by Covey include First Things First, Principle-Centered Leadership, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective Families, and The 8th Habit: From Effectiveness to Greatness.



Recently released books authored by Covey include Everyday Greatness: Inspiration for a Meaningful Life (2006), The Leader in Me: How Schools and Parents Around the World Are Inspiring Greatness, One Child at a Time (2008), Predictable Results in Unpredictable Times (2009), Great Work, Great Career (2009), and The 3rd Alternative: Solving Life’s Most Difficult Problems (2011).



Millions of people and thousands of clients throughout the world have personally experienced Covey's approach and commitment to teaching universal principles. His approach has been enormously empowering and it transcends differences of every kind--political, philosophical, religious, socio-economic, generational, gender, lifestyle, etc.



Over the years, clients from around the world—including from India, Japan, Korea, Africa, Israel, Saudi Arabia, Indonesia, and beyond—have commented to Stephen Covey that The 7 Habits intimately relate to their culture, country, organization, and family. He responded, "You recognize these principles because they are common to every society that prospers and endures." These universal, timeless principles have stood the test of time with millions of people around the world and will continue to do so in the future.



Stephen Covey passed away on July 16, 2012, with his loving wife, children and their spouses, grandchildren and great-grandchildren present. His legacy to the world is Principle-Centered Leadership and his many contributions will live on through the principles he loved, taught and espoused.



Milestones: In 2002, Forbes named The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People one of the top 10 most influential management books ever.

A survey by Chief Executive magazine recognized The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People as one of the two most influential books of the 20th century.

The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People audiobook on tape is the best-selling nonfiction audio in history, selling more than a million and a half copies.

Authored Principle-Centered Leadership and The 7 Habits of Highly Effective Families, with sales exceeding more than one million copies each.

Authored First Things First, with sales exceed more than two million copies

Authored The 7 Habits of Highly Effective Families, which was released in October 1997, and is the #1 best-selling hardcover book on family.

Authored The 8th Habit, with sales exceeding nearly a million copies.

The 8th Habit was named Best Business Book of 2005 by Soundview Executive Summaries.

Covey received The National Fatherhood Award from the National Fatherhood Initiative.

Covey was named Speaker of the Year in 1999.

Covey received The Sikh’s 1998 International Man of Peace Award.

Covey received The National Entrepreneur of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award for Entrepreneurial Leadership.

Covey received the International Man of Peace Award.

Covey received the International Entrepreneur of the Year Award.

Covey participated on the Board of Directors for the Points of Light Foundation.

Covey was co-founder and vice chairman of FranklinCovey.

Covey was awarded twelve honorary doctorate degrees. In February 2010, Stephen Covey joined the Utah State University Jon M. Huntsman School of Business faculty as a tenured, full professor and the first incumbent of the Jon M. Huntsman Presidential Chair in Leadership.



Stephen R. Covey held a B.S. in Business Administration from the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, an M.B.A. in Business Administration from Harvard University and a doctorate from Brigham Young University. He received 12 honorary doctorates. He made teaching principle-centered living and principle-centered leadership his life’s work.

"Voice is unique personal significance—significance that is revealed as we face our greatest challenges and that makes us equal to them." Dr. Stephen R. Covey, from The 8th Habit: From Effectiveness to Greatness