0317 kotzpftexas

Emails, Deborah Kotz, public affairs specialist, Food and Drug Administration, March 7-8, 2017

11:56 a.m.

March 7, 2017

Condoms are regulated as medical devices and not drugs. Condoms have never been regulated as drugs. FDA addresses condom labeling with general device labeling regulations (21 CFR part 801), as well as two specific labeling regulations, one on condom expiration dating (21 CFR 801.435) and another on user warnings about allergic reactions to natural rubber latex (21 CFR 801.437). In addition, dating back to 1987, FDA has issued a series of guidance documents that address specific elements of condom labeling related to protection against STDs.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, March 07, 2017 2:34 PM

To: Kotz, Deborah

Subject: Re: Following up, seeking on-the-record guidance and comment from Texas

At any time, have condoms had NDCs? If so, when?

1:50 p.m.

March 7, 2017

Here’s our drugs@fda database, which contains all drugs ever approved by FDA include those no longer on the market. I could not find condoms in there. You can do a search yourself of any product brand you’d like. Condoms are not regulated as drugs.

http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/index.cfm

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, March 08, 2017 3:24 PM

To: Kotz, Deborah

Subject: Following up from Texas

Hello again. Thank your for your help and patience.

I am sharing below a letter sent a taxpayer in 2000 about sales tax applying to condoms. You will see the state official says in this message that some condoms were then sold with NDCs.

That seems to contradict what you shared earlier, agree? Perhaps I miss a detail or two.

Anything else below strike you as meaningful?

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Lauren Willis

Sent: Wednesday, March 08, 2017 2:16 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com>

Subject: RE: Following up

December 14, 2000

Mr. Patrick Hubbell

Victoria, Texas

Dear Mr. Hubbell:

I appreciated receiving your e-mail regarding the inclusion of prophylactic

devices as tax-free "over-the-counter" drugs. Prophylactics qualify as

tax-free as a result of the statutory language found in Texas Tax Code Section

151.313(a)(3).

All tangible personal property sold in Texas is taxable unless a specific

statutory exemption applies. In 1999, the Texas Legislature specified an

exemption for "over-the-counter" drugs if they are labeled with a national drug

code issued by the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA). This reference

to the national drug code seems to suggest that the Legislature assumed that

all drugs and medicines would have a national drug code. Unfortunately, as my

office soon discovered when administering the law, that is not the case. Some

items that were clearly drugs or medicines did not have a code.

In formulating the list of exempt items, we used the FDA list of drugs and

medicines as a reference, but also focused on the definition of drug and

medicines. Some of the products on our list, including condoms, have national

drug code numbers issued by the FDA while others do not. The definition that

is used by my office is as follows:

"To qualify for this exemption, a product must be a drug or medicine, which is

an article or substance applied to, ingested, or inhaled by humans marketed for

the use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease,

illness, injury, or pain." (from our publication, Sales Tax Exemption for

Over-the-Counter Drugs and Medicines). See

http://www.window.state.tx.us/taxinfo/taxpubs/tx94_155html.

The definition of drugs and medicines and the statutory language used by the

Texas Legislature lead to the conclusion that the medicated prophylactic

devices, which aid in the prevention of disease, qualify for the exemption.

However, prophylactic devices that are not medicated are not exempt.

You asked whether the FDA pressured the State to include these items. The

Texas Legislature referenced the FDA's national drug code and the Comptroller's

office followed the language passed by the Legislature.

Please let me know if I can be of further assistance. Thanks for all that you

do for Texas.

Sincerely,

Carole Keeton Rylander

Texas Comptroller

4:14 p.m.

March 8, 2017

Okay, here’s what I found out:

Condoms were never regulated as drugs, but the spermicide used on condoms is regulated as a drug. Condoms containing spermicide, however, are devices. The codes used on devices are called unique device identifiers (UDI) and the FDA recently began requiring that devices have UDI’s affixed to them in a new regulation that was issued in 2013. For class II devices (which are condoms), manufacturers were required to have UDI codes on their products by September 2016. Before UDI’s, some manufacturers of devices were putting NDCs on their devices sold over-the-counter in drugstores, often for reimbursement purposes. Some of these devices still have NDCs.

In the UDI rule that FDA issued, NDCs on devices have been prohibited but the FDA does not intend to enforce this prohibition with respect to devices that are manufactured and labeled before September 24, 2021.