A look at Broward elections chief Brenda Snipes' long history of trouble
When Brenda Snipes took over the Broward Supervisor of Elections office in 2003, she was the figure with years of administrative experience who would steady an office that was reeling from what Gov. Jeb Bush called “incompetence” and “misfeasance.”

On Friday, following a court agreeing with a lawsuit brought by Gov. Rick Scott that Snipes had violated public records laws, she found herself the target of similar calls for her removal from office, and for the same reasons.

For 15 years, Snipes has served as Broward County’s elections chief, with mixed results. Long lines and vote counts that continued long after polls closed marred elections in 2002, 2004, 2006, 2012, 2016 and, of course, this year.

Among other issues:

-- A court ruled she had broken election law when she destroyed ballots from the 2016 election 12 months after it, instead of the 22 months required by federal law.

-- A medical marijuana amendment was left off some ballots in 2016.

-- Election results in the 2016 primary were posted on the elections office’s website before polls closed, another violation of election law.

-- In 2012, almost 1,000 uncounted ballots were discovered a week after the election

-- In 2004, some 58,000 mail-in ballots were not delivered to voters, leaving election officials to scramble to send new ones.

And now, after days passed in which Snipes could not or would not say how many ballots remained to be counted, and failed to give regular updates to the state every 45 minutes as required by law, she was hit with a lawsuit by Scott’s Senate campaign and the National Republican Senate Committee demanding she inform the public how many votes remained to be counted.

Snipes insists she is making sure all the votes are counted, and Democrats are asking for patience. But after years of long waits and unusual happenings around elections, Republicans say she is incompetent at best, corrupt at worst, and that she needs to go.

Upon Scott’s victory in court, U.S. Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fort Walton Beach, an ardent supporter of President Donald Trump, called on Scott to remove Snipes from office.

“I call on @FLGovScott to immediately suspend Brenda Snipes,” Gaetz wrote on Twitter. “She has failed to follow state transparency laws during this election, and has a long history of misconduct, including preemptively destroying ballots.”

Although a North Florida congressman, Gaetz was outside the Broward elections office Friday, along with about 75 Republican protestors who chanted “lock her up,” “bye, bye Brenda,” and “stop the steal.”

Even the president got in on the act, tweeting, “In the 2016 Election I was winning by so much in Florida that Broward County, which was very late with vote tabulation and probably getting ready to do a ‘number,’ couldn’t do it because not enough people live in Broward for them to falsify a victory!”

Trump won Florida by 1.2 percent of the vote.

Snipes has not responded to any of the criticism and avoided media throughout the day Friday, exiting the elections office through the back door.

If Snipes were to be removed by Scott, who alluded to “rampant fraud” in a speech Thursday, she would be the second Broward County Supervisor of Elections to lose the position due to being removed by the governor for poor job performance.

Gov. Jeb Bush removed Snipes’ predecessor, Miriam Oliphant, in 2003 after a disastrous 2002 election in which polls opened late and closed early after experienced senior staff had been fired by Oliphant and replaced by friends and acquaintances with little or no experience.

Bush named Snipes to replace Oliphant, and Snipes won election in 2004 and every four years subsequently.

Born in Talladega, Ala., Snipes moved to Florida in 1964 with her husband as they began their careers as educators. Snipes started her career as a teacher at Blanche Ely High School in Pompano Beach and eventually became principal of Robert Markham Elementary School, also in Pompano Beach. She retired in June 2003 and was appointed as supervisor of elections in November of the same year.

The removal of Oliphant had been a political firestorm, with a Republican governor removing Broward’s only countywide black Democratic official. Bush replaced her with another black female Democrat, possibly defusing some of the tension.

The idea, then, that Snipes could be removed from office without having committed a serious crime or ethical violation is not without precedent. But what would be unprecedented is for Scott to do so while Snipes is determining the ballot count in a race in which the governor is running.

Of course, Snipes could always be removed the natural way — through an election. She’s next up for election in 2020. But Snipes has easily weathered previous attempts to remove her from office. In 2016, citing many past issues with elections during Snipes’ term in office, David Brown ran against her in a Democratic primary. He even garnered the endorsement of the Sun Sentinel. He was defeated 76-24.