General Sir Mike Jackson speaks out
Without the braid, the medals and the cap of authority, not many military men possess anything like the power to intimidate that they have in uniform. In civvies, they can be disappointing, diminished. Lions become pussycats. This is not true, by a long shot, of General Sir Mike Jackson, Rtd. From the moment his long, lean frame fills the door of his local pub in Wiltshire, the man who ran the British Army looks… exactly like the man who ran the British Army.

A group of middle-aged men have been discussing their ailments at the bar of the Three Tuns, Great Bedwyn, in that unguarded, slightly louche way that men have when women are not about. When Sir Mike appears, they break off and there is a matey cry of "Jacko!" as they close in.

"Macho Jacko" is wearing the check shirt, soft tobacco-coloured jacket and suede shoes of the recently retired Army man but he might just as well be in disguise because all I can see is the maroon Parachute Regiment beret, the pressed fatigues and the gaunt features of an Easter Island monolith that dominated his military campaigns. That indelible image includes the portmanteau-sized eyebags, so seductive to his female following and such a gift to photographers, even though he's since had them surgically removed - shame! - because he says they were impairing his sight. A matter of "vision, not vanity".

Without the heavy-hooded cobra's eyes, he does look less deserving of his other nickname, Prince of Darkness, but his aura of power is intact. Here is a man still used to being at the centre of things, walking in and causing a stir. You wouldn't expect him to have taken up bowls or started editing the Great Bedwyn Parish News.

Since he retired last year as Chief of the General Staff, Sir Mike, 63, has been writing his fighting man's autobiography, Soldier. He is what they call a man's man, a soldier's soldier, and the title reflects his proudest description of himself. It also gives a personal thrust to his broadside against the Ministry of Defence, which he accuses of failing to understand soldiers or the ethos of soldiering - the can-do spirit inspired by old-fashioned concepts of duty, honour, selflessness, discipline. "These may not rest easily with some of today's values," he says, "but if they are not there you will not have an Army capable of doing what it has to do."

The lack of understanding is endemic, he says witheringly. "It is a cultural divide between the armed services and the civil service." Being out of uniform has liberated him from the need to stay on the right side of his paymasters. In an impassioned endpiece to his personal story, he accuses an over-bureaucratic MoD of failing to value soldiers and their families, undermining the position and authority of the chiefs of staff, and confusing activity with achievement. Without the soldier, he insists, ministers, civil servants, generals, admirals and air marshals are nothing.

"Everything starts and finishes with the soldier," he says. "I would love to have been able to persuade the MoD to understand that. Not much over £1,000 a month for the private soldier on operations is hardly an impressive figure. And some of the accommodation we provide is still, frankly, shaming."

The soldier's part of the contract with the nation, he argues, is to take risks - if need be, to risk their lives. But it cuts two ways: the nation has to honour its covenant with the soldier. "Soldiering is a very important profession, is it not? At the end of the day, you have to get people to risk their lives and you have to give them the best odds you can to succeed. I hope what I say will make people think hard." What a voice this man has, deep and throaty as a faulty exhaust.

"We're going to miss this old bugger," a senior British general remarked when Jackson retired. "They just don't make them like this any more." The MoD may think this is no bad thing. In the field, a flask of whisky in his map pocket, and cigars generally to hand, Jackson lived hard, worked all hours, and in the brief hours when he catnapped on a camp bed in his office, slept the sleep of the just.

His finest hour was undoubtedly Kosovo. The account of his eight months commanding Nato ground forces is the high point of his narrative, as well as of his career, culminating in a theatrical confrontation with the American commander of Nato forces, General Wesley Clark. The clash enhanced Jackson's reputation as the most colourful character of modern soldiery and exposed his contempt for Clark's aggressive stance.

The scene was Pristina airport. Three hundred Russian troops, in a gesture of solidarity with the Serbs, seized control of the airfield. Clark ordered Jackson to block the runway to prevent Russian reinforcement. Jackson squared up to him with the famous line: "Sir, I'm not going to start World War Three for you." When Clark, his superior officer, repeated his order, Jackson retaliated: "Sir, I am a three-star general, you can't give me orders like this. I have my own judgment of the situation and I believe that this order is outside our mandate." Clark, who later described Jackson's response as "emotional", countered: "Mike, I am a four-star general, and I can tell you these things." Wonderful stuff.

The film and theatre director, Richard Eyre, once speculated that he might cast Nigel Davenport or Richard Johnson in the role of General Sir Mike. But do either of them have the chutzpah or gravitas of the real thing?

In the event, a crisis was averted and Jackson went on to establish a working relationship with the Russian general, Viktor Zavarzin, lubricated with a mutual exchange of whisky and vodka. The British general, in a moment of inspiration, promised the nervous Russian troops protection from the Kosovan Liberation Army, using his son, Mark, who was with 5 Brigade's Pathfinder Platoon, as a guarantor and sweetener. It was pure Jacko. "This force of British soldiers," he told Zavarzin magnanimously, "will be commanded by my own son." A bottle of whisky, compliments of the management, was built into the arrangement. Zavarzin was mollified and Jackson observed: "The Russians are a very sentimental people."

You quickly grasp that Sir Mike is a man of granite certainties. His robustness is palpable. Nothing in his book or his conversation suggests that he has had a moment's doubt about anything. When I ask him about this, he looks nonplussed. "Whoeee…," he replies. "You want to get things right." And he launches into how effectively the Army's command structure exterminates indecisiveness. Precisely what the troops want. "There is a period for debate, for questioning, for weighing one course of action against another. Then that period must come to an end. The commander has to make his decision. The boys say, 'Fine' and on we go. It is very clear."

The son of an Army major, young Jackson knew he wanted to be a soldier by the age of 15. It was his passport to a life of adventure and an escape from the humdrum alternative of working in an office. He was commissioned in the Intelligence Corps in 1963 and transferred to the Paras in 1970. Ambition and aptitude carried him quickly through the ranks until, aged 44, in his one moment of wobble, he feared he wouldn't make brigadier and considered leaving the Army rather than miss the gateway to generalship.

"I thought maybe I was being given a message. I had begun to wonder whether I had reached my ceiling," he says. "It worried me." But not for long. Once he was made brigadier, all the other top jobs began to fall to him like skittles. He joined the Army with the idea of putting himself on the line and "seeing how far I could push myself". So the great irony of his almost 45 years' service is that he was never tested in combat in a conventional battle. The youngest private serving in Afghanistan today has probably seen more close-quarter fighting than he. There were two potential theatres of war for him - the Falklands and the First Gulf War. He missed them both.

As a young lieutenant-colonel, he was involved in defence intelligence during the Falklands campaign of 1982. In 1991, he was in Northern Ireland. "It's a regret. Fighting is what a young man with good red blood in his veins joins for. It is the ultimate test for the professional soldier." Jackson served three tours in Northern Ireland and still has "ugly pictures" in his head from witnessing the Warrenpoint massacre of 1979 when 18 soldiers were killed in an IRA ambush. "It greatly disturbed me. Still does. But I don't have nightmares. Fortunately, my temperament isn't like that." He's fired a gun in anger but not been shot at. Has he felt real fear? "Fear is a funny thing for a soldier because the adrenaline kicks in and that is a very clever mechanism in any animal. There are times when you think, 'Whoooah, a bit dodgy,' and the old hairs on the back of your neck stand up. But there we are. I'm lucky enough not to have been in anybody's sights."

At times, Jackson could be writing his own film script - or directing it. At one point in his account of his negotiations with the Kosovo Liberation Army, he pauses to say: "I took my specs off my nose and swung them in one hand as I explained our position." On holiday in Malaysia when word came through that deployment in Bosnia was likely, he records: "It was about nine in the evening local time and I was dressed simply in sarong." What a missed photo opportunity.

Before leaving for the Balkans in March 1999, he tells his second wife, Sarah, a soldier's daughter, he is "unlikely to be back for a while". She, the practical one, asks him to remind her where the family documents are kept "just to be on the safe side". Next morning, the doorbell rings and it is his aide-de-camp, Ed Sandry. "I opened the door and told him I'd be with him in a minute," writes Jackson. "Sarah and I said our goodbyes. I picked up my beret, shouldered my rucksack, walked out to the car and slung it into the boot." Cue the soundtrack from Where Eagles Dare…

Anyone expecting to discover how General Sir Mike Jackson runs his personal life will be disappointed. Soldier, the book, is essentially a career record - vivid, combative, self-justifying, exuberant, even inspirational, but it is not a confessional. To some, he acknowledges, it will seem egocentric. He married in 1966 while still at university, and there were two children, Amanda and Mark, but the marriage broke down in the early 1980s. "We were both rather young, even by the ways of the time," he says. His first wife is not named in the book, and their marriage not mentioned at all in his Who's Who entry. They divorced but he has never spoken of the split and is not about to begin now. All personal questions are deflected with courteous finality, as though a potential breach of the Official Secrets Act.

In 1984, he met Sarah Coombe at a dinner party and they hit it off over an argument about the Falklands War. "We fell for each other immediately, though it took a while for her to agree to marry me." For a long time, they couldn't conceive and eventually, while Jackson was doing a thesis on the future of the British Army at Wolfson College, Cambridge, they went to the pioneering fertility treatment clinic at nearby Bourn Hall. Their son, Tom, was born in Northern Ireland a year later in 1990. In the family tradition, he has been accepted for the Army after university. His stepbrother, Mark, had to leave a promising Army career after a parachuting accident and is now a painter and sculptor. "He was a much better soldier than his father was at his age," says Sir Mike.

Amanda, a mother of four young children, has just taken over the Three Tuns at Great Bedwyn - the Chardonnay and smoked salmon end of the village's pub catering. They are a close-knit family, and full of mutual pride. "Family really counts with him," says Amanda. "He is a brilliant father and grandfather. However busy he was, he was always good at switching into family mode." When she had an emergency operation for an ectopic pregnancy, Jackson was in Kosovo. He flew back in an RAF executive jet to be with her and a few hours later was picked up by a RAF Puma helicopter in a field near her home to begin the journey back. They had an emotional reunion.

"In eight or 10 hours," his daughter says, "he was off again, but it was the most wonderful thing. It meant a great deal to me. In a crisis, he's very much head man." Sir Mike took over as CGS on February 1, 2003, when the invasion of Iraq was imminent. He says he did his homework and convinced himself of the legality of the invasion, but he avoids saying when exactly action was decided. At the start of the operation, the shortage of boots, ammunition and biochemical suits became a cause célèbre. In the book, he recalls a conversation with a young private in the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers. "As you probably know," he said to the soldier, "there's a bit of a fuss going on about boots and bog rolls and whatnot. Are you all right for boots?"

Wasn't this a bit dismissive? "With hindsight, my handling of that could be seen as a bit cavalier," he admits. "I had no intention of belittling the gravity of the situation. I didn't want to send a message to the enemy that we were in any way not ready. It would have been interpreted as 'the Brits are in trouble'. You don't want to give succour to the enemy." Maybe the state of equipment was not perfect, he concedes, but "it was not a show-stopper".

He resists being drawn on the Army issues that are exploding daily in the media - such as overstretch in Afghanistan and the inadequate treatment of those wounded there and in Iraq - arguing, not entirely convincingly, that he's outside the loop now and it would be unwise to second guess. "It is not a luxury I am prepared to indulge." But he does agree both with Gordon Brown that it would be wrong to draw up a timetable for pulling out of Iraq, and with the warning of his successor, Richard Dannatt, that: "We can be busy, we can be stretched, we can run hot - provided we are looking after individuals."

Sir Mike is forceful about the need to accept casualties. "There is no such thing as a casualty-free military campaign," he growls. "Perhaps we understand that better now. The harsh reality is that there is risk, sooner or later tragically personified in soldiers being killed and wounded."

By far the most controversial strand of his distinguished career was the destruction of some of the Army's famous old regiments in his modernisation drive. The Royal Scots, the Devonshire and Dorset and the Queen's Lancashires were among those that disappeared. It made him hugely unpopular. The time he devotes to explaining that it "wasn't just Jackson", but the Army Board that unanimously promulgated the changes, suggests he is still sensitive about the criticism. "Regiments are emotional matters," he says. "Rightly. But the time was right to grasp that nettle. It was the completion of something that had been started 40 years previously and I am confident history will say it was right."

Sir Mike will not go quietly into retirement. He is in demand on the lecture circuit, speaking about leadership, and a consultant on security and defence. His options are limitless, ambition still sharp. "As a friend of mine said, 'Whatever you do, don't settle for pruning the roses or soon enough you'll be pushing them up.' " No chance.

'Soldier' by General Sir Mike Jackson (Transworld) is published on September 10. To order for £16.99 + £1.25 p&p, please call Telegraph Books on 0870 428 4112 or visit www.books.telegraph.co.uk.

Publishers wishing to reproduce photographs on this page should phone 44 (0) 207 538 7505 or e-mail syndication@telegraph.co.uk