Rev: a realistic and very funny new comedy from BBC Two
It all started with a christening. Tom Hollander was sitting near the font, watching a friend’s children being blessed. And as he sat, he began to consider how the curious proximity of schools with good Ofsted reports to churches can make even improbable events possible.

‘I suddenly remembered how, many years ago, this same friend had come back from holiday chortling to himself because he had proven the non-existence of God to his mother,’ says the actor, who was last seen on TV in The Thick of It’s finale, playing foul-mouthed political enforcer Cal Richard.

‘And here we were, 20 years later, christening his children. And I thought, “What changed?” But nothing had changed. And then I realised that his very sensible wife was solving the education problem.’ In other words, getting the children into the local church school by currying favour with the vicar.

On Monday, we’ll be able to see the results of Hollander’s musings: an adroitly observed, six-part comedy about modern-day vicarhood. Rev – which was co-created by the actor and his writer friend James Wood – sees Hollander donning the dog collar for what is his first ever leading role on TV. That’s something of a surprise considering Hollander’s mercurial talent and impressive CV, which ranges from bravura stage roles and an Ian Charleson award in his early career (he is now 42) to scene-stealing supporting roles in big-budget Hollywood features such as 2005’s Pride and Prejudice.

There is a link between his part in that adaptation of Pride and Prejudice and Hollander’s TV lead: he plays a parish priest in both. In Rev he is Rev Adam Smallbone, an earnest but self-doubting vicar who is struggling to cope with the tide of issues facing his tiny urban church.

Pushy parents – the theme of the opening episode – are just one of the Rev’s many problems. The ancient church of St Saviour’s is falling apart, the cynical archdeacon constantly harangues him to put more bums on pews, and his regular flock includes a drunk and a ‘cassock chaser’ who has taken a shine to him. Not to mention wife Alex (the excellent Olivia Colman) who, though supportive to a point, would rather concentrate on spicing up their sex life.

Being a ‘vicar comedy’, Rev will inevitably be compared to Dawn French’s BBC One hit The Vicar of Dibley. Did Hollander ever feel French’s shadow hovering over St Saviour’s? He laughs. ‘Not until we had to pitch it,’ he says. ‘At that point we had to answer the question, “Why are we NOT like Dibley?” And the essential difference, apart from the urban context, is that we’re trying to depict a real world rather than a slightly idealised one.’

In fact many of the show’s scenes come directly from life. Hollander spent weeks talking to vicars to research the show (seven pop up in the credits), and was inundated with good material.

A running joke in the opening episode, for instance, has Smallbone regularly turning the other cheek to a group of abusive builders. At the end of the episode, after a particularly bad day, he tells them to f--- off. Cue dumbstruck builders. ‘That was told us by a vicar who did that,’ says Hollander.

Even the shoot produced moments of black comedy. Filming took place in and around the church of St Leonard’s in Shoreditch, east London. One afternoon, the crew shot a scene in which a hearse was towed away by wheel clampers. ‘Before long, a crowd had gathered and was getting really furious about it,’ recalls the show’s director, Peter Cattaneo (who also directed The Full Monty). ‘I said to one of them, “It’s a joke.” And they said, “It’s still disgusting!”

‘I think it was [made worse] because the word “Nan” was in the hearse’s window,’ he adds.

This raises an interesting question, which is whether Rev’s gags may, occasionally, be a little too irreverent for some tastes. Clerics cussing? A vicar’s wife encouraging her husband to ‘bash the bishop’? Ahem.

Hollander tuts. ‘Yes, but they’re just funny jokes, aren’t they? And they’re said with love.’ In fact, he says, Rev is a fundamentally affectionate series – which is more than can be said for most TV programmes about the Church of England. ‘It would be very sad if people took offence to it because it’s a very loving show,’ he says. ‘It’s not some corrosive, toxic event. It’s very human.’

And in truth there are some quite remarkable things about Rev. One of them is Hollander’s performance, which is so deft that he somehow manages to make Smallbone both hapless and heroic, all at the same time. And the other is that it manages to temper the laughs with moments of real seriousness, ponderings on the nature of faith, and even straight-faced prayers.

How often, for example, do we hear the materialism of Richard Dawkins quietly debunked by a TV character, as the Rev does in episode one? ‘Professor Dawkins only believes in things if they’re scientifically proven,’ he tells a worried parishioner. ‘But there’s so much about God’s world that we don’t understand. Why is a snail’s shell a perfect mathematical spiral? It doesn’t need to be...’

When the Church of England recently lamented the decline in religious programmes on the BBC, it probably didn’t have Rev in mind as a champion of the cause. But here’s a series that might, for once, allow it to have the last laugh. At any rate, it should provide a little relief from all those pushy parents.

Rev starts on BBC Two, on Monday at 10.00pm; Northern Ireland, 12.00midnight