The continuing war against Islamic charities
Last week we wrote about the outrageous attacks made against the Muslim charity Interpal as it struggles to provide humanitarian aid to Gaza and elsewhere.

An equally troubling case is Islamic Relief, Britain’s largest Muslim charity. It is part of the Disasters Emergency Committee, a coalition of leading aid agencies that coordinate a response in emergencies. With global income of £173m in 2013, it is a vast operation, delivering aid to 31 countries around the world. Highly respected, the charity receives funding from the British government, UN agencies and the European Commission among others.

On November 15 the United Arab Emirates (UAE) designated Islamic Relief a terror group along with over 80 other organisations, such as Isil, and Al Qaeda.

This charge against Islamic Relief is completely ludicrous and defamatory. UAE has been running a vicious campaign against the Muslim Brotherhood and the designation against Islamic Relief is a by-product of this.

However, the UAE’s decision means it has become very difficult for it to carry out its humanitarian work at a crucial time when the Middle East is in turmoil and the Ebola crisis rages in West Africa. Israel banned Islamic Relief from operating in the West Bank this summer, accusing it of helping fund Hamas.

The UAE’s decision has already been disputed by Norway, Sweden and, crucially, the United States Government.

So far, however, Britain has failed to come out fighting for Islamic Relief. The Government has gone no further than stating that it is seeking clarification from the Emiratis.

This is really disappointing. The Department for International Development (DFID) knows perfectly well Islamic Relief is not a terrorist organisation and that it plays a vital humanitarian role in the work it does around the globe. The Government's silence is even more pathetic when you consider the charity received over £3m in funding from DFID last financial year (2013/14). Both Ms Greening and David Cameron have praised the charity's work recently.

Justine Greening must not give in to the Emiratis. She should come out on the side of Islamic Relief, so the organisation can carry on doing its commendable work unhindered.