Does pressing “cancel” twice on ATM stop PIN from being stolen? Fact Check
A message spreading online claims that those wishing to withdraw cash from an ATM should press the “cancel” button twice before inserting their card to protect themselves from having their PIN stolen.

FALSE

The message, which can be seen below, purports that doing so will prevent fake keypads from working by “cancelling their setup”.

Message from a Banker

* A very useful tip while withdrawing funds from an ATM.

* Press ‘cancel’ button twice before inserting the card. If anyone has set up the key pad to steal your PIN code, this will cancel that set up.

Please make it a habit and part of every transaction that you make.

Please share with those about whom you care

and

Just a very useful tip. If you want to withdraw funds at an ATM, please press the cancel button twice before inserting your card. If anyone is lurking in the vicinity with the intention to steal your card PIN, this act will cancel anything they’ve set up to do so. Make it a habit and part of the transaction process. Please share to others…

Blessed

While it is true that various scams could potentially affect customers while at the ATM machine, we can’t find any examples where pressing the cancel button twice on the keypad would prevent any such scams. As such we rank the message false.

It is true that scammers can try and scam victims as they withdraw money from the ATM. Typically crooks will use a variety of techniques to steal either the customers card number, their PIN number, or both.

Continued below...

SPONSORED AD







Skimming techniques are frequently used to steal card information. These are devices that fit over the card slot which are designed to steal the card information (namely the card number and expiry date) as they pass the device. Skimming devices vary, but can be a panel that fits over the slot, or more advanced examples are so small they could potentially fit into the actual card slot itself.

Fake keypads, or “pin-pad overlays” could potentially be used to steal a customer’s PIN number. As you may suspect, these are fake keypads that fit over the real keypad and record information inputted into them. (Alternatively crooks could attempt to install camera devices or simply watch a would-be victim enter their PIN.)

Continued below...

SPONSORED AD







More advanced crooks could even install an entire fake front panel to the entire ATM that could feasibly fit both a skimming device and a pin-pad overlay (fake keypad.)

The point we’re making is that such ATM scams are varied and diverse, and could involve many different aspects, ranging from primitive to very advanced. And from these, we’re not aware of any that could be overcome simply by pressing the “cancel” button twice on the keypad, nor could we find any experts on the subject iterating this advice. It makes little sense that crooks would go to considerable trouble to create their scams only to include some very easy workaround that would allow a would-be victim to escape the scam.

As such, pressing the cancel button twice isn’t likely to prevent any sort of ATM scam. Experts advise ATM users to inspect a machine carefully and make sure both the keypad and card slot are flush with the machine and are not loose. Always look to see if you can see any recording devices pointing at the keypad, or people trying to look over your shoulder. If anything appears suspicious, do not use the ATM. And certainly don’t rely on pressing the cancel button twice to prevent any type of scam.