Theresa May interview: 'I probably was Goody Two Shoes at school’
I was surprised when Theresa May agreed to see me. Although she holds one of the great offices of state, and is arguably the most powerful woman in Britain, Mrs May feels both known and unknowable. Who on earth is she? Like Imelda Marcos, she is mainly famous for her shoes, leopard-print kitten heels apparently being considered a substitute for a character in modern politics. Unlike Imelda, there is no sulphurous whiff of scandal about her, and even her critics will admit she is on a roll at the Home Office.

Over the past six months, she has annoyed the US and delighted the British public by refusing to extradite Gary McKinnon. Even better, she got shot of the one-handed hate preacher Abu Hamza. She was Wendy Darling to Hamza’s Captain Hook, which is not unlike the part she takes in the Coalition; a sensible, high-minded older sister to a pack of younger boys.

“Oh, no, I wouldn’t use the term boys’ club for the Cabinet,” says Mrs May hastily when we meet in her large, tranquil, modern office around the corner from the Commons. “I certainly don’t feel that I’m out on my own.”

A senior Tory friend offers another view: “Theresa’s done much better at the Home Office than the blokes anticipated – half of them wanted her to fail because she’s a woman.”

The Hamza deportation, and a determination to reduce immigration “to the tens of thousands”, has led to her being hailed as the new standard-bearer of the Right. She is even talked of as a future leader, though the Right has never really forgiven her for telling the Tories that they were “the Nasty Party” as chairman, in 2002. Mrs May told the faithful they needed to look like 21st-century Britain instead of “hankering after some mythical place called Middle England and descending into glib moralising and hypocritical finger-wagging”.

Whatever the opposite of a standing ovation is, she got it. After that, she hasn’t said anything as bold since, though her words now look prophetic. She was an early moderniser and finally got her reward, being rapidly promoted by David Cameron, a fan.

“Yes, the combination of being fanatically loyal, fanatically dull and fanatically hard-working is very attractive to a leader,” sparks one minister, who claims that colleagues find Mrs May lacking in warmth. Another says: “Theresa does her red boxes till three in the morning, she knows more than the civil servants do and is rarely caught out. She’s seen as a safe pair of hands.”

On the day we meet, the tips of those hands are coated in vermilion. Curiously, while incredibly buttoned up, Mrs May is one of the few flamboyantly stylish women in Westminster. She has lost a lot of weight since becoming Home Secretary (pressure of work, a flu bug that lasted two months, thrice weekly visits to the gym). She is tall and almost too slender in a brown-flecked bouclé jacket worn over a pencil skirt that reveals the best pair of pins in Parliament. They are parked in those trademark kitten heels. It’s as though the clothes and shoes are allowed to speak while the politician within must remain neutral. Doesn’t she ever lose it, say, about not being able to throw Abu Qatada out of the country?

“I’m not someone who feels anger on particular issues,” she says in her best primary headmistress manner. “I understand where the public are on this. Their view would be, just send him [Qatada] away as fast as possible. But government has to look at the rule of law.”

Come on, surely she must get cross sometimes?

“Of course I get cross,” she admits reluctantly. “I get cross about 13 years of Labour government that brought the country to the state it did.”

She says that Labour got it horribly wrong on immigration and believes people are upset that the composition of their country changed so quickly, making it harder to achieve integration. “That’s one of the reasons control in the immigration system is so important,” she insists. “Communities need to feel that they can accommodate people. Rather than feeling that it’s not possible to integrate and that the stress and strain on housing and public services is too great.”

Somebody who has known Theresa May since they were both at Oxford in the late-Seventies says she was always conscientious, with no interest in gossip or frivolity. “Never an uncalculated foot put anywhere,” says the source.

This makes the Home Secretary fiendishly hard to draw out. She is private in a way that seems quaint in this shamelessly confessional age. “Today, there’s an expectation that you get to know public people,” she says. “In the past, it was much more what you did and how you presented yourself.”

I think she is ready to become better known now, because she is doing what is acknowledged to be one of the toughest jobs in politics, and bloody well. Bizarrely, she absolutely loves being Home Secretary. It may be the job she was born to do.

Theresa Mary Brasier was born on Oct 1 1956. The only child of Hubert, a clergyman, and Zaidee, she knew she wanted to be a politician by the age of 12. “You don’t think about it at the time, but there are certain responsibilities that come with being the vicar’s daughter,” Mrs May admits. “You’re supposed to behave in a particular way.” She was always tall and walked with stooped shoulders because she was self-conscious. She was quite a swot at school. “I shouldn’t say it, but I probably was Goody Two Shoes.”

She was brought up listening to Test matches on the wireless with her father. Her pin-up was – I kid you not – one Geoffrey Boycott. “I have been a Geoff Boycott fan all my life,” she admits, laughing. “It was just that he kind of solidly got on with what he was doing.” Theresa to a Tee.

She read geography at Oxford, where she met her husband, Philip. After 32 years of marriage, they are still loving and close. A City colleague of Mr May tells me that Philip is “absolutely devoted to Theresa and a little in awe of her”. The match is slightly in the Thatcher mould, with a hugely supportive, high-earning man prepared to carry the wife’s handbag. And, in Philip May’s case, actually choose the handbag. “Philip is very good at picking accessories,” says his wife, sporting a beautiful silver Monica Vinader bracelet that he gave her last Christmas.

The Mays have no children, one of those “ultra-intrusive subjects” on which she has been silent until now. “It just didn’t happen,” she says quietly. “This isn’t something I generally go into, but things just turned out as they did.”

She admits to a sense of loss. “You look at families all the time and you see there is something there that you don’t have.”

As a strong Christian, she believes in making the best of the hand you are dealt. She has been free to focus on the job in hand. And, boy, does she focus. Exacting is the word colleagues use to describe her.

Does that mean bossy? “I do hope not,” she says, eyes crinkling with amusement. It strikes me that she invests a lot of energy in not making mistakes. Goody Two Shoes always trying to get it right? “That’s an interesting way of putting it,” she muses. “I think it’s important to do a good job and not to feel that you’ve got to make grand gestures, but just to get on and deliver.”

When we talk politics, she is polite but will not budge from the party line. To questions about cuts in child benefit and the hit that female workers are taking during the recession, she replies: “In tough times, everyone has to take their share of the pain.” But I know Mrs May is passionate about women’s issues. I first came across her over a decade ago when I was campaigning for better work-life balance. Today, you can’t move for male politicians telling childcare stories, but back then only Theresa May wanted to know.

“A lot of men in politics suddenly woke up to the issue of women in politics when they realised: hey, there are votes in this!”

Is Theresa May ever truly off duty? Her last two summer holidays were interrupted – the first by the riots, the second when two policewomen were shot. No wonder she looks so tired. She refuses to buy her groceries online, because she enjoys pushing a trolley through the Twyford Waitrose, in her Berkshire constituency. Her passion is cookery books. What does Mr May like to eat?

“Whatever I cook.” I see. I ask if she is a Mary Berry or a Delia person at Christmas and she explodes: “Not Delia! I will not allow a Delia Smith cookbook in my house! It’s all SO PRECISE with Delia, and it makes cooking seem so inaccessible. With somebody like Jamie [Oliver], you don’t actually have to worry if you’ve got one little bit of bicarb wrong.”

At last! A contradiction! A possible vote-loser! I would have put all my money on May being a Delia fan, but perhaps only in her cooking does this supremely disciplined woman unleash another, more spontaneous, devil-may-care Theresa.

Of course, she says that she doesn’t want to be party leader. But I reckon there are signs that Mrs May is starting to reach out for back-bench support. She is admired, but she needs to be liked, or to be surrounded by supporters who are likeable.

When we discuss Germany’s woman prime minister, she says: “If you look at somebody like Angela Merkel and think of what she’s actually achieved, you know, there are still people who don’t rate her, are a bit dismissive, perhaps because of the way she looks and dresses. And she goes walking in the Tyrol and all that sort of stuff. What matters is, what has she actually done? And, when you look at her abilities in terms of negotiation, and steering Germany through a difficult time, then hats off to her.”

Question: which other childless, Alpine-walking, Protestant clergyman’s daughter, who is utterly dedicated to her job, and perceived to be a bit worthy and humourless, wants to be judged on the principle that you are what you do?

For an answer, just imagine the Tory party poster in the election after next. May: The Force Be With You.