Moi party 'crushed' in Kenyan election
The ruling party of Kenya's outgoing president, Daniel arap Moi, faced defeat for the first time since independence yesterday as the opposition stormed towards an overwhelming election victory.

With more than a third of the results announced, the veteran opposition leader, Mwai Kibaki, was poised to become Kenya's third president . He has received more than 66 per cent of the vote counted so far, compared with only 27 per cent for Uhuru Kenyatta, the ruling party candidate chosen by President Moi.

The president is stepping down after 24 years in power , obliged to do so by a constitutional amendment in 1991.

Millions of Kenyans, fed up with the high levels of corruption of President Moi's autocratic tenure, punished his Kanu party - on its way to being reduced to a rump - by voting out some of his most powerful cronies.

Musalia Mudavadi, Mr Kenyatta's running mate, became the first sitting vice-president in Kenyan history to lose his seat. Julius Sunkuli, the feared interior minister caught trying to cheat his way to victory , was also beaten.

In all eight cabinet ministers slumped to humiliating defeats - three of them the Kanu party's vice-chairmen. Mr Kenyatta, however, easily won his seat in Gatundu South, central Kenya.

Mr Kibaki's National Rainbow Coalition (Narc) urged Mr Kenyatta to concede defeat. "We are on the eve of a historic victory," said Raila Odinga, Narc's secretary-general. "The people of Kenya have spoken and it is with joy and humility that we accept their trust. Kenya is back in business."

Of the 87 seats declared so far Narc has won 61 and Kanu 20, with five going to minor parties. There are 210 elected seats in Kenya's parliament.

Mr Odinga said that "President-elect" Kibaki would be sworn in tomorrow and urged Mr Moi to ensure a peaceful transition of power. Earlier the president said he would accept the result as he bade a tearful farewell to the armed forces.

There were isolated incidents of violence as supporters of the rival parties clashed. Two people were killed, bringing to six the number of deaths since Thursday, and dozens more injured.

The election has been relatively peaceful compared with two previous polls, when more than 2,000 people were killed.

There were widespread allegations of voter bribery, however, and the opposition accused the government of erasing the names of up to two million of their supporters from the electoral register.