TPPF to host “At the Crossroads” Energy and Climate Policy Summit
AUSTIN – The Texas Public Policy Foundation will host its second annual At the Crossroads: Energy & Climate Policy Summit on November 19 and 20, at the Foundation’s new building in downtown Austin, Texas. Building on the popularity and success of last year’s summit, this year’s gathering will once again showcase national and international thought leaders who will address the top energy and environmental concerns taking center stage today.



The burgeoning opportunities flowing from the energy revolution are now directly threatened by federal regulatory mandates to displace coal, oil, and natural gas. The transformative powers of energy face the coercive powers of government. Current federal policies to supplant fossil fuels could undermine mankind’s greatest advance and consign the developing world to abject poverty. The stakes couldn’t be higher in this epochal confrontation. Come hear the best minds on these important issues distinguish fact from prevalent myths.

Sessions include Not a Pollutant: CO2 is the Gas of Life; Society Transformed: How Low Energy Costs Bring Prosperity; and Politics and Economics of the Debate of Climate and Carbon.

For additional information and the full agenda, visit: http://crossroads-summit.com/

To register as media, contact Caroline Espinosa at cespinosa@texaspolicy.com or (512) 472-2700.

To sign up for livestream notifications, please visit: http://txpo.li/Crossroads15

WHO: U.S. Senator John Cornyn (R-TX)

U.S. Congressman Lamar Smith (R-TX)

Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton

Dr. Cal Beisner, Cornwall Alliance

Robert L. Bradley, Jr., Institute for Energy Research

Horace Cooper, National Center for Public Policy Research

Walter Cunningham, Apollo 7 Astronaut

Rupert Darwall, author, “The Age of Global Warming”

Dr. Hal Doiron, The Right Climate Stuff, former NASA Engineer

Dr. Don Easterbrook, Western Washington University

Raymond Gifford, Wilkinson Barker, Knauer, LLP

Dr. Will Happer, Princeton University

Dr. Richard Lindzen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Brian Lloyd, Public Utility Commission of Texas

Mark Mills, Manhattan Institute

Dr. Patrick Moore, co-founder of Greenpeace

Stephen Moore, Heritage Foundation

Marc Morano, ClimateDepot.com

Robert E. Murray, Murray Energy Corporation

Michael J. Nasi, Jackson Walker, LLP

Dr. Caleb Rossiter, American University

Dr. George L. Stegemeier, GLS Engineering, Inc.

H. Leighton Steward, Southern Methodist University

James Taylor, Heartland Institute

Kathleen Hartnett White, Texas Public Policy Foundation and former chair, TCEQ

WHAT:

“At the Crossroads: Energy & Climate Policy Summit”

WHEN: Thursday, November 19, 2015, 11:30 a.m.–10:00 p.m. CST

Friday, November 20, 2015, 7:30 a.m.–2:00 p.m. CST

WHERE: Texas Public Policy Foundation

901 Congress Ave.

Austin, TX 78701

The Texas Public Policy Foundation is a non-profit, free-market research institute based in Austin, Texas.

Find us on Facebook

Follow us on Twitter