Dickson Co Schools' 1,700-word reply to flag controversy
CLOSE

Dickson County Schools seal (Photo: file art)

The intended news story was supposed to explain student expectations for behavior and addressing those behaviors when they distract, disrupt, or divide students. The story instead was transformed and became about how a school system had banned the American flag. How in the United States of America can a public school justify the banning of the symbol of freedom and democracy? As ridiculous at it sounds, some groups of people believe that could happen, and as a result of the news media’s coverage, they became frightened that it had occurred. Unfortunately, recent actions to ensure student expectations were communicated clearly have resulted in distractions of their own, and for that a sincere apology is due to the citizens of Dickson County starting with our County Mayor, local government servants, elected officials, all teachers and staff, and to the good people of Dickson County

As public school educators, it is our job to ensure every student receives a free and appropriate education. This must be done regardless of grade, race, gender, language barriers, differences in beliefs and cultures, and religious beliefs. All students deserve the opportunity to learn in our schools. This requirement also demands we recognize that in order for a student to learn they must be safe, secure, and comfortable in the learning environment.

As school started in Dickson County on August 3, it followed a summer of controversy and concern over symbols and questions that led our country to become divided, distracted, and disrupted. Student behaviors at one of our schools on the first day of school led to parent reports at the Central Office concerning such symbols being in the parking lot of our schools. This matter was appropriately addressed and expectations were communicated to our students in order to prevent distractions or disruptions to our learning environment. The school also took the opportunity to speak to students about proper respect and appropriate display of the American flag. A particular student behavior that was addressed included flags being brought to sporting events by students and used in a manner which was not respectful. The behavior included wearing the American flag around the waist and or tying it around the neck to wear as a cape. At this same time the ROTC instructors who teach color guard, flag etiquette and flag protocol have suggested that vehicles in a parade must follow a certain protocol if they choose to post a flag on the vehicle. It is also suggested that it may not be appropriate to post a flag in a vehicle while moving at 55 mph. According to our ROTC instructors there are some veterans who would be offended the American Flag would be treated in such a manner.

Approximately three weeks after these expectations were shared with students, a parent called a local news station to report a concern that flags are not being allowed on campus. A television news reporter came to Dickson County to speak to officials where it was shared before the interview that this issue could be controversial, and we were putting trust in the reporter to complete a fair and accurate report that included both sides of the story. While administrators recognized it could not be a completely positive report because of the emotional nature of the story, we did not dream about the spin this story could and would take. Based on our reflection over the past few days to avoid similar future situations, we have determined all control was lost when the story itself was transposed and posted on the television station’s website. Any basic journalism courses would teach us two things about a headline. First, the headline attracts a reader. Second, most people only read the headline. The headline which was used on the website inaccurately implied we had banned the American flag on our campuses in Dickson County stating, “Mid-state school district bans all flags including the American flag”

Undoubtedly, various groups around our great country who are looking to ensure basic human rights and our First Amendment rights of expression are protected have internet search engines that continuously look for phrases such as “ban flag”. As a result many organizations began to report and share the story. Unfortunately, rather than reading the text of the story, people only read a headline. Soon, a national news media outlet who is also well known for sensationalizing and stirring the emotions of their viewers began to report that a school district in Tennessee had banned the American flag. They hijacked the local television broadcast and began to run soundbites and post web headlines which suggested that the school district was banning the American flag and that is was not “an unpatriotic act at all”.

Once school officials recognized this was rapidly becoming an issue, multiple attempts were made on Saturday morning, August 22, to contact news officials at the TV station in order to assist us. Despite many emails and repeated phone calls to the news desk, no one in authority could speak to us nor return our phone call in order to change the headline In fact we did not receive any message from the local news station until Tuesday morning, August 25, at approximately 11 AM. To their credit the local news station did a follow up story which aired on Tuesday evening, August 22, and appears to have assisted in a limited way to calm the storm.

By late Saturday afternoon the damage had been done. National media outlets picked up the story, and rather than use the content of the story, they only used the headline and soundbites which apparently communicated to the public that Dickson County had banned the American flag in all schools. It was reported that the decision was made as a means to ensure that no students would be offended or in order to be politically correct

The reality is a twelve minute interview has been reduced to a thirty second soundbite, and web headlines inaccurately stated that the flag had been banned in Dickson County. It is a totally ridiculous and ludicrous idea to think that that such an event could possibly happen anywhere in this great country of ours and is beyond belief.

The truth of the matter is the American flag flies in Dickson County at every school and district building, the Pledge of Allegiance is recited daily, and our students are being taught proper respect and appropriate display of the American flag. We want to ensure our parents and students that we are looking to only address student behaviors that distract, disrupt, or divide our mission of education. While we may not agree on how appropriate it may be to display an American flag behind a moving vehicle, this action does not distract, disrupt or divide. In fact it may assist us in unifying students toward our mission of academic success; therefore, we will not look to address issues involving the American flag any further. In addition the dress code may define what is to be worn on shirts, but beyond this requirement there are no restrictions on students bringing the American flag on campus.

However, other student behaviors that may reasonably or foreseeably distract, disrupt or divide our students will be addressed in an appropriate way, but even these actions may not constitute a punishment beyond expectation of correction. Under no circumstance would an administrator communicate to students they would be “kicked out of school for bringing one” when addressing these expectations. Just as we would expect a third grade student to not bring electronic toys to school as they distract and disturb our learning environment, we would expect the same for these type of behaviors. Students may still display flags of all kinds at home, behind vehicles on the road, or talk about how important they are to their friends. However, some flags would not be appropriate at school as they create a distraction and a disruption to learning. In most cases a repeated violation would result in the school confiscating the item and returning to parents with the request they not return to school campus.

In regards to the Confederate flag we will agree the right to fly and display is a basic right for our citizens to enjoy. We also protect the use of the symbol as a learning aid in eighth grade social studies classes where the Civil War is taught to our students. We have enjoyed a great relationship with the Sons of the Confederacy in Charlotte and field trips have been organized to their location to allow our students to see Civil War reenactments, learn of Confederate and Union leaders, and certainly learn the causes and results of the Civil War between the states. However, we also must recognize that while the Confederate flag has an appropriate place in our schools for educational purposes, the display or use may be also become inappropriate when it is considered to cause disruption, distraction, or division among our students.

Over the past few days Dickson County has lived a great nightmare. We have suffered from personal attack. Our county has been characterized in an unfair manner. We as an education system have had to take time, effort, and resources to battle a national news media by going one to one with emails and phone calls to explain what really happened and what we really believe. In this age of instant news and social media many efforts have been made to win the battle but it is a giant uphill effort for all of us.

As educators, we accept that our decisions may not be readily accepted by all, and we also recognize there may be instances in which we will need to agree to disagree on certain principles, yet it is our pledge to continue to work together in order to make our county and country a better place and to continue to strive to increase the opportunities for students in Dickson County to have success beyond their school careers.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1EmOIh0