Dickson Co. schools flag rule not ban, officials say
CLOSE

Students not allowed to fly flags in parking lot, wear them as clothing

Dickson County School District officials want to clarify the system's stance on flying flags after a weekend in which the school district was thrown into the ongoing nationwide flag debate.

Flags are not banned, said Schools Director Dr. Danny Weeks. However, flags are not allowed to fly on school vehicles and cannot be worn as clothing, such as draped over a student like a cape.

School officials arrived at the decision on the first day of school, Aug. 3.

The nationwide Confederate flag-flying controversy erupted shortly after the June 17 shooting death of nine people in an African-American church in Charleston, S.C. The accused shooter, Dylann Roof, 21, posted several photos online posing with a handgun and the Confederate flag.

"On the first day of school at Creek Wood High School, we had a student who had a Confederate flag flying in the back of their vehicle," Weeks said. "The administration made a decision that flags really aren't appropriate and designed to be flown on school parking lots and things like that."

"We don't think it's the appropriate way to fly the flag," he added.

Weeks noted that large American flags are displayed at the front of all the local schools and are also hanging in classrooms. The Pledge of Allegiance is said at every school, every morning.

"We are not banning flags," Weeks said. "We are teaching the appropriate use of flags and how to respect it."

He said the flag policy is not written; it's simply a "practice to not cause disruptions to the learning environments."

"We had inquiries with people being told we didn't have the flag at the football game Friday night, which is ridiculous," he added.

Though he thinks the flag situation "was handled a little different" than how it should have been, School Board Member Phil Buckner said he agrees with school officials' decision.

"They didn't want the Confederate flags on these trucks as they come up the hill," Buckner said. "That could cause problems."

"Somebody is trying to stir up trouble," said Buckner, who represents District 5 that includes Creek Wood High School. "We have a good school system in Dickson County. If these folks from outside would leave us alone, we would be better off."

The school board did not make any decisions about school policy on flags. Still, Buckner anticipates a crowd for the board's Thursday night meeting wanting to speak their mind – though it's not on the agenda.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1EmRuml