Pupils and goats share open-air Tiaty classrooms
It is minutes past noon at Kadokoi Primary School in Tiaty subcounty, Baringo, and Standard Three pupils are about to break for lunch.

The tired and hungry pupils are looking forward to the meal offered by the government through the School Feeding Programme.

But they must finish their English assignment before teacher Shedrack Aratich allows them to go. “You must finish my assignment before breaking for lunch,” he tells the pupils.

The pupils take about 20 minutes to finish the assignment.

Their concentration in class in the entire morning had been continuously interrupted by the whistling of herders who are grazing their goats, sheep and cattle near their classrooms that do not have walls.

The entire place is inhabited by pastoralists whose livelihoods depend solely on livestock.

Some of the animals stray inside the classrooms. The classrooms only have wooden posts supporting the aging iron sheet roofs.

Head teacher Dorcas Yatich said the school’sfirst candidates sat their KCPE exams in 2016. But she is not sure if this year’s candidates will be lucky.

“We are experiencing serious under-staffing. Two of our teachers were transferred due to insecurity. The two remaining teachers cannot manage the workload so I had to transfer all the 14 candidates to nearby schools,” she said.

Yatich said the school has a population of 136 pupils. She said three girls have dropped out of school due to early pregnancy.

Yatich said other challenges facing the school include poor infrastructure, water shortage and lack of support from the community.

“Parents here do not support education at all, leave alone school projects. Instead, they value traditional culture, forcing their teenage girls to undergo female genital mutilation, before marrying them off,” she said.

Yatich said the school was is the news three years ago for its deplorable conditions, but nothing has changed.

She appealed to the government to hire more teachers and urged well-wishers to help build more and better classrooms and fence the compound to keep away animals.

Tangulbei-Korosi MCA Shedrack Mailuk urged the county government to tap emergency funds to renovate the classrooms.

Pupils in more than 30 primary schools in Tiaty subcounty still learn under trees due to lack of classrooms.

They include Nasor, Nachururu, Loyeya, Seronu, Orus, Komolion, Lomuke, Katungura, Kitalim, Matunda, Lotita, Siria, Lodengo and Chepkererat.

Others are Ayan, Kadokoi, Manambelei, Orision, Nasorot, Akule, Toplen, Silale, Napeikore, Nalekat, Napukut, Kitailem, Cheptamas, Kangoria, Nakoko, Cheptunoyo, Akwichatis and Chemukutan.

At Nachururu Primary School, Standard One to Three pupils were learning in the open.

Deputy head teacher Shadrack Lomoki said since he joined the school in 2006, no classroom has been built.

He said three incomplete classrooms that were constructed three years ago, through the Constituency Development Fund, are being used by Standard Four to Eight pupils. The building is not partitioned yet.

The school has only two teachers hired by the Teachers Service Commission, five employed by the school board of management and two Early Childhood Development Education teachers hired by the county government.

“Our stores are also running out of food. Our school feeding programme is almost collapsing yet it used to attract many children from hunger-stricken families,” Lomoki said.