Outback Steakhouse Free Veterans Day Meal
To honor the military this Veterans Day, Outback Steakhouse is offering all veterans and active military a completely free Bloomin' Onion and beverage, in addition to a discount for family members.

There are plenty of other restaurants giving out free food in November if you're not a fan of Outback Steakhouse, like Chili's, Denny's, Golden Corral, BJ's, O'Charley's, Red Lobster, T.G.I. Friday's, Texas Roadhouse, LongHorn Steakhouse, Red Robin, IHOP, Olive Garden, Starbucks, Smokey Bones, and Applebee's.

Tip: In addition to free food this Veterans Day are many other businesses that are discounting purchases and handing out other types of free stuff. See this list of Veterans Day Freebies and Discounts for more information.

When Veterans Get Their Free Food at Outback Steakhouse

Outback Steakhouse's free Veterans Day food offer for 2017 is available on Veterans Day, which is Saturday, November 11.

After you've found a nearby Outback Steakhouse, I recommend you give them a call to see what time of day you should come in to get the free food, as well as to verify that your location is participating in the Veterans Day offer.

Also check out this list of frequently asked questions about Veterans Day free meals for some information on how Veterans Day offers work.

What Outback Steakhouse Is Giving Away For Veterans Day

Outback Steakhouse has another offer in addition to the free Bloomin' Onion and beverage for military personnel.

Anyone who can produce a military ID will also get 20% off their entire check from November 12 to November 16, 2017.

Who's Eligible for the Outback Steakhouse Veterans Day Free Food

Outback Steakhouse's Veterans Day free food can be had by all military personnel. This includes not only veterans but also active duty military.

Normally, this means even if you bring friends or family with you, only the military members would be able to take advantage of the free food. However, Outback Steakhouse is also giving out 20% discounts to the families of military members, which means so long as a military ID is shown, your family can also take part in this Veterans Day special.

This is just one of a few restrictions put in place by Outback Steakhouse. More are explained at the bottom of this page.

What You Need to Take With You to Outback Steakhouse

Military ID is required for military members to get the free food and beverage on Veterans Day. An ID is also necessary for their families to get the 20% discount.

This proof of service isn't unique to Outback Steakhouse. Nearly all restaurants that have Veterans Day free meals will require some sort of verification to prove that you're an active or retired military member.

Outback Steakhouse Veterans Day Free Food Restrictions

Saturday, November 11, is the only day for which this Veterans Day offer is valid. However, the 20% discount for families can be taken advantage of from the day after Veterans Day all the way through the end of 2017.

The Bloomin' Onion and beverage is what Outback Steakhouse is offering this year.