Who Is James T. Hodgkinson?
Charles Orear, 50, of St. Louis, told The Washington Post he met Hodgkinson when they worked together in Iowa on the Sanders campaign.

“You’ve got to be kidding me,” he said when told by the Post about the shooting. He called Hodgkinson a “quiet guy,” “very mellow, very reserved.” “He was this union tradesman, pretty stocky, and we stayed up talking politics,” he told the newspaper. “He was more on the really progressive side of things.”

Former Alexandria Mayor Bill Euille told the Post he spoke to the shooter almost every morning at the local YMCA, which is near the baseball field where the shooting occurred. He said the man had been living out of his gym bag. Euille said they spoke mostly about local restaurants and things to do.

“He was a very friendly person,” Euille said, but added: “[H]e sat in the Y’s lobby for hours and hours. Outside of myself, I don’t think he knew anyone else in town.”

Here’s more on Hodgkinson from his local newspaper: The Belleville News-Democrat reported:

Hodgkinson, 66, owns a home-inspection business. Hodgkinson was a licensed home inspector from 1994 to 1997, when his license expired, according records from the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. He also held a license from 2003 to 2016, but it was not renewed. … Hodgkinson has a varied arrest record in St. Clair County, for offenses such as failing to obtain electrical permits, damaging a motor vehicle, resisting a peace officer, eluding police, criminal damage to property, driving under the influence and assorted traffic offenses.

Read the newspaper’s full profile of Hodgkinson, including details of his background and family life.

Separately, NBC News cited court records showing Hodgkinson was arrested in 2006 for assaulting his girlfriend. The Daily Beast adds:

In 2006, he was arrested for domestic battery and discharge of a firearm after he punched a man’s girlfriend “in the face with a closed fist,” according to a police report reviewed by The Daily Beast. When the man walked outside of the residence, Hodgkinson aimed a shotgun at him and later fired one round. Hodgkinson was also “observed throwing” an unidentified minor “around the bedroom,” the police report said. Police identified the girl as his daughter. After the girl broke free, Hodgkinson followed and “started hitting her arms, pulling her hair, and started grabbing her off the bed.” When Hodgkinson’s girlfriend tried to leave in a vehicle, he reached inside and “turned off the ignition,” the report said. “James then pulled out a possible pocket knife and cut [her] seatbelt.” The charges were dismissed, according to court records.

Hodgkinson also wrote a number of letters to the newspaper, urging higher taxes on the rich:

Some letters to the editor James Hodgkinson wrote to the Belleville News-Democrat from 2008-2011 pic.twitter.com/HvOUzKx7cU — Emily Atkin (@emorwee) June 14, 2017

Sanders in a statement that did not mentioned Hodgkinson said he “was sickened by this despicable act.”

“Let me be as clear as I can be. Violence of any kind is unacceptable in our society and I condemn this action in the strongest possible terms,” he said. “Real change can only come about through nonviolent action, and anything else runs against our most deeply held American values.”