A Not-So-Brief List of All the Things President Obama Has Bowed To
2009: Obama bows to the Queen of England

This one isn't so much of a "bow" as it is a head nod (note: the president, who is a solid 6'1", is taller than many world leaders). It's apparently from the same trip to London as the Saudi bow, for his first G-20 summit as president. This moment does, however, show up on exhaustively researched lists from the right on every time Obama has bowed, so we will include it too. The YouTube user who uploaded this video helpfully flagged where the alleged bows took place, in case you can't spot them yourself.

2009: Obama bows to the Japanese Emperor

You'll notice a trend with these bow incidents: many of them occur in countries where a bow is considered part of greeting etiquette. As the New York Times pointed out at the time, Obama did actually break a big greeting rule with this bow, but not the one that caught the attention of conservatives: You're not supposed to shake hands and bow at the same time. Do one or the other, but not both.

Dick Cheney, then the recently ex-Vice President, weighed in on this one amid the pretty widespread criticism from conservative media outlets: "There is no reason for an American president to bow to anyone. Our friends and allies don't expect it, and our enemies see it as a sign of weakness," he told Politico. As the AP noted at the time, State Department guidelines tell American diplomats to " be aware" of greeting protocols in foreign countries, including kissing, handshakes, and bows. Those guidelines didn't specify whether they also applied to the president.

2010: Obama bows to Nancy Pelosi

Hmm. This one is a stretch. Here's Obama greeting Nancy Pelosi, at the 2010 State of the Union. He nods his head — another pattern, Obama likes to nod — in greeting. That became a bow, somehow. Judging by the comparatively low view count of this video, we're guessing that not even a lot of Obama bowing curators believe this is canon. But we are nothing if not thorough. Onward!

2010: FINALLY OBAMA BOWS TO A REPUBLICAN

This AP photo was picked up by a few conservative blogs as another example of Obama bowing to someone beneath his station. This time, it's Chris Christie, accompanied by then-Mayor (now Senator) Cory Booker. The AP caption describes the president as "laughing." "Obama was laughing as he bowed so maybe he didn’t really mean it," The Right Perspective posited at the time.

He may also be displaying weakness to the 2016 presidential election winner? Only time will tell.

2010: Obama bows to a child's diorama in Mumbai

There's no image of this bow, but there is this quote from a New York Times write-up of Obama's trip to Mumbai, India:

The school was also the scene of Mr. Obama’s much-publicized dancing. But before he got his groove on, the president did something that appealed to his wonkish side: he toured student presentations on the importance of wind and solar energy, rain-water harvesting and a model “eco-village” with a windmill. Standing before the diorama, he drew his hands together, as if in prayer, and greeted the children with a slight bow.

2010: Obama bows to a couple in Japan

This one's from a pool report of Obama's visit to the the 44-foot-high Great Buddha statue of Kamakura, in Japan:

POTUS walks up a central path lined with pines, other trees, his shirt collar open, toward the Great Buddha. He is greeted by a man and woman in traditional Japanese robes, whom he greets with a handshake and small bow, and tells them he visited years ago. Can't hear much else.

2010: Obama bows to the mayor of Tampa

Even the AP caption describes this as a "bow." That's Tampa Mayor Pam Iorio he's greeting. (Again, with an unnecessary handshake.)