This Is the Brain that Shot President James Garfield
That was, until 1880, when the voices inside his head led him to the Grand Old Republican Party.

Before Guiteau murdered Garfield, he was a die-hard supporter. In the lead-up to the 1880 election, Guiteau would haunt Republican Party offices, begging to contribute to the election effort. He was relentless, and party officials caved and allowed him to deliver one incoherent speech to a small group of black voters in New York City.

The contribution was minimal, but in Guiteau’s mind, “It was this idea that elected General Garfield,” he wrote. And what should be his reward? A cushy European diplomatic post. First, he thought Vienna. No: Only Paris would do.

After the election, Guiteau moved to Washington to collect his imagined prize. These were the days when any ordinary citizen could pay visits to officials. Guiteau roamed the halls of the State Department and White House, imploring anyone who would listen that he deserved a diplomatic post.

Meanwhile, he was wasting away. The Trial of the Assassin Guiteau describes his state:

He had no source of income, no lecturing, no books to sell, no bills to collect; he had no family; he never had any friends. His clothes, shabby enough when he reached Washington, were deteriorating. Even in March, with snow on the ground, he went about without boots or an overcoat. By June, his worn sleeves were pulled down over his hands and his coat buttoned up to his neck, for he had no collar and possibly lacked a shirt as well.

He didn’t get the diplomatic job. On one visit to the State Department, Secretary of State James Blaine barked at Guiteau, “Never bother me again about the Paris consulship as long as you live.”

The words stung, and set Guiteau off on a bizarre chain of logic, which would result in his demise. Blaine was a menace to the Republican Party. To get rid of Blaine, he reasoned, he had to kill the president. After all, it was Garfield’s fault that such a man served in the State Department. Guiteau heard these instructions from God himself. It wouldn’t be an assassination, but a divinely ordained “removal.” The plan was essentially motiveless, as the the death of the president wouldn’t stand to benefit Guiteau or any Republican. “In the president’s madness, he has wrecked the once Grand Old Republican Party; and for this, he dies,” Guiteau wrote in a letter of admission.

After weeks of careful stalking, Guiteau shot Garfield, twice, at the Baltimore and Ohio train depot in Washington. Upon being shot, Garfield said, “I am a dead man.” He’d lay in agony for 80 more days before that assertion became true.

Guiteau never really had a shot of going free in trial. He was the most hated man in America, and the only person to come to his defense was his brother-in-law, an attorney with very little courtroom experience. During the trial, Guiteau—who served as his own co-counsel—would shout obscenities and broke out into song on one occasion. He also declared, "The doctors killed Garfield; I just shot him." (Which sounded crazy at the time, but actually has some truth to it. “His doctors were ‘the best doctors,’ meaning old school,” Dhody explains. “They had trained before the theory of antisepsis, so they were not taking the necessary precautions. They were not sterilizing instruments; they were not sterilizing hands.” They also believed a person could be fed rectally and would give Garfield regular beef-broth enemas. Garfield died many pounds thinner and riddled with infection.)