How Donald Trump Manhandled the Media
At the dawn of the Trump presidency, America’s political press corps is feeling anxious, territorial, threatened—and the president-elect showed Wednesday that he’s ready to take advantage.

In the 18 hours leading up to Trump’s news conference, the press had been busy obsessing over BuzzFeed’s controversial publication of a dossier containing salacious, and unverified, claims about his relationship with Russia. Knowing they would field questions about the story, Trump and his team came prepared with a divide-and-conquer strategy—seizing on the intra-industry ethics debate surrounding the report to drive a wedge between their media adversaries.

Incoming White House press secretary Sean Spicer kicked things off with a belligerent statement blasting BuzzFeed as a “left-wing blog” that was engaged in a “sad and pathetic attempt to get clicks.” Next up was Mike Pence, who adopted a deeply-troubled-and-saddened tone as he delivered a brief sermon on the Fourth Estate. “You know, I have long been a supporter of a free and independent press and I always will be,” Pence intoned. “But with freedom comes responsibility.”

When Trump finally arrived at the podium, he was in good-cop mode, heaping praise on the journalists who had criticized BuzzFeed’s choice to publish the dossier. “I just want to compliment many of the people in the room,” he said. “I have great respect for the news and great respect for freedom of the press and all of that. But I will tell you, there were some news organizations with all that was just said that were so professional—so incredibly professional, that I’ve just gone up a notch as to what I think of you, OK?”

Trump spent the rest of the news conference demonstrating his newfound respect for members of the press by taunting them, chiding them, and happily hurling insults at them.

When NBC’s Hallie Jackson asked Trump if he would release his tax returns—as he once promised—the president-elect practically scoffed at the audacity of the request.

“You know,” Trump said, “the only one that cares about my tax returns are the reporters, OK? They’re the only who ask.”

“You don’t think the American public is concerned about it?” Jackson asked.

“No, I don’t think so,” came the response. “I won.”

Aides and supporters in the atrium burst into gleeful applause, and Trump pushed on to the next question.

Later, when CNN’s Jim Acosta—whose network first reported that intelligence officials had briefed Trump on the existence of the controversial dossier—tried to ask a question, Trump swiftly shot him down. “Not you,” the president-elect snapped. “Your organization is terrible … You are fake news.” (On Wednesday night, Director of National Intelligence James Clapper issued a statement verifying the essentials of CNN’s report.)

Supporters cheered again, drowning out Acosta’s protests, and Trump called on another reporter.