Liz MacKean obituary
Television journalist who worked for Newsnight for 14 years, leaving the BBC over its decision to drop her investigation into the Jimmy Savile sex scandal

Liz MacKean, who has died aged 52 after a stroke, was that rarest of creatures in the world of broadcast news. In an industry full of egos and elbows, Liz was a campaigning journalist without even the smallest measure of sanctimony or self-regard. It was the victims who were always given the limelight in her work. It was their cause, not her career, that was paramount. Indeed, she sometimes pursued her targets at great cost to her career.

Liz was born in Romsey, Hampshire, the second of four daughters of Tom MacKean, a circuit judge, and his wife, Muriel (nee Hodder). It was not until her parents sent her to Gordonstoun in Scotland that they found a school that could accommodate her energy and love of the outdoors. Her other passion was drama, which she went on to study at the University of Manchester. After graduating, Liz formed a two-person theatre company called Juicy Fruits. Although she gained her Equity card after touring the comedy circuit for a year, by now she had settled on broadcast journalism. In this she found a career that could feed her love of performance and required only minimal time in an office.

I first met Liz in the early 1990s when she arrived in the newsroom of BBC Radio Solent. She was so full of competence and confidence we were all in awe of her. For a journalist she had a skill worth more than any qualification – people wanted to tell her things. Her innate curiosity and personal warmth found stories and, just as easily, devoted friends.

Her first network job, in September 1994, was as one of the main presenters of BBC Breakfast News. In July 1999 she moved to Newsnight, her home for 14 years. As the programme’s Northern Ireland correspondent she grabbed with relish a subject lesser reporters would have happily avoided. In a conflict full of complexity and nuance ready to trip up the unprepared, Liz won the trust of all sides and as a consequence brought the obscured face of many a paramilitary hard man to our screens. Again, people wanted to tell her things and this was history being written as it was being lived. With great courage Liz was prepared to cross the hard men, as she did in her reporting of the 2005 murder of Robert McCartney.

Once the fragile peace that Liz put into words and pictures became more robust, Northern Ireland slipped down the news running order and she looked for new challenges. She began working on a string of exposés with Newsnight’s investigations producer Meirion Jones.

In 2009 the pair, with others, uncovered the illegal dumping of toxic waste in Ivory Coast by the oil trading company Trafigura. The firm eventually paid £30m in an out-of-court settlement to 31,000 victims in a class-action lawsuit. The settlement though included a joint statement agreed between Trafigura and the victims to the effect that the health impacts of the spill had not been severe. This exposed the BBC’s report, and its claim that there had been deaths and miscarriages, to a libel action. The BBC apologised on this one point and made a payment to charity.

The company had admitted, however, to the dumping of 500 tons of hazardous waste. In all other aspects Liz’s report proved correct. Together with Jones and four others she was awarded the 2010 Daniel Pearl award for international investigative reporting.

In late 2011 the pair began another investigation that would have a profound impact on both their lives, the BBC and wider society. Having found people who convincingly testified that Jimmy Savile had sexually abused them as children, Liz and Meirion could not persuade the then Newsnight editor to run their story. They believed it was being deliberately suppressed in order to save the BBC embarrassment.

A subsequent inquiry by Sky’s former head of news Nick Pollard concluded that the pair had got the story right and that that they had found clear and compelling evidence that Savile was a paedophile. The decision by their editor to drop the investigation was described by Pollard as “clearly flawed”, though he added it was made in good faith and not in an effort to limit the reputational damage to the BBC.

The episode left Liz feeling let down and isolated by an organisation she had once regarded as a benevolent employer. A less hardworking journalist might have accepted an opportunity to take things easy, to wait for the personnel inside the corporation to change, and the office politics to change with them. That was not Liz’s way. She hated to waste time. She accepted voluntary redundancy from the BBC in April 2013.

She continued her investigations, making a series of films for Channel 4 and winning more awards. In 2015 she was named journalist of the decade by Stonewall.

Liz and her partner of 22 years, Donna Rowlands, had two children. Their daughter, Alex, was born in 2001, and their son, Will, in 2002. The couple married as soon as the change in the law allowed.

Liz’s love of the outdoors continued all her life. She was hiking on Snowdon just a week before her death and in June achieved her “day skipper” licence as a sailor. She was a wonderfully fun woman to work with and be around. A glass with Liz after a day of filming was one of the great pleasures of working life at Newsnight. However stressful the day or upsetting the subject matter of the work, Liz would very soon have everyone laughing.

She is survived by Donna, Alex and Will, her parents and her sisters, Sal, Jane and Mags.

• Elizabeth Mary MacKean, journalist, born 30 November 1964; died 18 August 2017