Bodies of light
In 1939, while repairing high frequency electrotherapy equipment at his workshop in Krasnodar, Russia, the inventor and electrician Semyon Davidovich Kirlian made a spectacular discovery. When he attached a sparking electrode to his hand and placed it on to a photographic plate, the plate revealed the image of a glowing, blue, hand-shaped halo.

Over several years, Kirlian and his journalist wife Valentina developed equipment that allowed them to view moving objects in real time, creating dazzling visual effects. Encouraged by visits from scientific dignitaries, the Kirlians became convinced that their bioluminescent images showed a life force or energy field that reflected the physical and emotional states of their living subjects, and could even diagnose illnesses. In 1961 they published their first paper, in the Russian Journal of Scientific and Applied Photography, and their story then reached the west via the 1970 book Psychic Discoveries Behind the Iron Curtain.

The Kirlians' images struck a chord with Dr Thelma Moss, a parapsychologist and LSD-therapy enthusiast at the University of California, Los Angeles. Moss made several trips to see the Kirlians in the USSR, where their techniques were being taken seriously and being used in space research. Particularly impressive were claims that when a leaf is cut in two under Kirlian imaging, an outline of its missing half persists for some time, suggesting, they felt, the presence of an "energetic body". Moss considered the Kirlians' images to be documentary evidence of the subtle bodies and auras described by mystics, and used them to promote traditional ideas about healing and life force.

What the images actually reveal, scientists at Philadelphia's Drexel University discovered in the late 1970s, is a kind of corona discharge like that produced when dragging your feet on a carpet, or in the film St Elmo's Fire. The team, partly sponsored by the US defence department, found that the visual effect was dependent on moisture levels on the subject's skin, similar to how a lie detector works or the Scientologists' E-meter. The team failed to recreate the "phantom leaf" effect.

Despite those "aura photography" stalls at New Age fairs, the astral body remains an elusive quarry.