Donald Trump: the interview
He is America's most flamboyant tycoon, as likely to feature in the gossip columns as the business pages. And, as presenter of the US version of The Apprentice, he has become a household name. Now he wants to build an extravagant golf course in Scotland. But first things first - what's with the hair? Oh, and the wives ...

'Good morning, Trump Organisation?' On the 26th floor of the most egocentric skyscraper in New York, a man walks through the foyer trailing a large black container behind him. The box has 'fragile' stickers all over it and looks as though it might contain a weapon of some kind.

'Oh,' sighs the receptionist in delight, 'the trumpet!' At least that's what I think she says - until the man opens the box, peels back layers of packaging and reveals not a musical instrument but a Trump Head, an enormous cartoonish likeness of her boss.

The receptionist takes a furtive glance around her golden semicircle of a desk and says: 'Can I try it on?'

And who wouldn't want to know what it feels like to be The Donald, as he is affectionately known, mainly by himself? If he is to be believed, he is a multibillionaire. He lives in what is widely thought to be the most expensive apartment in the city, a three-storey penthouse 40 floors above his office, where there is a marble fountain to rival the Trevi in his living room and where his nine-month-old son Barron has a floor to himself, decorated in Louis XIV yellow damask. He is married to a model almost half his age. Thanks to the outlandish success of his TV show, The Apprentice, he has been deemed worthy of a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Perhaps most astoundingly, he gets away with That Hair.

Yet there is something curious about the costume. You would have thought that Trump, possibly the least publicity-shy celebrity since Madonna, would lend himself naturally to caricature. But the Trump head looks less like a Spitting Image puppet than Trump himself. He is, it seems, beyond caricature; he has transcended it by doing all the work himself. In the recently published collection of Spy magazine parodies, sometime editors Kurt Andersen and Graydon Carter reminisced that whenever Trump threatened to sue when they joked about him in the Eighties, 'it was like talking to the TV during Looney Tunes and having Daffy Duck reply'.

Via antechambers of sleek-looking ladies, I am led to the man himself. He is sitting behind a desk made of ultra-expensive wood, which has been glazed and polished until it looks like plastic. The desk is the size of a small swimming pool, an arrangement that conveniently obviates the need for a handshake. (Among Trump's tips for success are: 'Think big', 'Be paranoid', 'Have a short attention span' and 'Avoid the handshake whenever possible', none of which bodes well for an interview.) He is wearing a Brioni suit with a demure silver tie and his hair has taken on the unplaceable tinge of the marble in the Trump Tower lobby: orange? beige? dusky pink? Whatever it is, it's presumably designed to go well with gold - a lot of it. In a corner of the room is a Perspex box containing a scale model of Trump behind a desk, firing a young woman.

'How much time do you need for this interview?' he says by way of greeting, 'Because I'm closing a big deal.'

Time being money, Trump springs up to hand me some propaganda: glossy brochures featuring Trump Towers, Trump Palaces, Trump Plazas, Trump Hotels and Trump Golf Clubs all over North America - correction, the World.

'I'll get you a biography, too.'

Well, I mutter, I've read several of your autobiographies and ...

'This'll be a little easier for you. MEREDITH!'

Trump has what some of his employees refer to as an open-door policy; its main function seems to be that he can shout at them through it.

'Would you get me a biography please!'

Meredith McIver, one of the assistants who doubles as his ghost writer, scuttles in with a few sheets of paper, on which a company bio is printed in bold and written in similar fashion: 'A schoolboy's dream ... a competitor's challenge. Donald J Trump is the very definition of the American success story. In August 2006, Mr Trump was voted by the staff and writers of Business Week as one of the Top 10 most competitive business people on the planet.'

'Today, I'm in all the papers,' he says, confirming this spirit of competition. 'You saw the amount of press? It was beyond belief - every major show, every everything. You check me on the internet I guess, do you? What - does your machine explode?'

Barely a day goes by in New York when Trump is not in the news. Earlier in the week, there was a full page in the New York Post about a new construction site of his where 19th-century human remains had been found, prompting a delay and a number of fine metaphors about skeletons in closets, ancestors turning in graves, bodies Trump must have trampled on to get where he is today and the like.

But it's true: the day we meet, Trump is on the front page of all the tabloids for performing one of his most attention-seeking extravaganzas. Miss USA, the title holder in a franchise he owns, had been involved in an under-age drinking scandal. Trump was expected to issue the edict for which he has become famous: You're fired! Instead, he called a press conference and forgave the girl, who bore more than a passing resemblance to at least two of his wives. Hey presto: publicity.

'I had no idea it was going to be this kind of behemoth,' Trump marvels, 'in terms of the press that it got. It's crazy - the biggest story everywhere. And frankly, that's not bad for the franchise.'

Is that why you forgave her?

'No. I did it because it was the right thing to do. It's all about second chances. A lot of people come to New York thinking it's going to be a bowl of cherries and most young people, like Miss USA, get a big kick in the ass. It's a very tough place to break.'

There was a time, not so long ago, when Donald Trump was known as 'the Comeback Kid', an epithet he used in relation to Miss USA. His second autobiography, published in 1997, is even called The Art of the Comeback. According to a number of accounts, Trump more or less went bankrupt in the early Nineties, a state of affairs he has confessed might be partly attributed to his loss of focus when he had an affair with Marla Maples, soon to be his second wife, and was taken to the cleaners by Ivana, his first. He was reportedly bailed out by his three surviving siblings, who had also been left money by their father, a real-estate developer whom Trump followed into the family business. (His eldest brother died of alcoholism in 1981; though Trump has his own brand of vodka, he says he has never touched a drop.) I ask him if he forgave Miss USA because he saw himself in her.

'Well,' he says, 'in the early Nineties, I was in a lot of trouble because the real estate markets had collapsed; many of my friends went bankrupt, never to be heard from again. I never went bankrupt, but I was in deep trouble and now my company is much bigger, much stronger than it ever was before. So I don't view myself as "comeback". But when I speak, I have thousands of people come listen to speeches on success and everything else. Had I had a simple, smooth life, those crowds wouldn't exist.'

But you wouldn't call that a comeback? I ask.

'No, I've had a very steady career, with some interesting market pitfalls.'

Just then, a waif hovers in to indicate that he's expected on the phone. Trump takes the call.

'My man. I'm OK. You saw that thing about Miss USA, I guess? I am. An extremely nice person - like you. So what's going on? Oh, that's phenomenal. That's fantastic. Thanks, Georgie. Are you going to be down there this weekend? Florida, I mean? OK, good. Well, I'll see you down there. Let's try and play golf.'

Golf is one of Trump's secret (i.e., known to everyone) weapons. He claims to have made a lot of money on the golf course, just by getting to know people and mulling things over while playing. Now he has built four courses of his own and has plans to build a vast one in Scotland, a project that has drawn criticism from environmentalists. Trump will have none of it. It's a hunting site, he says; they shoot more birdies there now than they ever would on a golf course. Plus, he adds, his mother was from Scotland: the Isle of Lewis.

The waif returns. He takes a call on the other line.

'Hey. Yeah. Hold on one second.' He looks up at me. 'Could you give me two seconds?'

I step out of his office and stand near the door, a vantage point that allows me a more leisurely inspection of the decorations. Photos of Trump with various celebrities abound - Ronald Reagan, John F Kennedy Jr and, most important, himself, on the cover of Time magazine. A chummy letter from the head of Barnes & Noble has been framed ('Dear Donald ... to booksellers, you are the Harry Potter of business books'). And on a table near the window is a porcelain statue of a boxer, with an inscription beneath it: 'Donald Trump, the Comeback Kid.'

It's hard to know how seriously anyone takes Donald Trump. He is, in the New York Times's estimation, 'the emblematic New Yorker ... the number one guy in the number one city'. Once, at a very high-end New York fashion show, I was surprised to see Trump - no style icon - greeted with great warmth by Vogue editor Anna Wintour, who later wrote in her magazine: 'Donald is in cahoots with those who would portray him as a garish, ego-driven mogul. But anyone who has had meaningful dealings with him will invariably have caught a glimpse of his good-natured, kind-hearted side'.

Hip hop mogul Russell Simmons has referred to Trump as 'the American dream': his aesthetic tastes are even more bling than those of P Diddy, who is, incidentally, a friend of his; he is what every boy in every housing project wants to become. ('He's not a Hamptons person,' one of his assistants tells me. 'With the Boeing 727, it's a shorter commute to Florida.') One of the most inspired aspects of Trump's narcissism is that he draws attention to himself by claiming to want to make the rest of us rich. Countless books published under his name offer tips on 'how to think like a billionaire'. When it comes to knowing his audience, he is a master.

More than a businessman, Trump is an entertainer. When the producer of Survivor approached him in 2003 to make The Apprentice, Trump came into his own - his daily life was already a form of performance art. Kurt Andersen refers to him as 'our 21st-century reincarnation of PT Barnum', but Trump is both the ringmaster and the attraction. His sole form of communication, it seems, is hyperbole. He shouts or schmoozes, his lips puckering around choice words, his voice the tone of a Vegas club singer circa 1950. At one point in our interview, I asked him which had been more important to him as a child, performing or winning? 'Well, they're very similar words,' he said. 'You know, good performance leads to winning. You perform in order to win. It's all about the endgame.'

But is he a figure of the New York establishment or a figure of fun? Mark Singer, who wrote a New Yorker profile of him a decade ago, tells me: 'There are certainly a lot of people in whatever passes for power circles in New York who kind of tolerate Trump, like Trump.' He has made a lot of political contributions in order to build his towers. But is having money enough? And has Trump got enough money? Forbes magazine puts his fortune at $2.7bn. Trump says: 'Read Forbes and double it.'

Timothy O'Brien, a New York Times reporter who is being sued for $5bn by Trump over TrumpNation, a book published last year, claims Trump is, in fact, worth no more than $250m. A favourite experiment among certain of Trump's detractors is to send him cheques for very small amounts of money to see if he deposits them. He always does. 'You take some of these hedge-fund guys,' says Singer. 'They make Trump look like he should be shining their shoes when it comes to wealth, but they're quieter. His power, I believe, is in direct proportion to his shamelessness. You ask if anyone takes him seriously and the question really is: can anyone ever penetrate the degree to which he takes himself seriously?'

In the lead-up to the American elections in 2000, Trump made it known that he was considering running for President. 'The old rich may look down their noses at me,' he said then, anticipating accusations of being an arriviste, 'but I think they kiss my ass.'

When I ask him about his presidential aspirations, he says he wasn't really going to run, but 'people asked me to'. Then he adds cannily (think of the headlines!): 'I'd be more inclined to run now than I would have been in 2000.'

Really? I say, What would you do if you were President?

'First, I'd try and solve the problems in the Middle East - that could be solved. It's sad what's happening, but let's go on to another subject.'

No, I press him, I'm interested to hear what the solution is.

'Well, it can be solved. Everything can be solved if you have talent.'

I ask Trump if after 11 September, he considered building things a bit lower.

'Yeah, it had an impact,' he says. 'I was going to build a building in Chicago of 150 storeys and I made it 92. New York City made a big mistake by building the building they're doing. They should have duplicated the World Trade Centre, but a little bit taller and stronger.'

Our exchange doesn't remotely resemble a conversation. It's more like gunshot. After each of my questions, Trump takes a phone call, or barks an order, or says: 'OK, I think we're ...' as a prelude to showing me the door. I find myself firing things at him just to stop him finishing the sentence.

Now, about your hair, I begin.

'It's all mine!' Trump cries, lifting his fringe to show me grey roots beneath.

Um, yes, I see, I say, distracted. But that's not what I was going to ask. At photographer Helmut Newton's memorial service in 2004, super-designer Tom Ford reportedly spent all evening telling Trump's then-fiancee Melania that she had to do something about Trump's hair. How many people had advised him to change it?

'Uhh ... not many,' he says, patting it back into shape. 'Hey look, I have the hottest show on television. I wonder if I changed it, maybe the show wouldn't be so hot.'

Who does it for you? I ask.

'Mostly my wife just cuts it.'

The style has lasted longer than any of the wives - Trump is on his third. 'And by the way,' he adds, 'she thinks it's wonderful. You know why? Cos she's intelligent. In other words, even if it isn't, she wants to make me happy.'

I tell him futurologist Marian Salzman has described him as the ultimate 'ubersexual'. Would he say that was accurate?

'What does that mean?' he snaps, as if it were clearly an insult.

Well, I suppose it means you're sexy, I suggest.

'Oh,' he purrs, the slipperiest of smiles spreading across his lips, 'Well, tell her I like her also. I want a copy of that book. MEREDITH!'

Suddenly, his assistant is behind me. 'There's a woman called ...' Trump nods at me for the information. 'She wrote a book called ...' Another nod. 'Get it! She said nice things. She said I'm the ultimate ... whatever. Write her a letter, I'll thank her!'

I am introduced to Donald Trump Junior in his office down the hall. He is signing a two-foot high stack of cheques. It occurs to me that he, of all people, can tell me the difference between the man and the brand. 'The brand is very much the person,' he says. 'There are times when it may be exaggerated, but it's pretty much him. He is the brand; hopefully we can perpetuate that.'

An unusual way to talk about one's father, perhaps, but it does shed light on something I have been wondering about Trump: what kind of legacy is he aiming for? When he goes to what he calls 'that big boardroom in the sky', does he want to be remembered for himself or does he just want his name on everything? In other words, as I put it to Don S r, if his buildings were still standing but he was forgotten, would that be all right? 'No!' he exclaims. 'I want to be remembered!' Then he takes another call.

Eventually, Trump gives up trying to ease me out of his office. He simply stands up and says he has to go.

Just one more question, I insist. If no one were looking at you, do you think you'd still exist?

For once, Donald Trump pauses. He brings his palms together in front of his mouth and says: 'No. Because, honestly, I wouldn't have any fun. There are people who are successful, but nobody knows who they are, and I say what's the purpose? Everybody knows who I am.'

Don's life

Born 1946 Queens, New York, son of Fred Trump, wealthy property developer and founder of the Trump Organisation.

1959 New York Military Academy.

1964 Attends Fordham University, then University of Pennsylvania.

1968 Joins his father's real-estate company, the Trump Organisation.

1977 Marries Ivana Zelnickova (right); three children, Donald Jr, Ivanka and Eric.

1990 Recession bites empire hard.

1993 Weds Marla Maples; one child, Tiffany.

1994 Begins to eliminate debts of more than $4bn, but Trump Hotels is slow to recover.

2004 Cuts personal holding in hotels company. Becomes executive producer and host of American edition of The Apprentice

2004 Weds Melania Knauss, who is 24 years his junior; son Barron born 2006.

2007 He owns more than 18 million square feet of Manhattan and is one of the world's highest-paid TV stars.