General Sir Mike Jackson
That grizzled visage, so easily mistaken in the theatre of war for a field map of the Kosovan mountains, conceals one of the most finely-honed minds in the military. As a Services Fellow at Cambridge University a decade ago, Jackson penned a prescient paper arguing that the army's future was as a flexible intervention force. As an application for the post of Balkan peacekeeping supremo it certainly did the trick.

His mess-room nickname may be Darth Vader - perhaps Nato would have done better with light sabres instead of choppers that couldn't fly high enough - but the K-For chief's military hero is the Duke of Wellington. The duke (who only had to hold together an alliance of two countries) defeated 19th-century proto-Slobba, Napoleon.

The bags - perhaps 'suitcases' would do them more justice - under Gen Mike's eyes testify to a life of late nights spent in diplomacy with power-mad warlords. Jackson reportedly gets by on Thatcheresque amounts of sleep - a good thing too, since Serb generals might have taken him a bit less seriously if he'd had to leave negotiations over their withdrawal at quarter to ten each evening to warm some Horlicks and hit the sack.

Jackson - charged with safeguarding the return of the Kosovan Albanians back to their ravaged homeland - may have narrowly averted a global conflict, it emerged this week. According to Newsweek, Gen Wesley Clark, the American commander of the Nato action, wanted Gen Mike to send an assault squad of paratroopers to Pristina airport to stop the Russians getting there first. Jackson reportedly squashed the armchair general's cold-war ravings - 'I'm not going to start the Third World War for you,' he is quoted as saying - and, sure enough, General Clark discovered last week that he's heading for the Sunny Vale Home for Retired Nato Chiefs a little sooner than planned.

The cheroot-puffing Jackson, 55, famously possesses the ability to absorb quantities of alcohol that would make Boris Yelstin reach for the Alka-Seltzer - yet with no outward effects. It's one of the character traits that won him the undying loyalty of his troops, to whom he is Mike, not Michael - and certainly not Lieutenant-General Sir Michael Jackson KCB CBE.

The general insists that absolutely nothing - got that? - is to be implied from the fact that after leaving Sandhurst he joined the intelligence corps and got a degree in Russian. Let's face it - he'd have been too recognisable to be a spy anyway, except perhaps posing as his lookalike, WH Auden, at a Soviet poetry symposium.