Clinton pays Paula Jones $850,000
WASHINGTON (AP) - Paula Jones is awaiting the arrival of an $850,000 cheque from President Clinton, bringing an official end to the four-year saga spurred by her allegations of sexual harassment.

Clinton mailed the settlement cheque to Mrs. Jones on Tuesday, even as he braced for the heaviest fallout yet from her harassment suit - an impeachment trial in the Senate.

To finance the settlement, the president drew about $375,000 from his and Hillary Rodham Clinton's personal funds and got the rest of the money, about $475,000, from an insurance policy, a White House official told The Associated Press.

"This ends it. The check is being Fed-Exed" to Bill McMillan, one of Mrs. Jones' lawyers, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.

The official said the personal funds were drawn from the Clintons' blind trust, which was valued in their financial disclosure statement at between $1 million and about $5 million. None of the money was drawn from Clinton's legal defense fund, which raises money from private citizens to defray his legal bills, the official said.

How much of that money Mrs. Jones will see is still at issue. As the settlement was reached in November, Mrs. Jones faced an outstanding claim by Joseph Cammarata and Gilbert Davis, the two lawyers who quit her case last year and filed an $800,000 lien against any settlement in order to collect legal fees.

"I don't think it's been decided yet" how much Mrs. Jones will receive, said her friend and adviser, Susan Carpenter McMillan Tuesday night. "We did hear they are sending out the check. We hope to receive it soon."

Mrs. Jones' lawsuit brought to light the president's affair with former White House intern Monica Lewinsky and set in motion a criminal investigation that resulted in a historic House vote last month to impeach Clinton.

The president files his trial brief today, and House prosecutors on Thursday will begin presenting to the Senate their case that the president obstructed justice in the Jones lawsuit and lied about it before a federal grand jury.

Clinton reached a settlement with Mrs. Jones on November 13 after four years of litigation.

Under that settlement, Clinton didn't admit any wrongdoing or apologize and simply agreed to make a cash settlement to Mrs. Jones, a former Arkansas state worker.

Mrs. Jones alleged that Clinton, when he was governor of Arkansas, made a crude advance in a room at a Little Rock hotel in 1991. Clinton has steadfastly denied her accusation.

Clinton testified in that lawsuit on January 17, 1998, and during questioning about his relationships with other women, denied he had "sexual relations" with Ms. Lewinsky. Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr got permission to investigate whether Clinton was trying to obstruct the lawsuit.

Clinton was forced to acknowledge a relationship with Ms. Lewinsky in testimony before a federal grand jury last August. Starr's investigation led to a referral to the House of Representatives accusing Clinton of several criminal acts.

U.S. District Judge Susan Webber Wright dismissed the lawsuit last April 1, ruling that Mrs. Jones' allegations, even if true, wouldn't qualify as a case of sexual harassment. An appeal of that dismissal was pending before a federal appeals court when the settlement was reached.