Covering Hurricane Irma: journalists go to extremes to report storm
Journalists from US and international media networks sought out the storm for their viewers’ benefit

This article is more than 1 year old

This article is more than 1 year old

Evacuate or stay indoors was the general advice given to Florida’s residents ahead of Hurricane Irma. Many packed up their cars or sought refuge at home but, there was one particular group of people who remained.

Hurricane Irma: storm moves towards Tampa with risk of life-threatening surges – live Read more

It seems it is a rite of passage for every TV journalist and meteorologist to venture out into the elements during the midst of a wild storm. Live broadcasts are often met with wind-swept hair, drenched parkas and soaked microphones, as journalists attempt to maintain composure and report to camera.

Dramatic footage posted on Twitter on Monday shows CNN’s Chris Cuomo braving torrential rain and howling winds in his coverage of Hurricane Irma from Naples, Florida.

CNN (@CNN) CNN’s @BillWeirCNN gets slammed in Key Largo by #HurricaneIrma’s wind gusts as the storm’s eyewall reaches the Florida Keys pic.twitter.com/OHYwQ7TdT7

CNN Weather Center (@CNNweather) Chris Cuomo battling Irma's full force in Naples. Peak gust 142 mph at 4:35 pm https://t.co/SBp2cjLCIK pic.twitter.com/Gv1IjMAQij

His experience is not unique. We are all too familiar with a live cross to a soggy journalist reporting against the backdrop of a ferocious storm. Hurricane Irma was no exception, with many videos emerging on social media of meteorologists and reporters a like, battling the unthinkable.

Juston Drake (@JustonStrmRider) @SimonStormRider getting wind measurements out in the eyewall as well. Got a 117 mph wind gust. pic.twitter.com/PVEPP8FbtB

The most infamous was Mike Seidel, a meteorologist for the Weather Channel, who got a little too close to the action during his coverage on Saturday afternoon.



Mike Seidel (@mikeseidel) Getting slapped by one of the early squalls from #Irma tonight in the Brickell section of #Miami. @stevedresner captures behind the scenes pic.twitter.com/6uXw51mGmB

The Weather Channel (@weatherchannel) This is what the eyewall of Hurricane #Irma looks like. Watch The Weather Channel for continuing storm coverage. pic.twitter.com/7U7JzbVo3Z

AMHQ (@AMHQ) #Miami is being pounded by wind and rain from #Irma. @mikeseidel has a look at the deteriorating conditions. pic.twitter.com/OQDgJxsWaQ

Social media has reacted to much of the wild reporting emerging from Hurricane Irma, with many describing coverage tactics as “unnecessary” and “life-threatening”.

SUK 🚛 (@SUKnives) Don't get me wrong, the work you do is incredibly helpful, but this is just begging for tragedy to happen.

Shawn Bonfine (@BonfineScience) Who gave these storm reporters the idea that we need to see them standing in the storm? I believe you. Go inside #HurrcaneIrma

Some however made light of the situation, no matter the weather.

Nicole (@nicolesanbornn) Weather reporters be like... pic.twitter.com/XISHHyw74w