0316 rkeenepftexas

Email, Russ Keene, spokesman, Balanced Energy for Texas Coalition, March 22, 2016

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, March 22, 2016 10:43 AM

To: Russ Keene

Subject: Urgent inquiry for a fact check

Hello again. I am writing to see if Mike Nasi is available this afternoon to visit for our fact check of this claim, in Texas, by President Obama: “Right now, here in Texas, wind power is already cheaper than dirty fossil fuels.”

Thanks.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

4:37 PM

Gardner, sorry Mike cannot comment for this, he avoids critiquing other fuels. A gentleman’s agreement of sorts amongst the various lobbies.

If helpful, we recommend that any claims about the comparative price of electric energy sources must be checked to make sure the comparisons are "apples to apples." Two repeated mistakes that policy makers and our friends in the press seem to make are:

1. Comparing prices for new power projects but implying that such a comparison should inform whether to retire existing assets. Existing assets, especially coal, are nearly always more affordable than new coal, gas, or renewables because the significant capital costs associated with power projects will have been covered over the years through past rates. A study that addressed this issue can be found at:

http://instituteforenergyresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/ier_lcoe_2015.pdf

2. Not factoring in subsidization of the energy source. While it is accurate to say that all sources of fuel receive some level of subsidy, there is a significant difference between the rate-subsidization that results from such subsidies. For example, reports often note that "coal and gas" are subsidized by tax structures relating to exploration of those fuels and maybe even some R&D related to environmental control technologies at power plants using those fuels. However, the value of such "subsidies" is dramatically lower than the direct subsidization of renewables through regulatory mandates (I.e. Renewable energy quotas) and the production tax credit, in addition to state financial incentives. The following report from the Texas Comptroller tackled this issue:

http://comptroller.texas.gov/specialrpt/electricity/96-1767.pdf

… --Russ