Ex-Ukip Janice Atkinson joins Le Pen-led EU group
MEP for south-east England now vice-president of far-right Europe of Nations and Freedom, headed by France’s Front National leader

A former Ukip MEP has defected from Nigel Farage’s European parliamentary group to join a new far-right alliance led by the French Front National (FN) Marine Le Pen.

Janice Atkinson, who represents the south-east of England, praised the “great courage and leadership” of Le Pen as she became vice-president of the new group, Europe of Nations and Freedom, enabling it to qualify for millions of euros in public funding.

Janice Atkinson expelled from Ukip over false expenses claims Read more

Atkinson was expelled from Ukip before the election over allegations that a member of her staff tried to inflate an expenses bill, less than a year after she was elected for the party. She had previously got into hot water for referring to a Thai Ukip supporter as a “ting-tong from somewhere”, forcing Farage to apologise and make a personal visit to the constituent.

However, Atkinson was still allowed to remain a member of Farage’s Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy (EFDD) group, until the news broke on Tuesday that she was switching to Le Pen’s new alliance.

In a statement, Atkinson said it was a “historic day for all in Britain and across Europe who stand opposed to the European superstate”.

“Our co-president Marine Le Pen, leader of the first party of France, has shown great courage and leadership in advancing this movement across Europe,” Atkinson said. “She now takes her rightful place at the front of the European Parliament in opposition to the Brussels cartel.”

The move will be embarrassing for Farage, who last year stressed that he would not take Ukip into any alliance with the FN, despite their common anti-EU cause, because of “prejudice and anti-Semitism” in the French party.

Front National family feud goes nuclear as Jean-Marie Le Pen disowns Marine Read more

A spokesman for Farage’s EFDD group said: “Former Tory Janice Atkinson has been expelled from Ukip in March and suspended from the EFDD Group in the European parliament. Whatever she does is beyond our control.”

The new group is expected to be formed of 36 MEPs, mostly from Le Pen’s FN, but also from the Dutch anti-Islam Party for Freedom, led by Geert Wilders, the Freedom Party of Austria, Lega Nord from Italy and Vlaams Belang from Belgium.

Catherine Bearder, the Liberal Democrat MEP, said it was a “disgraceful decision”.

“The people of the south-east region she represents will undoubtedly be shocked by this move,” she said. “Janice Atkinson should do the honourable thing and resign, not prop up a group of Europe’s most hateful and far-right parties.”

According to research by think tank Open Europe, based on 38 MEPs, the new group could apply for funding worth around €17.5m over the remaining four years of the parliament.