Nine killed as US consulate in Jeddah attacked
Islamist militants today attacked the US consulate in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, with explosives and machine guns, killing four security guards and five staff, Saudi officials said.

Gunmen fought their way into the complex, reportedly taking 18 staff and visa applicants hostage for a short time before Saudi security forces stormed the building, killing three attackers and arresting two others.

Witnesses reported hearing two explosions, which breached the heavily-guarded compound's walls as the attack began shortly before midday local time (0900 GMT).

The blasts caused fire to break out, and clouds of thick black smoke could be seen above the consulate. Around 200 national guardsmen surrounded the building, and witnesses reported heavy exchanges of gunfire.

"We have five confirmed dead among our locally engaged staff and one of them is a contract [security] guard," the US embassy spokeswoman Carol Kalin said.

She said no Americans had been killed and a "handful of other employees" had been taken to hospital. Security sources told Reuters the dead were Arabs and Asians.

In a statement on Saudi television, an interior ministry official said three gunmen had been killed and two arrested after being wounded. Officials also said four members of the Saudi forces had been killed. The spokesman said the attackers had entered the compound after lobbing explosives at the gate.

Earlier, the al-Arabiya satellite television reported that attackers had attempted to storm the compound in a car, and the vehicle exploded in front of the building. One witness reported billowing smoke, and said police officers were keeping traffic away from the area. Some witnesses said gunfire had been heard just before the blast.

There was no early claim of responsibility. However, officials have blamed al-Qaida for a string of attacks in the kingdom over the past two years.

Roger Harrison, of Arab News, said US citizens in Saudi Arabia saw themselves as the "number one target" for attackers. The US embassy in the Saudi capital, Riyadh, and the consulate in Dhahran were closed to the public as a precaution, officials said.

Khaled al-Maeena, the editor of the Jeddah-based Arab News, said helicopters were flying over the scene of today's attack. "The magnitude of this assault on the consulate has taken all Jeddah residents by surprise," he said.

The consulate building is in the heart of the city, only half a mile from the Red Sea coastal road. Security around it has been very tight since last year's series of bombings of buildings housing foreign workers.

In May, 22 people, including six westerners, were killed by militants who sprayed gunfire inside an oil contractor's office in Yanbu, 220 miles (350 kilometres) north of Jeddah.

Last November, a suicide car bomb killed 17 people and wounded 122 at a compound for foreign workers in Riyadh. Al-Qaida claimed responsibility for shooting dead a British national in Riyadh in September.