Barack Obama calls for 'reset' in US-Russia relations
Moscow speech calls for co-operation to stop nuclear proliferation and a move away from cold war policies

This article is more than 9 years old

This article is more than 9 years old

Barack Obama today urged Russia to move on from the cold war and stop interfering in the affairs of neighbouring states.

In a keynote speech during his first visit as president to Moscow, Obama delivered a carefully worded critique of Russian foreign policy.

"In 2009, the great power does not show strength by dominating or demonising other countries. The days when empires could treat other sovereign states as pieces on a chess board are over," he said.

But, speaking at Moscow's New Economic School on the second day of his visit, he acknowledged that the US needed to play its role in making a "fresh start" in US-Russian relations. He admitted this would not be easy, and acknowledged previous tensions.

"America wants a strong, peaceful and prosperous Russia ... on the fundamental issues that will shape this century, Americans and Russians share common interests that form a basis for co-operation," he told his audience.

The president said old assumptions that the US and Russia were antagonists vying for spheres of influence were wrong.

"Given our interdependence, any world order that tries to elevate one value or people over another will inevitably fail.

"That is why I have called for a 'reset' in relations between the United States and Russia. This must be more than a fresh start between the Kremlin and the White House, though that is important.

"It must be a sustained effort among the American and Russian people to identify mutual interests, and to expand dialogue and co-operation that can pave the way to progress."

Obama made pointed remarks on democracy and press freedom. "Independent media have exposed corruption at all levels of business and government. Competitive elections allow us to change course and hold our leaders accountable," he said.

"If our democracy did not advance those rights, I, as a person of African ancestry, wouldn't be able to address you as an American citizen, much less a president.

"The arc of history shows us that governments which serve their own people survive and thrive; governments which serve only their own power do not. Governments that represent the will of their people are far less likely to descend into failed states, to terrorise their citizens, or to wage war on others."

On nuclear proliferation, the US leader said: "The future does not belong to those who gather armies or plant missiles."

He urged Russia to unite with the US to end North Korea's nuclear efforts and to stop Iran acquiring nuclear weapons.

"If the threat from Iran's nuclear and ballistic missile programme is eliminated, the driving force for missile defence in Europe will be eliminated," Obama said.

"In the short period since the end of the cold war, we have already seen India, Pakistan and North Korea conduct nuclear tests. Without a fundamental change, do any of us truly believe that the next two decades will not bring about the further spread of nuclear weapons?

"That is why America is committed to stopping nuclear proliferation, and ultimately seeking a world without nuclear weapons ... And while I know this goal won't be met soon, pursuing it provides the legal and moral foundation to prevent the proliferation and eventual use of nuclear weapons."

Obama's Moscow address is being billed as the third part in a series of major speeches that began in April in Prague, where he discussed disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, and continued with last month's speech in Cairo, in which he offered a fresh US approach to the Middle East and the Muslim communities.