0715 txsenatepftexas

Emails (excerpted), Patsy Spaw, secretary of the Texas Senate, July 15-16 and 20, 2015

2:09 p.m.

July 15, 2015

I’m not certain we can say anything definitely about why the Capitol faces south, but the more likely reason is that it was built to face the town and the river.

Patsy Spaw

Secretary of the Senate

12:01 p.m.

July 16, 2015

So far we’ve not found the source of the Goliad orientation claim. We’ve read the relevant parts of “The Texas Capitol: A History of the Lone Star Statehouse” publication of the Legislative Council, “The Capitol Story: Statehouse in Texas,” and “Seat of Empire: The Embattled Birth of Austin, Texas,” and done various web searches with no luck. We found a promising book at the archives library--"Austin, Texas: An American Architectural History," and searched through it finding that there was no mention of the Battle of Goliad or antipathy toward the north as a reason for the orientation of the Capitol building.

The Seat of Empire book does say that Waller had originally planned for the capitol to be situated in the center of Austin “grid” but that when he arrived at the site he decided that the “topography called for situating the public buildings on high ground to the rear so as to overlook the river.” Of course the current capitol wasn’t built until much later but this indicates that the plan all along was to have the Capitol face the river.

…

Patsy Spaw

Secretary of the Senate

10:06 a.m.

July 20, 2015

We have located in the Fort Worth Gazette (May 18, 1888) a reference to the statue of Liberty and the star she holds in connection with the massacre at Goliad but it doesn’t talk about the placement of the statue or the Capitol. The comment was made by Judge (and representative and senator) Alexander Terrell at the dedication of the Capitol in which he linked the Capitol to the battles of the Texas revolution and may have contributed to the story. On Goliad in particular he said that “This stately edifice typifies in its strength and fair proportions the unity of a mighty state. On its lofty dome you behold the statue of Liberty, holding up in her hand a single star to blaze amid its sister constellations, fit emblem of the aspirations, the grandeur and the unity of Texas. It rose above the massacre at Goliad to typify redemption.”

I’ve attached a copy of the Seat of Empire except regarding Waller’s decision to situate the Capitol facing south toward the river and the May 18, 1888 article from the Fort Worth Gazette, plus an enlarged copy of the page containing the statement from the newspaper article.

I still believe the Capitol is located where it is in order that it face the town and the river just as originally laid out by Waller.

But Judge Terrell made an interesting connection of the star on the lofty dome being a symbol rising above the constellations to signify redemption of those lost in the massacre—speech grandiose, flowery rhetoric, hyperbole—speaker’s prerogative when dedicating and describing such a grand building—don’t you think?

Patsy Spaw

Secretary of the Senate

From: Selby, Gardner

Sent: Monday, July 20, 2015 10:28 AM

To: Patsy Spaw

Subject: RE: placement of the Capitol building

Thanks for all this—some of which the State Library and Archives emailed me on Friday.

Terrell’s remark is interesting. But it also seems a bit afield from explaining why the Capitol faces south. Agree?

g.

10:37 a.m.

July 20, 2015

Agree—not an explanation—just a statement that includes Goliad massacre and Capitol dome and statue of Liberty—one could, I guess, assume that Liberty was facing Goliad if her star is above—but it takes much more than a leap of faith to connect that to the reason for placement of Capitol. I had the reference removed from Capitol Images last week.

We got the article from the State Library on Friday, too. They had been helping us look all week.

Patsy Spaw

Secretary of the Senate