Russian passenger plane crashes outside Moscow, killing 71
Saratov Airlines flight 6W703 crashes after take off from Domodedovo airport, leaving no survivors

More than 70 people died when a Russian passenger plane crashed shortly after take-off from Moscow’s Domodedovo airport on Sunday, officials say.

Saratov Airlines flight 6W703 was heading to Orsk, a city near Russia’s border with Kazakhstan, when it went down near the town of Argunovo, about 50 miles south-east of Moscow. Witnesses said the plane, an Antonov An-148 aircraft, was in flames as it fell from the sky.

The plane was carrying 71 people – 65 passengers and six crew members. Emergency services officials told the Tass news agency there were no survivors. Wreckage from the plane was reported to be spread over a large area and it was unclear if there were any casualties among people on the ground.

Russia’s gazeta.ru website cited unnamed investigators as saying the pilot had reported a technical malfunction and asked for clearance for an emergency landing at the nearby Zhukovsky International airport. Officials have not confirmed the report. Other reports said one of the plane’s engines may have exploded before the crash.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Russian emergency vehicles arriving at the site of the crash. Photograph: Dmitry Serebryakov/AFP/Getty Images

The transport ministry said several causes were being considered, including weather conditions and human error.



The flight-tracking site Flightradar24 tweeted that the seven-year-old passenger jet had gone into a steep descent five minutes after take-off, after which it had vanished from radars.

The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, expressed his condolences to the families and friends of those who died in the crash and ordered the government to set up a special commission to investigate.

A source from Russia’s emergency services told Interfax the 71 people on board had no chance of survival.

Russian state television aired a video of the crash site, showing parts of the wreckage in the snow. Russia has experienced record snowfalls in recent days and visibility was reportedly poor.

The Russian-made plane had been bought by Saratov from another Russian airline a year ago.

Russian media reported that the emergency services had been unable to reach the crash site by road and rescue workers had walked to the scene on foot. Emergency services said that more than 150 rescue workers had been deployed.

The Russian transport minister was on his way to the crash site, agencies reported. The transport ministry said several causes for the crash were being considered, including weather conditions and human error.

The governor of the Orenburg region, which the plane was flying to, told Russian media more than 60 people on the plane were from the region.

Local media website Ural56.ru in the Orenburg region showed footage of distressed relatives at Orsk airport, where the plane was due to land. Andrei Odintsov, the mayor of Orsk told Russian state television that six psychologists and four ambulances with medics were working with the relatives in the small airport.

Plane crashes are common in Russia, where airlines often operate ageing aircraft in testing conditions. A light aircraft crashed in November in the far east of the country, killing six people on board.

A military plane carrying Russia’s Red Army Choir crashed after taking off from the Black Sea resort of Sochi in December 2016, killing all 92 people on board. The choir had been due to give a concert to Russian troops in Syria. Pilot error was blamed for the crash.

In March 2016, all 62 passengers died when a FlyDubai jet crashed in bad weather during an aborted landing at Rostov-on-Don airport.