Trump G7 photo becomes internet classic, going from baroque to ridiculous
Viral picture of Angela Merkel standing over Donald Trump gets the meme treatment

Trump G7 photo becomes internet classic, going from baroque to ridiculous

A viral photo of Angela Merkel and other world leaders standing over a seated Donald Trump at Friday’s G7 summit has been given the meme treatment on social media, with Twitter users quick to liken the image to everything from renaissance art to a scene from the Apprentice.



Trudeau 'stabbed us in back' on trade, says Trump chief economic adviser Read more

The G7 summit, which brought together world leaders from Germany, Japan, Canada, the US, Italy, France and the UK, was held in Charlevoix, Quebec, in Canada, over the weekend. This year’s summit had a particular focus on trade.

However, the enduring image from the summit was one in which divisions between the group were clear. The German chancellor’s office posted the striking picture to Instagram on Saturday with the caption: “Day two of the G7 summit in Canada: spontaneous meeting between two working sessions.”

The photograph, which was taken by the German cabinet’s official photographer Jesco Denze, was quickly singled out for its uncanny resemblance to a classical painting.

Cameron Bailey (@cameron_tiff) When Art History comes for you. pic.twitter.com/kCeq9nLqiy

Trump, Merkel, Macron: the G7 photos worth a thousand words Read more

Tweets From A Dork (@TweetsFromADork) pic.twitter.com/VXE9A7DDla

The internet proudly presents: Palle Hoffstein (@Palle_Hoffstein) Ok, because I'm feeling pedantic as fuck, I need to point out that this photo does not look like a Renaissance painting. It looks like a Baroque painting. pic.twitter.com/LvlvcSZjmu

Some Twitter users alluded to the overshadowing tensions between the two world leaders. After Trump pulled out of the Iran nuclear deal and recent tariffs on trade, the summit had been renamed by many journalists as the ‘G6 plus one’.

Helen Lewis (@helenlewis) Today, as on many days, I would pay hard cash for access to Angela Merkel’s inner monologue. https://t.co/I3w4oOruyT

Professional Heckler (@HecklerForever) G7 Summit pic.twitter.com/HAiFItZn0q

Mark Kermode (@KermodeMovie) To whomever did this G7 photo-edit - bravo! pic.twitter.com/Bi1lo2kcll

Guy Verhofstadt (@guyverhofstadt) “Just tell us what Vladimir has on you. Maybe we can help.” pic.twitter.com/DLc7YJFXqT

Amee Vanderpool (@girlsreallyrule) Anyone is having a better weekend than Angela Merkel right now. #G7Summit pic.twitter.com/K9QmWxHxaP



While others just jumped at the chance to have a little fun.

Tim Young (@TimRunsHisMouth) This looks like an episode of Celebrity Apprentice where Trump is about to fire Angela Merkel because her strudel marketing plan fell through. pic.twitter.com/ZLYlaDrNts

Jon Lovett (@jonlovett) Leader of the free world meets president of the United States https://t.co/q65rYOoDuE

After a calamitous G7 summit, Donald Trump has arrived in Singapore ahead of his historic meeting with Kim Jong-un. The pair plan to discuss the fate of North Korea’s nuclear weapons program.