Beached humpback whale dies on shore near Vancouver
People gather around a beached humpback whale that died during low tide in White Rock, B.C. ( DARRYL DYCK / THE CANADIAN PRESS ) An RCMP officer walks away from a beached humpback whale that died during low tide in White Rock, B.C., on Tuesday. ( DARRYL DYCK / THE CANADIAN PRESS )

VANCOUVER—Armed with buckets for water and shovels for digging, the residents of White Rock streamed down to the beach early Tuesday in an attempt to help a humpback whale that had washed up on shore. RELATED: See more photos of the beached whale. But just hours after being beached on the waterfront about 45 minutes south of Vancouver, the whale died as dozens of people looked on helplessly. “The animal was alive but it was in just too weak and in such poor shape that we knew it had been distressed for a long time,” said Paul Cottrell, the marine mammal co-ordinator for the Department of Fisheries and Ocean. “It had been labouring for a long time and was swimming and just got caught by the tides.”

Article Continued Below

Cottrell said humpbacked whales are making a comeback on the West Coast and there are usually two or three live entanglements in fishing gear each year. More of the whales are appearing in shore and in more populated places. Last month, Cottrell helped untangle a whale off northern Vancouver Island after it was caught in 50 prawn traps. White Rock Mayor Wayne Baldwin said he wasn’t surprised to see dozens of residents rush to the East Beach to try to help the mammal. “It was heartbreaking for us but there are a lot of lessons here from this tragedy. I hope the big lesson to take away is people have to be conscious of what they discard in the ocean,” he said.

“We know parents are teaching their kids today that you can’t just leave things in the ocean and not do any harm.” Metres of tangled fishing line were found near the whale and damage to the whale’s skin showed scarring. When first discovered, the whale had ocean debris in its mouth and wasn’t able to eat. Vancouver Aquarium veterinarian Dr. Martin said the whale, which was about 8 to 10 metres long, is a juvenile and should have been much larger but had likely been starving for weeks. “It was great to see people interested and kids being respectful. It’s something so unique that we still have this fascination about these whales,” said Haulena, who was one of the first on the scene. He said while he wouldn’t have let his own kids touch the whale because of the whale lice and parasites crawling over the mammal, he understood why so many people were affected by the whale’s arrival. A decision on whether to perform a necropsy and how to remove the carcass will be made by the province and the DFO. After the whale was confirmed dead, police started keeping onlookers back but not before many in the crowd patted the carcass and left flowers on its body.