A ‘Pregnant Barbie’ that comes with a baby you pull out of its stomach has divided parents
A PREGNANT 'Barbie' that has a plastic baby you can pull out of its stomach has horrified parents.

The 'VWH Pregnant Doll Mom Doll Have A Baby In Her Tummy Attractive Barbie Toy For Kid Child' is available on Amazon for just £2.48 - but not everyone thinks it's appropriate for youngsters.

AMAZON 4 The doll has a removable baby bump with a toy baby inside

A link to the doll was shared on LatestDeals.co.uk, where it received a mixed response.

One said: "That's horrid lol, shouldn't be for little kids."

The doll, which is not a licensed Barbie product, is shipped direct from China - and according to some satisfied customers, the months-long wait was worth it.

One commented: "Very surprised how good this doll is! Ordered it because it was so cheap and didn't expect much but its great. For the price you can't beat it! Sure my daughter will love it."

Other happy customers said: "Cheap little doll, tummy comes off and baby out. Kids thought was amazing."

One shopper was so pleased with the doll that she decided to give the single plastic mum and her removable baby a stable family life - and shacked them up with Niall Horan of 1D.

AMAZON 4 The baby can be fished out of inside the doll and then shoved back in again for a later birth

AMAZON 4 The doll - which is not a licensed Barbie product - is less than £3 on Amazon

She wrote: "Considering this comes from China it was delivered pretty fast, it isn’t the average plastic £1 shop doll it is actually good quality I am impressed and my daughter thinks it’s awesome!

"I’m going to purchase the family for her now."

AMAZON 4 One shopper was so pleased with the doll that she shacked her up with Niall Horan from One Direction

However, it seems that sometimes you do get what you pay for, with one dissatisfied customer slamming the cheap toy.

They wrote: "Dreadful! Belly doesn’t fit on well and baby difficult to get out, don’t bother!"

More parenting stories HOL OF A BUSY SCHEDULE This is why Holly Willoughby has quit her lifestyle brand Truly 'STARS GAVE US INSPO' Celebs inspired these mums to breastfeed wherever they are WALT THE HELL Keira Knightley BANS her daughter from watching Disney films - and here's why OH BABY! Seven beauty buys every pregnant lady needs for under a fiver not playing around Mum told little boy to LEAVE playground as she'd planned 'girls day out' BREAK THE TABOO Chris Ramsey and his wife talk of miscarriage heartbreak to inspire others PARENT TRAP New parents reveal the hardest things about becoming a mum 'OUR BABY JUST DIED' Richard Madeley shares tragic story of his wife Judy's stillbirth NAPPY TAX IS PANTS Are you ready to use cloth nappies if disposables become too expensive? MAKING A SPLASH Mum takes breathtaking pics of water births after the death of her own baby BIRTHDAY BILL Mum told to pay £25 for daughter, 10, to go to friend's party - unreasonable? AU NO Mum suspects her husband is cheating with au pair after doing THIS with a cup of tea

The realities of childbirth are VERY different to Barbie's in'n'out method... as these intimate photos of women in labour reveal.

Primark have released a lip kit that can rival Kylie Jenner's... and it's a fraction of the price.

And this bride shed 2 stone for her wedding... only to give birth to a surprise baby just months later.