Teen ‘undergoes 50 surgeries’ in a bid to look like her idol Angelina Jolie… but is branded a ‘zombie’ instead
AN IRANIAN woman has gone viral after claiming she's had 50 surgeries in a bid to look like her idol Angelina Jolie.

Sahar Tabar claims to be one of the Tomb Raider actress' biggest fans and has said she "would do anything" to emulate her.

Instagram 8 Sahar, 19, is hoping to look like her idol Angelina Jolie, left

@sahartabar_official : Instagram 8 The Iranian woman has more than 308,000 followers

The 19-year-old from Tehran underwent 50 surgeries in the space of just a few months, according to Belgian website Sud Info.

This hasn't been officially confirmed however, so it's possible her unique looks are the result of careful make up or even prosthetics.

She also reportedly went on a diet to maintain her 40kg weight, which - provided she is over 4.8ft - would classify her as dangerously underweight.

Sahar has amassed more than 308,000 followers on Instagram although many have left unflattering comments on her pictures.

One person simply posted "Zombie" on a recent shot while another said: "Her: Doc make me look like an 8 month old corpse. Doc: Say no more."

8 Sahar before undergoing the extreme transformation

@sahartabar_official : Instagram 8 The teenager has said she would 'do anything' to look like the star

@sahartabar_official : Instagram 8 Sahar has reportedly had more than 50 surgeries to look more like her idol

@sahartabar_official : Instagram 8 Sahar also has piercings in her cheeks

@sahartabar_official : Instagram 8 She reportedly dieted in order to maintain her small size

@sahartabar_official : Instagram 8 Pictures show her with both brown and blonde hair - and her natural eye colour

From Joe McElderry to Chloe Khan: The 10 most mind-blowing X Factor contestant transformations ever

MOST READ IN FABULOUS WILLY GOOD TO KNOW There are 6 different types of todger… so which one does your man have? AGE GAP I’m a nan at 25 after marrying man 34 years older than me & our sex life is amazing OH BABY! Etiquette guru reveals the big sign that could reveal Meghan Markle is pregnant BEAT THE BLOAT How to EAT your way to a flat stomach - and stop bloating for good FAMILY TROUBLES Princess Diana’s feud with her mum - who called her a ‘whore’ in last call SILENT KILLER The 12 signs of pancreatic cancer - as Aretha Franklin dies from the disease

Meanwhile this skinny teen claimed she got a Kim Kardashian "bubble bum" by copying her Instagram idols’ workouts.

And this mum with selfie dysmorphia revealed she got plastic surgery to look like her Photoshopped snaps.

These super-fans have all had surgery to look like their celeb idols… but can YOU tell who they’re trying to resemble?