TGI Fridays Free Veterans Day Meal
Veterans and active-duty military members that come in to TGI Fridays this November can have a free complimentary meal in honor of Veterans Day!

The meal is restricted to certain days, and to particular individuals only, so be sure to keep reading to learn more.

Tip: See this list of Veterans Day Freebies and Discounts for other ways you can save money on Veterans Day.

When Veterans Get Their Free Meal at TGI Fridays

The Veterans Day free meal at TGI Fridays is on Veterans Day and the day after. This means that this year, the Veterans Day free meal is on Sunday the 11th as well as Monday the 12th.

Eligible customers can pick anything they like from the TGI Fridays menu as long as its value is no more than $12. However, the menu may be condensed to a smaller selection depending on your local TGI Fridays.

Active and retired military service members who take advantage of the free meal for Veterans Day will also be eligible to order a free personal-sized appetizer along with any purchase between November 13th and November 30th. The code for this offer will be printed at the bottom of their bill, and is good for any to-go or online purchase of $20+.

It's possible that not all TGI Fridays locations are participating in this Veterans Day free meal. I recommend you call your local TGI Fridays before you head out for meal just to be sure that yours is, as well as to double-check the time-frame for the meal.

Who's Eligible for the TGI Fridays Veterans Day Free Lunch

All veterans and active-duty military members can get a free lunch at TGI Fridays on Veterans Day, but they're the only ones. Neither their families nor their friends, co-workers, or any other guests that they bring, can take advantage of the offer.

There are some other restrictions explained below that you should be aware of before you head out for the free meal November 11th or 12th.

What You Need to Take With You to TGI Fridays

This free Veterans Day meal is only attainable for veterans and active-duty military if they can provide valid military ID. This is a common practice for restaurants to endure to be sure that their customers are actually military personnel.

If you're a veteran that can't provide military ID, be sure to read through this list of frequently asked questions about Veterans Day free meals. You'll find other forms of ID that may be acceptable as well as more information on how Veterans Day offers work.

TGI Fridays Veterans Day Free Meal Restrictions

You'll want to be sure to visit TGI Fridays on the one day that the offer is valid, which is Sunday the 11th and Monday the 12th. You can't come any other day to redeem this Veterans Day free meal.

Though you can choose anything off of their menu, TGI Fridays Veterans Day free meal may not include any beverages.