Auditor-general: DA-run Western Cape government irregular expenditure bill up by 91.3%
Auditor-general, Kimi Makwetu, has been uncovering a lot from his investigation into the government’s books. He has found that the Western Cape government, which is run by the Democratic Alliance (DA) has seen a large increase in irregular expenditure compared to 2017, according to reports by the Cape Argus.

Western Cape government sinks in irregular expenditure

In 2017, the province’s irregular expenditure bill sat at R23-million. However, this year, it has shot up to R44-million, a 91.3% increase.

Furthermore, R33-million of that total figure for this year represents cases of non-compliance. It seems that nothing has been done about the spending behaviour of the Department of Health in the province.

Read – Auditor-general reveals government still commits above R45bn in irregular expenditure

Last year, the department racked up an R11-million bill in irregular expenditure. This year it shot up by 118% to R24-million.

The Department of Economic Development also saw a sharp increase in irregular expenditure. In 2017, the bill came to R800 000. This year, it increased by a staggering 875% to R7-million.

The Department of Social Development contributed R5-million to this year’s irregular expenditure bill, R3-million more than in 2017.

Read – Auditor-General: SARS R4.3m in performance bonuses paid without ministerial approval

Opposition parties criticise the ‘good governance’ image of the DA

Pierre Uys, the ANC’s chief whip, stated that the provincial government’s audits were getting worse by the year.

“We have seen major issues with the development and with Wesgro as well. Some departments have not even submitted their financial statements on time and what that really tells us is that there is a culture where officials simply don’t care about the audits.” he stated.

Uys criticised the Western Cape government of being shady in its handling of the public’s finances, citing the 91.3% increase in irregular expenditure as the proof.

Read – VBS Mutual Bank: investigation recommends more than 50 arrests, concludes bank can’t be saved

“Most of these issues relate to non-compliance with supply chain management regulations. That tells you that the products and services procured were not done by law. There were also instances where there had been single bidders on tenders. To whom and why are they giving tenders out to single bidders?”, Pierre asked.

Ferlon Christians, the leader of the African Christian Democratic Party (ACDP) stated that the image of good governance the DA has sold for so long is beginning to erode.