0616 duwepftexas

Emails, Grant Duwe, author and director of research and evaluation for the Minnesota Department of Corrections, June 22, 2016

11:09 a.m.

I’ve attached the mass public shooting dataset, which contains 178 cases from 1900 to the present. I’ve defined mass public shootings as incidents that occur in the absence of other criminal activity (e.g., robberies, drug deals, gang “turf wars”, etc.) in which a gun was used to kill four or more victims at a public location. This is not a new definition, by the way, as it was originally developed for a 2002 study I co-authored that examined the impact of right-to-carry concealed firearms laws on mass public shootings (see attached). Mass public shootings are a specific type of mass murder (i.e., incidents in which four or more victims are killed within a 24-hour period) that have accounted for roughly 13 percent of the more than 1,300 mass killings in the U.S. since 1900.

Regarding your first question, definitions of mass murder or, even more narrowly, a “mass shooting” have varied over the years. While there is general consensus that a mass murder involves multiple victims (usually three or four) killed within a brief period of time, there is not unanimity—and I suspect there never will be—on the specific number of fatal victims or how brief the time period must be in order for an incident to be classified as a “mass murder”. The definitions for “mass shooting” appear to be even more numerous, as some include an interpretation of whether the shooting was indiscriminate, the number of wounded victims, and even the offender’s death (if he committed suicide or was killed by police). In general, I’ve opted to use definitions that are relatively straightforward and, compared to other definitions, easier to measure.

Regarding the identification of cases, I’ve used a triangulated data collection strategy in which I’ve relied on multiple sources. For cases that occurred prior to 1976, I’ve relied exclusively on news reports. For cases that have occurred since 1976, I’ve used the FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) to anchor my search for data on mass murders. Although the SHR data contain information on most murders committed in the United States since 1976, it does not record whether the homicide occurred in a public location or the number of wounded victims. As a result, I’ve also relied on news accounts as a source of data on mass killings. More specifically, after using the SHR to identify when and where mass murders have occurred, I’ve searched online newspaper databases to collect additional information not included within the SHR.

After pioneering this methodology in my prior research on mass murder, others have since adopted the same approach in their own data collection efforts. For example, reporters from USA Today relied on the SHR and news reports as sources of data in the series of articles they published on mass killings. More recently, the Congressional Research Service used the same process to collect data on mass shootings (see attached for a better, more updated report than the one they did in 2013).

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, June 22, 2016 11:21 AM

To: Duwe, Grant (DOC)

Subject: Tulsa query

In our phone interview today, I asked you to comment on other incidents that arguably could be classified as mass public shootings such as the June 1921 Tulsa race riot leaving more than 300 dead. You said he’d classify that as a mass murder.

I get that right? Could you elaborate on the distinction?

g.

11:39 a.m.

Although incidents like the Tulsa race riot or the Wounded Knee massacre would be classified as mass murders (per the definition I’ve used), they would not qualify as mass public shootings (again, per the definition I’ve used). Mass public shootings are a specific type, or subset, of mass murder, in much the same way that familicides (i.e., incidents in which an individual kills his/her family) are another (more common) type of mass murder.