Bizarre moment priest repeatedly dunks tiny baby in water in ‘most violent baptism ever’
A PRIEST has come under fire after appearing to baptise a tiny tot a little bit too vigorously.

In the footage that has appeared online the man of the cloth repeatedly dunks the naked baby into the baptismal font.

5 The poor little mite doesn't know what's coming next

The tot is rapidly dunked three times into the water before being handed back to his unperturbed parents.

According to reports the footage was taken in Ayia Napa, Cyprus, at a Greek Orthodox church.

With the church, baptisms are usually done ‘forcefully’ which is seen as a solution to the declining birth rate.

Many online commentators have criticised the bishop’s rather rough approach.

5 A quick plunge down...

5 Then back up...

5 And down again for a quick dunk...

5 The ordeal over the baby is safely handed over to the parents

One Twitter user posted: "Omg that’s the most violent baptism?! I’ve ever seen?!"

Another commented: “Baptism?? More like attempted murder.”

A third wrote: “But this sort of baptism. Aaaah. It’s actually “Roughism”.

Most read in news BLOODBATH Dad ‘stabbed 9 times’ on train as suspect & ‘getaway driver lover’ in court FOUL PLAY Barber shaves play button into customer's hair after he pauses vid of desired cut SCANDI-LOUS Britain braced for 3 months of storms as Scandi vortex brings snow & gales KILLED AT TESCO Man stabbed to death outside Tesco may have been killed for 'nasty look' KILLER ON THE RUN Murderer on the run as public warned not to approach him MCNIGHTMARE Babysitter ‘killed tot, took body to McDonald's then told mum he was asleep'

Although others also pointed out that the vigorous actions by a priest in the Greek Orthodox church was not that unusual.

One wrote: “I went to a Greek baptism last year an this is genuinely what it’s like, thought the guy was gona drown the baby haha.” [sic]

Another posted: “That was a Greek baptism and very custom. It also wasn’t just water, but olive oil in that said water.”

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368. You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.