As Vladimir Putin sends 330,000 troops to the EU border, experts reveal just how much of a threat Russian president is to Europe
THE spectre of war in Europe has become all too real as Britain sends planes, tanks and troops east to counter the threat from Russia.

Nato believes that Russia’s President Vladimir Putin has amassed 330,000 troops along the border to the EU and its allies.

13 This is how Russia measures up against the UK... but should we be worried? Our experts weigh in

While some politicians think the Russian leader is only sabre rattling, others believe we need to take the build-up very seriously.

Here Ian Bond, director of foreign policy at the Centre for European Reform think tank, military historian Professor Mark Almond and retired General Mike Jackson have their say.

Ian Bond: ‘We should be resolute rather than frightened’

13 Russia is a threat because it's clear it sees Nato as its main opponent Credit: AP:Associated Press

YOU have to see Russia as a threat because their military doctrine is clear – they see Nato as their main opponent – and they are exercising in ways which are quite aggressive.

In 2009 they carried out a military exercise which included a simulated nuclear strike on the Polish capital Warsaw.

That is threatening and you can’t bury your head in the sand and say nothing has changed. From Putin’s point of view the ideal situation is that you intimidate Nato countries so much you can ask for anything and get it without having to use force.

13 Putin reckons if you intimidate Nato countries enough you can get anything from them... but that needn't be the case Credit: Getty Images

A lot of the talk about 330,000 troops amassed along Europe’s borders is intended to make our politicians say we must give Putin what he wants at any cost.

For example, Putin might ask for Nato to move its forces 100 miles back from Russia’s border. If you show that you are not prepared to go down that road, then you are less likely to end up with a serious miscalculation by Russia.

Nato wouldn’t be a pushover in a war and Putin would be wrong to think we would be.

Britain and the French have capable military forces, while Germany, Poland and Turkey also have considerable forces.

None of these countries would be so militarily overwhelmed by Russia that the US wouldn’t be able to get there quickly enough.

13 Britain has a capable military force... so do plenty of our allies who would be a match for Russia Credit: Getty Images

He has shown that he is a risk taker, but I think he is a calculated risk taker.

He didn’t move in to Ukraine when it was united, he waited until a new government was being formed and he was able to add to that uncertainty.

He is not crazy. The people who win in poker games aren’t the ones who risk everything on everything.

They are the ones who look at the odds, look at how they can make their opponents think they have a stronger hand than they do . . . and then strike.

Putin is much more in that mode than “roll the dice and see what turns up”.

13 Putin's intervention was anything but reckless - he picked a moment of political instability Credit: EPA

13 He's not about to roll the dice and see what happens on any other invasion, and Nato can ensure his neighbours are safe if they play their cards right Credit: EPA

All the talk of Russia’s readiness for war is to make nervous Western politicians say: “Gosh, we should make plenty of concessions to the Russians because they are obviously very angry.”

Russians brandishing weapons do have a frightening effect on some Europeans.

But we should be resolute rather than be frightened. There is a threat there as there was during the Cold War.

The way we responded to that threat was not by making concessions, but by standing firm and letting the Russians know that if they try anything they will get a very bloody nose.

related stories fighter near-miss Russian and US planes so close pilot 'could feel it's jet wash as it passed by' CLOSE CALL Russian and US warplanes had near miss in skies over Syria as they flew in darkness VLAD'S SPAM FARM BOMBED Vladimir Putin’s notorious ‘troll factory’ attacked with Molotov cocktails APOCALYPSE NOW? Could Putin's 'Satan 2' Russian super-nuke wipe out London, Manchester or Birmingham? VLAD’S EXPOSED Top Putin aide hacked by Ukranian group, revealing Russia's darkest secrets DEVILISH What are Russia's Satan 2 nukes and could the RS-28 Sarmat warheads reach the UK? Exclusive 'ASSAULT ON HUMANITY' Minister slams 'barbaric' attack after 'Russian' bombs kill 22 kids in UK-funded schools in Syria WAR OF WORDS Russian Embassy brands Europeans 'gay pigs' in shocking Twitter post slamming 'decline' of the West

The fact that Nato is deploying small but significant forces to its most vulnerable Eastern allies is important.

The numbers of troops we are putting in eastern Europe are not intended to be able to push back the entire Russian army.

But they are designed to say to the Russians that if you mess around with our Nato allies then you are messing around with us.

13 Even France is a formidable nuclear power that could deter Putin - as is the UK Credit: Getty Images

Britain, France and the US are all nuclear powers so we are saying to the Russians be careful what you do.

For a long time after the Cold War, Nato didn’t make contingency plans for defending new members in eastern Europe because it wanted to show it didn’t think Russia was the enemy any more, which was a perfectly reasonable thing to do.

But as Russia has started to behave in a more aggressive way towards its neighbours it has become unsustainable to ­pretend nothing is happening.

Professor Mark Almond: ‘Fight that Russia wouldn't win’

13 Putin would be a fool to start a war in Europe - the U.S. would surely intervene and force him into submission Credit: Getty Images

IF Vladimir Putin were to attack, say, Estonia in the Baltic, that would start a war with the rest of Nato and would be horrendous.

It would also be a war that Russia wouldn’t win.

In a conventional war between Russia and Nato they would lose. Russia has a military force comparable to France, if you put aside nuclear weapons.

13 Without nuclear weapons Russia's military is only the same size as that of France - which isn't such a scary thought Credit: Getty Images

The Russians have in their armed forces 120,000 first-quality troops.

Even if they have 330,000 troops on the border with eastern Europe many are the equivalent of burger flippers and not well equipped.

They have spent a lot of money on modernising their air force, conventional missiles and tanks.

Their effective army is just a bit bigger than Britain’s effective army. Our army is very well trained, but it is now effectively 85,000 strong in terms of troops.

Aircraft carrier The Admiral Kuznetsov is of Ark Royal vintage – and the British ship was decommissioned in 1979.

13 But it's almost impossible to overstate how important the U.S. is - its navy is 16 times the size of Russia's Credit: Getty Images

However, it does have a fearsome armoury, with modern Cruise missiles and planes. And the Russian MiG-29 proved to be better than the RAFs Typhoon in a recent test.

Our Navy is a bit stretched at the moment, but will be strong again in a few years once we have the new aircraft carriers.

But we have the US as an ally, whose Navy is 16 times as strong as Russia’s. It’s almost impossible to exaggerate the power of the United States.

Mike Jackson: ‘No match for the U.S.’

13 Putin thinks the worst thing that happened in the 20th century was the fall of the Soviet Union Credit: AP:Associated Press

VLADIMIR PUTIN said that the worst thing which happened in the 20th century was the fall of the Soviet Union, so that’s worse than two World Wars and the Holocaust for him.

He is trying to re-state that Russia is a serious world power which doesn’t agree with everything the West does and indeed stands for.

Russia’s message is: “We are our own country and you should bear that in mind.”

13 That comment shows he wants Russia to be a serious, distinct world power that stands for something different from the West Credit: EPA

If Putin were to start an operation against the Baltic states he is risking everything.

While he is a chancer, I don’t think he is irrational. There is no comparison between the forces of the United States and Russia. Putin’s men are no match for America. Even the combined forces of Nato’s European nations are a match for Russia.

Russia has a large army, about 800,000 troops, and we are down to about 80,000.

13 In reality Putin's men aren't even a match for European Nato members - never mind the U.S. Credit: Getty Images

The idea of the United Kingdom taking on Russia alone doesn’t add up militarily. It would be Nato against Russia.

It would be impossible for the United States not to be concerned about a ­Russian military adventure into the Baltic states.

That would be upping the ante like fury.