Billionaire founder of Corona beer brewery ‘makes EVERYONE in his village a MILLIONAIRE in his will’
Antonino Fernandez, who was born in the Spanish village of Cerezales del Condado in 1917, emigrated to Mexico to make his fortune but clearly hasn't forgotten his roots

Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

THE billionaire founder of Corona beer has reportedly made his entire home village millionaires in his will.

Antonino Fernandez, who was born in the Spanish village of Cerezales del Condado in 1917, emigrated to Mexico to make his fortune but clearly hasn't forgotten his roots.

YouTube Antonino Fernández, founder of Corona Extra Beer, died in August 2016 but left £2m to each resident in the Spanish village of Cerezales del Condado

Reuters The Billionaire founder of Corona beer has made the entire Spanish village he grew up in Millionaires

The drinks mogul left the 80 residents of his home village £2 million each.

Generous Fernandez died in August this year at 99 years of age.

His will left £169 million to the residents of the village in Spain's Leon province where he grew up in deep poverty as one of 13 siblings.

related stories WHO WANTS SHOTS? YouTube video shows five-a-side game of two DRUNK teams after they down tequila and beers FROZEN LIQUOR Autumn Statement 2016 - how much are beer, wine, spirits and cigarettes going up by? INSIDE THE 'WORST HOTEL IN BRITAIN' Fire-hazard electrics and crumbling walls at real-life Fawlty Towers MORE FUN PLEASE, WE'RE BRITISH Brits think their lives are 29 per cent fun... but think hols and cold beer would help TOTAL TAKEDOWN Blood, sweat and violence at Mexico's extreme wrestling matches BRIT SIR HELD Married teacher who moved to Spain after he was cleared of sex charges is arrested for 'abusing pupil, 15'

He left school aged 14 because his family couldn't afford the fees.

Antonino emigrated to Mexico with his wife in 1949 at 32-years-old to make his fortune, eventually becoming the CEO of Grupo Modelo in 1971, the company which brews the world famous beer.

Alamy Corona is the second most successful imported beer in the USA raking in £556m a year

Maximino Sanchez, who owns a bar in the village, told the Diario de León newspaper: "We never had any pesete (money) before. I don't know, what we would have done without Antonino."

Corona Extra is the second most imported bottled beer in the USA raking in £556 million a year in sales.

But he never forgot his homeland and was honoured by ex King Juan Carlos for his services to charity.

Now in death he has transformed the lives of those in his village, with a cultural centre also being paid for out of his legacy.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368