One of the NFL’s biggest advertisers is pulling its ads
Update: After telling ESPN’s Darren Rovell that they had pulled NFL advertising, Papa John’s executives later clarified that instead of pulling the commercials themselves, they have removed NFL logos and “official sponsor” labels from ads.

Remember some of those incredibly awkward commercials where Peyton Manning shilled for some overtly average pizza?

Well, those may not be airing for much longer.

In a stunning move, the NFL just lost out on one of its biggest advertisers when the pizza chain Papa John’s pulled its NFL-related advertisements Wednesday, according to ESPN’s Darren Rovell.

Papa John’s says it has been pulling advertising associated with the NFL. The league, it says, has given some future spots in return. — Darren Rovell (@darrenrovell) November 1, 2017

TRENDING: Baseball legend reveals the major ‘sin’ about Barry Bonds’ Hall of Fame candidacy

The reason is extremely telling. Jonathan Maze, senior financial editor at Nation’s Restaurant News, puts the blame solely on the NFL.

Papa John's blames weaker than expected same-store sales on "negative consumer sentiment" with company's association with NFL. $PZZA — Jonathan Maze (@jonathanmaze) November 1, 2017

Papa John’s is primarily basing its projected losses on the NFL.

Negative association with the NFL. They just revised guidance mostly on projected losses associated with NFL. — Darren Rovell (@darrenrovell) November 1, 2017

“The NFL has hurt us. We are disappointed the NFL and its leadership did not resolve this,” company founder and CEO John Schnatter said via ABC News.

“Leadership starts at the top and this is an example of poor leadership,” Schnatter added, noting he thought the issue had been “nipped in the bud” a year and a half ago.

This is no small loss for the NFL, if only looking at the sheer volume of pizza commercials inundating your typical NFL viewing.

While small chains and private businesses have been ready to boycott the NFL over the rampant national anthem protests, Papa John’s is the biggest company to take a stance.

RELATED: First four NFL coaches get axed to start 2018

The NFL has been in a maelstrom of controversy ever since the beginning of last season, when then-49er quarterback Colin Kaepernick first began kneeling for the national anthem as a form of protest against police brutality and racism.

The movement slowly grew throughout the 2016 NFL season, with various players opting to kneel, sit or raise a “black power” first during the national anthem.

The issue exploded in 2017, however, when President Donald Trump condemned the NFL’s anthem protests in September. The protests spread across the league in direct response to his remarks.

Many Americans find the anthem protests disrespectful. While few would ever deny the right to peaceably protest, many NFL fans feel that the national anthem is neither the time nor the place to have such a discussion.

Papa John’s is the first major chain to truly feel the heat as angry customers are now speaking with their wallets.

As anti-NFL sentiment has now officially hit one of the league’s biggest advertisers, it’ll be interesting to see if Commissioner Roger Goodell finally takes a stand and makes a move.

What do you think? Scroll down to comment below.