Tomi Lahren: No, I Don't Think 'Obama Created Festivus'
Tomi Lahen was not pleased by a meme going around implying that she accused Barack Obama of creating Festivus as a way to destroy Christmas.

“You idiots think this is real? Have you nothing better to do than photoshop fake news? Get a hobby. Go for a walk. Do something. Good Lord,” she tweeted at someone who shared the meme on Christmas Eve.

“Hello there, do you realize you re circulating fake news? Not very professional,” she tweeted to another user. “By all means please tell me how stupid you think I am.”

Also Read: Somebody Mashed Up Tomi Lahren's Commentary Into a Totally Awesome '80s Pop Hit (Video)

You idiots think this is real? Have you nothing better to do than photoshop fake news? Get a hobby. Go for a walk. Do something. Good Lord. https://t.co/tAVh7Vy3n0 — Tomi Lahren (@TomiLahren) December 24, 2017

Does it not bother you to circulate a photoshopped piece of FAKE NEWS? Classy. https://t.co/hvwdgwPkd2 — Tomi Lahren (@TomiLahren) December 24, 2017

Hello there, do you realize you are circulating fake news? Not very professional Dr. Allen but by all means please tell me how stupid you think I am… https://t.co/qlg4RzTEFP — Tomi Lahren (@TomiLahren) December 24, 2017

Festivus, a fake holiday first created by the popular ’90s sitcom “Seinfeld,” was originally intended as a secular non-commercial alternative to Christmas, and has since widely penetrated popular culture.

The Twitter account @Seinfeld2000 took credit for the viral photoshop.

lol i photoshoped this https://t.co/kg0oZwZW8J — Seinfeld Current Day (@Seinfeld2000) December 24, 2017

And fake or not — it whipped around the Internet like wildfire with Lahren’s outrage merely stoking the flames.

Christmas is cancelled. Thanks Obama pic.twitter.com/vD7gJoAPgg — Barstool News Network (@BarstoolNewsN) December 24, 2017

My fav part of "Tomi Lahren says Obama created Festivus" is how many ppl found it so utterly believable. — Seth Mandel (@SethAMandel) December 25, 2017

Dumbest statement of the week! And what a lying piece of garbage. Is she too young to know Seinfeld? pic.twitter.com/bP8WZZyNKW — Brasilmagic (@Brasilmagic) December 24, 2017