Smitten Louth mum, 45, marries a 300-year-old pirate ghost and insists sex with a spirit 'goes a lot deeper'
AN Irish woman has ­legally married the ghost of a 300-year-old pirate — and says the sex is the best she’s ever had.

Former Captain Jack Sparrow impersonator Amanda Teague says her “soulmate” was a Haitian pirate from the 1700s who was executed for being a thief on the high seas.

8 Amanda says sex is better with her ghost hubby than real-life men

8 Amanda and her bridesmaids

Smitten Amanda, 45, from Drogheda, Co Louth, met Jack in 2014 when he appeared beside her while she lay in bed — and says he looks like the Pirates of the Caribbean character played by her and Johnny.

She said: “He is black, so he is not the same colour as Johnny Depp. But he is dark skinned and has very dark jet-black hair, so he tells me.”

Loved-up Jack — who is so powerful he can make lights flicker and turn on stereos — ­proposed two years later after being presented with an ultimatum by Amanda.

She said: “I told him I wasn’t really cool with having casual sex with a spirit and I wanted us to make a proper commitment to each other.

“If I am going to be in a long-term relationship with somebody I have the right to be married.

“I wanted the big traditional wedding with the white dress, it was very important to me.”

8 Amanda was a Captain Jack Sparrow impersonator

The couple were married by a Shaman priest in a boat off the Irish coast in international waters.

Marriages to dead people are allowed in a number of countries, including France and China, meaning their wedding was legal outside of our waters.

Groom Jack was represented by a flag bearing a skull and crossbone — with a medium brought out on the boat so he could say his vows through them.

She said: “Obviously I can’t speak for him but there has to be verbal consent from both people.

“If I gave consent on his behalf it would put a question mark over the authenticity of the marriage, so we had an independent medium to speak for Jack.”

The couple had matching rings designed for the ceremony — but as Jack can’t wear a ring it has been fitted to a candle that was used in place of his hand.

8 Amanda with pals

After their wedding — which was attended by their friends and hasn’t been disputed by the Irish authorities — they went to Northern ­Ireland for their honeymoon.

They then bought their first home together and while Jack couldn’t contribute financially, he helped pick the gaff and had an input with the interior design.

And Amanda, who has five kids from a previous marriage, even feared they were about to start a family when a pregnancy test came back positive.

She said: “Shortly after we got married, my periods stopped. I did a couple of pregnancy tests and they came back positive.

“I was shocked! I did not think I had to worry about birth control when having sex with a spirit.

“On further tests it turns out it was the start of the menopause, and sometimes you can get high HPG readings — what a relief that was.”

Satisfied Amanda says sex with a spirit is surprisingly similar to sex with a physical human — and Jack even makes sure she doesn’t go without an orgasm.

8 On Amanda's special day

She explained: “It is well known that people often feel a spirit touch their hands, their face or their hair.

“The only difference with having a sexual relationship with a spirit is obviously that sense of touch goes a lot deeper.

“You can feel the weight of the spirit, their touch, the pressure. You can literally feel the physical act of what the spirit is doing to you, and the spirit can feel it, too.”

She added: “For me, it is much more about a spiritual and emotional connection than it is about the physical looks and the physical body.”

Amanda, who now lives in Downpatrick, near Belfast, insists they are just like any couple and go out on regular date nights.

They go out for dinner, drinks and even to the cinema — except Amanda doesn’t have to pay for Jack’s meal or his movie ticket, saving her cash.

She said: “He can’t eat or drink, but he can sense it through me, it is called ‘embodiment’.

8 Amanda and Jack were married by a Shaman priest in a boat off the Irish coast in international waters

“I can order Jack a drink and allow him to feel it through me, or he can taste my food.”

Amanda says her family and friends are very accepting of her spiritual relationship and that Jack is treated like part of the family.

He is included in Christmas cards, invited to parties and there is always a place set up for him at the dinner table.

They also buy each other ­birthday and Christmas presents, with Jack making clear what he wants to get her through one of her daughters.

Amanda said: “Obviously he doesn’t physically buy them - it has mostly been through one particular daughter.

“Although she is not a medium, she often has dreams and premonitions and usually coming up to a birthday or Christmas, she will have a dream of him and he will say what he wants to buy me.

8 Amanda says she met Jack in 2014

“So last Christmas as an example, he had told her that he wanted to buy me a coffee maker, and it cost €45.

“And she told him ‘I hope you’re going to come up with the money because I’m not paying €45, I have to buy my own present for her!’

“And he said someone will be giving me some money in the sum of €45 and that money will be for the present.

"And literally as she was telling me this, we were sitting in the car and I got a message from this guy, who wanted to buy something I was selling on Facebook - and it was for €45. It was so strange.

8 Amanda says she and Jack are writing a book to help other singletons find love with a spirit

“In the beginning, the first couple of years, it wasn’t too hard me buying stuff for him because I could only buy symbolic kind of stuff — candle holders, a plaque — that kind of stuff.

“But there are only so many plaques and memorials you can actually buy before it becomes really really tacky.

Most Read in News Exclusive death probe Naked man arrested 'running through field' as woman's body found in Westport 'Eternally smiling' Family tribute to Irishman found dead as case linked to Grindr 'rape' MEGA WINS Irish €500k EuroMillions Plus winners bought tickets at Cork and Dublin stores COULD IT BE YOU? EuroMillions results revealed as Lotto chiefs say Ireland has TWO winners RAPE HELL Man arrested over rape of Brit girl, 15, in Majorca hotel sauna on family holiday WHO'S RIGHT? Vigilante cyclist blocks 'doc on way to cancer patients' on wrong side of road

“For his last birthday, I just paid for us to go away for a couple of days so we could spend some time on our own together.

"I thought that was more practical than buying physical things.”

Amanda added: "Some people are saying I'm a nutjob but obviously anyone who knows me has a different view.

"I'm actually a very logical person, I'm not airy-fairy at all.

"I'm involved in the spiritual community so a lot of the people I know are like-minded individuals."

And to prove any would-be detractors, Amanda and Jack are now co-writing a book about their relationship, with advice for other singletons on how to find a soulmate on the other side.

The book will be called ‘Ain’t no grave can hold my body back’, after the Johnny Cash song - one of Jack’s favourite singers.

Amanda's book A life you will remember', about being Ireland's only modern-day pirate, is available on Amazon.