Does this video prove miracles exist? Statue of Jesus OPENS ITS EYES in church leaving priests and paranormal investigators baffled
SPOOKY footage has emerged of a statue of Jesus appearing to open its eyes, with many believers claiming the spectacle is a miracle.

Investigators have scoured over the vision which appears to show the figure quickly open its eyes at a church in Mexico.

Eye of God ... Statue of Jesus appears to open its eyes in what is being hailed as a 'miracle'

Social media users were quick to comment on the clip filmed in the Chapel of Saltillo, saying it was merely an optical illusion or Photoshop job.

“What a coincidence that there was someone there to record it,” one person wrote.

'Miracle' ... Statue in Mexico has left experts baffled

“Totally and obviously an actor.

"How stupid that people are dumb enough to think otherwise," another added.

Related Stories ‘I talk to dead people’ Ghost hunter says he’s caught a ghoul on camera in a 17th century mansion SPANK THE MONKEY The ghost of a masturbating ape haunts the hallways of a grand country estate in Dorset Spook behind you! Family left terrified by selfie taken in empty cinema which seems to show a ghost child holding a teddy 'IT'S B****kS' Hugh Grant in unlikely spat with real life exorcist as his home is ‘haunted by the ghost of a little boy’ off it ghosts Is this proof ghosts exist? Spooky footage 'shows possessed trolley being guided around a warehouse' 'I'm GETTING OUT OF THIS F***ING HOUSE!' Traumatised dad's terror after he calls in paranormal investigator DEAD SPOOKY Chilling footage seems to show a 'ghost' following a small child as he walks into a forest

Statue appears to close its eyes again at the end of the astounding clip

Elancasti.com.ar reports that the clip was shot last June, but has since gone viral after it was posted on paranormal website Adimensional this week.

Site manager and paranormal activity expert Ivan Escamilla said more than 20 specialists, as well as priests, had spent weeks analysing the clip.

They found no proof it had been doctored.

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368