TSA announces additional Advanced Imaging Technology deployments at U.S. airports
WASHINGTON – The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) today announced 25 airports which are set to receive recently purchased millimeter wave Advanced Imaging Technology (AIT) units. The machines will be deployed with new automated target recognition (ATR) software designed to enhance privacy by eliminating passenger-specific images while improving throughput capabilities and streamlining the checkpoint screening process.

"Advanced Imaging Technology is currently the best available technology to detect non-metallic threat items concealed under layers of clothing," said TSA Assistant Administrator for Security Capabilities Robin Kane. "This deployment enhances not only aviation security, but also the safety and security of the traveling public."

TSA plans to deploy units to the following airports in the coming weeks:

Atlantic City International Airport (ACY)

Augusta Regional Airport (AGS)

Billings Logan International Airport (BIL)

Blue Grass Airport (LEX)

Central Illinois Regional Airport (BMI)

Central Wisconsin Airport (CWA)

Charleston International Airport (CHS)

Colorado Springs Airport (COS)

Columbia Metropolitan Airports (CAE)

Columbus Airport (CSG)

Cyril E. King International Airport (STT)

Fargo Hector International Airport (FAR)

Gary / Chicago International Airport (GYY) Grand Forks International (GFK)

Greenbrier Valley Airport (LWB)

Hayden/Yampa Valley Airport (HDN)

Henry E. Rohlsen Airport (STX)

Montgomery Regional Airport (MGM)

Newport News Williamsburg International Airport (PHF)

Outagamie Country Regional Airport (ATW)

Quad City International Airport (MLI)

Santa Barbara Municipal Airport (SBA)

San Luis Obispo County Regional Airport (SBP)

Santa Maria Public Airport (SMX)

South Bend Airport (SBN)

TSA will make additional airport announcements as plans are finalized. Many factors are taken into consideration before AIT units are deployed including airport readiness and checkpoint infrastructure.

AIT is designed to enhance security by safely screening passengers for metallic and non-metallic threats—including weapons, explosives and other objects concealed under layers of clothing. This technology has led to the detection of hundreds of prohibited, illegal or dangerous items at checkpoint nationwide since January 2010.

Imaging technology screening is safe for all travelers, and the technology meets all known national and international health and safety standards. In fact, the energy emitted by millimeter wave technology is 1000 times less than the international limits and guidelines.

In September 2011, TSA purchased 300 millimeter wave units equipped with ATR, which are currently being deployed. Currently, there are more than 570 AIT units at approximately 130 airports nationwide. President Obama's fiscal 2011 budget included the purchase of 500 units, and the President's fiscal 2012 budget requests funding for an additional 275 units.

For more information about AIT, visit www.tsa.gov.

###