Kenya
Development planning

Tullow and its Joint Venture Partners have proposed to the Government of Kenya that the Amosing and Ngamia fields should be developed as the Foundation Stage of the South Lokichar development. This stage would include a 60,000 to 80,000 bopd Central Processing Facility (CPF) and an export pipeline to Lamu. This approach brings significant benefits as it enables an early FID of the Amosing and Ngamia fields taking full advantage of the current low-cost environment for both the field and infrastructure development and provides the best opportunity to deliver First Oil in a timeline that meets the Government of Kenya (GoK) expectations. The installed infrastructure from this initial phase can then be utilised for the optimisation of the remaining South Lokichar oil fields, allowing the incremental development of these fields to be completed at a lower unit cost post-First Oil.

The Foundation Stage is currently planned to involve an initial 210 wells through 18 well pads at Ngamia and 70 wells through seven well pads at Amosing. This stage will target volumes of around 210 mmbo of the total estimated 2C resources of 560 mmbo and a plateau rate of 60,000 to 80,000 bopd. The incremental development of the remaining 2C resources and the significant upside potential is expected to increase plateau production to 100,000 bopd or greater. It is anticipated that the FEED and baseline Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) for the foundation development will commence in the second quarter of 2018, with FID targeted for 2019 and First Oil for 2021/22. Total gross capex associated with the Foundation Stage is expected to be $2.9 billion, of which $1.8 billion is investment in the upstream and $1.1 billion is for the pipeline.

Tullow and its Joint Venture Partners, following the extended election period, have re-engaged with representatives of the Government of Kenya on the overall approach and timelines for progressing the development.

Early Oil Pilot Scheme (EOPS)

In early June 2018, the transfer of stored crude oil to Mombasa, by road, commenced. The EOPS will transport oil produced from injection and production testing at the Ngamia and Amosing fields and the scheme will build up to ~2,000 bopd gross production.