Daktari Nyuki recovers a latest Range Rover model stolen from Karen, Nairobi. Find out how he did it
On August 31, a Managing Director working with an International Non-Governmental Organization was confronted by two hooded, armed gangsters who made away with his latest Range Rover on the Bomas-Kitengela road.

The MD kept silent. This was in fear of losing popularity and protecting his name among friends and who is who in the leafy suburbs. When he reached home, he narrated the incident to his wife. She then forced him to report the matter at the nearest police station.

Photo: Pixabay

Source: UGC

"I was scared by the incident. The way they waylaid me remains a mystery. They then dumped me in a nearby bush, it was actually like a dramatic movie. After reporting the matter I disclosed the issue to my closest friend who referred me to Daktari Nyuki, a renowned traditional medicine man. I contacted him, see the results!" he narrated.

The MD says that Daktari Nyuki arrived on time through Jomo Kenyatta International Airport after he had booked the doctor an air ticket. He placed his medicine at the scene and two hours later the thieves were nabbed in Thika town.

"They were smoked out by live bees which attacked them accordingly. They shouted 'hii gari ni ya wizi, tumeiba,' (this is a stolen vehicle, we took it). At this juncture angry residents had descended on them with crude weapons but they were lucky to have been saved by police officers on patrol," said the MD who has since received his fuel guzzler back.

Daktari Nyuki also has an instant solution to your problem, he is never hesitant. Contact him today and any sort of regret will be history.

Photo: Shutterstock

Source: UGC

He has powers to end cheating in marriages, he has scientifically proven medicine from caves in the Seychelles which automatically restricts partners from having Mpango wa Kando.

A couple in Mlolongo town almost ended their marriage of six years because of suspected infidelity.

The wife, a headteacher in a local primary school was secretly dating a manager of a blue chip company. The affair almost cost her job and family after the husband came to understand the ongoing illicit activity.

"Being jobless, I reached out to Daktari and he gave me the powerful anti-cheating medicine from the forests of Malawi. As we speak my wife is back home after she fell out with the manager" said Michael Mbunde the husband.

Photo: Masterfile

Source: UGC

Miriam Wanjiku in Thika had been humiliated by the fact that her boy friend of three years had been snatched by a rich widow in Juja town. She and her boyfriend had been planning to wed in December.

"I approached Daktari Nyuki and he has been of great help. My boy friend is back and we are marrying each other soon, let God be praised," narrated Naomi.

The famous Daktari Nyuki also helped Faniel Leporoto in Kitengela, Kajiado county to win a case in a protracted legal matter. This came after he was laid off unceremoniously by a security company he had been working with for the last 20 years.

"I was sacked without notice in 2014. I took the matter to court, it has dragged on for 3 years. But I finally won after getting the assistance of Daktari Nyuki. The court ordered my former employer to pay me KSh3 million for unlawful sacking," said Leporoto.

Photo: Masterfile

Source: UGC

The traditional doctor also has medicine for increasing sperm count in men, opening up blocked uteruses in women and medicine to help women who menstruate once or twice a year.

"A number of victims are now a testimony after I served them with my medicine. Their marriages are now intact. What are you waiting for? Let the problems bedeviling you now not be an impediment to good living. Contact me now, I have your answer," said Daktari.

Are you an alcohol, cigarette or sex addict?

"What are you waiting for? I have medicine that works instantly and you will automatically avoid those vices like plague," Daktari Nyuki assured.

Dickson Wafula in Webuye town who was battling asthma and allergies for years is now healed after he was given medicine by Daktari. What are you waiting for? Call him now.

Photo: Shutterstock

Source: UGC

Are you battling such problems as unemployment, sickness, barrenness, lack of promotion at work, demons and spirit attacks and the spirit of rejection? Daktari Nyuki is your ultimate saviour.

Daktari Nyuki also treats stomach problems, backaches, high blood pressure, diabetes and prolonged menstruation periods.

He has modern medicine for the protection of farms and homesteads.

He gets his medicine from the forests of Congo, Namib desert, caves of DRC, Nigeria, South Africa, Egypt and Eastern Uganda.

Where did I acquire the powers from?

"I fell sick at a tender age and suffered for 15 years after I was attacked by evil spirits. I was later healed in a mysterious way and landed on these extra ordinary powers which have helped me to assist many people suffering from different problems."

Do not fear nor be discouraged from seeking help from a professional traditional healer, the Bible says step up and you will be healed.

Daktari Nyuki is found in Webuye town (Bungoma County), call:

0781 777 666

[Sponsored]

Source: Tuko.co.ke