Donald Trump's hair: Defended and explained in his own words
Get Stuff We Love Subscribe to our newsletter. SUBSCRIBE

Aug. 11, 2015, 9:37 PM UTC / Source: TODAY By Emily Sher

Donald Trump has been stealing headlines with his presidential run, but there's one question none of the debates have asked: What's with the hair?

His very particular color, cut and combing technique has raised questions since the real estate tycoon was first in the spotlight, inspiring #trumpyourcat hashtags and even TODAY Halloween costumes. But The Donald isn't shy about sharing his hair-care secrets.

Katie Couric dressed like Donald Trump for TODAY's annual Halloween segment on Oct. 29, 2004. Richard Drew / AP

RELATED: Felines show off their Donald Trump-worthy 'dos

Below, see some of the most hair-raising things he's had to say about his strand style.

Donald Trump in 2008. AP

1. “As everybody knows, but the haters and losers refuse to acknowledge, I do not wear a ‘wig.’ My hair may not be perfect, but it’s mine.” (Twitter)

Donald Trump in 1994. AP

2. "I would probably comb my hair back," Trump said of how he might change his hair if elected president. "Why? Because this thing is too hard to comb. I wouldn't have time, because if I were in the White House, I'd be working my ass off." (Des Moines Register)

3. “I’ve been called out by everybody for the ALS ice bucket challenge. Homer Simpson, Mike Tyson, Vince McMahon … I guess they want to see whether or not it’s my real hair, which it is.” (Trump YouTube channel)

Donald Trump in 2004. AP file

4. "I do not wear a rug. My hair is 100 percent mine. No animals have been harmed in the creation of my hairstyle." ("Trump: How to Get Rich")

Donald Trump and his ex-wife Ivana Trump in 1997. AP

5. "I get up, take a shower and wash my hair. Then I read the newspapers and watch the news on television, and slowly the hair dries. It takes about an hour. I don’t use the blow dryer. Once it’s dry I comb it. Once I have it the way I like it — even though nobody else likes it — I spray it and it’s good for the day." (Playboy)

Donald Trump on July 9, 2004. Getty Images

6. "The reason my hair looks so neat all the time is because I don't have to deal with the elements. I live in the building where I work. I take an elevator from my bedroom to my office. The rest of the time, I'm either in my stretch limousine, my private jet, my helicopter, or my private club in Palm Beach Florida [...] If I happen to be outside, I'm probably on one of my golf courses, where I protect my hair from overexposure by wearing a golf hat." ("Trump: How to Get Rich")

7. "What's the difference between a wet raccoon and Donald J. Trump's hair? A wet raccoon doesn't have seven billion f---ing dollars in the bank." (Comedy Central Roast)

Donald Trump at the MTV Video Music Awards, 2002. Star Max via AP Images

8. "I will also admit that I color my hair. Somehow the color never looks great, but what the hell, I just don't like gray hair." ("Trump: How to Get Rich")

9. "You can check it. It's actually my hair. It may not be beautiful, but it's my hair." (Ryan Seacrest Presents)

U.S. Republican presidential candidate, real estate mogul and TV personality Donald Trump formally announces his campaign for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination during an event at Trump Tower in New York June 16, 2015. REUTERS/Brendan McDermid Reuters

10. "I actually don't have a bad hairline. When you think about it, it's not bad. I mean, I get a lot of credit for comb-overs. But it's not really a comb-over. It's sort of a little bit forward and back." (Rolling Stone)

Donald Trump and his wife Melania Knaus when they were dating in 2003. Getty Images

11. "She doesn’t fool with the hair. She’s not trying to reinvent the wheel," he said about his wife Melania giving him haircuts. (Playboy)

Donald Trump in an undated publicity photo from "The Apprentice." Reuters file

12. "I think he's a highly [overrated] person," he said about Marco Rubio. "And by the way, I have better hair than he does. Believe me. And it is my hair." (MSN.com)