Famous Daktari Nyuki recovers a Toyota Fortuner in Nandi county
Daktari Nyuki a known traditional witch doctor miraculously recovered a Toyota Fortuner in Nandi county after it had been stolen from Kericho town.

Daktari is famous for recovering stolen vehicles, household items and helping people suffering from different problems.

Dr Nyuki is famous for helping his clients trace their lost property. Photo:UGC

Source: UGC

READ ALSO: The dreaded Daktari Nyuki recovers a KSh6.5 million Range Rover in a Kisumu garage. Find out the magic behind it

On Wednesday, January 16, he shocked residents of Nandi county after recovering a stolen vehicle hidden in a garage.

Johana Kiptarus a renowned farmer had parked his vehicle in his compound but unknown people stole it at night.

"I had packed my vehicle in my compound and retired to bed after the day's work when I woke up the following morning and found my beloved machine was missing. I immediately reported the matter to police and sought Daktari Nyuki's services," narrated Kiptarus.

Daktari unleashed live bees and the vehicle was recovered in Nandi county the following on Thursday, January 17.

The thieves had parked it at a garage awaiting to transport it to unknown destination.

Kiptarus stated that three thieves were apprehended after they were attacked by live bees and were only saved from the insects and angry residents by police officers on patrol.

Daktari Nyuki also helped a woman in Kwale county who could not conceive and nearly lost her marriage.

READ ALSO: 3 thieves who robbed a renowned Kilgoris trader nabbed. See what Daktari Nyuki did to capture them

"I had been married for 5 years but it was distressful, I couldn't conceive I tried all medication but failed but when i was heard of Daktari Nyuki I tried his medicines and as we speak am a very happy woman because I have six months pregnant now" said 30 year's old Vivian Mghanga.

Daktari also helped a man from in Lamu county who had no powers to impregnate his wife leave alone Mpango Wa Kando.

Victor Maury was born a young and energetic man but he had a problem, he was suffering from low sperm count, despite his manhood raising to the occasion during the night marathon, he couldn't impregnate any woman hence he was rendered fatherless.

"I contacted Daktari Nyuki, who got me some medicines from Ugandan caves, I tell you, after using them for a month, I was healed and as we talk now, my wife is 4 months and we expect our first born this year," said Maury.

He asked other men outside there experiencing similar problems to contact Daktari Nyuki and they would never regret.

Daktari Nyuki also has powers to return back snatched wives and husbands.

The now famous Daktari helped Joseph Mamboleo in Lake Bogota to get back his snatched woman, the woman had been married by a high school teacher in their neighborhood.

Daktari Nyuki gets his modern medicine from Congo, Eastern Uganda, Egypt and Nigeria. Photo:UGC

Source: UGC

“My woman is back and we live happily, the other man has tried reaching her but in vain.? he posed.

Daktari Nyuki also has medicine to stop promiscuity and early pregnancies among teenage girls.

Are you battling such problems like unemployment, different kind of sickness, barrenness, lack of promotion at work place, demons and spirits attacks.

Daktari Nyuki is your ultimate saviour.

He helped Dan Wanyama in Mayanja Vitunguu in Bunions County to stop alcohol and cigarette addiction which had affected him for years.

"I was almost dying from this addiction, alcohol and cigarette were my main friends efforts by friends and my relative to even taking me to rehabilitation Centre totally failed but with the help from Daktari I have abandoned the 10 years addiction, I now only take tea and other soft drinks, you can be like me, visit him now," he said.

He also treats stomach problems, chest ache, backache, high blood pressure, diabetes, prolonged menstrual periods.

Daktari Nyuki also has medicine to improve the sex power, medicine to stop infidelity and winning different cases in court.

He has modern medicine for the protection of farms and homesteads.

Daktari Nyuki, gets his medicine from Congo forest, Namibia desert, DRC caves, Nigeria, South Africa, Egypt and Eastern Uganda.

Where did I acquire the powers from?

I fell sick at a tender age and suffered for 15 years after I was attacked by evil spirits but I was later healed in a mysterious way and landed on these extra ordinary powers which has helped me to help many people suffering from different problems.

Remember there is no fear in seeking help from a professional witch doctor, God helps somebody who helps himself.

Daktari is found in Webuye town in Bungoma County

0781 777 666

(SPONSORED )

Do you have a hot story or scandal you would like us to publish, please reach us through news@tuko.co.ke or WhatsApp: 0732482690 and Telegram: Tuko news.

Kenyans Donate to Victims Of 14 Riverside Attack - On Tuko TV

Source: Tuko.co.ke