0517 lsaatpftexas

Emails (excerpted), Lauri Saathoff, director of communications, Sen. Paul Bettencourt, May 17-22, 2017

-------- Original message --------

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)"

Date: 5/17/17 11:16 AM (GMT-06:00)

Subject: Seeking factual backup on savings claim, SB2

Robert:

Hello again.

For a fact check, could you point me to the basis of the statement aired by Lt. Gov. Patrick today about SB 2 savings to the average homeowner in Texas over the next 20 years or so? I am not seeing that figure in the bill’s fiscal or tax equity notes (maybe I missed or misread).

Patrick just told reporters the changes would save the average homeowner $20,000, provided I heard right. If so, what’s the basis of that?

Thanks.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

7:48 p.m.

May 17, 2017

Here’s our calculation that shows the basis of this claim. Senator Bettencourt would be happy to talk with you about it tomorrow if you have any questions.

Lauri Saathoff│Senator Paul Bettencourt/Director of Communications

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, May 18, 2017 1:20 PM

To: Lauri Saathoff

Subject: Following up for fact check

Lauri:

I have heard back this afternoon from a couple of entities about the accuracy of your provided chart.

Don Lee of the Texas Conference of Urban Counties said the chart assumes local government tax increases that have never happened before. Lee said too that the local revenue figures playing into the senator’s calculations fail to account for local governments being permitted to reap revenue from new housing and businesses before an effective rate is calculated.

Separately to our inquiry, Dick Lavine of the Center for Public Policy Priorities said likewise—that the assumed tax increases don’t come close to matching actual effective rate increases.

Lee also provided the attached sheet listing out what he described as actual effective tax changes in the 38 counties he represents over recent years. Seem solid?

I still do not know the origin of the provided figures or why the presented assumptions were made.

I’d be happy to visit with you about the fact check by phone or email. I will be back from lunch by 245 pm.

g.

2:33 p.m.

May 18, 2017

Senator Bettencourt called and left you a message a little while ago before he heard you had more questions. In response to those, we’ve got some data from Dale Craymer with the Texas Taxpayers and Research Association (attached) that property tax bills over the last five years have actually gone up 33%, and that’s calculated and it’s based on real numbers.

The Senator said we picked 8 and 5 because it’s the maximum under current law and would be the maximum under SB 2 when passed – and we did it for estimation purposes.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin

Sent: Monday, May 22, 2017 11:08 AM

To: Lauri Saathoff

Subject: FW: SB 2 Information

Sharing below:

From: Bill Longley

Sent: Saturday, May 20, 2017 2:09 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: SB 2 Information

Gardner,

Thanks for speaking with me yesterday.

The chart provided by Lt. Governor Patrick appears to take an average tax levy figure and calculate the levy under an 8 percent rollback rate versus a 5 percent rollback rate over the course of 20 years. The chart also appears to group all cities, counties, and special purpose districts together and assume that each is adopting a rate equal to the rollback rate (whether 8% or 5%) each year over the 20-year window.

While we haven’t run the numbers for counties or special purpose districts, we have analyzed comptroller data for city tax rates. The most recent data can be found here: https://comptroller.texas.gov/taxes/property-tax/reports/index.php (See under “Property Tax Biennial Report” and then “2014 and 2015 Values”). Our understanding is that this data is self-reported by appraisal districts to the comptroller. The data isn’t perfect, but this is the only statewide collection of tax rate data.

I have attached a couple of spreadsheets that we put together analyzing the comptroller’s numbers. Please note that we have removed some data that appeared to be clearly inaccurate.

The Lt. Governor’s chart seems to indicate that every city, county, and special purpose district adopts a tax rate equal to the 8 percent rollback rate. Our analysis shows that the vast majority of cities haven’t been increasing their tax rates above the current 8 percent rollback rate. Beyond that most cities aren’t even increasing their tax rates beyond a hypothetical 5 percent rollback rate as proposed by the Senate version of SB 2:

If you look at the 2015 city data, out of 963 cities, 258 cities adopted maintenance and operations tax rates less than or equal to the effective maintenance and operations tax rate. In other words, roughly 26 percent of Texas cities didn’t adopt tax rates that were any percentage above effective M&O, much less 8 percent above effective M&O (which would equal the current rollback rate). This means that, in theory, these cities adopted a property tax rate that would bring in the same amount of property tax revenue or less property tax revenue for M&O as in the previous year for properties taxed in both years.

Of the remaining 705 cities that adopted rates that were some percentage above the effective M&O tax rate, 198 adopted M&O rates equal to or exceeding the 8 percent rollback rate in place under current law. The remaining 507 cities adopted an M&O tax rate higher than the effective rate, but lower than an 8 percent rollback rate. All in all, 765 out of 963 cities adopted an M&O rate less than the 8 percent rollback rate. Relatively few cities adopt rates exceeding the current 8 percent rollback rate. This is supported in the 2014 data as well. By our count, 209 cities adopted tax rates equal to or exceeding the 8 percent rollback rate in 2014.

Our analysis of the comptroller data also shows that there are many cities in any given year that adopt rates lower than 5 percent beyond effective M&O. In 2014, 620 cities adopted tax rates lower than 5% beyond effective M&O. In 2015, the number was 587 cities. In both cases, more than 60 percent of cities were under a 5 percent rollback rate, if it had been in place.

All of these numbers contradict the assertion that cities are adopting tax rates at the current 8 percent rollback rate every year, or would constantly adopt rates at the Senate-proposed 5 percent rollback rate in future years. Keep in mind also that there is variability each year depending upon the city. For instance, if a city adopts a rate equal to the 8 percent rollback rate one year, that has no bearing on the rate the city adopts the next year. There may be extenuating circumstances that force the city to adopt a high rate one year that aren’t present the following year. This is all to say that it would be extremely unusual for one city to adopt a rate that is the same percentage above the effective M&O rate every year. Municipal budgeting just isn’t that simple.

…

Bill Longley

Legislative Counsel

Texas Municipal League

2:34 p.m.

May 22, 2017

From Senator Bettencourt:

That’s why we sent a 6.5% example on Friday afternoon to let you see the other example. This whole report ignores the obvious that the current rollback, effective tax rate, truth-in-taxation calculations, all exclude new improvements from the calculations as first-time homestead exemption, et al. Thus the actual revenue recovered by the taxing units is actually much higher than just the statistics of adopted M&O tax rates, effective M&O rates, and percentages thereof.

You have to look at total property tax levies and increases over time to get a real picture of this problem; that as appraisal values increase, tax rates do not come down for property tax relief. That’s what SB 2 was designed to address.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Monday, May 22, 2017 12:35 PM

To: Lauri Saathoff

Subject: Less than half of cities raising effective rates past rollback rate?

My writing here, drawing on what Longley sent our way:

According to the spreadsheets, in 2014 and 2015, respectively, about 21 percent of the state’s cities adopted effective rates equal to or exceeding 8 percent.

We wondered, in keeping with SB 2’s proposed automatic rollback rate, how many cities lately have escalated effective rates 5 percent or more. According to the sheets, 38 percent (382 of 1,002 cities) did so in 2014 and 39 percent (376 of 963 cities) did so in 2015. “In both cases,” Longley wrote, “more than 60 percent of cities were under a 5 percent rollback rate, if it had been in place.”

From: Lauri Saathoff

Sent: Monday, May 22, 2017 2:50 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: RE: Less than half of cities raising effective rates past rollback rate?

Followup from Senator Bettencourt:

Gardner –

Remember both HB 15 and SB 2 were filed at a 4% rollback level. SB 2 was amended to 5% in the committee, and of course the higher the rollback rate the lower their “coverage” is.

However, these cities with rollbacks above 5% really hurt taxpayers hard due to the exempted pro rata values that they are paying on as well. Note 2016 increases are higher than 2015 per recapture and Foundation School Program estimates.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Monday, May 22, 2017 2:52 PM

To: Lauri Saathoff

Subject: RE: Less than half of cities raising effective rates past rollback rate?

My question may be simpler than the senator’s answer.

It still looks to me like the assumptions on future rate hikes are not supported by existing data. If there is rate data that supports the assumptions, I would like to see that. So my question has been, why make these future rate assumptions?

Best we can tell, local units targeted by SB 2 have mostly not been setting tax rates at the rollback level or above. But the chart we’ve been discussing presumes both that all such units will do so every year both if SB 2 doesn’t pass and if it does. That seems unrealistic, no?

Another way of putting this: The chart offered as the basis for a cumulative savings of $20,000-plus assumes worst-case tax rate actions across the board for all the affected local government units, both columns.

G.

11:22 p.m.

May 22, 2017

Gardner – Senator Bettencourt’s answers to your questions below are attached. Have a good night.

Lauri Saathoff│Senator Paul Bettencourt/Director of Communications│