0914 vdputtepftexasguardfoodbank

Emails on behalf of Leticia Van de Putte campaign, Emmanuel Garcia, communications director, Texas Democratic Party, Sept. 4 and 17, 2014

1:05 p.m.

Texas National Guard Troops Deployed By Gov. Perry Were Not Paid Immediately And Were “Unable To Pay For Their Own Food or Gas.” In August 2014, Texas Tribune reported, “Some of the Texas National Guard troops deployed by Gov. Rick Perry to help secure the border haven't been paid and are unable to pay for their own food or gas, according to a report from KGBT Action 4 News in the Rio Grande Valley.” [KGBT News Rio Grande Valley, 8/29/2014]

· Reports From Rio Grande Valley That National Guard Troops Deployed By Gov. Perry “Hadn’t Received Their Checks And Were Unable To Pay For Basic Necessities.” In August 2014, Texas Tribune reported, “After media reports in the Rio Grande Valley suggested that some National Guard troops dispatched by Gov. Rick Perry to the border hadn't received their checks and were unable to pay for basic necessities, Democrats saw an opening.” [Texas Tribune, 8/29/2014]

Texas Rep. Jose Menedez, Chairman of House Committee on Defense and Veterans’ Affairs, Said National Guard Soldiers Contacted Food Bank As A “Resource For Soldiers Who Needed Food.” In August 2014, Texas Tribune reported “State Rep. Jose Menedez, D-San Antonio, the chairman of the House Committee on Defense and Veterans’ Affairs, said that volunteers from the National Guard's soldier and family support services contacted a food bank on behalf of the Guard units. The food bank was identified as a ‘resource for soldiers who needed food’ or other goods while they wait on their paychecks, he said, adding that while Guard members are allotted $36 per day for food, they must pay out of pocket until they are paid. ‘The problem here is that the state is deploying them and not asking ‘Hey, are you going to be OK until your check comes?’,’ he said.” [Texas Tribune, 8/29/2014]

Texas Sen. Leticia Van de Putte, Chairwoman of the Senate Veterans Affairs and Military Installations, Said The National Guard Was Forced To Contact Food Banks Because They Haven’t Been Paid In Weeks. In August 2014, Texas Tribune reported Leticia Van de Putte called the deployment "nothing but a political ploy: there is no request from local leaders for this mission, no exit strategy or even a plan to pay for it. Today, we learn that our men and women of the Guard have been forced to contact food banks to feed themselves because they haven’t been paid in weeks. This is unacceptable." [Texas Tribune, 8/29/2014]

Texas National Guard Confirmed Family Assistance Coordinator Contacted Food Bank To Check Available Resources Because Service Members Were Not Going To Be Paid For Nearly A Month After Being Deployed. In August 2014, Austin American-Statesman reported National Guard spokeswoman Lt. Col. Joanne MacGregor said a “proactive” family assistance coordinator “contacted the Rio Grande Valley food bank to see what resources were potentially available.” “The Guard said it had identified 50 service members who, because of their early August start date, weren’t going to be paid until Sept. 5.” [Austin American-Statesman, 8/29/2014]

· Texas National Guard Officials Clarified They Have No Indication Any Guardsmen Received Assistance From Food Bank. In August 2014, Austin American-Statesman reported, “Texas National Guard officials said this afternoon they have no indication that any Guardsmen received assistance from the Food Bank of the Rio Grande Valley.” [Austin American-Statesman, 8/29/2014]

--

Emmanuel Garcia

Communications Director

Texas Democratic Party

5:22 p.m.

Sept. 17, 2014

Below is our original press release. We clearly respond to a San Antonio Express News article, which we cite in the release.



That article states: "The Texas National Guard contacted a Rio Grande Valley food bank Thursday to ask whether the charity had food and gas resources for about 50 soldiers who are in need of assistance because they have not received a paycheck."



Further, the Austin American Statesman reported in Jemery Schwartz' article that:

http://www.statesman.com/news/news/breaking-news/texas-national-guard-troops-use-border-food-banks/nhCDC/



"According to the National Guard, an unknown number of deployed soldiers have asked for help and were directed to local resources, including food banks."



"According to spokeswoman Lt. Col. Joanne MacGregor, a “proactive” family assistance coordinator “contacted the Rio Grande Valley food bank to see what resources were potentially available.”"



"According to Omar Ramirez, Food Bank RGV’s manager of communications and advocacy, the food bank made extra preparations after being contacted by someone from the Texas National Guard Support Foundation, but that he wasn’t aware of any troops being served."



We reached the conclusion based on the reporting of the San Antonio Express News and your own outlet.



Best,

Manny



-------------------------





FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

August 29, 2014

Contact: Emmanuel Garcia, (956) 459-8498, press@leticiavandeputte.com



Senator Van de Putte Comments On Consequences of Perry-Patrick Deployment of National Guard



San Antonio, TX - Today, the San Antonio Express News reported that National Guard troops deployed to the border by Governor Rick Perry are requesting food and gas resources from the RGV Food Bank because they haven’t been paid in weeks. [San Antonio Express-News, 8/29/2014]



Senator Leticia Van de Putte issued the following statement:



“The border must be secure; we are all working to ensure that happens. The Perry - Patrick deployment of the Guard has been nothing but a political ploy: there is no request from local leaders for this mission, no exit strategy, or even a plan to pay for it. Today, we learn that our men and women of the Guard have been forced to contact food banks to feed themselves because they haven’t been paid in weeks. This is unacceptable.



“Texans do not play politics with the service of our troops.”



###









--

Emmanuel Garcia

Communications Director

Texas Democratic Party

On Wed, Sep 17, 2014 at 5:32 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

...

Did the senator, who chairs the Veteran Affairs panel, do independent checking before she spoke? If so, what?

Does she still believe what she said? If so, why? If not, why not?

g.

5:56 p.m.

The article cited, and there were a number on that day at that time, is what the Senator relied on. She trusted the reporting of the San Antonio Express-News and others.

The Senator stands by her words.

-EG

--

Emmanuel Garcia

Communications Director

Texas Democratic Party