Meghan Markle's Dog Guy at the Royal Wedding Reception at Frogmore House
We got to see every moment of Meghan Markle and Prince Harry's wedding this weekend, from the starry guest arrivals to the moving ceremony and the Duke and Duchess of Sussex's romantic carriage ride through Windsor.

But the evening reception, which Prince Charles hosted for the couple at Frogmore House, was a strictly private affair, with only 200 guests in attendance. Phones were banned so there are no photos of the party, just a few pre-event instagrams.

Our favorite rumor to come out of the evening's festivities is that Markle's dog Guy, a beagle, made the list and partook of the reception's delicacies, "lapping up any spilled canapés," according to the Mirror.

Guy made a star turn earlier in the week when he traveled to Windsor with the Queen. You can see the full footage here on Daily Mail.

Courtesy of DailyMail.com

Markle brought Guy with her from Toronto when she officially moved to England, but she had to leave Bogart, her other adopted dog, behind. In her BBC interview with Prince Harry, Markle explained that Bogart now lives with close friends. "Well, I have two dogs that I’ve had for quite a long time, both my rescue pups," she said. "And one is now staying with very close friends and my other little guy is—yes he’s in the U.K., he’s been here for a while. I think he's doing just fine."

Before she deleted her Instagram account, Markle had shared a few pictures of her dogs and guy appears adorably in a Union Jack sweater.

Courtesy of Instagram

Markle apparently has quite a way with dogs. When she first met the Queen, Prince Harry told the BBC that his then-fiancée won over the affections of the Queen's corgis. "The corgis took to you straight away!" Prince Harry said to Markle during the interview. "I've spent the last 33 years being barked at, and this one [Meghan] walks in, absolutely nothing."

Markle and the Queen are not the only dog lovers in the family. When Prince William and Duchess Kate and their three children, Prince George, Princess Charlotte, and newborn Prince Louis, traveled to Windsor, they reportedly brought their dog Lupo with them as well.

Thanks all for pointing out my typo! (It’s been a long day):



For those asking, Kate and the kids are staying at Windsor Castle tonight. Lupo’s with them too! — Omid Scobie (@scobie) May 18, 2018

After all, if you're going to your grandmother's house for the weekend—and she has a big yard—you bring your dog.