Keanu Reeves Runs Secret Cancer Foundation To Fund Children’s Hospitals
PA

Everyone knows Keanu Reeves is Hollywood’s biggest low-key don, but we didn’t know he funded children’s hospitals.

The John Wick 2 star isn’t exactly boastful of his donations, unlike a lot of celebrities.

Reeves runs a private foundation which aids cancer research and children’s hospitals, but Keanu being Keanu, he doesn’t brag about it too much.

PA

He told Ladies Home Journal, according to Snopes:

I don’t like to attach my name to it, I just let the foundation do what it does. One of his sisters was diagnosed with leukaemia in the 1990s but achieved remission a few years later.

The List writes:

Public efforts found him manning the phones at a Stand Up to Cancer telethon in 2008. Stars like Reeves generously gave their time and used their star power to encourage fans to become callers, donors and participants in the efforts to heal cancer. Cancer research is extremely expensive. ABC Anchor Charles Gibson pointed out, ‘In the long run there’s a public awareness responsibility here that may be more important than the money.

On top of that, Reeves also donates to SCORE, Spinal Cord Opportunities for Rehabilitation Endowment, a charity founded after a UCLA hockey player’s spinal cord was crushed in a post-season game.

The List added:

Reeves got into the net at a celebrity fundraiser for SCORE, revisiting a one-time dream of playing pro hockey.

According to The Globe and Mail:

Reeves, nicknamed ‘The Wall’ for his impenetrable goal defense in high school, was tasked with stopping pucks from Cuba Gooding Jr., D.B. Sweeney, Alan Thicke and Rachel Blanchard of Clueless, among others.

Summit Entertainment

Other good deeds include buying his mum a house, buying The Matrix stunt crew motorcycles, taking pay cuts to hire other actors – when Keanu learned The Devil’s Advocate‘s budget couldn’t afford Al Pacino, he took a slice out of his own so the film could hire him – and putting money back into films.

Essentially, save maybe for Liam Neeson, there’s no greater soul in Tinseltown than Keanu Reeves.

Legend!