Urban Dictionary: The Circle Game
A game of peripheral vision, trickery and motor skills The game starts out when the Offensive Player creates a circle with their thumb and forefinger, not unlike an " A-Okay " signal, somewhere below his waist.His goal is to trick another person into looking at his hand. If the Victim looks at the hand, he has lost the game , and is subsequently hit on the bicep with a closed fist, by the offensive player.Rules:1. The Offensive Player's hand must be below his waist.2. The Victim should attempt to see the circle without looking down. In other words, by peripheral vision, the Victim realizes there is a circle-hand event occurring. The Victim has two possible methods to win the game:a. The Victim does not look down at the signal . Instead, the Victim stares the Offensive Player in the eye and says, "I'm not going to look at that." (or words to that effect.)b. The Victim does not look down at the signal. Instead, the Victim quickly pokes his index finger through the Offensive Player's circle-hand display. If he can poke inside and break the circle, HE wins, and gets to hit the Offensive player in the bicep. This action requires excellent motor skills (to poke the circle without actually looking directly at it.)3. If the Victim looks at the circle, he loses (and is hit.)4. If the Victim attempts to poke the circle and misses, he loses (and is hit.)5. If the Victim attempts to poke the circle and Offensive player closes the circle, trapping Victim's finger, then the Victim loses (and is hit.)It is customary to playfully "wipe off the hit" after it is delivered. (Quick open hand brush on the bicep.)There is no limit on the type of distraction allowed by the Offensive Player to draw attention to the signal. A good tactic is saying, "Hey, is this yours?" Or, "You oughta try one of these."There is no limit on the number of times a day you can try this out. You'll find some people are "easy to get" and some people have good alertness and peripheral vision, "tougher to get."