Black Consciousness and Progressive Movements under Apartheid book launch
Posted on August 06, 2018

The Faculty of Humanities at the University of Pretoria (UP) is proud to launch Dr Ian Macqueen’s (Department of Historical and Heritage Studies) book, Black Consciousness and Progressive Movements under Apartheid. The book is an important contemporary work that gives context to, and acknowledges the role of Black Consciousness and other progressive movements in the fight against apartheid.

According to Prof Tinyiko Maluleke, of UP's Centre for Advanced Scholarship, "in my view, Macqueen’s book is essential background reading for Biko’s lucid book, I write what I like. This book paints a much thicker and richer picture of the context and times in which Biko wrote, spoke and led”.

In recent years, black conscious philosophy has been decontextualised and most notably, the writings of Steve Biko have been used in the narrowest interpretations to bolster varying levels of political rhetoric. The book tries to address this and expand on the broadness of Black Consciousness and what it seeks to achieve while providing a context to the intellectual history of the anti-apartheid movements.

Dr Macqueen explains that, “there has been a tendency, in popular usage and perhaps as a product of the fierce political contestations of the 1980s and the lead up to the negotiated settlement of 1994, to characterise the Black Consciousness Movement in its narrowest sense, or even to miscast Black Consciousness as anti-white, racist and even ideologically immature. Our history has been saturated with nationalist symbols, heroes and events to the exclusion of other traditions, such as Black Consciousness, Pan Africanism and the worker’s struggles, dismissively caricatured as ‘workersim’. Recent engagements with the legacy of Biko, derived very often solely from a decontextualized reading of his I write what I like have added to the confusion as they often fail to contextualise the historical context of many of those statements.”

The book is a wide-ranging account of the movement and ideology of Black Consciousness in relation to other resistance movements in South Africa such as radical Christianity, student politics and radicalisation, feminism, trade unions and how all these movements envisioned freedom for South Africa.

Prof Maluleke led a discussion on the book and lauded it for being a “spirited attempt to re-humanise and reinsert Black Consciousness into the mainstream history of struggle in South Africa”. He said that the book is “one of the finest attempts to define Black Consciousness as a total system designed to deal with colonialism at the level of the physical, the mental, the psychological and the structural”.

Prof Vasu Reddy, Dean of the Faculty of Humanities, said that the book was an important addition to the body of knowledge and the contribution of Dr Macqueen to South Africa and the world’s understanding of South Africa’s intellectual history, heritage and political philosophies which have carried the country through to democracy.

Prof Karen Harris, Head of the Department of Historical and Heritage Studies at UP, Prof Vasu Reddy, Dean of the Faculty of Humanities, Prof Tinyiko Maluleke, Centre for Advanced Scholarship and Dr Ian Macqueen at the recent book launch.

About the author

Ian M. Macqueen is a lecturer in the Department of Historical and Heritage Studies at the University of Pretoria. He is also a research associate of the Society, Work and Development Institute (SWOP) at the University of the Witwatersrand. He was awarded his doctorate at the University of Sussex in 2011 and was a National Research Foundation-Innovation-funded postdoctoral fellow at SWOP from September 2012 to December 2014. He has published in the Journal of Southern African Studies, the South African Historical Journal, Historia, Journal of Asian and African Studies and Theoria.

Black Consciousness and Progressive Movements Under Apartheid is published by UKZN Press and is available through Booksite Afrika. ISBN 978 1 86914 388 6