Kevin Spacey scandal: A complete list of the 15 accusers
CLOSE Kevin Spacey was accused by more than a dozen men who say he sexually harassed and attempted to rape them decades ago. USA TODAY

Kevin Spacey at the BAFTA Los Angeles Britannia Awards at in Beverly Hills, on Oct. 27, 2017. (Photo: Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP)

The first accusation of sexual misconduct against Oscar-winning actor Kevin Spacey landed on Oct. 29, and a little more than a week later more than a dozen men — including five who said they were teens at the time — have come forward to allege he sexually harassed, assaulted or attempted to rape them.

Here is a list of accusers, some of them named, some of them anonymous.

Spacey's lawyers, Todd Rubenstein and Bryan Freedman, have not returned calls and emails from USA TODAY seeking comment.

1. Anthony Rapp, an actor on Star Trek: Discovery, told BuzzFeed in an interview on Oct. 29 that Spacey made sexual advances in 1986, when he was 14, in Spacey's New York apartment. Spacey issued a statement saying he was "beyond horrified" to hear the accusation, insisting he didn't remember the encounter but apologizing to Rapp. In the same statement, he came out as gay for the first time in public, infuriating gay rights advocates who viewed his acknowledgment as a false conflation of homosexuality with pedophilia in an attempt to distract attention from the underlying accusation.

Anthony Rapp, actor in 'Star Trek: Discovery,' on September 19, 2017 in Los Angeles. (Photo: Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP)

2. Roberto Cavazos, a Mexican actor, said in Spanish in a Facebook post on Oct. 30 that Spacey fondled or tried to fondle him against his will while he was at the Old Vic theater in London and Spacey was artistic director there. "Those of us who were around him at the Old Vic know that a lot more people will come forward with their stories in the coming days and weeks," Cavazos said in the post.

3. Daniel Beal, told London tabloid The Sun on Oct. 31 and The Daily Mail on Nov. 7 that in 2010, when he was 19 and working as a bartender in a West Sussex hotel, Spacey exposed himself to him outside the hotel while he was on a cigarette break. He continued, saying Spacey gave him an expensive watch to buy his silence.

4. Justin Dawes told BuzzFeed on Nov. 3 he was 16 and a theater usher in New Haven, Conn., in 1988, when Spacey, then appearing in a play there, invited him and a male friend to his apartment to watch a movie. Instead, Dawes said, Spacey gave them cocktails and played pornography on the TV. Dawes said it was "awkward" but not intimidating, and they left without incident. Still, “He knew that I was in high school. It was pretty clear. It's not like I was pretending to be an older, cooler person.”

5. Mark Ebenhoch was a 35-year-old military advisor working in uniform on the set of 1995's Outbreak when, he said, Spacey (who had a role in the movie) instructed one of his "harem" of young male crewmembers to solicit him for sex with Spacey, BuzzFeed reported on Nov. 3. Ebenhoch turned him down feigning disgust because he was then in the closet himself and feared repercussions for his career. “As a military adviser the last thing you’d want anyone to know is that you were gay,” he told BuzzFeed.

6. Harry Dreyfuss: The son of Oscar-winning actor Richard Dreyfuss wrote a first-person column in BuzzFeed on Nov. 4 describing how Spacey groped his genitals when he was 18 and his father was in the room. Harry Dreyfuss said it happened in 2008 in London when Spacey was directing his father in a play at the Old Vic and the three were alone in Spacey's apartment rehearsing lines.

Thanks to anyone who's ever spoken out. I add my story in the hope predators learn there will always be consequences https://t.co/DezeSnr6Gj — HarryDreyfuss (@harrydreyfuss) November 4, 2017

His father didn't see it, and he didn't tell him until many years later. Instead, Harry Dreyfuss, now an actor and writer in Los Angeles, told jokes about it at parties, although now he realizes there was nothing funny about it. “Kevin Spacey is a sexual predator. But I still never thought talking about it seriously was ever an option.” Buzzfeed quoted Bryan Freedman, one of Spacey's lawyers, as rejecting Harry's allegation: “Let me be clear, Mr. Spacey absolutely denies the allegations.”

7. Tony Montana told USA TODAY on Nov. 1 that a drunken Spacey confronted him in 2003 at a Los Angeles pub, groped his genitals and chased him into a bathroom. "He grabbed my whole package, he grabbed me hard; no one had ever done that to me," said Montana, who was then in his 30s.

Filmmaker Tony Montana, in June 2004. (Photo: John Sciulli, WireImage)

8. Kris Nixon, a 20-year-old bartender from Belfast, was working at a bar Spacey frequented near the Old Vic in 2007. He told People and The Sun on Nov. 6 he was invited to a party at Spacey’s London apartment; he was sitting on a sofa when Spacey sat beside him and grabbed his crotch. "He was drunk but not paralytic. I walked over to (my girlfriend) and said, ‘We need to leave.’ ” He brushed it off as "just some drunk guy" and never reported the incident. "It was my word against his and who is going to believe me?"

Anonymous accusers:

9. Anonymous bartender: London police said on Nov. 1 it is investigating an allegation by a man, then 23, who said Spacey sexually assaulted him in 2008 after he passed out at Spacey's London home where he had gone seeking advice on his career. He left after Spacey warned him to keep quiet about it.

10. Anonymous New York artist: A former child actortold Vulture on Nov. 2 that he began a sexual relationship with Spacey in 1983 when he was 14 and Spacey was 24, and that it ended when he was 15 and after Spacey allegedly attempted to rape him. He said he believes Spacey is a "pedophile."

11. Anonymous production assistant: CNN reported on Nov. 2 that a former production assistant on House of Cards said Spacey sexually assaulted him, putting his hand down the assistant's pants while Spacey was driving them to the Baltimore-area set during one of the show's early seasons. The assistant said the touching was non-consensual.

12. Anonymous British journalist: BuzzFeed reported on Nov. 3 that a British journalist then in his 20s interviewed Spacey for a magazine in London in the early 2000s and afterward went to a club with Spacey and some of his friends. He said Spacey repeatedly grabbed his genitals and angrily tried to block him from fleeing. The journalist realized he could not write about the encounter because it meant outing then-closeted Spacey as gay. "If I were to publish a story about Kevin Spacey sexually harassing me on the job … there's no way without making it quite clear that he likes guys," he said. The interview ran without his byline.

13. "John" told the BBC's Victoria Derbyshire on Oct. 31 that Spacey tried to seduce him at his New York apartment in 1984 when he was 17. He said Spacey asked him to share his bed, but he slept on the sofa and woke up with the actor's arms around him. He said he didn't believe anything sexual took place, but added, "I was uncomfortable at best, traumatized at worst."

14. Heather Unruh's son: The former Boston TV news anchor held a press conference Nov. 8 in Boston to accuse Spacey of groping the genitals of her then-18-year-old son in a bar on Nantucket, Mass., in July 2016. Unruh said her son filed a report on the allegation with police and "a criminal investigation has been opened," though police said they could not confirm or deny that due to state law. If confirmed, his case would be the first under police investigation in America. And as the most recent, it could potentially lead to criminal charges.

15. Andy Holtmzan: In 1981, the NYU grad was working at The Public Theater in New York when Spacey, then 22 and an up-and-coming actor with a minor role in their production of Henry IV, Part 1, committed what he termed a "wordless assault." Holtzman told USA TODAY he was on a phone call when Spacey began his attack.

"Within minutes, wordlessly, he was up and all over me," Holtzman, now a 64-year-old marketing consultant, recalled. "The aggression was certainly more than a grope. When I was finally able to push him off and scream (at him), he theatrically stepped back, incredibly angry, grabbed his coat and bag, stormed out and slammed the door."

Holtzman said the encounter, which happened when he was 27, left him more stunned than traumatized. He was gay and comfortable with his sexuality but said he wasn't interested in Spacey, who was then in the closet. He couldn't fathom why the actor would do such a thing to him and then react the way he did when he was rebuffed.

"It was the look on his face that was really shocking and then scary," Holtzman said. "The anger was undeserved. If you ask for something and get a no, then I can understand the anger, but you ask for nothing and then try to take everything? Where is that anger coming from?"

If you have ever experienced or witnessed sexual misconduct while working in the entertainment industry, we’d like to hear from you. Send us a secure tip using the instructions at newstips.usatoday.com.

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2hRShnF