0715 krooseveltpftexas

Emails, Kermit Roosevelt, professor of law, University of Pennsylvania Law School, July 22, 2015

12:41 p.m.

There are a couple of different issues here. Cruz is right on one and wrong on another, and overall I would say he’s wrong, although his position does have some respectable historical support—most notably, Abraham Lincoln. (It also has less respectable support, in the opponents of Brown v. Board of Education.)

First, he’s right that a judicial order binds only the parties to the case. So states that were not party to any marriage lawsuit and have never been subject to some court order are not under any directly enforceable obligation to comply.

He’s wrong, though, to suggest that officials in such states should feel no obligation to comply with the decision. (If that’s what he’s suggesting—the quote I see says only that they should “feel no obligation to agree that the court ruling is right”. I think everyone would say that as long as they comply with the decision, they can feel whatever they want.) The reason for that is that the Supreme Court is, in our system, the highest authority on the meaning of the Constitution. States that disagree with its constitutional interpretation are not entitled to resist its rulings on the basis of that disagreement. If they refuse to comply because they haven’t been subjected to a direct order, they’re acting in bad faith and also futilely—they will soon be subject to an order, when someone sues them for not following the decision. (Cruz acknowledges this when he says that “in subsequent litigation, other courts will follow the precedence [sic—should be precedents] of the court.”) So it’s pointless, even in the pretty short run, and could well trigger sanctions from a judge because it’s so obviously a waste of everyone’s time.

It is true, though, that Abraham Lincoln said just this about the Supreme Court’s Dred Scott decision—that it bound only the parties, that he thought it was wrong, and that he would work to reverse it. So Cruz can claim the mantle of Lincoln. (Lincoln, of course, isn’t necessarily the person to look to for punctilious compliance with the Constitution—he suspended the writ of habeas corpus, which pretty much everyone agrees the President is not allowed to do on his own, and tried to bring civilians before military tribunals, which the Supreme Court said was unconstitutional.) Dred Scot, though, was an anti-equality decision, and in opposing a pro-equality decision, Cruz looks to me a lot more like the opponents of Brown v. Board, who made similar claims in resisting school desegregation. (There’s been some interesting writing about which side of the debate is following Dred Scott—I recommend a New Yorker piece by Amy Davidson. http://www.newyorker.com/news/amy-davidson/what-does-marriage-equality-have-to-do-with-dred-scott).

Ultimately, he has a narrow technical point right, but it has no practical significance, and it doesn’t support any more ambitious claim about state authority to disagree with the Supreme Court.

Kermit Roosevelt

Professor of Law

University of Pennsylvania Law School

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, July 22, 2015 4:24 PM

To: Kermit Roosevelt

Subject: Following up

What is the guiding principle or ruling or federal law that establishes the statement as technically true?

g.

3:38 p.m.

I guess it’s the federal rules about the effects of judgments. There’s a Restatement of Judgments, published by the American Law Institute, that sets out very detailed rules about the effects of judgments. That’s not technically binding on federal courts, but it’s generally accepted as authoritative. But it’s also a general constitutional rule that courts lack the power to adjudicate the rights of parties who are not before them. That rule comes from the Due Process Clause: it’s not fair for a court to decide what your rights are if you haven’t had notice and an opportunity to be heard. For people who are identically situated to a Supreme Court litigant (and a state with a same-sex marriage ban is), the Supreme Court doesn’t declare their rights in a binding and immediately enforceable way, as if it had issued an order directed to them. It does declare what their rights will be if they go to court to enforce them.

Kermit Roosevelt

Professor of Law

University of Pennsylvania Law School