06262714 abbottpftexas
June 26, 2014 For Immediate Release Contact: Avdiel Huerta (512) 477-2002 avdiel@gregabbott.com Abbott Billboards Greet Convention Goers On Way To Dallas AUSTIN- Texans for Greg Abbott unveiled a series of five billboards lining roadways leading into Dallas, the site of the Texas Democrat convention beginning today. The billboards highlight Sen. Davis’ record of questionable ethical practices. Communications Director Matt Hirsch issued the following statement: “As Democrats travel to Dallas today for their state convention, they will be forced to confront the reality of Sen. Davis’ unethical record. From her refusal to release her tax returns and client list, to profiting from taxpayer dollars and her ties to an open FBI investigation, Sen. Davis has shown she is out of touch with Texans and more interested in lining her own pockets than serving her constituents.” The Billboards Are At The Following Locations: IH-35 Mile Marker 317 (Southbound) IH-35 Mile Marker 274 (Northbound) IH-35 Near Temple, Texas (Southbound) IH-35 Mile Marker 375 (Northbound) IH-35 Near Hillsboro, Texas (Northbound) Click Here For Photos And Locations For All Five Billboards Billboard Ad Facts – FBI Investigation: Sen. Davis’ Legal Work For The North Texas Tollway Authority Is “The Subject Of An Open Investigation” By The FBI. “Documents related to Sen. Wendy Davis’ work as a lawyer for the North Texas Tollway Authority are part of an FBI inquiry of the agency, Travis County officials say. … The Travis County district attorney’s office said last month that details from its review of a 2012 complaint that a rival filed about Davis’ legal and political activities were ‘the subject of an open investigation’ by the FBI.” (Wayne Slater, “FBI Probe Of NTTA Includes Wendy Davis File, Travis DA’s Office Says,” Dallas Morning News, 4/18/14) Billboard Ad Facts – Client List And Tax Returns: Sen. Davis Has Not Released Her Full Client List. On March 11, 2014, The San Antonio Express-News Reported Sen. Davis And Her Firm Did Work For The Tarrant County Hospital District, A Public Entity That Was Not Included On Her Public Sector Client List. “On the phone call, Davis was asked about her clients — and about the issue of Tarrant County Hospital District, operating John Peter Smith Hospital. The hospital district wasn't on the client list she released, but documents obtained by the Express-News/Chronicle show it paid the Newby Davis firm more than $67,000 between 2012 and this past February.” (Peggy Fikac, “Wendy Davis Rebuffs Abbott Criticism Over Clients,” San Antonio Express-News , 3/11/14) Sen. Davis Says “She Will Not Release Her Private-Sector Clients.” “But Davis didn't release clients handled by Newby, and her campaign said she will not release her private-sector clients because they deserve the privacy of attorney-client privilege.” (Peggy Fikac, “Wendy Davis Rebuffs Abbott Criticism Over Clients,” San Antonio Express-News , 3/11/14) Sen. Davis Has Not Released Her Current Tax Returns. “Wendy Davis said at a stop in Dallas today that she has filed an extension on her taxes and won’t be able to release her tax returns until a later date.” (Christy Hoppe, “Greg Abbott Releases Tax Return, Pays 14% On A Portion Of Income,” Dallas Morning News, 4/15/14)