Judge throws out black teen's conviction from 1944
The murder conviction of George Stinney, Jr., a 14-year-old African-American boy who was executed 70 years ago for the deaths of two white girls, was just overturned. A South Carolina judge ruled the boy did not have a fair trial. VPC

George Stinney Jr. was the youngest person ever executed in South Carolina when he was put to death in 1944. The black teen was found guilty of killing two white girls in a trial that lasted less than a day in the tiny Southern mill town of Alcolu. (Photo: South Carolina Department of Archives and History via AP)

SUMTER, S.C. — A judge threw out the conviction Wednesday of black teen executed 70 years ago for the deaths of two white girls.

George Stinney Jr., 14, was convicted of the grisly murders of Betty June Binnicker, 11, and Mary Emma Thames, 7, in Alcolu, S.C. The girls had disappeared in March 1944 while riding their bicycles, and their bludgeoned bodies were found in a watery ditch along a road in the town, about 70 miles north of Charleston.

After hours of questioning without his parents or a lawyer present, George confessed to the killings and had a daylong trial in which the all-white jury found him guilty after 10 minutes of deliberation.

The teen's supporters have said he was forced to confess. When George was sent to the electric chair in June 1944, he was the youngest person in the country ever executed.

He weighed less than 100 pounds.

The teen's prosecution had "fundamental, constitutional violations of due process," Judge Carmen Mullen of South Carolina's 14th Judicial Circuit said in her ruling that stemmed from a two-day hearing in January. Her decision effectively exonerates the child.

During the January hearing, Mullen called the situation a tragedy but said the proceeding was not happening to determine the teen's guilt or innocence.

“We know that law enforcement separated the defendant from his parents and otherwise took advantage of his age and stature.” Judge Carmen Mullen, South Carolina's 14th Judicial Circuit

Many of the records in the case, including the confession, have been lost. In January, lawyers for the Stinney family argued in court that the verdict needed to be dismissed because of the prosecution's errors.

But the victims' relatives and Third Circuit Solictor Ernest "Chip" Finney argued that the previous ruling was fair and should stand.

Records from that era were poor and scant, Mullen said. A lack of any transcript made it difficult to sort through some of the key details in the case.

However, Mullen, who is white, thought George's confession was compromised. During the trial, psychologist Amanda Salas, a defense witness, said he likely confessed because of the power differential between a 14-year-old black male and the white, uniformed law-enforcement officers in a small, segregated town who were questioning him.

"Methods employed by law enforcement in their questioning of the defendant may have been unduly suggestive, unrestrained, and noncompliant with the standards of criminal procedure as required by the Fifth and 14th amendments," the judge wrote. "We know that law enforcement separated the defendant from his parents and otherwise took advantage of his age and stature to garner a result they determined to be true and just."

His lawyer apparently did little to defend him during the trial and asked few questions on cross examination, she wrote. And no effort was made to move the trial even though much of the town likely was angry because of the deaths and the jury likely was not impartial.

His sentencing to death at age 14 amounted to cruel and unusual punishment, Mullen wrote.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1DOTpPr