Celebs react to Kanye West's post-'SNL,' pro-Trump, anti-13th Amendment rant
CLOSE From Matt Damon to Kanye West, SNL's season premiere was full of moments to keep fans talking. USA TODAY

Kanye West again brought up his intention to run for president in 2020 on "Saturday Night Live." (Photo: Chris Pizzello/AP)

In the end, dressing up as a bottle of Perrier sparkling water may not have been the biggest risk Kanye West took on “Saturday Night Live.”

As he wrapped up his “SNL” appearance, the rapper donned a red “Make America Great Again” hat and defended President Donald Trump, who said he heard that Kanye was “great.”

“He’s leading the charge!” Trump tweeted.

Like many, I don’t watch Saturday Night Live (even though I past hosted it) - no longer funny, no talent or charm. It is just a political ad for the Dems. Word is that Kanye West, who put on a MAGA hat after the show (despite being told “no”), was great. He’s leading the charge! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) September 30, 2018

West capped off his curious musical guest gig, where he subbed for Ariana Grande, with a rambling rant after NBC's broadcast ended. The impromptu speech was captured by Chris Rock, who posted it to his Instagram Story.

Wowwwww only 3 people clapped. Chris Rock is laughing At @kanyewestpic.twitter.com/jAGP5OwKXD — 2cool2blog (@2Cool2Bloggg) September 30, 2018

“Black man in America, supposed to keep what you’re feeling inside right now,” West sang softly. “All those Democrats. You know, it’s like the plan they did, uh, to take their fathers out the home and promote welfare. Does anybody know about that? That’s a Democratic plan.”

Cast members stood behind him, stone-faced and looking at the ground, as a chorus of boos and a smattering of applause emanated from the audience.

In another video circulated on Twitter by hip-hop producer Mike Dean, West suggested the show’s producers didn’t want him to wear the MAGA hat on stage. "They bullied me backstage. They said, 'Don't go out there with that hat on.' "

KANYE SNL TALK THAT GOT CUT OFF FREEDOM OF SPEECH SHOULD HAVE EXTENDED pic.twitter.com/IpULoEJxsN — MIKE DEAN! #MWA (@therealmikedean) September 30, 2018

West noted that white people ask him, “ ‘How could you like Trump, he’s racist’? Well, uh, if I was concerned about racism I would’ve moved out of America a long time ago.”

“We need to have dialogue, not a diatribe,” West said, claiming that 90 percent of the news media, the TV industry, rappers and musicians are liberal. “It’s easy to make it seem like it’s so, so, so one-sided.”

He also reminded the crowd of his intention to run for president in 2020 – when Trump presumably intends to seek re-election.

On Sunday afternoon, Kanye resumed the discussion, tweeting: “there is no such thing as one sides. There’s infinite sides.”

there is no such thing as one sides. There’s infinite sides — ye (@kanyewest) September 30, 2018

To drive that point home, he tweeted a photo of himself again wearing his red baseball cap and suggested abolishing the 13th Amendment, which outlaws slavery.

"This represents good and America becoming whole again," he wrote. "We will no longer outsource to other countries. We build factories here in America and create jobs. We will provide jobs for all who are free from prisons as we abolish the 13th amendment. Message sent with love"

this represents good and America becoming whole again. We will no longer outsource to other countries. We build factories here in America and create jobs. We will provide jobs for all who are free from prisons as we abolish the 13th amendment. Message sent with love pic.twitter.com/a15WqI8zgu — ye (@kanyewest) September 30, 2018

He later clarified those remarks: "The 13th Amendment is slavery in disguise," he noted, "meaning it never ended."

But Chris Evans, aka Captain America, was having none of it.

"There’s nothing more maddening than debating someone who doesn’t know history, doesn’t read books, and frames their myopia as virtue," he wrote in his retweet. "The level of unapologetic conjecture I’ve encountered lately isn’t just frustrating, it’s retrogressive, unprecedented and absolutely terrifying."

Whoopi Goldberg also brought up his remarks on Monday's episode of "The View." After pointing out that all the "SNL" promo photos and videos featured him wearing the MAGA hat he was allegedly bullied about, she addressed his comments about the 13th amendment.

"The 13th Amendment abolished slavery, Kanye," she said, trying to keep her composure. "So maybe, maybe, you want to think and write it down before you say it so that you know what you're saying."

Singer Lana Del Rey expressed ire as well.

"Trump becoming our president was a loss for the country, but your support of him is a loss for the culture," she commented on his Instagram post.

She also noted that West and Trump seem to share certain personality traits: "Delusions of grandeur, extreme issues with narcissism – none of which would be a talking point if we weren't speaking about the man leading our country."

On "Fox & Friends" Monday, regular guest Candace Owens had a different take on the rapper's MAGA hat and post-show comments.

She said she thinks West is “one of the bravest men in America right now. The left has declared war on our American values and Kanye is fighting the cultural front.”

More 'SNL': 'Saturday Night Live' taps Matt Damon to play an angry Brett Kavanaugh

Also: 'Weekend Update' unloads on Brett Kavanaugh, Republican senators

More: Kanye performs on 'SNL' as a Perrier bottle; Twitter has thoughts

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2NUkpIu