0214 amlifeleaguepftexas

Emails, Paul Rondeau, executive director, American Life League, Feb. 6 and 12, 2014

1:45 p.m.

Christy Volanski is a former troop leader with two daughters who left the organization. A correction from Volanski regarding our misunderstanding on Sanger (only) was emailed to me:

“Margaret Sanger is not in the official GS curriculum but rather she is promoted through GSUSA's official social media account: This is the documentation that is linked in my article: http://mygirlscoutcouncil.com/uploads/3/2/6/7/3267198/eloquent_women.pdf”

Volanski provides links to documentation regarding the GSUSA curriculum promoting pro-abortion women here: http://mygirlscoutcouncil.com/politiciansactivists-honored-by-journeys.html

The general section of the site dealing with overall curriculum is here: http://mygirlscoutcouncil.com/curriculum-issues.html

Paul E. Rondeau, M.A.M.

Executive Director

American Life League

3:24 p.m.

“The idea that GSUSA would promote Margaret Sanger, who wishes to eliminate the weeds of society through eugenics, in any way is hard to stomach. But as early as 2004, then Girl Scout CEO Kathy Cloninger admitted in a “Today” show interview that GSUSA works with Planned Parenthood nationally: ‘We have relationships with our church communities, with YWCAs and with Planned Parenthood organizations across the country, to bring information-based sex education programs to girls,’ said Cloniger.

“In 2010, GSUSA sponsored a ‘girls only’ session at the 54th Commission on the Status of Women at the United Nations. This time, the International Planned Parenthood Federation booklet ““Happy, Healthy and Hot” was discovered at the back of the room by Sharon Slater. As I reported with Dr. Judith Reisman in “Global Sex Deviance Advocacy” in the Ave Maria International Journal of Law this booklet encourages libertine sex of all types as “advice” and proposed that laws requiring an HIV-positive person to disclose such to a new sex partner is a violation of “sexual rights.” However, once again, GSUSA pleaded ignorance as to how the IPPF material was available in the room.

“GSUSA’s claim that it is neutral when it comes to abortion is belied by how often pro-abortion speakers and organizations mysteriously orbit around the Girl Scouts.”

Paul E. Rondeau, M.A.M.

Executive Director

American Life League

5:11 p.m.

Feb. 12, 2014

Since you are fact checking specifically the curriculum, I cannot agree your writing is an accurate summary. It suffers from the error of omission. Nine of the 11 women have relationships with NARAL, Planned Parenthood, National Abortion Federation, or advocate for abortion. Only one, Mother Teresa, clearly does not.

Three actually founded pro-abortion groups, two more received the Sanger award for “leadership, excellence, and outstanding contributions to the reproductive health and rights movement,” and another was on PPFA board of advocates.

Our statement said GSUSA holds up pro-abortion icons to be emulated. That is an accurate statement. We have already acknowledged one misstatement that Sanger is promoted via social media rather than in the curriculum. Your writing might be read as if none of these women had no abortion connections when in fact 82% of the list is in that category.

If we eliminate both Roosevelt as “unknown” and Sandra Day O’Conner “just interpreting law,” that means 8 of 9, or 89% are pro-abortion.

Betty Friedan— founded NARAL.

Pauli Murray – advocated for “reform of abortion laws.” NOW is profoundly pro-abortion.

Rosa Parks —was on Planned Parenthood Board of Advocates

Barbara Jordan — pro-abortion and LGBT advocate

Geraldine Ferraro — dissented from Church teaching, a publicly pro-abortion Catholic and advocate for Catholics for a Free Choice.

Hillary Clinton — runs on a pro-abortion platform, Margaret Sanger Award from Planned Parenthood

Sandra Day O’Connor — National Abortion Federation considers O’Conner’s legacy as upholding abortion.

Elizabeth Gurley Flynn — founding member of staunchly pro-abortion ACLU.

Dolores Huerta — received Margaret Sanger Award from Planned Parenthood

Eleanor Roosevelt — unclear

Mother Teresa — pro-life

The pattern seems quite clear.

Paul

Paul E. Rondeau, M.A.M.

Executive Director

American Life League