NFL Arrest-Database
BUF Tyrel Dodson LB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of hitting his girlfriend and damaging her front door in Scottsdale, Ariz. Resolution undetermined.

HOU Ryan Griffin TE Arrested Public intoxication Accused of punching out window of hotel in Nashville, public intoxication. Paid $306 in restitution, community service, plus court costs.

PHI Jalen Mills CB Arrested Disorderly conduct Accused of getting into an altercation with NBA player Devin Robinson outside nightclub in Washington, D.C. Resolution undetermined.

JAC Leonard Fournette RB Arrested License Pulled over for speeding in Jacksonville, accused of driving with a suspended license after not paying ticket for previous traffic violation. Pleaded no contest, fined $303.

CIN Mark Walton RB Surrendered Drugs, gun Accused of carrying a concealed weapon, marijuana possession and reckless driving in South Florida stemming from incident on March 12. Resolution undetermined. Team released him later that week.

DAL Tyrone Crawford DE Charged Disorderly conduct Accused of misdemeanor unlawful assembly in fight at saloon in Panama City, Fla. Resolution undetermined.

BAL Alex Collins RB Arrested Drugs, gun Police responded to report of a car crash and said they found Collins with marijuana and gun in his vehicle. Resolution undetermined. Team released him same day.

CIN Mark Walton RB Arrested Battery Accused of misdemeanor and getting into a scuffle with a woman at Walton's parking garage in Miami. Resolution undetermined.

DET Trevor Bates LB Arrested Assault Accused of punching a police officer after not paying $32 cab fare in New York. Resolution undetermined.

KC De''Anthony Thomas WR Arrested Drugs Suspected of possessing marijuana and drug paraphernalia in Allen County, Kan. Resolution undetermined.

NO P.J. Williams CB Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding, accused of driving drunk and careless driving. Resolution undetermined.

CIN Mark Walton RB Charged Drugs Pulled over for not wearing a seat belt, accused of misdemeanor marijuana possesions in South Florida. Resolution undetermined.

WAS Montae Nicholson S Arrested Assault Suspected of assault and public drunkenness after police responded to a report of a fight in Ashburn, Virginia. Resolution undetermined.

SF Reuben Foster LB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of pushing and slapping a woman in Tampa. Police observed scratch on woman'''s neck. Dropped by prosecutors. Released by team the morning after arrest.

NYG Kyle Lauletta QB Arrested Eluding police Accused of resisting arrest, eluding police and reckless driving in New Jersey. Resolution undetermined.

DEN Chad Kelly QB Arrested Trespassing Charged with first-degree criminal trespassing after police were called about a man inside a home in Englewood, Colo. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor, one year probation, 50 hours community service.

LAR Aaron Neary OC Arrested DUI Suspected of driving drunk in Simi Valley, Calif., where he registered a blood-alcohol content of 0.17 percent. Resolution undetermined.

DAL Rico Gathers TE Arrested Drugs Suspected of marijuana possession in Frisco, Texas. Deferred prosecution agreement, $99 fine, court costs.

CLE Mychal Kendricks LB Charged Insider trading Accused of taking advantage of non-public tips to enhance his financial portfolio in scheme from 2014, when he played for Philadelphia. Pleaded guilty. Released by Browns.

MIN Cayleb Jones WR Arrested Domestic assault Suspected of misdemeanor domestic assault, interfering with a 911 call and theft in Minnesota. Resolution undetermined.

CLE Antonio Callaway WR Cited Drugs Pulled over for traffic violation in Strongville, Ohio, accused of marijuana possession and driving with suspended license. Drug charge dropped. Paid $911 related to license violation.

CAR Vernon Butler DT Cited Assault Accused of pushing and throwing drink in the face of a woman at nightclub around 2 a.m. in Dallas. Resolution undetermined.

ARI Ricky Seals-Jones TE Arrested Assault Accused of pushing hotel staffer in effort to use the restroom in Scottsdale, Ariz. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor, diversion program for alcohol abuse.

DAL Marquez White CB Arrested Assault Accused of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon in apparent road-rage incident near Dallas. Resolution undetermined.

CIN Logan Woodside QB Arrested DUI Pulled over in Kentucky for speeding, suspected of drunken driving. Resolution undetermined.

IND Chris McCain DE Charged Battery Accused of spitting on a woman and grabbing her neck in Los Angeles in Jan. 7, when he was a member of the Chargers. Resolution undetermined.

NYJ Chris Herndon TE Arrested DUI Suspected of driving while intoxicated after crashing into the vehicle of a 76-year-old man. Resolution undetermined.

MIN Antwione Williams LB Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding in Minnesota, suspected of driving drunk. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor, one year probation.

DAL Terrance Williams WR Arrested Public intoxication Suspected of public intoxication after police in Frisco, Texas found his Lamborghini abandoned after hitting a pole. Diversion program in alcohol awareness, paid restitution.

GB Trevor Davis WR Arrested Bomb threat Accused of talking about explosives when checking for flight at Los Angeles airport. Dropped by prosecutors.

PHI Daryl Worley CB Arrested DUI Accused of resisting arrest after being found unconscious in car blocking highway. Gun without permit reccovered from the scene. Pleaded guilty to three charges, 72 hours in jail. NFL suspended four games. Team released him hours after arrest.

SEA Michael Bennett DE Indicted Injury to elderly Accused of pushing his way past a 66-year-old parapalegic security worker at the Super Bowl in Houston in 2017 when Bennett was a spectator and played for Seattle. Dropped by prosecutors.

NE Duron Harmon S Detained Drugs Apprehended at Costa Rica airport, accused of carrying 58 grams of marijuana inside a can of iced tea. Sent back to the U.S.

BUF Zay Jones WR Arrested Vandalism Accused of breaking glass window in bloody argument with his brother in Los Angeles. Jones apparently was nude during the incident. Dropped by prosecutors.

DEN Adam Gotsis DE Arrested Sexual assault Accused of rape in an incident that happened in 2013 when Gotsis was a student at Georgia Tech. Dropped by prosecutors.

OAK Aldon Smith LB Warrant Domestic violence Smith allegedly fled the scene of a domestic incident in which the victim suffered non-life-threating injuries. Resolution undetermined. Team cut him within two days.

NYJ Dylan Donahue LB Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving, driving wrong way in Lincoln Tunnel and crashing into a bus with a blood-alchohol content of 0.15. Pleaded guilty, license suspended, education program.

SF Reuben Foster LB Arrested Domestic violence Suspected of domestic violence, possession of an assault rifle and making criminal threats in Los Gatos, Calif. Pleaded no contest to weapons charge, 232 hours community service, domestic case dropped.

CIN Josh Tupou DT Arrested Public intoxication Kicked out of bar in Boulder, Colo., accused of violating probation from 2015 altercation. Sentenced to additional year of probation, 48 hours of community service.

BAL Marlon Humphrey CB Arrested Robbery Accused of stealing $15 phone charger and refusing to give it back to an Uber driver in Alabama. Dismissed by judge in Alabama.

KC Kevin Pierre-Louis LB Arrested Drugs Pulled over in Kansas, accused of marijuana possesion and related misdemeanors. Plea deal, one-year probation, NFL suspended one game.

NYJ Robby Anderson WR Arrested Eluding police Accused of reckless driving in South Florida, resisting arrest, fleeing police and threatening a police officer's family. Pleaded no contest to reckless driving, six months probation.

DEN Carlos Henderson WR Arrested Drugs He was the passenger in a car pulled over for speeding in West Monroe, La., and was suspected of marijuana possession. Plea agreement, NFL suspended one game.

SEA Jeremy Lane CB Arrested DUI Pulled over and suspected of drunken driving in King County, Wash. Lane said his blood-alcohol content was .03. Pleaded guilty to reckless driving, suspended sentence, two days on work crew.

SF Reuben Foster LB Arrested Drugs Accused of misdemeanor marijuana possession in Tuscaloosa, Ala. Diversion program, including drug testing and education.

TB T.J. Ward S Arrested Drugs Accused of marijuana possession at his home, based on outstanding warrant from incident in October 2017. Resolution undetermined.

NYJ Rashard Robinson CB Arrested Drugs Pulled over for careless driving in New Jersey, accused of possessing candy containing marijuana. Resolution undetermined. NFL suspended four games.

SEA Malik McDowell DT Arrested Disorderly conduct Accused of being disruptive at night club in Georgia despite police warnings. Resolution undetermined.

MIA Rey Maualuga LB Arrested Battery Accused of grabbing and shoving a person at Miami nightclub after refusing to pay a $40 bar tab. Resolution undetermined. Released by team later that day.

CAR Matt Kalil OT Charged Selling alcohol to minor Accused of selling alcohol to minor at pizza restaurant he owns in Minnesota despite not being present for sale. Resolution undetermined.

KC Roy Miller DT Arrested Domestic violence Suspected of domestic battery in Jacksonville. Arrest report said his wife had marks on her face and neck after confrontation. Diversion program. NFL suspended six games. Team released him two days after incident.

CIN Tyler Boyd WR Charged Drugs Charged with owning a vape pen containing marijuana ingredient after friend crashed his car in July. Dismissed charges in court.

GB Aaron Jones RB Arrested DUI, drugs Pulled over for speeding, accused of operating a vehicle with a restricted substance after smoking marijuana. Resolution undetermined.

LAR Ethan Westbrooks DE Arrested Gun Pulled over for speeding near Bakersfield, Calif. Police found gun in his car and suspected him of carrying a stolen loaded firearm. Pleaded no contest to misdemeanor, one day in jail, three years probation.

GB Lance Kendricks TE Cited Drugs Pulled over speeding in Wisconson, cited for marijuana possession. Resolution undetermined.

CLE T.Y. McGill DT Arrested Drugs Accused of misdemeanor marijuana posession at hotel in Charlotte. Resolution undetermined.

NYG Michael Bowie OT Arrested Domestic violence Accused of domestic assault and battery, grabbing girlfriend by the neck and throwing her to the ground in Tulsa. Resolution undetermined.

OAK Sean Smith CB Arrested Assault Charged with felony assault for incident in Pasadena, Calif., on July 4. Accused of stomping on head of sister's boyfriend. Pleaded guilty, one year in jail, five years' probation.

JAC Dante Fowler DE Arrested Battery Accused of hitting a man who criticized his driving in St. Petersburg. Pleaded no contest, 75 hours community service, one-year probation, $925 fine.

HOU D'Onta Foreman RB Arrested Drugs, gun Accused of marijuana possession and unlawfully carrying a gun in Austin, Texas. Pleaded no contest to disorderly conduct, $500 fine, required to turn in gun.

BUF Adolphus Washington DT Arrested Gun Accused of carrying a concealed weapon at water park in Ohio, leading to intense encounter with police. Resolution undetermined

DAL Damien Wilson LB Arrested Assault, gun Charged with two counts of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon in Frisco, Texas after allegedly brandishing rifle at a man. Dropped after grand jury declined to indict.

PIT Artie Burns CB Arrested Suspended license Pulled over in Miami Beach, accused of driving with a suspended license. Resolution undetermined.

GB Letroy Guion DT Arrested DUI Pulled over in Hawaii, suspected of drunken driving. Resolution undetermined.

NYJ Lorenzo Mauldin LB Charged Assault Accused of attacking man at nightclub in Manhattan April 2. Dropped by prosecutors.

NO Willie Snead WR Arrested DUI Accused of drunk driving in Kenner, La., where his car had crashed and he registered a blood-alcohol content of .125. Diversion program, counseling. Suspended three games.

NYG Roger Lewis WR Arrested DUI, drugs Pulled over in Ohio, acccued of operating a vehicle while impaired after police smelled marijuana. Fined $175 for lesser charges, including having tinted windows. Most serious charge dismissed.

DAL Nolan Carroll CB Arrested DUI Pulled over in Dallas, suspected of driving while intoxicated. Resolution undetermined.

NYJ Dylan Donahue LB Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving in Billings, Montana. Resolution undetermined.

NYJ Robby Anderson WR Arrested Resisting arrest Accused of fighting police and security at music festival in Miami. Dropped.

CAR Michael Oher OT Cited Assault Accused of getting into scuffle with Uber driver in Nashville in apparent dispute over fare. Dropped.

WAS Junior Galette LB Arrested Disorderly conduct Accused of getting into a fight and running away from police in Biloxi, Miss. Resolution undetermined.

SEA Trevone Boykin QB Arrested Probation violation Suspected of violating probation with March 27 arrest. Probation stemmed from 2015 bar fight while at TCU. Resolution undetermined.

SF Tramaine Brock CB Arrested Domestic violence Suspected of felony domestic violence in Santa Clara, Calif. Officers said female had visible injuries. Dropped by prosecutors based on insufficient evidence.

ARI Marquis Bundy WR Arrested Disorderly conduct Suspected of failing to obey police commands after getting agitated outside club in Scottsdale, Ariz. Resolution undetermined.

DEN Will Parks S Arrested Domestic violence Accused of harassment and non-physical domestic violence in incident involving his former girlfriend. Charges dropped after woman didn''t testify.

SEA Trevone Boykin QB Arrested Drugs Accused of marijuana possession, public intoxication. He was a passenger in a car involved in accident in Dallas. Resolution undetermined.

GB Makinton Dorleant CB Arrested Police interference Accused of interfence after scuffle outside of bar in Cedar Falls, Iowa. Resolution undetermined.

CHI Deiondre Hall CB Arrested Disorderly conduct Accused of disorderly conduct, public intoxication and interference outside bar in Cedar Falls, Iowa. Resolution undetermined.

KC Demetrius Harris TE Arrested Drugs Suspected of felony marijuana possession as passenger in car pulled over in Missouri. Resolution undetermined.

LAR Ethan Westbrooks DT Arrested Domestic violence Suspected of domestic violence in Sacramento after police observed injuries to mother of his child. Dropped by prosecutors.

BAL Matt Elam S Arrested Drugs Pulled over in Miami Beach, accused of possessing marijuana, Oxycodone. Resolution undetermined.

IND David Parry DT Arrested DUI, resisting arrest Suspected of stealing golf cart, driving drunk, resisting arrest in Scottsdale, Ariz. Pleaded guilty to reduced charges, two years of probation.

LAC King Dunlap OT Arrested Violating court order Suspected of violating protective order in Nashville stemming from domestic incident. Resolution undetermined.

NYJ Darrelle Revis CB Charged Assault Accused of aggravated assault after altercation in Pittsburgh. Video shows two men on the ground unconscious. Charges dismissed.

GB Sam Shields CB Charged Drugs Accused of misdemeanor marijuana possession from Oct. 19, 2016. Pleaded no contest, $500 fine.

LAR Tre Mason RB Arrested Eluding police Accused of fleeing law enforcement, careless driving on an ATV in July 2016. Resolution undetermined.

KC Khaseem Greene LB Charged Gun Accused of unlawful possession of a weapon and handing gun to a man who fired into a crowd in New Jersey. Charge dismissed after accused shooter said he lied. Team cut him after his indictment in May 2017.

CIN Adam Jones CB Arrested Assault Accused of poking hotel security employee in the eye in Cincinnati, obstructing police. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charge, sentenced to time served of two days in jail.

SEA Damontre Moore DE Arrested DUI Suspected of driving while intoxicated in King County, Washington. Resolution undetermined.

GB Geronimo Allison WR Charged Drugs Accused of marijuana possession after getting pulled over for speeding in September. Fined $330, community service. NFL suspended one game.

ARI Michael Floyd WR Arrested DUI Found unconscious in idle car in Scottsdale, charged with drunken driving. Pleaded guilty to extreme DUI, 24 days in jail, 96 in home detention, 30 hours community service.

MIA Leon Orr DT Arrested Drugs Pulled over for tinted windows, charged with marijuana possession near Naples, Fla. Deputies also found gun in car. Resolution undetermined. Team released him next day.

LAR Troy Hill CB Arrested DUI Suspected of drunken driving after crashing into a big rig on the freeway. Pleaded no contest, three years probation, 100 hours community service, NFL suspended two games.

PHI Josh Huff WR Arrested DUI, drugs, gun Pulled over and accused of drunken driving, marijuana possession and having an unloaded gun without a permit. Resolution undetermined. Team released him later that week.

MIN Isame Faciane OG Arrested DUI Charged with drunken driving after being pulled over for driving around barricades. Resolution undetermined. Team released him later that week.

PHI Nigel Bradham LB Arrested Gun Accused of carrying loaded gun through airport security in Miami. Dropped by prosecutors.

CLE Alvin Bailey OG Arrested DUI Accused of operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol and having drug paraphernalia in his car after returning from game in Miami. Pleaded no contest, found guilty, three-day intervention program. NFL suspended him two games.

TB Austin Seferian-Jenkins TE Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding and driving erratically, accused of drunken driving in Tampa. Pleaded no contest to reduced charge, one-year probation, 50 hours community service. Team released him same day.

SF Bruce Miller TE Arrested Assault Accused of assaulting a man and his 70-year-old father at hotel in San Francisco. Resolution undetermined. Team released him same day.

PHI Nigel Bradham LB Arrested Assault Suspected of punching somebody in the nose at a Miami Beach hotel after verbal altercation. Deferred prosecution.

BUF Jonathan Williams RB Arrested DUI Accused of driving while intoxicated in Fayetteville, Ark. Resolution undetermined.

IND Robert Turbin RB Cited Drugs Police in Utah accused him of marijuana possession after pulling him over for running a stop sign and then smelling it in his car. Charges dropped.

JAC Dan Skuta LB Arrested Battery Accused of pushing a woman's face with an open hand after she refused to give him her phone number in Orlando. Dropped by prosecutors.

DEN Cody Latimer WR Arrested Traffic warrant Latimer called police and alleged his girlfriend hit him. Police found outstanding traffic warrant from 2015 and arrested him for that. Paid $311 to settle ticket.

LAR T.J. McDonald S Arrested DUI Suspected of hitting a parked car and driving under the influence of a substance other than alcohol. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor, 200 hours community service, three years probation, alcohol program.

CAR Cameron Artis-Payne RB Arrested Reckless driving Accused of driving 102 mph in a 65-mph zone in North Carolina. Resolution undetermined.

ATL Ra' Shede Hageman DT Arrested Domestic violence Police report said his girlfriend had lacerations on elbow and hand, also accused of cruelty to children. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges, NFL suspended six games.

NO Damian Swann CB Arrested Reckless driving Pulled over in Athens, Ga., accused of driving 100 mph in 65-mph zone, reckless driving. Resolution undetermined.

LAR Tre Mason RB Arrested Drugs Pulled over in Hollywood, Fla., accused of reckless driving, marijuana possession and resisting arrest. Pleaded no contest to three charges, $293 fine.

BAL Terrell Suggs LB Arrested License Accused of leaving the scene of an accident and driving with a suspended license in Scottsdale, Ariz. Charges dropped, driving class for speeding.

HOU Jaelen Strong WR Arrested Drugs Accused of marijuana possession after traffic stop in Arizona. Diversion program, education and counseling.

IND Jonathan Newsome LB Arrested Drugs Accused of marijuana possession in Indiana after police responded to a complaint about loud music at his residence. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor, sentenced to supervised probation. Team released him shortly after the incident.

DEN Shiloh Keo S Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving in Ada County, Idaho. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor, one year probation, community service, fined nearly $1,000.

NE Montee Ball RB Charged Domestic violence Accused of disorderly conduct and battery after allegedly striking his girlfriend in the face. Pleaded guilty to two charges, 60 days in jail, probation. Team released him the next week.

CLE Johnny Manziel QB Indicted Domestic violence Former girlfriend accused him of striking her after leaving a bar in Dallas. Grand jury indicted him on misdemeanor charge in April 2016. Diversion program, anger counseling. Team released him in March.

NE J.J. Worton WR Arrested Assault Accused of assault and battery after fight at a bar in Foxboro, Mass. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanors.

CLE Armonty Bryant LB Arrested Drugs Accused of illegally possessing Adderrall after failing to produce a prescription for it in traffic stop with teammate De'Ante Saunders. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor drug charge, 68-day probation, $1,000 fine.

CLE De'Ante Saunders S Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding, cited for driving drunk. Gun found in car without permit. Resolution undetermined. Team released him three days after arrest.

JAC Justin Blackmon LB Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving in Carter County, Okla. Blackmon already was serving an indefinite NFL suspension at the time of his arrest. Resolution undetermined.

SEA Derrick Coleman FB Arrested Hit-and-run Accused of leaving the scene of an accident after his vehicle struck the back of a Honda Civic, causing the driver to suffer serious injuries. Resolution undetermined. Team suspended him.

TEN Dorial Green-Beckham WR Arrested Outstanding warrant Pulled over for speeding in Missouri, where officer found an outstanding warrant for previous unpaid speeding ticket. Paid $92 and received warning.

SF Ahmad Brooks LB Indicted Sexual battery Accused of misdemeanor sexual battery stemming from a December 2014 incident at the home of teammate Ray McDonald. Resolution undetermined.

SF Aldon Smith LB Arrested DUI Accused of hitting a parked vehicle with his vehicle, being under the influence of alcohol and vandalism in Santa Clara, Calif. Resolution undetermined. Released by team the next day.

CAR Stephen Hill WR Cited Drugs Pulled over for seatbelt violation, cited for possession of drug paraphernalia after officer smelled marijuana. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor, 48 hours community service, one year of probation.

KC Justin Cox DB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of domestic violence, trespassing and burglary in Mississippi. Resolution undetermined. Released by team the next day.

TEN Justin Hunter WR Surrendered Assault Charged with felonious assault stemming from an incident at a Virginia Beach bar July 4. Acquitted by judge.

NYJ Sheldon Richardson DE Arrested Resisting arrest Accused of resisting arrest after street racing, speeding and running through a traffic signal in Missouri. Gun found under seat. Pleaded guilty to reduced charges. Two years of probation, 100 hours community service, $1,050 in fines.

NYG Josh Brown K Arrested Violating court order Accused of violating protective order obtained by wife after his previous arrest. The order prevented him from being within 500 feet of her. Charge dropped.

GB Andrew Quarless TE Arrested Gun Accused of firing a gun in public in Miami Beach, a misdemeanor offense. Pleaded no contest, $1,000 fine, one year probation, gun safety and anger management classes.

HOU Brandon Ivory DT Arrested Burglary Accused of first-degree burglary in Alabama after victims said two armed men kicked in their door and stole cash and iPads. Resolution undetermined.

NE Brandon Spikes LB Charged Hit-and-run Accused of leaving the scene of a crash in which a woman and boy in another car suffered minor injuries. Cut by team the next day. Pleaded guilty to multiple charges, one year of probation.

ATL Prince Shembo LB Arrested Animal cruelty Accused of killing ex-girlfriend's Yorkie dog, which showed extensive injuries. Charged with felony aggravated animal cruelty. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor cruelty charge, $1,000 fine, community service. Released by team same day.

CHI Ray McDonald DT Arrested Domestic violence Accused of assaulting a woman while she was holding a baby in Santa Clara, Calif. Resolution undetermined. Released by team the same day.

NYG Josh Brown K Arrested Domestic violence Accused of fourth-degree domestic violence by wife, who later obtained a protective order against him. Charge dropped. NFL suspended him one game.

DET Rodney Austin OG Arrested Domestic violence Accused of pushing mother of his child and damaging her phone in North Carolina on April 5. Police say they observed no signs of injury. Found guilty on four charges, one-year probation, intervention program. Team released him the week after arrest.

NO Brian Dixon CB Arrested Resisting officer Pulled over in Miami, accused of resisting officer who ticketed him for driving in the middle of the road on his scooter. Resolution undetermined.

BAL Bernard Pierce RB Arrested DUI Failed sobriety tests after his 2014 Ford Mustang was pulled over for speeding in Baltimore County. Resolution undetermined. Team released him same day.

PIT Antwon Blake CB Arrested Public intoxication Accused of being drunk in public in Oceanside, Calif. Resolution undetermined.

ARI Alex Okafor LB Arrested Evading arrest Accused of running from the scene after police received a report of a disturbance and then tried to detain him in Austin, Texas. Resolution undetermined.

SF Bruce Miller FB Arrested Domestic violence Suspected of misdemeanor battery in domestic incident in Santa Clara, Calif. Pleaded no contest to misdemeanor domestic violence charge, 16 weeks of counseling.

GB Jarrett Bush CB Arrested Public intoxication Accused of disorderly conduct while under the influence after police received a report of a fight in Vacaville, Calif. Case dropped.

BAL Victor Hampton CB Arrested DUI Pulled over in Charlotte, accused of driving while impaired and driving 100 mph in a 55-mph zone. Resolution undetermined. Team cut him the next day.

PHI Nate Allen S Arrested Indecent exposure Pulled over in Fort Myers, Fla., after a girl said she saw a man exposing himself. He later was exonerated after "false arrest." Case dropped. Allen cleared of all wrongdoing.

IND Ahmad Bradshaw RB Cited Drugs Pulled over in Preble County, Ohio, for traffic violation, accused of marijuana possession. Pleaded no contest to marijuana charge, $351 fine, six-month driving suspension. NFL one-game suspension.

DAL Joseph Randle RB Arrested Drugs Accused of marijuana possession in Wichita, Kan., after report of domestic disturbance at hotel. No signs of injury, police said. Dropped by police. NFL suspended four games.

GB Letroy Guion DT Arrested Drugs, gun Pulled over in Florida, accused of felony drug possession with 357 grams of marijuana. He also had a gun and $190,000 in cash. Deferred prosecution, probation.

IND D'Qwell Jackson LB Arrested Assault Accused of hitting a pizza delivery driver in the head in a dispute over a parking space in Washington, D.C. Convicted of misdemeanor assault, $1,000 fine.

BAL Terrence Cody DT Indicted Animal cruelty, drugs Charged with two felony counts of aggravated animal cruelty after one of his dogs died, illegal possession of alligator and marijuana. Convicted of misdemeanor neglect, acquitted by judge of felony charges. Released by team the same day.

ARI Bobby Massie OT Arrested DUI Suspected of drunken driving in Arizona, he flunked two sobriety tests and had a blood-alcohol content of 0.14 percent. Resolution undetermined. NFL suspended three games.

IND Andrew Jackson LB Arrested DUI Pulled over in Bowling Green, Ky., accused of drunk driving, blood-alcohol content of .088. Pleaded guilty, 14 days of home confinement, fines and $1,000 in court costs, alcohol treatment program.

GB Datone Jones DE Cited Drugs Accused of marijuana possession in Green Bay after police were called to check vehicle playing loud music in parking lot. Convicted, $880 fine, one-game suspension.

IND Josh McNary LB Arrested Domestic violence, rape Accused of rape, battery and criminal confinement of woman who said he attacked her Dec. 1 after night of drinking. Acquitted by jury and rejoined the team.

NYJ Oday Aboushi OG Arrested Drugs Pulled over in New Jersey, accused of possessing marijuana and drug paraphernalia. Diversion program, probation. NFL suspended one game.

NYJ Chris Johnson RB Arrested Gun Pulled over in Orlando, accused of misdemeanor gun offense after two guns were found in his vehicle. Case dropped by prosecutors.

CHI Tim Jennings CB Arrested DUI Pulled over for allegedly driving 99 mph in 65-mph zone in Georgia. Accused of drunken and reckless driving. Pleaded guilty to reckless driving, one year of probation, 40 hours community service, $1,050 in fines.

NO Junior Galette LB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of simple battery against woman in Galette's home. Police noted bleeding from her ear and also arrested Galette's cousin. Case dropped by prosecutors.

NYJ Jermaine Cunningham LB Arrested Gun, privacy invasion Accused of spreading sexual images, criminal mischief and illegally transporting a gun found in his Audi. Pleaded guilty to invasion of privacy and gun charge, three years of probation, counseling.

MIN Jabari Price CB Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding, accused of misdemeanor drunken driving. Pleaded guilty to careless driving, 30 days home detention, one year probation, $300 fine.

JAC Dwayne Gratz CB Arrested Trespassing Accused of disorderly intoxication and trespassing after trying to buy items at a store in Miami with bubble gum instead of money. Resolution undetermined.

TEN Shonn Greene RB Arrested Handicap parking Accused of leaving the scene, reckless driving and driving with a suspended license after being caught parking in handicap spot. Pleaded guilty to parking charge and failing to exercise due care, charged $655.

DEN John Boyett S Arrested Assault Accused of being drunk, head-butting and hitting a cab driver and trying to hide from police by stealing a shovel and covering himself in mulch. Resolution undetermined. Team cut him the next day.

DAL Joseph Randle RB Arrested Theft Accused of shoplifting at store in Frisco, Texas, after allegedly being caught in the act on video. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor, probation, $706 in costs. Charge could be dismissed if he stays out of trouble.

MIN Tom Johnson DT Arrested Trespassing Police said he refused to leave a restaurant in Minneapolis after it closed. Police used a chemical spray and stun gun on him when they say he resisted. Acquitted by jury.

MIA Derrick Shelby DE Arrested Trespassing Police report in Fort Lauderdale says he was touching females at club without permission and refused to leave when asked. Resolution undetermined. Team suspended him.

IND Da'Rick Rogers WR Arrested DUI Pulled over for swerving in Indianapolis, suspected of drunken driving. Resolution undetermined. Team cut him later that day.

ARI Jonathan Dwyer RB Arrested Domestic violence Suspected of aggravated assault in incident involving woman. Pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct, 18 months probation, community service.

MIN Adrian Peterson RB Indicted Child abuse Grand jury indicted him on felony charge of injury to a child. Accused of injuring his 4-year-old son with a tree branch while disciplining him. Pleaded no contest to misdemeanor reckless assault, 80 hours community service, $4,000 fine, court costs.

NYJ Quincy Enunwa WR Arrested Domestic violence Charged with simple assault after alleged incident with woman at hotel in Florham Park, N.J. Dropped after alleged victim said she didn't want to pursue the case.

SF Ray McDonald DE Arrested Domestic violence Suspected of domestic violence against pregnant fiance, who showed police bruising on her body. Dropped by prosecutors.

BUF Alan Branch DT Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving, blood-alcohol content of 0.14, after police say they noticed him vomiting out of car door. Pleaded guilty, $900 in fines and costs, six-month ignition interlock device required. Team released him the next day.

PIT Le'Veon Bell RB Arrested Drugs Pulled over and suspected of marijuana possession with teammate LeGarrette Blount in passenger seat. Diversion program, 15 months probation, suspended license for 60 days.

PIT LeGarrette Blount RB Detained Drugs Was riding in passenger seat when police pulled over car driven by teammate Le'Veon Bell. Suspected of possessing bag with about 20 ounces of marijuana. Diversion program, 50 hours of community service in exchange for dismissal of charge.

WAS Bashaud Breeland CB Cited Drugs Cited for marijuana possession at gas station by police of Virginia Commonwealth University. Resolution undetermined.

JAC Justin Blackmon WR Arrested Drugs Pulled over for traffic violation in Oklahoma, accused of marijuana possession. Pleaded no contest to misdemeanor marijuana possession after entering voluntary rehabilitation program.

STL Jo-Lonn Dunbar LB Arrested Battery Accused of getting into a fight with NBA free agent Donte Greene outside club in Miami Beach. Charges dropped in August.

PHI Keelan Johnson S Arrested Assault Accused of striking police officer, disordery conduct during disturbance at a bar in Tempe, Ariz. Pleaded guilty to aggravated assault.

BAL Jimmy Smith CB Arrested Disorderly conduct Accused of refusing to obey police orders during incident at a bar in Maryland. Smith said he was trying to help an intoxicated woman. Case dropped.

MIN Jerome Simpson WR Cited Drugs Pulled over and suspected of marijuana possession, open container and violating terms of his driver's license. Resolution undetermined.

CLE Josh Gordon WR Arrested DUI Accused of driving while impaired after being pulled over for speeding in Raleigh, N.C. Pleaded guilty, 60-day suspended sentence, $390 in fines and costs. NFL suspended for season, then reduced to 10 games.

ARI John Abraham LB Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving after an officer found him passed out behind the wheel of his car outside Atlanta. Resolution undetermined.

CIN Sam Montgomery DE Arrested Speeding Spent night in jail in South Carolina after being clocked at 89 mph in 55-mph zone. Case dropped. State trooper fired.

IND Andrew Jackson LB Charged DUI Accused of drunk driving and speeding in Muncie, Ind. Diversion program with 40 hours of community service and treatment program.

CHI Cornelius Washington DE Arrested License Pulled over for speeding, accused of driving with a suspended license in Georgia. Paid fines.

KC Sean Smith CB Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving after a police officer said he saw Smith drive his car into a pole in Kansas City. Pleaded guilty to DUI charge and failure to show proof of insurance, two years of probation, $895 fine.

BUF Marcell Dareus DT Arrested Reckless driving Accused of crashing his Jaguar into a tree, drag racing and reckless endangerment in upstate New York. Pleaded guilty to two traffic violations, fined $300 and agreed to host free high school football clinic.

ATL Darius Johnson WR Arrested DUI Suspected of drunk driving, failure to obey traffic signs in Atlanta. Released by team in July.

BAL Lorenzo Taliaferro RB Arrested Public intoxication Accused of destroying a taxi cab window in Virginia, being drunk in public. Diversion program. Charges to be dropped if he pays for damages, has clean record.

DEN T.J. Ward S Warrant Assault Accused of throwing a glass at a female bartender after being told he couldn't buy at the strip club. Diversion program, four hours community service.

CAR Greg Hardy DE Arrested Domestic violence Police responded to call and reported that a woman accused Hardy of assaulting her and threatening her. Case dismissed on appeal after being convicted by judge on assault charge, 18 months probation. Deactivated by team.

BUF Marcell Dareus DT Arrested Drugs Pulled over for speeding in Alabama, accused of felony drug possession. Resolution undetermined.

CHI Josh Morgan WR Warrant Assault Accused of simple assault, punching another man outside of a nightclub in Washington, D.C. Diversion program. Charge to be dropped after doing 32 hours of community service.

JAC Tandon Doss WR Arrested Disorderly conduct Accused of refusing to listen to police orders after two men reported him to police and said Doss was following them in his car. Dropped after prosecutors declined to file charges.

SF Aldon Smith LB Arrested Disorderly conduct Accused of making a false bomb threat at Los Angeles airport after being selected for secondary screening. Dropped by prosecutors.

CIN Orson Charles FB Arrested Gun Accused of brandishing gun in car in apparent road rage incident. Resolution undetermined.

STL Greg Reid CB Arrested Probation violation Accused of undiclosed probation violation stemming from 2012 arrest after the car he was riding in was pulled over in Georgia for seatbelt violation. Resolution undetermined.

SF Chris Culliver CB Arrested Reckless driving, weapon Accused of hitting a bicyclist with his vehicle, felony hit-and-run and possession of brass knuckles in San Jose. He allegedly threatened witness with brass knuckles. Pleaded guilty to two misdemeanors, 40 hours community service, restitution. NFL one-game suspension.

TEN Adewale Ojomo DE Arrested Solicitation Accused of soliciting a prostitute in Miami for $100, busted by undercover cop. Diversion program. Team cut him the next month.

BAL Jah Reid OL Arrested Battery Acccused of getting into a fight at an adult entertainment establishment in Key West, Fla. Diversion program.

OAK Kory Sheets RB Arrested Drugs Pulled over for speeding in Canada, accused of marijuana possession. Pleaded guilty, then charge dropped after he made $300 donation to Students Against Drunk Driving.

BAL Deonte Thompson WR Arrested Drugs Accused of marijuana possession after Chevrolet SUV he was riding in was pulled over for driving without its headlights on. Charges dropped.

WAS Fred Davis TE Arrested DUI Accused of drunk driving in Tysons Corner, Va., after passerby called police to report a man apparently asleep in his Rolls-Royce. Charge dropped.

ATL Roddy White WR Arrested Failure to Appear Pulled over for speeding in Georgia, accused of failing to appear on illegal window tint charge from a year earlier. Resolution undetermined.

BAL Ray Rice RB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of striking his wife at Atlantic City casino, rendering her unconscious. She also is accused of hitting him. Diversion program. Two-game suspension, then indefinite suspension, cut by team.

SF Daniel Kilgore OG Arrested Public intoxication Accused of being drunk in public in Kingsport, Tenn. Charge dropped.

CLE Davone Bess WR Arrested Assault Accused of assaulting a law enforcement officer and disorderly conduct after bizarre behavior at airport in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. Pleaded no contest to resisting arrest and disorderly conduct, required to write apology to officer.

TB Akeem Spence DT Arrested Drugs Pulled over for speeding in Alabama, accused of marijuana possession after police dog searched car. Diversion program, probation.

SEA Spencer Ware RB Arrested DUI Pulled over by Washington State Patrol, suspected of drunken driving in Seattle. Charge dropped after judge ruled the arresting officer lacked reasonable suspicion in traffic stop.

TB Michael Hill RB Arrested Resisting Arrest Accused of refusing to obey a lawful officer, disorderly conduct stemming from fight at bar in St. Joseph, MO. Resolution undetermined.

MIN Erin Henderson LB Arrested DUI, drugs Accused of drunken driving for second time since November after allegedly crashing into trees in parking lot. Also accused of marijuana possession. Pleaded guilty to fourth-degree intoxicated driving, two years probation. Team released him next month.

NYJ Kellen Winslow Jr. TE Charged Drugs Accused of possession of synthetic marijuana after police responded to a complaint of him in a parked car outside a Target store in New Jersey on Nov. 19. Diversion program.

SD Thomas Keiser LB Arrested Assault Accused of getting into a fight with another man outside a bar in downtown San Diego after Chargers' game. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor battery, required to take anger management classses.

CHI Henry Melton DT Arrested Assault, alcohol Accused of public intoxication and attacking a man at a bar in Grapevine, Texas. Charge dropped at bar owner's request.

NYG Will Hill S Arrested Child support Arrested in New Jersey on warrant related to lack of child-support payments. Paid the amount owed: $9,184.92

MIN A.J. Jefferson CB Arrested Domestic violence Taken to jail by Eden Prairie police on probable cause of domestic assault. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor, suspended jail sentence. Cut by team hours later.

MIN Erin Henderson LB Arrested DUI Failed breath test during traffic stop, suspected of drunk driving with blood-alcohol measured at 0.11. He said police didn't have grounds to stop his car. Pleaded guilty to careless driving, one year of probation, 40 hours community service.

ATL Jason Snelling FB Arrested Drugs Pulled over for traffic violation, accused of marijuana possession of less than one ounce, no registration. Resolution undetermined.

KC Dwayne Bowe WR Arrested Drugs Pulled over for going 48 mph in a 35-mph zone, accused of marijuana possession after police smelled odor and searched car. Pleaded guilty to reduced charges of defective equipment and littering, $610 fine. NFL suspended one game.

MIN Jerome Simpson WR Arrested DUI Accused of drunk driving after police responded to a report of a stalled vehicle. He failed sobriety tests. Pleaded guilty to careless driving and refusing test, 120 days of community service.

ARI Lequan Jefferson TE Arrested DUI Police in Arizona stopped him after report of a collision. Blood-alcohol measured at .156. Resolution undetermined. Released by team within days.

SF Aldon Smith LB Charged Gun Case stems from house party in June 2012, in which Smith was stabbed. Three felony counts of illegal possession of an assault weapon. Pleaded no contest, three years of probation, 235 hours of community service for this and DUI case.

CIN Adam Jones CB Arrested Disorderly conduct He was the passenger in a car pulled over for speeding and was cited for disorderly conduct. The driver was charged with drunk driving. Paid $130 for fine and court costs.

SF Aldon Smith LB Arrested DUI, drugs Accused of drunk driving and marijuana possession after crashing his pickup truck in San Jose, Calif. Pleaded no contest, three years of probation, 235 hours of community service for this and other guns case.

DEN Von Miller LB Cited License Pulled over for speeding in Arapahoe County, Colo., accused of driving with a suspended license. Second traffic issue in six weeks. Pleaded guilty to traffic offenses, required to take driving class and do 24 hours of community service.

IND John Boyett S Arrested Public intoxication Accused of getting into an altercation with police, public intoxication and not departing a bar in Indianapolis when asked. Resolution undetermined. Team cut him the next day.

DEN Julius Thomas TE Arrested Failure to appear Pulled over for speeding, charged with failing to appear in court for previous traffic ticket from Jan. 25, 2013. Pleaded guilty to having a defective vehicle, adding two points to license.

BUF Nigel Bradham LB Charged Drugs Pulled over for window-tint violation, charged with marijuana possession. Diversion program. Charge dropped if he stays out of trouble for six months. Window-tint charge dismissed.

DEN Von Miller LB Arrested Outstanding warrant Arrested near Denver on warrant for failure to appear in court on previous traffic charges, including careless driving and driving without a license. Resolution undetermined.

NYJ Joe McKnight RB Arrested Outstanding warrant Pulled over for speeding, he was accused of having outstanding warrants for previous unpaid traffic fines. Resolution undetermined.

TB Eric Wright CB Arrested DUI Arrested in Los Angeles on suspicion of drunken driving. Pleaded no contest to reckless driving, six months of drug treatment. Traded to San Francisco a week later.

NE Alfonzo Dennard CB Arrested DUI Pulled over around 2 a.m. in Lincoln, Neb., arrested on suspicion of drunken driving. Pleaded no contest to refusing test, DUI charge dropped, probation, $500 fine.

NYG Dan Connor LB Arrested Weapon Accused of having a switchblade in his luggage at Philadelphia airport. Charged with possession of offensive weapon. Diversion program. Charge dropped if he keeps clean record.

IND Joe Lefeged S Arrested Gun Accused of fleeing police and multiple gun charges in Washington, D.C., including carrying unlicensed gun. Resolution undetermined.

NE Aaron Hernandez TE Arrested Murder, gun Charged with first-degree murder in death of friend Odin Lloyd, five gun charges. Convicted by jury of first-degree murder, life in prison. Released by team same week of arrest.

CLE Ausar Walcott LB Arrested Attempted murder Turned himself in after allegedly punching man in head outside night club. Pleaded not guilty, case pending. Released by team.

PHI Jason Peters OT Arrested Resisting arrest Accused of drag racing and resisting arrest in Monroe, La. Pleaded guilty to lesser charges, including resisting officer by flight. Fined $656.50.

BAL Damien Berry RB Arrested Failure to appear Accused of not appearing in court for charge of driving with a suspended license in January. Dropped.

CIN Adam Jones CB Arrested Assault Accused of punching a woman outside a Cincinnati bar on June 5. It is his eighth run-in with the law since 2005. Resolution undetermined.

CHI Evan Rodriguez FB Arrested DUI Arrested for drunken driving after getting pulled over at 3:30 a.m. Resolution undetermined. Released by team month after arrest.

TB Cody Grimm S Arrested Public intoxication Arrested in Virginia, where he was attending a wedding. Second arrest on same charge since March. Resolution undetermined.

NO Joe Morgan WR Arrested DUI Arrested on drunken driving charge after being found asleep behind wheel on expressway in Louisiana Diversion program, counseling.

DEN Quentin Saulsberry C Arrested DUI Pulled over after 2 a.m., accused of drunken driving and lane violation in Arapahoe County, Colo. Resolution undetermined.

NYJ Mike Goodson RB Arrested Drugs, gun Accused of marijuana possession and having an illegal gun with hollow-point bullets. Resolution undetermined.

SEA Josh Portis QB Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding by Washington State trooper, accused of drunken driving. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team later that month.

CLE Armonty Bryant DE Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving in Ada, Okla. Blood-alcohol content of .098. Pleaded no contest, $1,136 in fines and court costs, one-year deferred sentence.

ARI Daryl Washington LB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of assaulting ex-girlfriend, grabbing her by throat and shoving her to the ground. Pleaded guilty to aggravated assault, one year of supervised probation.

NYJ Claude Davis DE Arrested Drugs Charged with marijuana possession after police saw occupied vehicle filled with smoke. Resolution undetermined. Released by team day after arrest.

NYJ Cliff Harris CB Arrested Drugs Charged with marijuana possession after police saw occupied vehicle filled with smoke. Resolution undetermined. Released by team.

BAL Rolando McClain LB Arrested Disorderly conduct Accused of resisting arrest at park in Decatur, Ala., after police responded to report of disturbance Convicted of two misdemeanors. Sentenced to 18 days in jail.

DET Ronnell Lewis LB Arrested Public intoxication Charged with three misdemeanors, including disturbing the peace outside bar in Norman, Okla. Pleaded no contest to two misdemeanors, six-month deferred sentence, $400 in fines and costs.

ATL William Moore S Arrested Domestic violence Accused of grabbing woman by shoulder in dispute, charged with simple battery. Resolution undetermined.

CLE Quentin Groves LB Arrested Solicitation Accused of responding to sex-for-hire advertisement in prostitution sting. Pleaded no contest, apologized, paid $365.

CLE Greg Little WR Charged Reckless driving Accused of drag racing after one-car crash involving his 2011 Audi. He left about 40 yards of brake tracks after driving 127 mph. Convicted of failure to stop, $350 fine, $201 in court costs.

DET Amari Spievey S Arrested Domestic violence Accused of third-degree assault, risk of injury to a child and disorderly conduct in dispute with girlfriend about child support. Diversion program. Released from team in August.

STL Trumaine Johnson CB Arrested DUI Accused of misdmeanor drunken-driving in Missoula, Montana. Pleaded guilty to reckless driving, 90-day suspended sentence, $2,500 donation to DUI task force.

CHI Evan Rodriguez FB Arrested Resisting arrest Accused of disorderly intoxication and resisting arrest after traffic stop in Miami. Charges dropped.

OAK Kaluka Maiava LB Arrested Assault Accused of beating two men at a bar in Maui along with his brother. Pleaded no contest, 15 days in jail.

TB Cody Grimm S Arrested Public intoxication Accused of public intoxication in Christianburg, Va. Deferred disposition.

DEN Quinton Carter S Arrested Fraud Accused of felony cheating at craps in North Las Vegas casino. He allegedly placed $5 chips on table after dice rolled. Charges dropped.

ARI Javarris James RB Arrested Failure to appear Accused of failing to appear in court to face previous marijuana possession charge. Resolution undetermined.

OAK Desmond Bryant DT Arrested Criminal mischief Accused of misdemeanor mischief in Miami. Related lawsuit says he tried to break down door of house. Diversion program, six months of probation.

CHI J'Marcus Webb OT Arrested Drugs Charged with possession of a controlled substance, marijuana and paraphernalia in Pulaski County, Ill. Charges dropped.

TEN Brandon Barden TE Arrested DUI Charged with drunken driving after single-car accident in Georgia. Car left road and flipped. Charge dropped.

SF Al Netter OG Arrested DUI Charged with drunken driving in San Jose, Calif. Resolution undetermined.

TB Da'Quan Bowers DE Arrested Gun Arrested at LaGuardia airport after allegedly packing gun into his carry-on bag. Pleaded guilty to reduced charge of disorderly conduct, fined $370.

Free agent Michael Boley LB Arrested Child abuse Accused of excessive spanking in incident involving a child at a hotel in Alabama in 2011. He later signed with Cincinnati. Pleaded guilty, 10-year suspended sentence, treatment program.

IND Moise Fokou LB Arrested DUI Charged with drunk driving for arrest in January in Washington D.C. Resolution undetermined.

SEA Leroy Hill LB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of third-degree assault and unlawful imprisonment in dispute with girlfriend. Charges dropped for lack of evidence. Not re-signed by Seattle.

DAL Jay Ratliff DT Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving after crashing his Ford pickup truck into an 18-wheeler. Resolution undetermined.

CIN Andre Smith OT Arrested Gun Accused of bringing loaded .38 pistol in carry-on bag at the Atlanta airport. Resolution undetermined.

PIT Chris Rainey RB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of slapping girlfriend in face in dispute over cell phone. Pleaded no contest to disorderly conduct, $500 in fines and costs. Released by team hours later.

OAK Rolando McClain LB Arrested False name Pulled over for window-tint violation in Alabama, accused of giving false name to police. Pleaded guilty to window-tint charge. Other charge dropped.

CIN Robert Sands S Arrested Domestic violence Accused of assaulting his wife at their home in Florence, Ky. Wife treated at hospital for minor injuries. Released by team in June.

DAL Josh Brent DT Arrested DUI Charged with intoxication manslaughter after flipping his car, killing teammate Jerry Brown. Police report blood-alcohol content at .189. Convicted. Sentenced to 180 days in jail, 10 years probation.

KC Jovan Belcher LB Died Murder, gun Fatally shot his girlfriend 10 times, then drove to team facility and fatally shot himself in head. Suspect dead

SF Demarcus Dobbs TE Arrested DUI Suspected of drunk driving and marijuana possession at 3:45 a.m. after crashing car on 25th birthday. Resolution undetermined.

MIA Jonathan Amaya S Arrested Battery Accused of choking cab driver outside club in Miami Beach at 4:30 a.m. Resolution undetermined.

NYJ Bryan Thomas LB Arrested Domestic violence Charged with assault on wife at their New Jersey home. He allegedly punched her in stomach. Probation, pretrial intervention program.

TB Ahmad Black CB Cited Drugs Accused of having less than 20 grams of marijuana after being pulled over at 1:56 a.m. Resolution undetermined.

PIT Alameda Ta'amu DT Arrested DUI Accused of resisting arrest, eluding police and drunk driving after hitting several parked cars Resolution undetermined.

ATL John Abraham DE Arrested Obstruction Accused of obstructing police and firefighters who responded to a call about a woman threatening to jump from a building. Resolution undetermined.

ATL Michael Turner RB Arrested DUI Charged with drunk driving just hours after scoring a touchdown in a win against Denver on Monday night. Resolution undetermined.

DAL Ronald Leary OG Arrested DUI Pulled over near Dallas, suspected of driving drunk after failing sobriety test. Pleaded guilty, 18 months probation, $1,000 fine.

SEA John Moffitt OG Arrested Disorderly conduct Banned from mall in Bellevue, Wash., in January 2012, he later was accused of trespassing there, obstrucing police and public urination. Pleaded no contest to disorderly conduct, $1,407 fine, two-year suspended jail sentence.

MIA Chad Johnson WR Arrested Domestic violence Accused of head-butting the wife he married a month earlier. Pleaded no contest to misdemeanor domestic violence, probation. Cut by team.

DET Aaron Berry CB Arrested Assault, gun Charged with simple assault during incident in which he brandished a gun. Released by team same week.

TEN Kenny Britt WR Arrested DUI Charged with drunken driving after trying to pass through security gate at Fort Campbell Army post in Kentucky. Found not guilty of DUI, guilty of refusing Breathalyzer test.

KC Donald Washington CB Arrested DUI, drugs Stopped for speeding by Illinois state police, who detected an odor of marijuana. Charged with DUI drugs. Resolution undetermined.

DAL Dez Bryant WR Arrested Domestic violence Turned himself in after being accused by his mother of hitting her. Diversion program, anger management counseling.

DEN Elvis Dumervil DE Arrested Assault, gun Accused of aggravated assault with a firearm in Miami after allegedly lifting his shirt to show a gun to a motorist. Charge dropped.

SEA Marshawn Lynch RB Arrested DUI Pulled over in Oakland, Calif., and taken to Santa Rita Jail on DUI charge. Resolution undetermined.

JAC Odrick Ray DE Arrested Traffic warrants Pulled over in Tulsa, Okla., for speeding and arrested for having outstanding traffic warrrants. Resolution undetermined.

STL Robert Quinn DE Arrested DUI Charged with driving while intoxicated and two other traffic charges. Resolution undetermined.

PHI Dion Lewis RB Arrested Reckless endangerment Charged with falsely reporting a fire and reckless endangerment. Police said he and his brother tried to knock down door at hotel. Charges dismissed.

STL Isaiah Pead RB Arrested Drugs Charged with marijuana possession in McKinney, Texas. Resolution undetermined. Suspended by league.

MIN Adrian Peterson RB Arrested Resisting arrest Arrested in downtown Houston on charge of resisting arrest at nightclub after he "assumed an aggressive stance." Charge dismissed.

TB Eric Wright CB Arrested DUI Charged with felony drunk driving in Los Angeles after being involved in an accident that caused an injury. District attorney declined to prosecute.

CLE Kiante Tripp DT Arrested Burglary, gun Arrested in Georgia on suspicion of felony burglary after allegedly having gun and threatening people in an apartment. Resolution undetermined.

BAL Albert McClellan LB Arrested Domestic violence Former girlfriend accused him of throwing lamp at her and grabbing her in Florida. No visible signs of injury. Dropped after woman declined to prosecute.

DET Aaron Berry CB Arrested DUI Arrested on suspicion of drunk driving in Harrisburg, Pa., after slamming into parked cars. Diversion program.

NYG David Diehl OT Arrested DUI Arrested on DUI charge in Queens, N.Y. after hitting parked cars. Blood-alcohol content of .18. Pleaded guilty to aggravated DUI, license restrictions, $1,200 in restitution.

JAC Justin Blackmon WR Arrested DUI Arrested in Stillwater, Okla.,on DUI charge after traffic stop. Blood-alcohol three times the limit. Pleaded guilty, $500 fine, deferred sentence of one year.

MIN Jerome Felton FB Arrested DUI Arrested on DUI charge in drive-thru lane at McDonald's. Resolution undetermined.

DET Nick Fairley DT Arrested DUI Arrested on DUI charge and eluding police in Mobile, Ala., after being pulled over for going 100 mph. Found guilty of reckless driving, acquitted of DUI, $500 fine.

MIN Caleb King RB Arrested Assault Accused of third-degree assault in incident that put another man in the hospital with a skull fracture. Resolution undetermined. Released from team after the weekend.

WAS Brandon Meriweather S Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding, charged with drunken driving after failing sobriety test in Arlington County, Virginia. Pleaded no contest, $300 fine, 180-day suspended jail sentence.

OAK Darrius Heyward-Bey WR Arrested DUI Pulled over on Bay Bridge in California, charged with DUI. Pleaded no contest, three years' probation, DUI classes.

DET Nick Fairley DT Arrested Drugs Pulled over in Mobile, Ala., charged with marijuana possession after police found marijuana cigarettes. Charge dropped after he passed drug test.

MIA Koa Misi LB Arrested Battery Police said he punched a man in the eye in California in 2011. Pleaded no contest to misdemeanor, three years' probation.

Free agent Samson Satele C Arrested Disorderly conduct Arrested at a shopping complex in Hawaii. He later signed with Indianapolis. --

DET Mikel Leshoure RB Cited Drugs Charged with marijuana possession after traffic stop in Michigan, his second in a month. Pleaded guilty, $575 fine

SEA Jarriel King OT Arrested Sex Charged with having forcible sex with woman in South Carolina who said she was intoxicated. Resolution undetermined. Released by team after it learned of the arrest.

SEA Leroy Hill LB Arrested Drugs Accused of marijuana possession in Atlanta and report of strong odor coming from apartment. Charge dropped.

JAC Nate Collins DT Arrested Drugs Accused of marijuana possession after traffic stop in Warrenton, Va. Police pulled him over because of his tinted windows. Resolution undetermined.

DET Mikel Leshoure RB Cited Drugs Pulled over for speeding, charged with marijuana possession in Benton Township, Mich. Pleaded guilty to marijuana use, $485 fine.

CHI J.T. Thomas LB Arrested Drugs Pulled over for going wrong way on one-way street. Police say they found marijuana. Resolution undetermined.

SF Ray McDonald DE Arrested Outstanding warrant Pulled over in Sunnyvale, Calif., arrested on outstanding warrant from drunken driving case in 2010. Resolution undetermined.

CIN Rey Maualuga LB Arrested Assault Charged with misdemeanor assault after bar employee said Maualuga hit him in the face. Charged dropped after private mediation.

DEN Knowshon Moreno RB Arrested DUI Charged with drunken driving after being pulled over for speeding. License plate reportedly was "SAUCED." Pleaded guilty to driving while impaired, 30-day suspended jail sentence, 24 hours community service.

SF Aldon Smith LB Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving in Miami Beach. Diversion program. Charge reduced to reckless driving.

DET Johnny Culbreath OT Arrested Drugs Accused of marijuana possession at Comfort Inn in South Carolina. Convicted, paid $412 fine.

CIN Jerome Simpson WR Indicted Drugs Accused of marijuana trafficking after 2.5 pounds of it were delivered to his home the previous September. Pleaded guilty to felony, 15 days in jail, three years of probation.

MIN Benny Sapp CB Cited Assault Accused of fifth-degree assault and careless driving after dispute with security guard who tried to detain him at hospital. --

CHI Sam Hurd WR Arrested Drugs Accused of accepting a kilogram of cocaine from undercover officer and trying to set up drug distribution network. Pleaded guilty to conspiracy to possess drugs with intent to distribute. Awaiting sentence.

OAK Rolando McClain LB Arrested Assault, gun Accused of discharging a gun within city limits of Decatur, Ala., and putting a gun next to a man's head in fight. Dropped after he appealed conviction and reached settlement.

GB Erik Walden LB Arrested Domestic violence Jailed after complaint of felony assault against live-in girlfriend. Diversion program, counseling, 50 hours community service. NFL suspended him one game.

CAR Lawrence Wilson LB Arrested Drugs Pulled over for speeding, accused of having 11 grams of marijuana. Resolution undetermined.

NE Julian Edelman WR Arrested Assault Accused of touching a woman inappropriately at a nightclub on Halloween night. Charges dropped.

MIN Chris Cook CB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of domestic assault after neighbor called 911 to report argument. Acquitted. Team suspended without pay him after arrest.

DEN Ryan McBean DT Arrested Stalking Accused of felony stalking, ordered to cease contact with victim. Resolution undetermined.

GB Johnny Jolly DE Arrested Drugs Pulled over, accused of possessing narcotic containing codeine and tampering with evidence to conceal it. --

MIN Tyrell Johnson S Arrested DUI Accused of fourth-degree drunken driving with blood-alcohol content of 0.12. Resolution undetermined.

DAL Kevin Ogletree WR Arrested Outstanding warrant Pulled over for speeding in Coppell, Texas. Police found two previous traffic violations unresolved. Paid $597 bond, car towed.

MIN Rhett Bomar QB Arrested DUI Accused of third-degree drunk driving in Mankato, Minn. Resolution undetermined.

DEN Matt Prater K Arrested DUI Accused of drunk driving after allegedly backing his Chevy Trailblazer into parked car and fleeing the scene. Resolution undetermined.

BUF Paul Hubbard WR Arrested DUI Accused of drunk driving after his car hit a police officer. Blood-alcohol content measured at 0.08. Resolution undetermined.

CIN Cedric Benson RB Arrested Assault Accused of misdemeanor assault after incident with former male roommate in Travis County, Texas. Resolution undetermined.

IND Jerry Hughes DE Arrested Public intoxication Taken into custody around 2:30 a.m. at nightclub in Dallas with TCU teammates. Resolution undetermined.

CIN Marvin White S Arrested Assault Accused of disturbing the peace and being verbally abusive at his child's day care center. Resolution undetermined.

CIN Adam Jones CB Arrested Alcohol Accused of disorderly conduct while intoxicated and resisting arrest at bar in Cincinnati. Resolution undetermined.

PIT Hines Ward WR Arrested DUI Accused of drunk driving in Georgia after being pulled over about 2:30 a.m. Pleaded guilty to reckless driving in plea deal. One year probation, $2,000 fine.

TEN Kenny Britt WR Surrendered Outstanding warrant Turned himself in on two outstanding warrants that say he provided inaccurate information on driver's license applications. Resolution undetermined.

PHI Akeem Jordan LB Arrested Assault Accused of assault and battery after incident at bar in Harrisonburg, Va. Resolution undetermined.

DET Corey Williams DT Arrested DUI Pulled over in Arkansas for crossing center line, accused of drunk driving. Breath test measured his blood-alcohol level at .10. His attorney alleged racial profiling. Charge dropped by judge, according to court clerk.

SEA Raheem Brock DE Arrested Theft Accused of walking out on $27 restaurant tab in Philadelphia. He said they canceled order before food arrived. Acquitted.

GB Brandon Underwood CB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of pushing wife to the ground and ripping necklace from her neck in Green Bay. Pleaded no contest to disorderly conduct, $767.50 in fines. NFl suspended two games. Released in September.

IND Javarris James RB Arrested Drugs Accused of misdemeanor marijuana possession in Florida. Resolution undetermined.

TEN Kenny Britt WR Arrested Drugs Accused of resisting arrest in New Jersey after police suspected him of trying to hide a marijuana cigar. Resolution undetermined.

CHI Garrett Wolfe RB Arrested Theft Accused of refusing to pay bill at Miami nightclub, resisting arrest and assaulting police. Charges dropped.

TB Alex Magee DE Arrested Drugs Pulled over for driving with an expired tag on his 2009 black Dodge Charger, accused of marijuana possession. Resolution undetermined.

SD Antwan Applewhite LB Arrested DUI Pulled over around 2:30 a.m. in San Diego, suspected of drunken driving. Resolution undetermined.

WAS Albert Haynesworth DT Indicted Sex Charged with misdemeanor sexual abuse for allegedly fondling the breast of a worker in a Washington restaurant. Pleaded no contest to simple assault.

ATL William Moore S Arrested License Accused of speeding, driving with a suspended license and failure to appear in court for a previous ticket. Resolution undetermined.

TEN Kenny Britt WR Arrested Obstruction Accused of eluding police with car chase in his hometown of Bayonne, N.J., speeding and obstruction. Pleaded guilty to careless driving, $478 fine.

KC Mike Vrabel LB Arrested Theft Accused of stealing alcoholic beverages from casino deli in Florence, Ind. Diversion agreement. Charge dropped if he stays out of trouble for 180 days.

OAK Louis Murphy WR Arrested Drugs Pulled over in Gainesville, Fla., accused of possessing bottle of Viagra for which he had no prescription, resisting arrest. Resolution undetermined.

TB Aqib Taliq CB Warrant Gun Police near Dallas issued warrant accusing him of firing gun near head of sister's boyfriend. Charge dropped.

PHI Jason Peters OT Arrested Disturbing the peace Accused of playing loud music, disturbing the peace in Shreveport, La. --

GB Johnny Jolly DE Arrested Drugs Pulled over in Houston around 12:45 a.m., accused of having bottles of codeine, charged with intent to distribute. Charge dropped but pleaded guilty to 2008 drug charge, probation, jail time, drug treatment.

DAL Bryan McCann CB Arrested Public intoxication Accused of public intoxication by Dallas police, which he denied. Resolution undetermined.

OAK Mario Henderson OT Arrested Gun Pulled over in Fort Myers, Fla., and accused of carrying a concealed weapon an d playing music too loud. Resolution undetermined.

NYG Joe Burnett CB Arrested DUI Pulled over in Orlando, charged with drunken driving. Resolution undetermined.

MIN Chris Cook CB Arrested Gun Accused of brandishing a gun during an argument in Virginia with a neighbor. Charge dropped.

PHI King Dunlap OT Arrested Disorderly conduct Accused of reckless driving and disorderly conduct in Nashville after allegedly driving his Escalade onto sidewalk near arena. Resolution undetermined.

OAK Michael Bush RB Arrested DUI Suspected of drunk driving in Clarksville, Ind. Resolution undetermined.

SD Legedu Naanee WR Arrested Public intoxication Accused of public intoxication, resisting arrest after refusing orders to stay away from homicide scene in Indianapolis. Resolution undetermined.

TEN Kenny Britt WR Charged Theft Accused of theft by deception after allegedly not paying two bail bonds companies in New Jersey on behalf of his friend. Resolution undetermined.

WAS Albert Haynesworth DT Charged Assault Accused of punching motorist in Virginia in traffic altercation after the alleged victim made gesture at Haynesworth for tailgaiting. Charge dropped after settlement with alleged victim.

MIN Everson Griffen DE Arrested Assault Pulled over near USC campus, subdued by Taser after allegedly assaulting officer during traffic stop. Pleaded guilty to reduced charge, $10,000 fine, three years probation.

MIN Everson Griffen DE Arrested Public intoxication Accused of being drunk in public in Hollywood, Calif. Charge dropped.

DEN Laurence Maroney RB Arrested Drugs, gun Pulled over in St. Louis, accused of unlawful possession of guns and drugs with other men. Acquitted.

WAS Joe Joseph DT Arrested DUI Police responded to report of single-car accident, accused him of drunk driving around 3 a.m. Resolution undetermined.

BAL Sergio Kindle LB Arrested DUI Pulled over on suspicion of drunk driving in Jessup, Md. Measured .17 on a Breathalyzer test. Pleaded guilty, two years probation, five days in a private facility.

DEN Kevin Alexander LB Arrested Domestic violence Girlfriend accused him of shoving and striking her in the face. Charged with battery and assault. Charges dropped for a lack of evidence. Alexander cut by Broncos a day after arrest.

TB Geno Hayes LB Arrested Disorderly conduct Charged after altercation outside Tampa nightclub in which police used stun gun on him. Pleaded no contest to trespassing, with ajudication withheld. Disorderly conduct charge dropped. Paid $265 in court costs.

DEN Perrish Cox CB Arrested Sexual assault Accused of impregnanting woman after she passed out at his home. Acquitted.

NO Will Smith DE Arrested Domestic violence Charged after police in Lafayette, La., observed him allegedly arguing with his wife and pulling her by the hair. Diversion program. Charges were dropped when Smith completed community service and counseling.

TB Mike Williams WR Arrested DUI Pulled over on suspicion of drunken driving in Hillsborough County, Fla., despite Breathalyzer test showing legal blood-alcohol level. Charges dropped when urine test came back clean.

SEA Raheem Brock DE Arrested DUI Pulled over by University of Washington police on suspicion of drunken driving. Measured .13 on a Breathalyzer test. Resolution undetermined.

DEN D.J. Williams LB Arrested DUI Pulled over on suspicion on drunk driving in Denver at 2:40 a.m. Also cited for driving without headlights. Convicted of DUI and sentenced to 30 days home arrest.

DEN Elvis Dumervil LB Arrested Assault Cited for assault, disturbing the peace after alleged altercation with parking lot attendant at Invesco Field after he forgot his credentials. Charges dimissed five days before scheduled trial.

TB Jerramy Stevens TE Arrested Drugs Pulled over and cited for possession of marijuana, of which 38 grams were found in the car. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team two days after arrest.

IND Pat McAfee P Arrested Alcohol Cited after he took a late-night swim in a canal and told police, "I am drunk." Officers said he had a .15 blood-alcohol content. Diversion program in which he attended eight hours of community service and paid $298 fee. Suspended one game by the Colts.

CAR Dwayne Jarrett WR Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding after 2 a.m. and arrested on suspicion of driving under the influence. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team same day of arrest.

NE Bret Lockett DB Arrested Disorderly conduct Cited after police said he ignored their instructions to stay away from a club in Providence, R.I., that was filled to capactiy. Diversion program, charge dismissed after three months without incident.

NYJ Braylon Edwards WR Arrested DUI Pulled over at 5:15 a.m. because police say his windows were too tinted; smelled of alcohol and blood-alcohol measured .16 Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor. Deal included $500 fine, driver's license suspended for six months, entered into substance-abuse program.

IND Fili Moala DT Arrested DUI Pulled over at 2:31 a.m. for speeding and cited with suspicion of driving under the influence. Blood-alcohol measured .10. Convicted of misdemeanor operating a vehicle while intoxicated with a blood-alcohol count of .08 to .15 and public intoxication. Sentenced to 180 days probation.

IND John Gill DT Arrested Alcohol Cited after found in a ditch on the side of the road, barefoot and slurring his speech. Charged dropped. Gill entered treatment facility.

CLE Gerard Lawson DB Arrested DUI Cited with suspicion of driving under the influence after hitting a parked car and leaving the scene. Pleaded no contest and sentenced to one year of probation, 72 hours of an alternative to jail program, 20 hours of community work service and $500 fine. Also had license suspended for six months.

WAS Fred Davis TE Arrested Reckless driving Cited with reckless driving, driving 20 mph over the speed limit. Pleaded guilty to reduced charge of speeding, $75 fine.

TEN Kenny Britt WR Cited License Pulled over in Nashville for windows in Camaro tinted too dark, then cited for misdemeanor driving without a valid license. Resolution undetermined.

STL Jerome Murphy CB Arrested License Pulled over in Tampa for what said police said was loud music, charged with misdemeanor of driving without a valid license. Resolution undetermined.

SEA Quinton Ganther RB Arrested DUI Pulled over on suspicion for two misdemeanor counts of driving under the influence in Sacramento. State limit for BAC is .08. Resolution undetermined.

TEN Chris Simms QB Arrested DUI,drugs Charged in New York City with driving while on drugs (marijuana) with his pregnant wife in the car. Acquitted in May 2011

CLE Robaire Smith DE/DT Arrested Gun Charged for November 2009 incident of possessing a firearm (Belgian 5.7) in Flint (Mich.) Bishop Airport, in his bag Resolution undetermined.

CIN Cedric Benson RB Arrested Assault Charged with misdemeanor assault for a May 30 incident in Austin, Texas, where he allegedly punching a bar employee in the face. Pleaded no contest, 20-day jail sentence, $4,000 fine.

TEN Derrick Morgan DE Arrested License Pulled over in northwest Georgia for speeding, charged with driving with a suspended license. Resolution undetermined.

TEN Vince Young QB Cited Assault Accused of getting into a fight at a Dallas strip club and left before police arrived. Resolution undetermined.

SF Ray McDonald DE Arrested DUI Pulled over in his black BMW when the California Highway Patrol clocked him at 94 mph in a 65-mph zone, given field sobriety test. Resolution undetermined.

GB Brandon Underwood CB Arrested Sexual assault Charged with prostitution/non-marital sexual intercourse after two women alleged he sexually assaulted them in Lake Delton, Wis. Pleaded no contest to misdemeanor count of soliciting a prostitute, $379 fine.

MIA Phillip Merling DE Arrested Domestic violence Charged with aggravated battery against his pregnant girlfriend in Weston, Fla. Charges dropped after girlfriend stopped cooperating with authorities.

SD Kevin Ellison S Arrested Drugs Pulled over for speeding, charged with suspicion of possessing a controlled substance -- 100 Vicodin pills -- in Redondo Beach, Calif. Pleaded guilty to possession of controlled substance, charged later dropped through diversion program.

NO Harry Coleman S Arrested Battery Charged with misdemeanor simple battery after allegedly shoving someone out of the way upon leaving tribal casino in Louisiana. Resolution undetermined.

TB Mario Urrutia WR Arrested License Charged with non-resident driver's license violation by Hillsborough (Fla.) County deputies. Resolution undetermined.

DEN Ronald Fields DT Arrested Gun Pulled over in Houston upon witness seeing Fields waving a gun at a club, then driving off, charged with misdemeanor. Resolution undetermined.

WAS Fred Davis TE Cited License Charged with driving with a suspended license, falsely identifying himself to police in Loudon County (Va.). Pleaded guilty, 30-day suspended sentence, fined $2,500

CIN Maurice Purify WR Arrested Disorderly conduct Charged with misdemeanor disorderly conduct after scuffle at a Newport, Ky., nightclub. Charges dropped; one-game NFL suspension under personal conduct policy

CLE Chris Jennings RB Arrested Assault Accused of hitting a bouncer outside a Cleveland nightclub. Never charged.

SEA Leroy Hill LB Arrested Domestic violence Charged with investigation of assault in the fourth degree/domestic violence from dispute with girlfriend in Issaquah, Wash. Diversion program, 18-month probation, treatment program.

WAS Fred Davis TE Arrested License Pulled over for speeding, found to be driving under a suspended/revoked license. Pleaded guilty, 10-day suspended sentence, $2,500 fine, driver's license suspended 90 days.

CLE Shaun Rogers DT Arrested Gun Charged at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport on felony count for carrying a handgun in his carry-on bag. Diversion program of 12 months, 10-hour weapons course, 40 hours community service, NFL fine.

ARI Joey Porter LB Arrested DUI, assault Suspected of DUI and charged with assaulting an officer, resisting arrest after trying to help a friend who had been pulled over. Charges dropped; prosecutor did not believe jury would find Porter guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.

MIA Ronnie Brown RB Arrested DUI Pulled over in Atlanta for failing to use a turn signal, then charged with DUI with reported blood-alcohol level at 0.158. Resolution undetermined.

GB Spencer Havner TE Arrested DUI Arrested in Grass Valley, Calif., after crashing his motorcycle; taken to hospital, and found to be under the influence. Charges dropped, not enough evidence

MIA Will Allen CB Arrested DUI Charged in Miami Beach after tried to get through police roadblock. Blood alcohol measured at .152 and .167. Resolution undetermined.

WAS Byron Westbrook CB Arrested DUI Pulled over in Waldorf, Md., after his Mercedes crossed the center line several times, suspected of drunken driving. Acquitted by jury in June 2010.

MIA Tony McDaniel DT Arrested Domestic violence Charged with misdemeanor battery at Davie, Fla., home, after shoving his girlfriend, whose head hit the pavenment. Pleaded no contest to amended charge of disorderly conduct, six months probation, counseling. NFL suspended him one game.

DAL Deon Anderson FB Arrested Gun Accused of pulling loaded gun a man in dispute in Addison, Texas, also having outstanding traffic warrants. Resolution undetermined.

KC Michael Richardson CB Arrested Alcohol One of hundreds charged with being in possession of an open alcohol container, at the Gasparilla Parade in Tampa. Resolution undetermined.

CIN Rey Maualuga LB Arrested DUI Charged with drunk driving in Covington, Ky., after police said he struck two parked vehicles and parking meter. Blood-alcohol .157. Pleaded guilty, suspended seven-day sentence, two days' probation. NFL fined him for two games.

WAS Chad Rinehart OT Arrested Public intoxication Charged after police in Cedar Falls, Iowa, say he was pulling on the locked door outside a bar and refused a breath test. Found guilty by a judge, paid $195 fine

SD Vincent Jackson WR Arrested License Pulled over for playing loud music, cited for driving with a suspended license and expired tags. Pleaded guilty to knowingly driving with suspended license , 80 hours community service, fined under $1,000.

TEN Kenny Britt WR Arrested License Pulled over in Glen Ridge., N.J., and had three outstanding traffic warrants. Paid $865, released.

TB Jermaine Phillips S Arrested Domestic violence Charged with third-degree felony domestic battery for allegedly strangling his wife at home in Tampa after she called 911. Diversion program.

IND Taj Smith WR Arrested DUI Pulled over in Indianapolis after car crossed lane divider and was above 30 mph speed limit. Failed field sobriety, breath tests. Resolution undetermined.

NO Bobby McCray DE Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding in New Orleans at 4:30 a.m., refused breathalyzer test, accused of drunk driving, driving without registration. Resolution undetermined.

ATL Jonathan Babineaux DT Arrested Drugs Pulled over for a traffic violation in Gwinnett County, Ga., accused of marijuana possession. Pleaded no contest in misdemeanor plea deal, $1,500 fine, one year of probation.

CAR Jon Beason LB Arrested Assault Accused of aggravated assault after a confrontation with a man in Charlotte strip club. Charges dropped.

ATL Eric Weems WR Arrested DUI Pulled over in Dekalb County, Georgia, accused of drunk driving. Resolution undetermined.

TB Marcus Johnson OG Arrested DUI Suspected of DUI after being found asleep in a Chevy Impala at 4 a.m. in Tampa, Fla., refused breath tests. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team less then 12 hours later.

CLE Braylon Edwards WR Arrested Assault Charged with assault after allegedly punching a friend of LeBron James inside a Cleveland nightclub. Pleaded no contest to aggravated disorderly conduct, 180-day suspended sentence, $1,000 fine.

PIT Jeff Reed K Arrested Alcohol Cited for resisting arrest, public intoxication in confrontation with police outside a Pittsburgh bar with teammate Matt Spaeth. Diversion program, 40 hours community service, then cleared.

PIT Matt Spaeth TE Cited Public urination Cited for public urination outside a Pittsburgh bar. Teammate Jeff Reed was arrested as part of the same incident. Resolution undetermined.

CHI Lance Louis OT Arrested Assault Charged with assault after beating a teammate in a meeting room while enrolled at San Diego State in November of 2008. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor battery, 40 hours of community service, 12 hours anger management, three years probation.

MIA Will Billingsley CB Arrested Domestic violence Charged with assault and nonviolently resisting arrest after argument over shoes with his girlfriend, who was found with scratches on her upper arm and neck. Case dropped after girlfriend said she wouldn't pursue it. Cut by team two months later.

IND John Gill DT Arrested Public intoxication Police said he was charged with being drunk in public, the first of two such allegations within a year. Charge dropped.

DEN Richard Quinn TE Arrested Domestic violence Live-in girlfriend accused him of shaking her to the ground and taking away the phone during an argument in Denver. Charges dropped.

SD Shawne Merriman LB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of battery and false imprisonment after allegedly choking and restraining his girlfriend, television personality Tila Tequila, in San Diego. Charges dismissed less than a week later.

NO Usama Young S Arrested Failure to appear Stopped for speeding in New Orleans, arrested for failing to appear in traffic court for allegedly parking in a handicap spot. Resolution undetermined.

MIN Cedric Griffin CB Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving after voluntarily pulling, possibly because he felt he was too impaired to drive in Minnesota. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor, two years probation, two days community service, $300 fine.

BAL Tony Fein LB Arrested Assault Accused of assault after a confrontation with an officer in Baltimore who was investigating report of possible gun being passed around his group. Died in October 2009 before trial. Suspected gun turned out to be phone.

TEN Chris Davis WR Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding in Nashville after 2 a.m., suspected of drunken driving. Consented to a breathalyzer test that measured 0.11 in blood alcohol content. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team a few days after arrest.

TB Aqib Talib CB Arrested Assault Accused of battery and resisting arrest after allegedly hitting a cab driver in Tampa in the neck and ear. Diversion program, anger management course, civil settlement with driver.

PHI Juqua Parker DE Arrested Drugs Pulled over for a traffic violation in Bethlehem, Pa., accused of marijuana possession as passenger in the car. Charges dropped after district attorney said the officer had no right to search the car.

HOU Vonta Leach FB Charged Assault Charged with simple assault in July for an alleged confrontation with a man in a restaurant near Leach's hometown of Lumberton, North Carolina. Resolution undetermined.

SEA Owen Schmitt FB Arrested DUI Suspected of drunken driving after being seen by an officer weaving and following cars too closely in Black Diamond, Wa. Blood-alcohol measured at 0.151. Pleaded guilty to reckless driving, one-year suspended jail sentence, 24 hours community service, $2,130 fines and fees.

ATL Quinn Ojinnaka OT Arrested Domestic violence Accused of tossing his wife down the stairs and throwing her out of the house after an argument over him contacting a girl on Facebook in Gwinnett County, Ga. Diversion program. NFL suspended one game.

MIA Randy Starks DE Arrested Assault Arrested after allegedly swerving his vehicle to strike a police officer on foot and pin him up against another car. Charged with aggravated battery in Miami, Fl. Convicted of misdemeanor traffic violation, eight-hour traffic course, $219 fine.

HOU Brandon Walker OG Arrested DUI Accused of drunk driving in Norman, Okla., where he played college football. Resolution undetermined. Released by team two days later.

BUF Corey McIntyre FB Arrested Indecent exposure Arrested two months after allegedly fondling himself outside of a woman's home in Port St. Lucie, Fla. Charges dropped.

HOU Brandon Walker OG Arrested Outstanding Warrant Warrant issued in Norman, Okla., after he failed to pay a ticket for driving without proper registration and proof of insurance. Resolution undetermined.

TB Anthony Mix WR Arrested Sex Turned himself in after alledgedly having sex with a 15 year-old girl; the girl's mother turned him in after seeing text messages between the two. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team day of arrest.

NO Biren Ealy WR Arrested Alcohol Charged with lewd coduct, obscenity and disturbing the peace. Accused of being drunk, urinating in public and exposing himself to women with teammate. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team two days after arrest.

NO Kolomona Kapanui TE Arrested Alcohol Charged with lewd conduct, obscenity and disturbing the peace. Accused of being drunk, urinating in public and exposing himself to women with teammate. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team two days after arrest.

SD Shaun Phillips LB Cited Battery Cited for misdemeanor battery after a security guard at a San Diego hotel said Phillips punched him. Never charged. Civil settlement with guard.

BUF Donte Whitner DB Arrested Disorderly conduct Police said they used Taser to subdue him at Cleveland club, charged him aggravated disorderly conduct and resisting arrest. Diversion program that included meetings with a probation officer for three months. Charges then dropped.

CIN Leon Hall CB Arrested DUI Accused of drunken driving after being pulled over after 3 a.m. In Ohio. Breath test showed blood-alcohol content of 0.149. Pleaded guilty to reckless operation of a vehicle, 30-day suspended jail sentence, 64 hours community service, $250 fine.

CLE Donte Stallworth WR Arrested DUI, manslaughter Accused of striking and killing a pedestrian with his car in Miami March 14. Blood-alcohol content measured .126. Charged with DUI manslaughter. Pleaded guilty, 24 days in jail, two years of house arrest, 1,000 hours of community service. NFL suspended for 2009.

OAK Cornell Green OT Arrested Domestic violence Accused of slamming the mother of his two children against wall and striking her arm with mop handle. Arrested at Tampa airport after incident. Diversion program, classes, court costs.

KC David Macklin CB Arrested DUI Pulled over after 3 a.m. in Newport News, Va., accused of drunken driving. Convicted, six-month suspended sentence, $250 fine. The team cut him five days after arrest.

WAS Albert Haynesworth DT Indicted Reckless driving Grand jury indicted him on charges of misdemeanor reckless driving and expired registration. Accused of causing Dec. 13 accident that caused another motorist to crash. Pleaded no contest, three months of probation, 25 hours community service.

JAC Matt Jones WR Arrested Alcohol Accused of violating terms of previous plea deal in cocaine case. He tested positive for alcohol consumption, leading to his arrest in Arkansas. Found guilty, six days in jail.

DEN Brandon Marshall WR Arrested Domestic dispute Accused of disorderly conduct in Atlanta after fight with fiance. Charges dropped.

PIT Jeff Reed K Cited Disorderly conduct Police said he broke towel dispenser in convenience store after finding it out of towels, also used profane language at employee. Pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct and criminal mischief, fined $543.50. Arrested again in October 2009.

JAC Gerald Sensabaugh S Arrested License, guns Accused of driving with a suspended license in Kingsport, Tenn. He had three guns in his Bentley, but apparently had a permit for them. Resolution undetermined.

BUF Marshawn Lynch RB Arrested Guns, drugs Police in Culver City, Calif., said they checked car without tags and smelled marijuana, then found gun in trunk, plus marijuana cigarettes. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor gun charge, 80 hours community service, three years probation. No drug charge. NFL suspended him three games.

JAC Reggie Williams WR Arrested DUI, drugs Pulled over in Houston at about 2 a.m., charged with drunken driving and possession of .97 grams of marijuana. Charges dropped.

IND Darrell Reid DT Arrested Disorderly conduct Police said he refused to leave nightclub parking lot in Indianapolis, accused of disorderly conduct and trespassing. Resolution undetermined.

KC Michael Merritt TE Arrested Drugs Police officer in Orlando said he saw him with a marijuana cigarette, leading to marijuana possession charge. Resolution undetermined. Released from team later that month.

SF Roderick Green LB Arrested Guns, drugs, reckless driving Pulled over in Brenham, Texas, accused of unlawfully carrying a weapon, marijuana possession, reckless driving and interfing with police, all misdemeanors. Resolution undetermined.

SD Jamal Williams DT Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding, accused of drunken driving but blood-alcohol content measured at under the legal limit of .08. Pleaded guilty to a lane-change violation and speeding, required to take traffic safety class.

PIT Jonathan Dekker TE Arrested Obstruction Accused of fleeing police and giving a false name after apparent public intoxication in Alexandria, Va. Acquitted by judge.

SEA Leroy Hill LB Arrested Drugs Accused of possessing less than an ounce of marijuana after being found asleep behind the wheel of his car at an intersection in Georgia. Pleaded guilty to marijuana possession, 12 months of probation, $500 fine.

NO Jonathan Vilma LB Arrested Reckless driving Miami police said he resisted arrest after being spotting swerving his car and running red light. Charges dropped. Vilma agreed to give $1,000 to hospital trauma center.

DAL Anthony Spencer LB Arrested Alcohol, disorderly conduct Bouncer at Indianapolis nightclub told police Spencer tried to punch him. Accused of public intoxication, disorderly conduct. Resolution undetermined.

SD Vincent Jackson WR Arrested DUI Pulled over for speeding and weaving, failed sobriety tests in San Diego, accused of drunken driving in 2008 GMC Sierra. Sentenced to four days in jail and five years of probation

BUF Ko Simpson S Arrested Interfering with police Accused of hindering police in Rock Hill, S.C., when one of his friends was being arrested at bar. Police said Simpson proclaimed he was "worth millions." Diversion program, at least 50 hours of community service.

STL Gary Stills LB Arrested Child support Civil warrant issued for unpaid child support. Resolution undetermined.

JAC Travarous Bain CB Arrested License Pulled over for speeding in Florida, accused of having suspended or revoked license. Resolution undetermined. Released from team a few days after arrest.

CAR Jeremy Bridges OG Arrested Assault Accused of spraying champagne on restaurant patrons and making threats in Charlotte. Dropped.

NYG Plaxico Burress WR Surrendered Gun Accidentally shot himself in thigh at New York club and did not have a permit for the pistol. Pleaded guilty to lesser weapons charge, two-year prison sentence, NFL suspension.

NYJ Shaun Ellis DE Arrested Drugs Pulled over in Hanover, N.J., charged with marijuana possession, speeding and driving without insurance. Resolution undetermined.

NYG Kareem McKenzie OG Arrested DUI Pulled over in New Jersey, accused of drunken driving after cutting through a gas station parking lot. Resolution undetermined.

KC Larry Johnson RB Surrendered Assault Charged with simple assault, accused of spitting in a woman's face at a nightclub in Kansas City. Pleaded guilty to two counts of disturbing the peace for this and other case. Two years probation.

PIT Santonio Holmes WR Arrested Drugs Pulled over because police were looking for similar car, marijuana cigars found in his car by police. Dropped after prosecutors agreed the search warrant wasn't specific enough.

TB Matt McCoy LB Arrested DUI Pulled over near his home in Tampa after 4 a.m., accused of drunk driving. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team day of arrest.

NYG Danny Ware RB Arrested Alcohol Accused of being a pedestrian under the influence of alcohol after standing in road talking in Athens, Ga. Resolution undetermined.

ATL Lawyer Milloy S Arrested DUI Accused of drunk driving, speeding after game in Atlanta. Resolution undetermined.

OAK Tommy Kelly DT Arrested DUI Pulled over on suspicion of drunk driving in Oakland. Resolution undetermined.

IND Ed Johnson DT Arrested Drugs Pulled over for speeding near Indianapolis, charged with marijuana possession. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team within a day of arrest.

CAR Ricardo Colclough CB Arrested DUI Accused of driving while impaired just hours before team made its final cuts. Pleaded guilty to driving while impaired, 30-day suspended sentence. Released by team within a day.

JAC Fred Taylor RB Arrested Disorderly conduct Forced out of car at gunpoint, accused of being uncooperative during search near nightclub in Miami Beach. Charges dropped.

HOU Jameel Cook RB Arrested Drugs Pulled over, ticketed for license and registration issues, charged with marijuana possession. Charge dropped for marijuana possession.

TB Donte Nicholson S Arrested Battery Scuffled with security guards at bar, shot with stun gun, accused of resisting arrest and battery. Resolution undetermined.

JAC Matt Jones WR Arrested Drugs Accused of cocaine possession after being spotted by Arkansas police in parked car cutting up cocaine-like substance. Diversion program of drug treatment. Suspended by league for three games.

GB Johnny Jolly DE Arrested Drugs Accused of having mixture containing codeine in his car after arrest outside Houston nightclub. Pleaded guilty to possession in plea deal that included probation, five years of deferred adjudication.

NE Willie Andrews CB Arrested Domestic violence, gun Accused of pointing gun at girlfriend's head, assault with a deadly weapon Resolution undetermined. Cut by team a day later.

BAL Derrick Martin CB Cited Drugs Cleveland airport security personnel say they found marijuana packets on him at airport. Resolution undetermined.

TEN Jevon Kearse DE Arrested DUI Accused of drunk driving near Vanderbilt campus around 5 a.m., refused breath test. Pleaded guilty to reduced charge of reckless driving, six months of probation, restricted license.

NYG Geoffrey Pope CB Arrested Assault Accused of hitting man in head with champagne bottle at club in Detroit. Charges dropped.

ARI J.J. Arrington RB Arrested Disorderly conduct One of five arrested stemming from fight at nightclub in North Carolina. Resolution undetermined.

NYG Ahmad Bradshaw RB Surrendered Probation violation Undisclosed probation violation stemming from undisclosed incident when he was a juvenile. Sentenced to two 30-day jail terms in Virginia.

ATL Daren Stone S Arrested DUI Suspected of drunk driving in downtown Atlanta. Resolution undetermined.

TEN Brandon Jones WR Arrested Gun Accused of carrying .32-caliber gun into Nashville airport. Diversion program of six months, $500 fine.

CHI Cedric Benson RB Arrested DUI Accused of running a red light in Austin, Texas, suspected of drunk driving. Case dropped. Grand jury declined to indict.

BUF Marshawn Lynch RB Charged Reckless driving Accused of hitting woman with his Porsche SUV in Buffalo and driving away. Woman required seven stiches for cut, plus hip bruise. Pleaded guilty to failure to exercise due care to pedestrian, license revoked, $150 fine and surcharge.

JAC Gerald Sensabaugh S Arrested Reckless driving Accused of doing stunts on a motorcycle in Kingsport, Tenn. Resolution undetermined.

SF Ezra Butler LB Arrested DUI, drugs Pulled over in Nevada, accused of intoxicated driving and marijuana possession. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team the next week.

NO Charles Grant DE Indicted Manslaughter One of several men charged in connection to shooting death of innocent pregnant woman, a bystander at club fight in Georgia. Pleaded to reduce charge of affray (public fighting), $20,000 restitution, $1,000 fine, probation.

SEA Lofa Tatupu LB Arrested DUI Pulled over in Kirkland, Wash., for speeding. Police measured blood-alcohol content at .155 or more. Pleaded guilty, one day in jail, $1,255 fines and court costs.

CHI Cedric Benson RB Arrested DUI Accused of boating while intoxicated and resisting arrest on Lake Travis, Texas. Case dropped. Grand jury declined to indict.

ATL Michael Boley LB Arrested Domestic violence Accused of becoming physical with wife during argument at home in Dacula, Ga. Diversion program. NFL suspension of one game.

CIN Ahmad Brooks LB Summoned Assault Accused of punching woman in left eye during dispute with neighbor in Kentucky. Accepted mediation.

Free agent Darrion Scott DE Arrested Assault Accused of putting dry-cleaning bag over 2-year-old son's head. After leaving Minnesota, he later signed with Washington Redskins. Pleaded guilty to child endangement.

NE Nick Kaczur OT Arrested Drugs Pulled over for speeding, accused of having 202 OxyContin pills, charged with misdemeanor drug possession. Pleaded guilty to reduce charge of speeding, drug charge dropped in deal, $355 in fines and fees.

DET Kalvin Pearson S Arrested Domestic violence Accused of aggravated battery of pregnant woman, domestic battery by strangulation, obstrucing officer in southwest Florida. Domestic charges dropped.

SEA Rocky Bernard DT Arrested Domestic violence Accused of hitting his girlfriend in the head at Seattle nightclub. Diversion program, agreed to have no contact with woman for two years, domestic violence treatment.

IND Kenton Keith RB Arrested Alcohol Accused of refusing to leave nightclub parking lot being cleared by police, trespassing, public intoxication, disorderly conduct. Resolution undetermined.

SF Donald Strickland CB Arrested Alcohol Accused of running away from police in San Jose, public intoxication and resisting arrest. Resolution undetermined.

MIA Reagan Mauia RB Arrested Battery Accused of knocking a man out in restaurant parking lot in Florida. Resolution undetermined.

CLE Kenny Wright CB Arrested Drugs Accused of evading arrest by trying to outrun police in Texas, misdemeanor marijuana possession. Resolution undetermined. Cut by team a month after arrest.

CIN Chris Henry WR Arrested