Dolly Parton donates money, books to 2017 hurricane victims
CLOSE Dolly Parton celebrates new children's album with patients at children's hospital video by Michael Schwab/Tennessean

Dolly Parton talks to media and fans Friday, Aug. 18, 2017, about her upcoming harvest and Christmas events. (Photo: Michael Patrick / News Sentinel)

KNOXVILLE, Tenn. — Dolly Parton has donated funds to help those in need after the devastation from hurricanes Harvey, Irma and Maria.

Parton made a contribution to the One America Appeal for Hurricane Relief, which is helping those affected by the storms with immediate life-sustaining needs. The appeal was originally launched by the five living former American presidents to help recovery efforts for Hurricane Harvey, and it has grown to include areas affected by Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria.

Parton referenced the November 2016 Gatlinburg wildfires as a reason she donated funds for hurricane relief. After the fires, Parton and the Dollywood Foundation created the My People Fund to help those who lost their homes in the wildfires.

More: One-room schools of Montana shine with family-like education

More: How the 'Hurricane Harvey Book Club' on Facebook is helping kids cope

“After the tremendous outpouring of support my hometown received last winter after the wildfires raged through the area, I want to do my part to help other areas affected by natural disasters. I admire and respect this effort led by our presidents so it is an honor for me to contribute to their work," Parton said in the press release.

Parton's Imagination Library, non-profit social enterprise First Book and Penguin Young Readers also have teamed up to donate 500,000 books to hurricane-affected areas, according to the press release.

So far, Parton's foundation has donated 165,000 books and $90,750 to cover their shipping and handling charges.

“I know in the immediate aftermath of a disaster, books are not the first thing people need or miss. But I also know from our past experience that after some time has passed, families, schools and libraries are eager to replenish their shelves, and their hearts, with books. First Book asked us to join with them to get the right books in the right hands at the right time and we were pleased to do so," Parton said in the release.

To donate to First Book and help send books to those affected by hurricanes, click here.

Follow Maggie Jones on Twitter: @AvengerMags

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2x71xK6