LeBron James wears 'I can't breathe' shirt before Cavs game
Cleveland Cavaliers forward LeBron James wears an " I Can't Breathe" t-shirt during warm ups prior to the game against the Brooklyn Nets at Barclays Center. (Photo: Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY Sports)

Cleveland Cavaliers stars LeBron James and Kyrie Irving wore T-shirts with "I Can't Breathe" on them while warming up for Monday night's game at the Brooklyn Nets.

The Nets' Jarrett Jack, Alan Anderson, Deron Williams and Kevin Garnett also wore the T-shirts.

"I can't breathe" were the last words of Eric Garner, who died in July after a confrontation with an New York Police Department officer. The incident was caught on tape and sparked national outrage.

The NBA will not fine any of the players who have worn the T-shirts, a person with knowledge of the situation told USA TODAY Sports. The person spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitive nature of the situation.

Photos: Protests and pageantry at Cavs-Nets game

"I think it's really important that we show our respect to the families," said Irving in the locker room before the game. "More importantly we're in the city where tragedy happened and it's really important to us that we stand up for a cause, especially this one. It hits close to home and means a lot to me."

Irving decided to wear the shirt two days ago.

"I was in contact with Jarrett Jack and I was like 'I want one of those shirts and I'm going to wear it,'" Irving said.

Jack played for the Cavaliers last year.

Cleveland Cavaliers guard Kyrie Irving wears an "I Can't Breathe" T-shirt for warmups prior to the game against the Brooklyn Nets at Barclays Center. (Photo: Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY Sports)

The decision to wear the shirt was a personal one, and pregame Irving wasn't sure if any other Cavaliers players would be wearing one.

"Obviously everyone has their own emotions towards this and what's going on," Irving said. "That's all that matters. It's just personal.

"I think more or less the condolences go out to the families. That's the most important thing. Things happen within the world that you can't necessarily control but for me standing up and taking it as my own and being a part of something bigger than myself…it's just…what happened is a tragedy. I feel terrible about it but that's just my emotions more or less for the condolences for the families."

"I respect Derrick Rose and all of our players for voicing their personal views on important issues but my preference would be for players to abide by our oncourt attire rules," NBA Commissioner Adam Silver said in a statement.

LeBron James also received one of the T-shirts from Jack, and before the game hadn't made up his mind as to whether or not he would wear it.

"It's a possibility," James said in the locker room. During warm-ups, James then took off his outer jacket to reveal the T-shirt beneath.

When asked what message the T-shirt sent out to the country, James responded: "I don't know. It's not for us to figure out. It's just for us to understand what we're going through as a society. I've been forwarded over and over about what's been going on. This is more of a notion to the family more than anything. As a society we have to do better. We have to be better for one another no matter what race you are. But it's more of a shoutout to the family more than anything because they're the ones who should be getting the energy and effort."

ESPN's Jeremy Schaap then asked James what will determine if he wears it.

"Y'all stop asking," James replied.

Schaap said he didn't understand.

"Me either," said James, then ended the interview.

The Bulls' Derrick Rose wore a very similar T-shirt during his team's pre-game warm-ups on Saturday night.