Trump administration struggles with fate of 900 DREAMers serving in the military
CLOSE President Trump’s controversial decision to end the DACA program was criticized by both Republicans and Democrats in Washington. Buzz60

Immigration activists protest the Trump administration's decision to end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program on Wednesday in Newark, N.J. (Photo: Eduardo Munoz Alvarez, Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — About 900 undocumented immigrants known as "DREAMers" are currently serving in the United States military, the Pentagon says — which could prove a major challenge for the Trump administration as it tries to wind down the Obama-era program that protected those immigrants from deportation.

Those service members — all of whom have health care or language skills the U.S. military considers vital — would be forced to leave the military under Trump policy that would rescind their protected status beginning next March.

The enlistees are a small proportion of the 800,000 immigrants who have received quasi-legal status under the program known as DACA, or Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals.

But they are also among the most symbolically important faces of the program, now that President Trump has called on Congress to resolve the fate of immigrants whose parents brought them to the country illegally as children.

The DACA enlistees are part of a Pentagon pilot project called Military Accessions Vital to the National Interest. The program waives certain citizenship requirements for green card holders, refugees and DACA recipients with skills that the military considers essential to the national interest.

The group includes doctors, nurses, and service members with proficiency in a language considered to be of strategic importance. Spanish is not one of those languages, but Arabic, Russian, Chinese and Korean are.

Homeland Security spokesman Dave Lapan said his agency and the Pentagon were still reviewing how to handle the military status of DACA recipients who are serving.

Under the policy adopted by the Obama administration, those whose DACA protections expired at any point in their service — on active duty or under contract — would no longer be eligible to serve, Lapan said.

"We're still figuring out what the different outcomes are," Lapan said.

The Pentagon declined to say whether how those who lose their protected status would be given an honorable, general or administrative discharge.

The White House has said the question of legal status of undocumented childhood immigrants is up to Congress. Asked specifically about military enlistments, White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said, "We have confidence that Congress is going to step up and do their job."

"This is something that needs to be fixed legislatively, and we have confidence that they’re going to do that," she said.

Alan Gomez reported from Miami.

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2xSjjBl