Steven Spielberg Film and Video Archive-- Eichmann Trial -- Session 69 -- Testimony of A. Beilin and Y. Bakon
Title:

Eichmann Trial

Collection Title:

Adolf Eichmann Trial Collection

Event Date:

06/07/1961

Place:

Jerusalem, Israel

Copyright:

Israel State Archives & Steven Spielberg Jewish Film Archive

Duration:

00:40:18

Links:



Description:

Session 69. Court room. 00:00:59 Witness Dr. Aharon Beilin is asked about whether he saw Jewish boys who had had experiments carried out upon them. He describes seeing 40 Greek Jews who had burns on their genitals from x-rays - tests performed by Dr. Schumann. 00:02:10 Describes giving them treatment - ointments. Mengele would come and look at the wounds, one day he took them away - disappeared. Also describes a case of castration. 00:03:35 Describes Schillinger as committing the worst atrocities in Birkenau. Schillinger was murdered by a woman in transport [Note: accounts of his death vary]. 00:06:05 The witness is asked to speak about Dr. Globersohn, the liquidation of Sonderkommando, and Globersohn's role as physician of Sonderkommando. Globersohn poisoned himself - Moll, commander of the Sonderkommando, beat him for trying to avoid his job by killing himself. 00:09:38 He describes being transferred to the sick quarter in January 1945; the closeness of liberation, being forced to march - describes the route they took. 00:13:15 Describes the process of the walk - mercy shooting, counting the number of shots - work out the number of deaths. Entering a bunker to sleep - turned out to be air tight, people suffocated during night, 1000 people died. 00:17:00 Claimed to be a chemist to get out of the march - told they would be sent to Flossenbuerg "to forge dollars", ended up at Götterland - Reichenau - factory for radio sets. Made to pave the road. Given bread by woman - SS found the bread, was going to give him an injection of petrol in the heart but the syringe was being borrowed. 00:24:30 Just before liberation he lost consciousness, woke up in clean bed with flowers next to him. 00:27:22 Talks about being chosen as a physician.



00:29:34 Mr. Yehuda Bakon continues his testimony - asked to read a passage, signed by Bakon. Passage contains information about the Edelstein family being put to death under special instructions from Eichmann. A discussion on accuracy of translation and witness ensues. 00:36:29 Judge Halevi confused by Bakon's story - Mrs. Edelstein was promised by Eichmann to see her husband - went to meet him twice. She was eventually executed. 00:38:13 Testimony is finished.



Judge announces that session will end and that tomorrow the films will be shown, there is a discussion of the practicalities of showing the films. 00:40:06 Court adjourns.

Notes:

See official transcripts, published in "The Trial of Adolf Eichmann", Vol. I-V, State of Israel, Ministry of Justice, Jerusalem, 1994. Also available online at the Nizkor Project.

Language:

English

German

Hebrew

Genre:

Unedited

Color:

No

Image Quality:

Good

Biography / History:



Accession Info:

1999.A.0087 Capital Cities Broadcasting Corporation recorded the proceedings of the Adolf Eichmann trial in 1961. The original recording was made on two-inch format videotape. One set of videotapes contained selected portions of the trial for distribution to television stations. The "selected portions" version remained in Israel and was later turned over to the Israel State Archives. Capital Cities Broadcasting retained the set of videotapes containing the complete trial proceedings at offices in New York City until 1965, when they gave the videotapes to the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith. The Anti-Defamation League, in turn, gave the complete set to the Steven Spielberg Jewish Film Archive at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 1972. With a grant from the Revson Foundation, Hebrew University transferred the two-inch videotapes to U-Matic format. During the transfer process, Hebrew University created three duplicate sets. One set was given to the Steven Spielberg Jewish Film Archive, one to the Israel State Archives, and one set to the Jewish Museum in New York City. In 1995, the Israel State Archives transferred the trial footage to digital videoformat with a grant from the Israeli Prime Minister's Office. Three subsequent digital videotape copies resulted from this transfer of footage. The Israel State Archives retained one digital copy and a second set was deposited at the Steven Spielberg Jewish Film Archive at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. The Steven Spielberg Film and Video Archive at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum received the third set of digital videotapes in May 1999.

Keywords:

COURTS/COURTROOMS

DOCTORS

EICHMANN TRIAL

EICHMANN, ADOLF

FILMS

GREECE

JUDGES

LIBERATION

MEDICAL EXPERIMENTS

MEDICAL PERSONNEL

RACIAL SCIENCE

SHOOTINGS

TRIALS

Director:

Leo Hurwitz

Producer:

Capital Cities Broadcasting

Production Date:

June 7, 1961

Source:

Steven Spielberg Jewish Film Archive, VTEI 311

Original Format:

2" Quad

USHMM Format:

DigiBeta; Betacam SP; VHS

Time Code:

00:00:48 - 00:41:06