No fines for 9/11 cleats, but NFL players can expect to pay for other tributes
Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE USA TODAY Sports' Lorenzo Reyes looks at the three biggest story lines heading into this week's games. USA TODAY Sports

Pittsburgh Steelers running back DeAngelo Williams arrives at Heinz Field to play the Baltimore Ravens. (Photo: Charles LeClaire, USA TODAY Sports)

The NFL won’t fine players who violated the league’s equipment policy to honor victims of the 9/11 terrorist attacks on Sunday, but that doesn’t mean the league is easing up on the uniform policy.

Players honoring other causes will still have to open their wallets, as they have in the past.

In other words, if Pittsburgh Steelers running back DeAngelo Williams again wears eye black with “FIND THE CURE” during Breast Care Awareness Month in honor of his mother who died from breast cancer, or teammate William Gay wears purple cleats for domestic violence awareness, or teammate Cameron Heyward wears eye black with the words “IRON HEAD" to honor his father who died of cancer, the league likely will fine them, just as it did last season.

Besides those three last season. the league docked current New York Jets receiver Brandon Marshall $10,500 in 2013 while he was a member of the Chicago Bears.

NFL senior vice president of communications Brian McCarthy told USA TODAY on Tuesday that not fining players for what they wore Sunday was consistent with the league’s recent history, that players who honored 9/11 in violation of the equipment policy during Week 1 in 2011 also weren’t fined.

While McCarthy wouldn’t call 9/11 an exception to the uniform rule, he did say that any other causes players may choose to honor in subsequent weeks would be subject to fines, “provided that it’s in violation of the equipment policy.”

The NFL has been criticized for sanctioning players who chose to honor certain personal causes.

Sports Illustrated reported Monday the league will allow players that opportunity this season – on their cleats in Week 13, but the league must approve of the charity.

According to the NFL’s uniform and equipment rules, “players are prohibited from wearing, displaying, or otherwise conveying personal messages either in writing or illustration, unless such message has been approved in advance by the League office. Items to celebrate anniversaries or memorable events, or to honor or commemorate individuals, such as helmet decals, and arm bands and jersey patches on players’ uniforms, are prohibited unless approved in advance by the League office.”

The NFL elaborates that it will not allow players to convey messages “which relate to political activities or causes, other non-football events, causes or campaigns, or charitable causes or campaigns.”

According to NFL operations, the league and the NFL Players Association agreed to donate fine money to the NFL Player Care Foundation and the Gene Upshaw Players Association’s Player Assistance Trust.

Follow Lorenzo Reyes on Twitter @LorenzoGReyes.

PHOTOS: NFL power rankings entering Week 2