United States Citizens at Birth (INA 301 and 309) - Chapter 3, Part H, Volume 12
A. General Requirements for Acquisition of Citizenship at Birth

A person born in the United States who is subject to the jurisdiction of the United States is a U.S. citizen at birth, to include a person born to a member of an Indian, Eskimo, Aleutian, or other aboriginal tribe.

In general, a person born outside of the United States may acquire citizenship at birth if:

•The person has at least one parent who is a U.S. citizen; and

•The U.S. citizen parent meets certain residence or physical presence requirements in the United States or an outlying possession prior to the person’s birth in accordance with the pertinent provision.

A person born abroad through Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) to a U.S. citizen gestational mother who is not also the genetic mother acquires U.S. citizenship at birth under INA 301 or INA 309 if:

•The person’s gestational mother is recognized by the relevant jurisdiction as the child’s legal parent at the time of the person’s birth; and

​

•The person meets all other applicable requirements under either INA 301 or INA 309.

Until the Act of October 10, 1978, persons who had acquired U.S. citizenship through birth outside of the United States to one U.S. citizen parent had to meet certain physical presence requirements to retain their citizenship. This legislation eliminated retention requirements for persons who were born after October 10, 1952. There may be cases where a person who was born before that date, and therefore subject to the retention requirements, may have failed to retain citizenship.

An officer should determine whether a person acquired citizenship at birth by referring to the applicable statutory provisions and conditions that existed at the time of the person’s birth. These provisions have been modified extensively over the years. The following sections provide the current law.

B. Child Born in Wedlock

1. Child of Two U.S. Citizen Parents A child born outside of the United States and its outlying possessions acquires citizenship at birth if at the time of birth: •Both of the child’s parents are U.S. citizens; and

​ •At least one parent had resided in the United States or one of its outlying possessions.

2. Child of U.S. Citizen Parent and U.S. National A child born outside of the United States and its outlying possessions acquires citizenship at birth if at the time of birth: •One parent is a U.S. citizen and the other parent is a U.S. national; and

​ •The U.S. citizen parent was physically present in the United States or one of its outlying possessions for a continuous period of at least one year.

3. Child of U.S. Citizen Parent and Foreign National Parent A child born outside of the United States and its outlying possessions acquires citizenship at birth if at the time of birth: •One parent is a foreign national and the other parent is a U.S. citizen; and

​ •The U.S. citizen parent was physically present in the United States for at least 5 years, including at least 2 years after 14 years of age. Time abroad counts as physical presence in the United States if the time abroad was: •As a member of the U.S. armed forces in honorable status;

​ •Under the employment of the U.S. government or other qualifying organizations; or

​ •As a dependent unmarried son or daughter of such persons.

4. Child of a U.S. Citizen Mother and Foreign National Father A child born outside of the United States and its outlying possessions acquires citizenship at birth if: •The child was born before noon (Eastern Standard Time) May 24, 1934;

​ •The child’s father is a foreign national;

​ •The child’s mother was a U.S. citizen at the time of the child’s birth; and

​ •The child’s U.S. citizen mother resided in the United States prior to the child’s birth.

C. Child Born Out of Wedlock

1. Child of U.S. Citizen Father General Requirements for Fathers of Children Born Out of Wedlock The general requirements for acquisition of citizenship at birth for a child born in wedlock also apply to a child born out of wedlock outside of the United States (or one of its outlying possessions) who claims citizenship through a U.S. citizen father. Specifically, the provisions apply in cases where: •A blood relationship between the child and the father is established by clear and convincing evidence; •The child’s father was a U.S. citizen at the time of the child’s birth; •The child’s father (unless deceased) has agreed in writing to provide financial support for the child until the child reaches 18 years of age; and •One of the following criteria is met before the child reaches 18 years of age:

​ •The child is legitimated under the law of his or her residence or domicile;

​ •The father acknowledges in writing and under oath the paternity of the child; or

​ •The paternity of the child is established by adjudication of a competent court. In addition, the residence or physical presence requirements contained in the relevant paragraph of INA 301 continue to apply to children born out of wedlock, who are claiming citizenship through their fathers. Written Agreement to Provide Financial Support In order for a child born out of wedlock outside of the United States (or one of its outlying possessions) to acquire U.S. citizenship through his or her father, Congress included a requirement that the father agree in writing to provide financial support for the child until the child reaches the age of 18. Congress included the language to prevent children from becoming public charges. USCIS interprets the phrase in the statute “has agreed in writing to provide financial support” to mean that there must be documentary evidence that supports a finding that the father accepted the legal obligation to support the child until the age of 18. The written agreement of financial support may be dated at any time before the child’s 18th birthday. If the child is under the age of 18 at the time of filing an Application for Certificate of Citizenship, the father may provide the written agreement of financial support either concurrently with the filing of the application or prior to the adjudication of the application. USCIS may request the written agreement of financial support at the time of issuance of a Request for Evidence or at the time of an interview (unless the interview is waived). Alternatively, if the applicant is already over the age of 18, he or she may meet the requirement if one or more documents support a finding that the father accepted his legal obligation to support the child. In such cases, the evidence must have existed (and have been finalized) prior to the child’s 18th birthday and must have met any applicable foreign law or U.S. law governing the child’s or father’s residence to establish acceptance of financial responsibility. In all cases, the applicant has the burden of proving the father has met any applicable requirements under the law to make an agreement to provide financial support. A written agreement of financial support is not required if the father died before the child’s 18th birthday. Written Agreement Requirements In order for a document to qualify as a written agreement of financial support under INA 309(a)(3), the document: •Must be in writing and acknowledged by the father;

​ •Must indicate the father’s agreement to provide financial support for the child; and

​ •Must be dated before the child’s 18th birthday. In addition, USCIS considers whether the agreement was voluntary. Other Acceptable Documentation A written agreement of financial support may come in different forms and documents. USCIS may consider other similar documentation in which the father accepts financial responsibility of the child until the age of 18. Some examples of documents USCIS may consider include: •A previously submitted Affidavit of Support (Form I-134) or Affidavit of Support Under Section 213A of the INA (Form I-864);

​ •Military Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System (DEERS) enrollment;

​ •Written voluntary acknowledgement of a child in a jurisdiction where there is a legal requirement that the father provide financial support; •Documentation establishing paternity by a court or administrative agency with jurisdiction over the child’s personal status, if accompanied by evidence from the record of proceeding establishing the father initiated the paternity proceeding and the jurisdiction legally requires the father to provide financial support; or

​ •A petition by the father seeking child custody or visitation with the court of jurisdiction with an agreement to provide financial support and the jurisdiction legally requires the father to provide financial support.

2. Child of U.S. Citizen Mother The rules that determine whether a child born out of wedlock outside of the United States derives citizenship at birth from his or her U.S. citizen mother vary depending on when the child was born. Child Born On or After December 23, 1952 and Before June 12, 2017 A child born between December 23, 1952 and June 12, 2017 who is born out of wedlock outside of the United States and its outlying possessions acquires citizenship at birth if: •The child’s mother was a U.S. citizen at the time of the child’s birth; and •The child’s U.S. citizen mother was physically present in the United States or one of its outlying possessions for 1 continuous year prior to the child’s birth. Child Born On or After June 12, 2017 A child born on or after June 12, 2017, who is born out of wedlock outside of the United States or one of its outlying possessions acquires citizenship at birth if: •The child’s mother was a U.S. citizen at the time of the child’s birth; and

​ •The child’s U.S. citizen mother was physically present in the United States or one of its outlying possessions for at least 5 years prior to the child’s birth (at least 2 years of which were after age 14). Effect of Sessions v. Morales-Santana Decision Prior to the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in Sessions v. Morales-Santana, the physical presence requirements for children born out of wedlock were different for a child acquiring citizenship through a U.S. citizen mother than for those acquiring through a U.S. citizen father. An unwed U.S. citizen mother could transmit citizenship to her child if the mother was physically present in the United States for 1 continuous year prior to the child's birth. An unwed U.S. citizen father, by contrast, was held to the longer physical presence requirement of 5 years (at least 2 years of which were after age 14) in the United States or one of its outlying possessions. On June 12, 2017, the U.S. Supreme Court held, in Sessions v. Morales-Santana, that the different physical presence requirements for an unwed U.S. citizen father and an unwed U.S. citizen mother violated the U.S. Constitution’s Equal Protection Clause. The U.S. Supreme Court indicated that the 5 years of physical presence (at least 2 years of which were after age 14) requirement should apply prospectively to all cases involving a child born out of wedlock outside the United States to one U.S. citizen parent and one foreign national parent, regardless of the gender of the parent. The U.S. Supreme Court decision effectively eliminated, prospectively, the 1 year continuous physical presence requirement that previously applied to unwed U.S. citizen mothers, and replaced it with the higher physical presence requirement that previously applied to unwed U.S. citizen fathers. After Sessions v. Morales-Santana, the 1-year continuous physical presence requirement remains in effect only for those children born prior to June 12, 2017 outside of the United States to unwed U.S. citizen mothers.

D. Application for Certificate of Citizenship ( Form N-600 )

A person born abroad who acquires U.S. citizenship at birth is not required to file an Application for Certificate of Citizenship (Form N-600). A person who seeks documentation of such status, however, must submit an application to obtain a Certificate of Citizenship from USCIS. A person may also apply for a U.S. passport with the Department of State to serve as evidence of his or her U.S. citizenship.

A person who is at least 18 years of age may submit the Application for Certificate of Citizenship on his or her own behalf. If the application is for a child who has not reached 18 years of age, the child's U.S. citizen parent or legal guardian must submit the application.

USCIS will issue a proof of U.S. citizenship in the form of a Certificate of Citizenship if the Application for Certificate of Citizenship is approved and the person takes the Oath of Allegiance, if required to do so.

E. Citizenship Interview and Waiver

In general, an applicant must appear in person for an interview before a USCIS officer after filing an Application for Certificate of Citizenship. This includes the U.S. citizen parent or legal guardian if the application is filed on behalf of a child under 18 years of age. USCIS, however, may waive the interview requirement if all the required documentation necessary to establish the applicant's eligibility is already included in USCIS administrative records, or if the application is accompanied by one of the following:

•Consular Report of Birth Abroad (FS-240);

​

•Applicant’s unexpired U.S. passport issued initially for a full 5 or 10-year period; or

​

•Certificate of Naturalization of the applicant's parent or parents.

F. Decision and Oath of Allegiance

1. Approval of Application, Oath of Allegiance, and Waiver for Children under 14 Years of Age If an officer approves the Application for Certificate of Citizenship, USCIS administers the Oath of Allegiance before issuing a Certificate of Citizenship. However, the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) permits USCIS to waive the taking of the Oath of Allegiance if USCIS determines the person is unable to understand its meaning. USCIS has determined that children under the age of 14 are generally unable to understand the meaning of the oath. Accordingly, USCIS waives the oath requirement for a child younger than 14 years of age. If USCIS waives the oath requirement, USCIS issues a Certificate of Citizenship after the officer approves the application.