A list: Members of Congress facing sexual misconduct allegations
CLOSE According to Blake Farenthold's former spokesman, the GOP Texas representative used taxpayer dollars to help settle a sexual harassment suit. USA TODAY

Senator Al Franken arrives for a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing in the Dirksen Senate Office Building on Capitol Hill, July 12, 2017. (Photo: MANDEL NGAN, AFP/Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — The national conversation over sexual harassment that began with misconduct and assault accusations against Hollywood film maker Harvey Weinstein is reverberating throughout the U.S. Capitol as at least four sitting lawmakers stand accused of groping, harassment or other unwanted sexual behavior.

Here is a rundown of the Congress members and the accusations against them:

Sen. Al Franken, D-Minn.

Franken was the first sitting lawmaker in Washington to be publicly accused. A Senate ethics panel opened a preliminary inquiry after at least six women accused Franken of groping and other unwelcome conduct.

Franken has apologized and said he welcomes an ethics investigation even as his spokesman released a statement saying that Franken “has never intentionally engaged in this kind of conduct.”

Stephanie Kemplin of Ohio, who says Franken cupped her breast as the two posed for a photo in 2003 while she was stationed with the Army in Kuwait, is the latest accuser to come forward. Others include radio and sports broadcaster Leeann Tweeden, who says Franken stuck his tongue down her throat and later pretended to grope her in a picture while she was sleeping. The alleged incidents took place during a 2006 USO tour in the Middle East to entertain U.S. troops, before Franken was elected to the Senate in 2008.

Franken has pledged to cooperate with a Senate Ethics Committee investigation and said he “is open” to making the results public.

Rep. John Conyers, D-Mich.

Rep. John Conyers, D-Mich. (Photo: Andrew Harnik, AP)

Conyers, the longest-serving member currently in Congress, resigned a seat he’s held for more than five decades after a series of accusations alleging sexual misconduct.

Conyers, 88, announced his resignation Dec. 5, two weeks after a BuzzFeed.com article detailed a secret settlement of more than $27,000 with a former staffer who accused him of making sexual advances toward her. The settlement was paid out of funds from Conyers' taxpayer-supported office account.

Accusations from several other women followed, despite Conyers’ denial that he harassed anyone. At least six other women have claimed they either experienced or saw him touching and rubbing women in his office, making sexual advances toward them or making inappropriate remarks.

A number of House Democrats, including Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi and Rep. Jim Clyburn of South Carolina, the third-ranking Democrat in the House and a colleague of Conyers’ on the Congressional Black Caucus since 1993, had called on him to resign.

Conyers continues to say the allegations against him are inaccurate. “They’re not true and they’re something I can’t explain where they came from,” Conyers said on a recent Detroit radio show.

Rep. Blake Farenthold, R-Texas

Rep. Blake Farenthold, R-Texas, and his wife Debbie Farenthold stand with House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., for a ceremonial swearing-in and photo-op during the opening session of the 115th Congress, Tuesday, Jan. 3, 2017, on Capitol Hill in Washington. (Photo: Jack Gruber, USA TODAY)

In December 2014, Farenthold’s former aide, Lauren Greene, accused him of sexual harassment.

Greene served as the congressman’s communications director until she was fired in July of 2014. Her lawsuit accuses Farenthold of making sexually charged statements toward her and engaging in off-color behavior.

In her complaint, Greene alleged that another staffer had told her that “Farenthold had admitted to being attracted” to her and had said he'd had “sexual fantasies” and “wet dreams” about her. The complaint also states that Farenthold had said during a staff meeting that “a female lobbyist had propositioned him for a ‘threesome.’”

The court document further alleged that “Farenthold regularly drank to excess, and because of his tendency to flirt, the staffers who accompanied him to Capitol Hill functions would joke that they had to be on ‘redhead patrol’ to keep him out of trouble.”

Farenthold at the time called the salacious allegations "outrageous" and said they were the product of an unhappy former staffer. The suit was settled in November 2015 and the terms were not disclosed. More recently, Farenthold came under criticism because the settlement was paid with taxpayer money. He has vowed to repay the taxpayer money while saying he cannot discuss the matter. He repeated an earlier statement that he “adamantly denies that he engaged in any wrongdoing.”

Rep. Ruben Kihuen, D-Nev.

Rep. Ruben Kihuen, D-Nev., speaks with reporters on Capitol Hill in Washington on Nov. 14, 2016. (Photo: Cliff Owen, AP)

A 25-year-old woman who worked on Kihuen’s 2016 campaign has accused him of repeated, unwanted sexual advances, according to a report published by BuzzFeed News.

The woman, identified only as Samantha, told BuzzFeed that Kihuen twice touched her thighs without consent. She did not know what to do with her complaint, and didn’t feel comfortable bringing it to the campaign’s leadership, so she quit the campaign, according to the online news outlet.

Buzzfeed also reported that the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee was contacted by the staffer and told that Kihuen had done things that made her uncomfortable.

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., has said that Kihuen should resign.

More: Congress Ethics chairs request more data to determine extent of sex harassment payouts

More: House Democrat divisions erupt as sexual harassment issue heats up, threatens members

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2zPyxYG