Rare bipartisan moment: Both sides embrace Robert Mueller as special counsel
CLOSE Robert Mueller will oversee the Russia investigation. Here's a look at his background. USA TODAY

Then-FBI director Robert Mueller testifies during a Senate Appropriations hearing on Capitol Hill on May 16, 2013. (Photo: Brendan Smialowski, AFP/Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — A Congress utterly fractured by partisan bickering came to rare bipartisan agreement Wednesday night as members of both parties effusively praised the selection of former FBI director Robert Mueller as special counsel in charge of the FBI's investigation into Russian attempts to influence the 2016 election.

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y. said, “Former Director Mueller is exactly the right kind of individual for this job. I now have significantly greater confidence that the investigation will follow the facts wherever they lead."

House Oversight and Government Reform Chairman Jason Chaffetz, R-Utah — who announced Tuesday that he was demanding from the FBI copies of memos written by former FBI director James Comey summarizing his conversations with President Trump — tweeted Wednesday that "Mueller is a great selection. Impeccable credentials. Should be widely accepted."

Sen. Tim Kaine, D-Va., Hillary Clinton's running mate in last November's presidential election, called the announcement "a good move."

"Now let's get some answers," he tweeted.

Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, called the action "a good first step."

"Bob was a fine U.S. attorney, a great FBI director and there’s no better person who could be asked to perform this function," she said in a statement. "He is respected, he is talented and he has the knowledge and ability to do the right thing."

Read more:

Many Republicans had hedged over the past few days on whether a special counsel was needed, but pressure for an independent investigation mounted after Trump fired Comey last week. After Mueller's appointment Wednesday, many GOP lawmakers they thought it was a good idea.

"I commend (Department of Justice) for bringing in an independent voice to help bring clarity to this situation," said Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, a senior member of the Senate Judiciary Committee.

House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., said, "My priority has been to ensure thorough and independent investigations are allowed to follow the facts wherever they may lead. That is what we’ve been doing here in the House. The addition of Robert Mueller as special counsel is consistent with this goal, and I welcome his role at the Department of Justice."

Rep Adam Kinzinger, R-Ill., called Mueller " a well respected and trusted veteran of the FBI" and said "this special counsel appointment is a step in the right direction on getting answers on the many questions we have with Russian meddling in our election and our democracy."

Republican Sen. Rob Portman of Ohio tweeted: "The issue of Russian meddling in our election must be investigated fully & former FBI dir. Mueller is well qualified to oversee this probe."

Perhaps the least effusive statement came from Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., who had strongly opposed calls for a special prosecutor. After Comey was fired last week, McConnell said on the Senate floor, "Today we'll no doubt hear calls for a new investigation, which could only serve to impede the current work being done" by the Senate Intelligence Committee, which has a probe underway.

On Wednesday, McConnell said "The decision by the Deputy Attorney General to appoint former FBI Director Robert Mueller as a special counsel confirms that the investigation into Russian intervention into our election will continue, as stated last week by Acting FBI Director Andrew McCabe. The Senate Select Committee on Intelligence will also continue its investigation into this matter."

Intelligence Chairman Richard Burr, R-N.C., and Vice Chairman Mark Warner, D-Va., issued a joint statement echoing McConnell's commitment to the committee's investigation. Mueller's selection "will provide some certainty for the American people that the investigation will proceed fairly and free of political influence,“ they wrote. The committee "will continue its own investigation and to the extent any deconfliction is required, we will engage with Director Mueller and our expectation is that he will engage with the Committee as well.”

Even as Democrats praised Mueller's credentials, many said they still plan to push for an independent commission, similar to the 9/11 Commission, to investigate Russian meddling in the election and issue a public report.

"Director Mueller will still be in the chain of command under the Trump-appointed leadership of the Justice Department," said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif. "He cannot take the place of a truly independent, outside commission that is completely free from the Trump administration’s meddling."

The House earlier Wednesday rejected an attempt by Democrats to force a vote on creating an independent commission to investigate Russian interference in last year's election. The legislation would create a 12-member, bipartisan commission that could interview witnesses, obtain documents, issue subpoenas and receive public testimony.

California Rep. Adam Schiff, the top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, added that "the appointment of a special counsel is not a substitute for a vigorous investigation in Congress, and the House Intelligence Committee will take steps to make sure our investigations do not conflict and ensure the success of both efforts."

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2quoI0n