0615 tmfpftexas

Email, Texas Military Forces Public Affairs Staff, June 17-18, 2015

12:01 p.m.

June 17, 2015

Thanks for your inquiry. Please see the response to your query below.

Q1:We are checking a claim that Gov. Abbott activated the Texas State Guard to monitor Jade Helm 15 in case the troops try to impose martial law, disarm innocent Texans, and detain them in tunnels beneath closed Walmart stores. Is this accurate? Why or why not? I would be happy to visit by phone or email on this breaking story.

A: The Texas State Guard was directed by Governor Abbott to monitor the U.S. Army Special Operations Command (USASOC) exercise Operation Jade Helm and provide to him updates on the progress and safety of the operation as it pertains to Texas. The directive from the Governor is designed to expedite his communication with USASOC as well as city and county officials by utilizing Major General Betty and the Texas State Guard as his designated representative for this exercise. They understand military operations, as well as what details are important to communicate locally in Texas communities.

Very Respectfully,

Texas Military Forces Public Affairs Staff

12:49 p.m.

June 18, 2015

Please see the responses below. At this time, we must respectfully decline your request for an interview.

Q1: To be clear, I would welcome a brief interview about how often the State Guard has been activated this year and for what purposes.

A1: The Texas State Guard has been called to State Active Duty three times this year to include flood response and support to the Texas DPS led mission, Operation Strong Safety.

Q2: Also, what does it take for the Guard to be activated?

A2: The activation of the Texas State Guard requires a request from the Governor.

Q3: How many volunteer troops are entailed?

A4: The Texas State Guard, a component of the Texas Military, under the command of the Texas Governor, has approximately 2,200 service members. The Texas State Guard is comprised of an all-volunteer force that helps with state missions and serves as a force multiplier for the Texas Military Forces.

Q4: I would need the full name and title of whoever kindly engages.

A4: All responses may be attributed to the Texas Military Forces Public Affairs Office.

Very Respectfully,

Texas Military Forces Public Affairs Staff