Did the Queen’s Brooch Send a Secret Message About Donald Trump?
Donald Trump and Queen Elizabeth had their much-anticipated meeting on Friday at Windsor Castle; the most viral moment of their get-together was a clip of the uncomfortable way in which the president seemed unaware of the Queen’s place behind him as they walked outside together. The meeting was also notable for who wasn’t in attendance: Prince Charles, Prince William, or any of the other members of the royal family. (While this was at first reported to have been a conscious decision on the part of Charles and his son, the Palace has since said in a statement that they were never in the mix to attend the meeting.)

On Tuesday, a new potential theory emerged, as a Twitter user (it always begins with those Twitter users!) posited that the Queen may have been making a statement—in the most subtle of ways—with her choice of brooches. The brooch she wore to meet Trump on Friday is the palm-leaf brooch, which the Queen Mother wore at the state funeral for King George VI. The brooch is pictured in the “Three Queens in Mourning” photograph. (“QE rolled up to tea with the Trumps wearing the brooch her mother wore to her father’s STATE FUNERAL,” as the originator of the thread put it.)

The brooches the Queen wore on the days adjacent to the Trump meeting are also included as part of the “theory,” since Trump was visiting the U.K. on both of those days, as well. On Thursday, she wore the brooch gifted to her by Barack and Michelle Obama in 2011 (purchased at the Tiny Jewel Box jewelry store in Washington, D.C.). And on Saturday, she wore the sapphire brooch that was a gift from the Canadian people in 2017. As the theory goes, the choice to wear brooches from two of Trump’s slew of “enemies”—the Obamas and Canada—were intended to annoy the president, as well.

Of course, while it is entertaining and fun to read too much into this, in all likelihood it’s just a coincidence, given the Queen and the rest of the royals do not, as a practice, comment on political matters. The Palace has refrained from commenting on the theory.

Get Vanity Fair’s Royal Watch A weekly overview of the chatter from Kensington Palace and beyond. E-mail Address Subscribe