Gillum heads to Tallahassee after 3 killed in yoga studio shooting
Democratic gubernatorial candidate in Florida Andrew Gillum announced Friday he was leaving the campaign trail for Tallahassee after a fatal shooting at a hot yoga studio in the state's capital.

"I’m deeply appreciative of law enforcement's quick response to the shooting at the yoga facility in Tallahassee today," Gillum, the city's mayor, tweeted. "No act of gun violence is acceptable. I'm in close communication with law enforcement officials and will be returning to Tallahassee tonight."



I’m deeply appreciative of law enforcement's quick response to the shooting at the yoga facility in Tallahassee today. No act of gun violence is acceptable. I'm in close communication with law enforcement officials and will be returning to Tallahassee tonight. — Andrew Gillum (@AndrewGillum) November 2, 2018



The shooter killed two people when he opened fire at the studio, located inside a shopping plaza, then pistol-whipped another before turning his weapon on himself, the Associated Press and local media reported.

The four people were taken Tallahassee Memorial HealthCare to be treated for their injuries.

Neither the gunman nor his victims have been publicly identified by authorities. But Chief of Police Michael DeLeo told reporters at a Friday press conference there were “indications that several people inside fought back and tried to not only save themselves but other people, which is a testament their courage.”

Gillum earlier Friday attended a rally with former President Barack Obama in Miami.

Gillum's Republican opponent, Ron DeSantis, described the shooting as "heartbreaking."

"Casey and I are praying for the families of the victim whose life was tragically taken tonight and those taken to the hospital with injuries," DeSantis wrote on Twitter, referring to his wife Casey.



The news of the shooting in Tallahassee is heartbreaking. Casey and I are praying for the families of the victim whose life was tragically taken tonight and those taken to the hospital with injuries. — Ron DeSantis (@RonDeSantisFL) November 3, 2018



Republican Florida Gov. Rick Scott, who himself is campaigning for the Senate against Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson, said state assistance had already been offered to the city.

"I have been briefed by FDLE and local law enforcement regarding the shooting in Tallahassee," he tweeted, using an abbreviation for the Florida Department of Law Enforcement. "FDLE is on the scene and assisting local police. I will remain in constant communication with law enforcement."

Gillum is ahead of DeSantis by almost 3 percentage points as of Friday, according to RealClearPolitics' poll aggregator.