0416 sospftexas

Emails, Alicia Phillips Pierce, communications director, Texas secretary of state, April 20-21, 2016

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, April 19, 2016 12:18 PM

To: Alicia Pierce

Subject: Fresh urgent inquiry for a fact check

Good afternoon. I write again because we’re trying to explain the origin of a figure, which we attributed to the SOS in 2012, of an estimated 600,000 registered Texas voters lacking a valid photo ID to cast a ballot at the polls.

We ask because we’re checking an April statement to that effect by Tom “Smitty” Smith.

So, how was the 600,000 figure reached?

Any further analysis?

Any updates?

That 2012 fact check drew on this American-Statesman news story describing a federal request for more detail to the state. What ever came of that?

I hope to close in on this issue today.

THANKS.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Tuesday, April 19, 2016 5:32 PM

To: Alicia Pierce

Subject: Following up

It looks to me now like the figure I am checking was based on research by a Harvard professor. Pasting what I’ve jotted below. Accurate?

g.

A Corpus Christi federal judge, Nelva Gonzales Ramos, originally accepted the estimate of 600,000 registered Texas voters lacking a required form of ID to go to the polls.

Ramos’s October 2014 ruling includes her finding, starting on page 50, that “approximately 608,470 registered voters in Texas, representing approximately 4.5% of all registered voters, lack qualified SB 14 ID,” meaning one of the types of photo ID spelled out in Senate Bill 14, the legislation creating the law.

In the ruling, Ramos wrote that she based her finding on research presented by scholars, particularly Stephen Ansolabehere, a Harvard professor of government. Ansolabehere, Ramos wrote, “performed an extensive match of various databases to arrive at the figures set out above, which is referred to as the ‘No-Match List.’”

Ramos elaborated:

“First, he (Ansolabehere) determined which of the 13.5 million voters in Texas’s voter registration database, the Texas Election Administration Management System (TEAM), lacked SB 14 ID. He did this by comparing individual TEAM voter records with databases containing the records of those who possessed SB 14 ID—current DPS-issued Texas driver’s licenses, Texas personal ID cards, EICs, Texas concealed handgun licenses, United States passports, citizenship certificates, and military photo IDs—to arrive at a list of voter records that did not match with any SB 14 qualified photo ID.

“Dr. Ansolabehere ‘scrubbed’ the list by removing entries that appeared to be duplicates and those appearing in other databases that identified persons who were deceased and who had relocated (potentially out of state). He also removed voters identified as inactive, and those who were eligible for SB 14’s disability exemption to further ensure that he was counting only those who had no alternative for voting other than with a qualified SB 14 ID. All of these matches were performed with algorithms designed to address different name spellings and the use of nicknames or other variations in the way individuals are identified or would be input into a database. He concluded that approximately 608,470 voters in the TEAM database lack qualified SB 14 ID.”

In the lawsuit, Ramos wrote, defenders of the photo ID mandate challenged Ansolabehere’s findings “by arguing that he failed to remove felons and voters who subsequently re-registered in another state. There was evidence that the SOS,” secretary of state’s office, “purges the TEAM database on a daily basis for felons,” Ramos wrote, “and Dr. Ansolabehere testified that recent data from both the Pew Research Center and various secretaries of state established that the number of voters who may have re-registered in another state is extremely small—less than one percent,” the judge wrote.

From: Alicia Pierce

Sent: Wednesday, April 20, 2016 10:33 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: RE: Following up

Do you know that this is the number to which Smitty was referring? I’m asking because there are several different numbers out there and some use varying methodology.

Alicia Phillips Pierce

Communications Director

Texas Secretary of State

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, April 20, 2016 10:38 AM

To: 'Alicia Pierce'

Subject: RE: Following up

It is the backup Smith offered for his figure.

For now, though, I suspect the figure we attributed to SOS was a different calculation.

At any rate, I also am interested in whether the office has a more up-to-date estimate and, if so, in learning the basis of the updated figure.

G.

4:34 p.m.

Unfortunately I can’t speak to this claim, as it is subject to pending federal litigation (Veasey v. Abbott), which is on appeal. I will note that the state defendants have disagreed with the findings of the federal District Court, including all of its findings relating to the so-called “No Match List(s)” (i.e. lists which attempt to project the number of voters without photo IDs). In response to your request for an “up-to-date” estimate of the number of voters without photo ID, we do not have such an estimate; as noted in the state’s briefs in the litigation, we do not believe such estimates have any bearing on whether an individual can or will vote. Our focus remains making sure every qualified Texan who wants to cast ballot has the information they need to do so. This includes making sure voters 65 and older and those with disabilities know they may vote by mail, which almost never requires proof of photo ID, making sure voters with a disability know they may be able to obtain an exemption from showing a photo ID to vote in person, making sure voters without ID know how to get a free Election Identification Certificate, and making sure voters know which IDs they can bring to the polls.

You may find it relevant to review the state’s most recent appellate briefs in the Veasey v. Abbott. The brief to the three judge panel can be found here* and the pages dealing with “No-Match List(s)” are pages 34-36. The brief to the full Fifth Circuit can be found here and the pages dealing with “No Match List(s)” are pages 35-40, 44, and 54. On page 54 of the brief to the full Fifth Circuit, you may want to look at footnote 19 which indicates “approximately 22,000 voters on the No-Match List voted in at least one election since SB14’s implementation.”

Alicia Phillips Pierce

Communications Director

Texas Secretary of State