The simple way you can make Christmas merry for this 8-year-old arson survivor
A Facebook post has gone viral, asking for Christmas cards for 8-year-old Safyre Terry, who was the sole survivor of a 2013 arson fire that killed her family. (Gillian Brockell/The Washington Post)

When firefighters pulled Safyre Terry’s father from the ashes, she was underneath him — buried in his arms and still alive.

It was an early May morning in 2013 when, investigators said, an arsonist set fire to the family’s apartment stairwell in Schenectady, N.Y., not far from Albany. Safyre, then 5, lost her father, her younger sister and two younger brothers in the blaze.

Safyre was severely burned over the majority of her body. She lost the skin on her face, the toes on her left foot, her entire right hand and, later, the rest of her left foot, her aunt said.

“Doctors were just making her comfortable until she passed away,” her aunt and legal guardian, Liz Dolder, 43, told The Washington Post. “She wanted to live.”

[Why a Georgia state trooper waited to tell four children they were orphans]

Safyre is now 8 and is preparing to celebrate Christmas without her immediate family — and she has asked strangers for help.

Dolder posted a message on Facebook over the weekend asking people to send Christmas cards for Safyre to hang on a card tree.

“Everything is magical,” the aunt said. “I went to Goodwill and bought a Christmas card tree. And she helped me put it up. When we got our first Christmas card, she was so excited. … It was just incredible.”

Dolder said Safyre turned to her and declared: “I can’t wait to fill it all up.”

And Dolder told her: “Honey, I don’t think we’re going to end up filling that.”

But when Dolder posted a photo online showing Safyre with the card tree, her friends came through.

Safyre’s supporters have since launched an Imgur campaign to “make this little girl’s Christmas wish come true.” Dolder said so far she has collected close to 50 cards from the mailbox.

Dolder posted one of the letters on Facebook:

Dear Safyre, I’m sure you have no idea who I am, but I recently saw your story on Imgur, and it immediately stuck with me. You are a beautiful girl, and you deserve all the happiness in the world. Your outlook on life makes me smile, and your undefeatable attitude is what makes humans amazing.

“It’s so overwhelming,” Dolder said, sobbing. “I’m crying buckets, because when you’ve seen the ugly in the world, and then you see the world come together for her, it’s just more than words can say. I’m so moved.”

[A firefighter’s touching gesture to comfort a child hurt in a grim car crash]

On May 2, 2013, authorities said, someone doused an apartment stairwell with gasoline and set it ablaze. The fire spread to the family’s apartment and killed Safyre’s father, David Terry, 32; her 3-year-old sister, Layah; her 2-year-old brother, Michael; and her 11-month-old half-brother, Donovan Duell.

“The firefighters found her father, and when they tried to lift him up, she was underneath him — cuddled into his arms,” Dolder said of Safyre. “That is the reason why she lived.”

A suspect, Robert Butler, was charged in June 2013 with federal arson in U.S. District Court but the charges were later dropped, said Grant Jaquith, first assistant U.S. attorney for the Northern District of New York.

No one else has been charged with arson in the case, Jaquith said, explaining that it is still an ongoing investigation.

Jaquith said another man, Edward Leon, was convicted last month on two counts of perjury for lying to a federal grand jury about the fire.

Safyre’s mother, Jennica Duell, has also been charged for allegedly lying to a federal grand jury — first claiming she saw who started the fire and then claiming that statement was false, Jaquith said. She is set to go to trial in February.

Court documents allege that on May 24, 2013, Duell testified under oath that “a man said that he could make it so Duell and him could be together forever” and later poured gasoline in the hallway and lit the stairs on fire.

“She spoke about her babies and he said they would get out and not get hurt,” according to court documents. “She saw the flames and wanted to get in there, but he wouldn’t let her.”

On January 31, 2014, she testified that the previous statements were untrue and that she and others were not at the crime scene at the time of the fire, according to court documents.

Duell’s attorney could not be immediately reached for comment.



Safyre Terry (back left) and her siblings. (Courtesy of Liz Dolder)

After the fire, Safyre — who was burned over 75 percent of her body — was put into a drug-induced coma, her aunt said.

“The first moment I saw her, I was not prepared,” Dolder told The Post. “She did not have a face anymore. It was all burned off — all but a small patch on her forehead.”

Over the past two years, Safyre has undergone about 65 surgeries, including one earlier this year to amputate her foot.

“We opted to do it; it was very sensitive,” Dolder said. “She didn’t have a sole left, so when she stepped on something, it was like knives going into her foot. There was no movement — her ankle didn’t bend and her joints were fused together from the fire.

“In order for her to have a better quality of life, she had it removed.”

She is scheduled to undergo more surgery — on her face and neck — next month.

When asked how Safyre survived it all, Dolder said: “Prayers and her sheer will to survive. Her heart was beating strong.”

Safyre Terry. (Courtesy of Liz Dolder)

Dolder and her husband, who have 8-year-old twins, became Safyre’s legal guardians after the deadly fire.

Despite her injuries, Safyre is no different than other second-graders, her aunt said.

“She’s spunky, she’s straightforward, she’s a go-getter,” Dolder said. “She’s determined, very determined.”

Asked what Safyre thought about the cards she has received, her aunt said she is “thrilled.” She posted a photo to prove it.

Can someone say GLOWING … Safyre got mail today. Posted by Safyre Schenectady’s Super Survivor on Monday, December 7, 2015

Send a card to Safyre Terry at

P.O. Box 6126

Schenectady, NY 12306

(h/t BuzzFeed)

This story has been updated.

Want more inspiring news and ideas to improve your life? Sign up for the Inspired Life newsletter.

If you liked this story on Inspired Life, you may also enjoy:

A police officer paid the tab for a desperate mother who stole birthday cake mix

‘I Got You:’ San Bernardino victim shielded female co-worker during shooting, saving her life

Here are 15 things you can do when the world feels like a terrible place

Grieving dad to collect toys for charity at funeral of his slain toddler