The Berkeley rally aftermath: Mass arrests, a stabbing and weaponized Pepsi
Supporters and protesters of President Trump clashed on Saturday, April 15 in Berkeley, Calif. (Reuters)

A news station called it “something resembling a war zone.” A woman told the Los Angeles Times that it was “more of a riot.”

In any event, on Saturday, Berkeley, Calif., hosted its third recent clash between demonstrators who support President Trump and those who oppose him.

A park that normally sees produce stalls on the weekend was the scene of a stabbing, as reported by ABC 7, as well as at least 20 arrests and 11 injuries. Berkeley police confiscated several makeshift weapons.



(Courtesy of Berkeley Police Department)

And, yes, that’s apparently weaponized Pepsi sitting there — along with knives, sticks, a shield and cans of pepper spray.

In a widely panned commercial earlier this month, Pepsi had billed its product as a catalyst for peaceful protest. Instead, this happened:

@Berkeley police confirm soda can filled with concrete to use as a weapon during #berkrally — Lisa Amin Gulezian (@LisaAminABC7) April 16, 2017

All this occurred despite police efforts to prevent a repeat of the violence and vandalism that occurred in the city in February, before a university canceled a scheduled talk by former Breitbart News editor Milo Yiannopoulos.

And again in early March, when about 500 pro- and anti-Trump demonstrators punched, sprayed and clubbed one another, according to local news reports.

So, after a pro-Trump group announced Saturday’s rally in Civic Center Park downtown, a farmers market that regularly opens next door closed as a precaution, the Los Angeles Times reported.

Police banned anything that could be used as a weapon — or had been in past rallies — such as pepper spray, mace, baseball bats and glass bottles. In a sweep of the park before the rally, they found a “realistic-appearing replica gun.”

But despite these measures, fistfights broke out. Protesters fired pepper spray into a crowd. Small explosions, often blamed on firecrackers, could be heard going off in a thick throng of people.

Members of a citizen militia in security gear showed up to protect the pro-Trump demonstrators. Police in riot gear separated both sides, the Times reported.

It wasn’t total chaos, though.

A citizen militia member told the Times that police were doing a good job of keeping people “chilled and relaxed” — despite sporadic fights.

Although many people simply walked around chanting or counter-chanting, others ended up bloodied and injured, as seen in photos of the event.

Police said that seven people had to go to the hospital, and that several people were arrested on suspicion of assault with a deadly weapon, with more arrests expected as investigators review videos of the event.

A previous version of this post incorrectly said February’s violence followed the university’s cancellation of Milo Yiannopoulos’s speech. It has been corrected to reflect that the violence preceded the cancellation.



A man is sprayed with a chemical irritant as fights break out between supporters and opponents of President Trump in Berkeley, Calif., on Saturday. (Getty Images)

Read more:

Trump asks why people are still talking about his taxes a day after protesters asked for his returns

Trump says he can’t be sued for violence at his rallies because he won the election