‘Nevertheless, she persisted’ becomes new battle cry after McConnell silences Elizabeth Warren
Senate Democrats criticized Republicans for "twisting the rules of the U.S. Senate" by using a little-known senate rule to silence Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass) during debate over attorney general nominee Jeff Sessions. (Jenny Starrs/The Washington Post)

When Senate Republicans invoked a little-known rule Tuesday night to silence Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) in the middle of a speech criticizing attorney general nominee Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-Ala.), Democrats were stunned.

But it was Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell's defense of the rare move later that launched a thousand tweets.

“Sen. Warren was giving a lengthy speech,” he said. “She had appeared to violate the rule. She was warned. She was given an explanation. Nevertheless, she persisted.”

[The silencing of Elizabeth Warren and an old Senate rule prompted by a fistfight]

If the Republican senators had intended to minimize Warren's message, the decision backfired — severely.

Her supporters immediately seized upon McConnell's line — giving Warren a far bigger megaphone than if they had simply let her continue speaking in what had been a mostly empty chamber, some pointed out.

“Thanks for the new battle cry,” one person tweeted.

As had been the case through a long, embittered presidential campaign (see: “basket of deplorables,” “nasty woman"), an off-the-cuff phrase meant to end a debate was instead turned into a badge of honor by the other side.

#ShePersisted, #LetLizSpeak and “Silencing Elizabeth Warren” were among Twitter's top trending topics in the United States by Wednesday morning.

Women in particular bristled at the sentiment — essentially, to sit down and stop talking — and noted it was hardly unfamiliar to them.

Let's be real. What happened to @SenWarren is not a new phenomenon, and every woman watching knows EXACTLY what is going on. #letlizspeak — collette nic (@thelandsiren) February 8, 2017

"The senator will take her seat," said by Republican senators to Liz Warren. Remember that, ladies, when you vote. For now, #letlizspeak — Cheryl Kar (@CherylUpNorth) February 8, 2017

"She was warned." Words every strong woman has heard from a man at some point in her life.#LetLizSpeak #ShePersisted — Jen (@jendrinkswine) February 8, 2017

On the heels of the furious tweets came the memes.

Soon, people were applying McConnell's trio of sentences to any notable situation — historical or fictional — in which women had been silenced.

The Suffragettes. Rosa Parks. Harriet Tubman. Malala Yousafzai. Even Princess Leia.

“[Warren] was warned. She was given an explanation. Nevertheless, she persisted,” said @SenateMajLdr, providing a history of feminism. — Jamil Smith (@JamilSmith) February 8, 2017

“She was warned. She was given an explanation. Nevertheless, she persisted." #ShePersists pic.twitter.com/zibEorqbNq — Brian Jay Jones (@brianjayjones) February 8, 2017

She was warned. She was given an explanation. Nevertheless, she persisted. pic.twitter.com/ebXJRX23Re — Marc (@MarcSnetiker) February 8, 2017

That Warren had been interrupted as she was reading a 1986 letter by Coretta Scott King, the wife of civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr., added extra insult to injury for many.

It is demeaning to the memory of Coretta Scott King and harmful to the process for the Republicans to silence @SenWarren. #LetLizSpeak — Kamala Harris (@KamalaHarris) February 8, 2017

For her part, Warren did persist in reading King's letter in its entirety — outside the Senate chamber, on Facebook Live, where it garnered over 4.5 million views by early Wednesday morning.

After Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) struck down Sen. Elizabeth Warren's (D-Mass.) attempt to read a letter from Coretta Scott King on the floor of the Senate during the debate on attorney general nominee Jeff Sessions, Warren read the letter outside the doors of the Senate and streamed it live. (Facebook/Sen. Elizabeth Warren)

Read more:

From ‘nasty woman’ to ‘failing pile of garbage’: When an insult becomes a badge of honor

The silencing of Elizabeth Warren and an old Senate rule prompted by a fistfight

Read the letter Coretta Scott King wrote opposing Sessions’s 1986 federal nomination

Trump’s pick for attorney general is shadowed by race and history