What it’s really like to attend a White House holiday party
The 420-pound Ginger Bread House is part of the White House holiday decorations. (AP Photo/Evan Vucci)

When 1600 Penn. dived into a very digital holiday season this year, the humble brags on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram were virtually unavoidable: “Eggnog in the East Wing! #WHHolidays #NBD.”

Are the numerous holiday receptions held at the White House in December just as “awesome!!!” as those twitpics clearly want the rest of us believe? Or is the all-American experience of a lucky few thousand actually “no big deal”? We asked some Washington insiders to give us the official scoop, and their answers fell somewhere in between.

Here’s what happens when “The President and Mrs. Obama request the pleasure of your company at a Holiday Reception to be held at The White House.”

After receiving your golden ticket via e-mail (or even snail mail — they’re still doing that), you first have to pass the smell test. “You give them your name, date of birth, social security number, and a blood sample,” joked one veteran Hill staffer who’s spent the holidays “with” the Obamas several years in a row.

The dress code is a wintry mix of straight-from-work business attire, sparkly cocktail party and “have tuxedo, will wear to White House.” One attendee pays homage to her favorite first lady, Jacqueline Kennedy, every year. “I always pick out something classic that includes some pearls,” she said. (And yes, she made sure to snap a photo next to Jackie O’s portrait in the Gold Room.)

When you arrive at the Southeast gate in your finery don’t expect a ton of a Christmas cheer from Santa’s little helpers, a.k.a the Secret Service. “Sometimes you’re barked at,” said another source of the security cattle call, which includes no fewer than three metal detectors.

Once inside, you gawk at the impeccable decor, sip spiked eggnog (the open bar overfloweth) and, most importantly, grab a seat — stat! Buffet tables set up in the East Room and State Dining Room are groaning with lamb, lobster claws, cauliflower mac ‘n cheese, and more. But chairs? Those are scarce.

“There are very few seated tables, so once you find one, stay as long as you can,” said our Jackie O fan.

Another sad fact? You’re not actually mixing and mingling with the president and first lady. The Obamas usually hole up in the residence at the beginning of the reception before descending the grand staircase, possibly saying a few words and then heading straight to the photo line. But despite the brief cameo, the crowd goes wild.

“Everyone is cheering and showing all 32 teeth when the president and first lady enter the room,” said one invitee. “Now granted, most people don’t realize they have been invited to one of the 13 or more holiday parties.”

If lines are your thing, you can get about 90 seconds of face time with the first couple during the photo opp. We’re told they chat amiably with each guest, which can’t be easy after three hours packed with holiday cheer.

Pro tip: “I usually avoid the picture line at first because, well, I hate lines, and then I jump in at the last minute,” said our congressional staffer.

Overall, the vibe of the evening is more fancy night at the museum than cozy family gathering. Still, most attendees — even the ones who’ve been to America’s most famous address multiple times — admitted to getting into the holiday spirit. Have you seen that tree?

Said one lobbyist who’s holiday partied with both the Clintons and the Obamas, “I always walk out singing Christmas carols.”

Read more Reliable Source:

President Obama to Ryan Seacrest: ‘Michelle is hard to shop for’

Who wore the sweater vest best: Prince George, John McCain or Chuck Grassley?

Mark Pryor engaged to girlfriend Joi Whitfield

Even more surreal estate, Party Diary and Love, etc: Sign up for The Reliable Source newsletter. And follow us on Facebook and Twitter.