0816 rbpftexas

Emails (excerpted), Robin Bernstein, chair of Studies in Women, Gender, and Sexuality,

professor of African and African American Studies, professor of Studies in Women, Gender, and Sexuality, Harvard University, Aug. 25-26, 2016

6:15 p.m.

Aug. 25, 2016

It's true that I was invited to apply for a UT faculty position, and I declined to apply in large part because of the changes in Texas law to allow guns in class...

Best wishes,

Robin

__________

Robin Bernstein

Chair of Studies in Women, Gender, and Sexuality

Professor of African and African American Studies

Professor of Studies in Women, Gender, and Sexuality

Harvard University

[JOB POSTING RECEIVED BY BERNSTEIN]

Sent: Wednesday, October 21, 2015 11:12 AM

Subject: [QSTUDY-L] Associate/Full Professor in Gender and Sexuality - U Texas Austin

The University of Texas at Austin

Center for Women¹s & Gender Studies - Senior Faculty Search

Position Title Associate/Full Professor - Gender and Sexuality Studies

(2016/17)

Position Description We are particularly interested in attracting candidates

who will be able to establish a strong research program in the areas of:

queer studies, transnational gender/sexualities studies, feminist studies,

transgender studies, reproductive health, gendered, classed and/or racial

inequities.

Candidates from all disciplines are encouraged to submit applications; the

successful applicant will hold an appointment in an appropriate university

department (e.g., Sociology, American Studies, or Geography and the

Environment). They will also be expected to participate in teaching

activities at both the graduate and undergraduate levels, to have an active

publishing agenda, to attract external funding, and to exhibit a commitment

to service to the university, department and center. Additionally, the

hired candidate is expected to direct dissertations, MA reports, and honors

theses.

Qualifications A Ph.D., evidence of teaching excellence and a strong

research agenda in the applicant¹s discipline are requirements.

The successful candidate will provide intellectual leadership and vision

within the Center for Women¹s & Gender Studies and should have experience

with and commitment to an intellectual community in an interdisciplinary

center. Salary will be commensurate with rank and experience.

Application Instructions To apply, please submit a letter of interest that

includes a description of current and planned research, a curriculum vitae,

a recent writing sample, and a list of three professional references via

Interfolio at: apply.interfolio.com/32125

Please send questions to: Professor

Ben Carrington, Chair of the Search Committee...

Review of applications will begin on November

15, 2015. Applications will continue to be accepted until the position is

filled; however applications received after November 15, 2015 may not

receive full consideration.

Position funding is pending budgetary approval. The University of Texas is

an AA/EEO employer. A background check will be conducted on the successful

candidate.

Equal Employment Opportunity Statement

The University of Texas at Austin is an Equal Opportunity Employer with a

commitment to diversity at all levels. All qualified applicants will receive

consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion,

gender, national origin, age, disability or veteran status. (Compliant

with the new VEVRAA and Section 503 Rules)

From: Bernstein, Robin

Sent: Friday, August 26, 2016 9:25 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Re: FW: [QSTUDY-L] Associate/Full Professor in Gender and Sexuality - U Texas Austin

...

You have my permission to quote this part of my email:

[On Tue, Nov 17, 2015 at 1:55 PM, Bernstein, Robin wrote:]

"I've been watching the madness with the Texas legislature, and even with same-sex marriage coast to coast, I wasn't more than 50% sure I would accept the job if I were lucky enough to be offered it. I felt that I couldn't go forward and apply without at least a solid above-50% sense that I would accept the job if it were offered to me. But I am plagued with doubt and ambivalence and more than a little regret."

…

Robin