0814 perryvacationcongress

Emails, Travis Considine, deputy press secretary, Gov. Rick Perry, Aug. 15, 2014

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Monday, August 11, 2014 5:37 PM

To: 'Lucy Nashed'

Subject: Inquiry for a Gov. Perry fact check

Lucy:

Good afternoon.

Gov. Perry said the other day Congress is on a five-week vacation. Can you guide us on how he reached this conclusion? I realize, of course, Congress is in recess.

Thanks.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

PolitiFact Texas

www.politifact.com/texas

Austin American-Statesman

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Friday, August 15, 2014 9:55 AM

Subject: RE: Inquiry for a Gov. Perry fact check

Lucy:

Good morning.

I didn’t hear back from you on this fact check. I learned since sending the note below that what Perry referred to as a five-week vacation is an annual congressional recess in accord with established federal law, an act that took effect in October 1970.

Moreover, members of Congress spend time in the recess doing constituent work including public appearances.

It doesn’t appear to be a vacation.

Let me know if you think we missed something here? I expect we’ll complete our research soon.

g.

(Considine)

11:52 a.m.

A definition for vacation is “the action of leaving something one previously occupied.” Do you know the ratio of all 535 members of Congress that are actually working in their districts, spending time with their families and friends, or traveling abroad? Also, recess sounds a lot like what I enjoyed so much in elementary school, except my teachers always made me finish my work before hitting the jungle gym. Or maybe the Governor uses this phrase as hyperbole, a rhetorical device meant to reflect the reality that Americans are overwhelmingly frustrated with dysfunction in Washington.

In light of continued federal inaction to secure our border, Governor Perry has stepped up to protect the residents of Texas and our country from criminal aliens, narco-traffickers and transnational gangs. The strong and decisive actions he has taken to disrupt illegal activity along the border stand in stark contrast to the Washington dysfunction that has delivered no solutions to this serious problem. What solutions to the crises can Congress provide if they’re not in session?

Please consider all of this in your analysis.

Regards,

Travis Considine

Deputy Press Secretary, Office of the Governor

(From Gardner Selby)

12:50 p.m.

Travis:

Thanks for this.

I hope our story presents Perry’s contrast clearly.

Still, we don’t yet see a factual basis for calling the legally mandated recess during which members continue to work a “vacation.”

Below, do you mean to say the governor was exaggerating for rhetorical effect and didn’t mean to say the Congress is actually on vacation?

g.

(Considine)

1:27 p.m.

The Legislative Reorganization Act of 1970 doesn’t prevent the lawmakers from adjourning in the first place or coming back early if both houses agree to do so. Lawmakers can choose to recess later by passing an extension resolution. In fact, this exception “has become an established precedent of sorts, as the Senate has met the deadline only 11 times in the last 40 years.” Alas, it appeared that Harry Reid was in a hurry to get out of town this year.

The Governor was not exaggerating. If the federal government was as committed to securing the border as Governor Perry, Congress could have chosen to stay in Washington and address the urgent problem rather than adjourning.