LeBron James jokes that he’s ready to settle GOAT debate with Michael Jordan
LeBron James has a message for Michael Jordan. (Harry How/Getty Images)

The Week 9 “Sunday Night Football” matchup between the Patriots and Packers will feature two quarterbacks — Tom Brady and Aaron Rodgers — who are mentioned any time the “greatest of all time” argument comes up. And to promote this battle of GOATs, NBC brought in another:

How do you settle the debate over who is the ‘Greatest of All Time?’@Jumpman23 wants to see it happen head-to-head. pic.twitter.com/L4v6kOvJfF — SNF on NBC (@SNFonNBC) October 29, 2018

“A lot of talk going on these days about who is the greatest ever,” Jordan says in the promo, which aired during Sunday night’s game between the Vikings and Saints. “About who has the titles, the raw talent, the most clutch moments. I get it, it’s a tough call. I mean, even the jersey numbers are the same. But maybe the best way to settle this debate is to play it out, head to head.

“I’ll watch that.”

You know who else was watching? LeBron James, the most frequent other side of the coin to Jordan whenever the NBA GOAT argument flares up. Tongue planted firmly in cheek early Monday morning, he threw down the GOAT gauntlet via Twitter, suggesting that they perhaps take the argument to the court.

IM READY!!!! Oh my bad I thought, maybe u were, umm never mind back to my regular schedule program https://t.co/4JmeesffNu — LeBron James (@KingJames) October 29, 2018

James moved past Dirk Nowitzki into sixth place on the NBA’s career scoring list during Saturday’s loss to the Spurs. He has 31,202 career points, only 217 behind Wilt Chamberlain for fifth place — if he keeps up his current 27.3 points-per-game average, he should pass the Big Dipper sometime in mid-November — and 1,090 points behind Jordan for fourth place. Barring an injury, James should surpass Jordan, his fellow No. 23, later this season.

But unlike Brady and Rodgers on Sunday night, Jordan and James will never get to play in any sort of sanctioned head-to-head matchup, and the GOAT argument will burn forever.

Read more from The Post:

Why did the Cavs fire Tyronn Lue now and which coach might be next?

Scott Brooks says Bradley Beal and John Wall had angry words because they’re frustrated

The Lakers might have suspensions to thank for stumbling into their most effective lineup