Blue Whale Penis
When it comes to penis size the blue whales penis is the largest of any known living animal.

In order to provide the whale with a more streamlined design when swimming and to protect its sexual organs from injury the blue whales penis is often hidden within a genital slit during normal daily activities and becomes exposed during sexual intercourse.

Penis size for the blue whale can vary depending on genetics and the overall size of the whale with the average penis length estimated to be between 8 – 10 ft. long.

Interestingly although their penis is relatively long the average diameter of the penis is estimated to be about 1 ft., with larger whales growing between 15 – 18 inches in diameter.

In terms of weight the estimated weight of a blue whales penis is assumed to be between 390 – 990 lbs. depending on the penises overall size.

The testicles are also relatively large weighing in at up to 150 lbs. per testicle with smaller testicles weighing 100 lbs or less.

During sexual intercourse as much as 30 – 40 pints of sperm may be ejaculated from a blue whales penis in a single session.

Not only is the large amount of sperm that the blue whale produces useful for maximizing the likelihood of producing a successful offspring, in some whale species it’s also good for trying to wash out the sperm of competing males while also increasing the chances of being the one that impregnates the female whale.

Since whales are generally non-monogamous creatures it is common for some species to mate with several partners during a single mating season, therefore each male that mates with a female whale cannot guarantee that he will be the only male to mate with her or that he will successfully pass his genes on to a new generation.

For the blue whale mating generally takes place during the colder fall/winter months where they migrate to warmer climates in order to bare offspring and begin reproducing.

During this migration trip the blue whale will forgo eating for up to 4 months living off of its fat stores that it gained during feeding season.

Mating season continues until the end of the winter time at which point the whales will begin their long journey back to their feeding grounds to stock up on food and replenish their energy until the next mating season comes around.

Additional information about the blue whale

In addition to having the largest penis of all known living animals the blue whale is also the largest living animal in the world.

When fully grown the blue whale can grow to lengths in excess of 90 ft. long with the largest whales growing over 105 ft. long.

On average however these massive marine mammals can reach lengths of 70 – 90 ft. when fully grown and weigh around 150 tons, however some blue whales have been estimated to weigh up to 180 tons.

Even at birth these whales are large in size with the baby blue whale measuring 20 – 26 ft. long, which is about the size of an adult killer whale (the largest of the dolphin species).

What about other whale species?

When it comes to the penis size of other whale species less research has been obtained so information regards these facts is somewhat speculative.

From observations of gray whales it is estimated that the gray whales penis measures around 5 – 7 ft. long when it is exposed and erect.

In regards to the humpback whale penis numerous statements claim that a large humpback whale may grow a penis as large as 10 ft. long , however one observation of a humpback whale estimated the whales penis to be 12 long and the whales penis was given the name “Pink Floyd”.

Given the fact that the average size of a humpback whale is 40 – 60 ft. long the mention of a 12 ft. long penis seems speculative.

If we assume that the length of a baleen whales penis size is up to 8% – 15% of its total body length then the humpback whales penis would measure a maximum of 7.2 ft. long with a minimum size of around 4 ft. long.

Looking at the blue whales penis we can assume that it measures around 8% – 15% of the whales total body length so that percentage size is being used as a possible comparison to the actual size of a gray whale and humpback whales possible penis size.

Part of the reason it is so difficult to pin point actual sizes is because penis size in relation to total body length can vary greatly depending on the whales species.

For instance scientific studies have estimated that a blue whales penis may be an average of 3 times the size of the typical sei whales penis.

Seeing as how the sei whale can grow to an average length of 40 – 60 ft.long the penis would measure smaller than the 8% – 15% estimate of the blue whale.

While uncommon it is important to point out that abnormally large penises can also occur in marine mammals such as whales.

One estimate based off of a partially acquired blue whale penis stated that had the full length of the penis been measured it would have been a total length of around 16 ft. long with a weight of between 750 – 1,000 lbs., so it is possible that a gray whale or humpback whale may also grow an abnormally large penis.

Note: Please remember that the numbers presented in this part of the article are speculative and some of these estimates are based on observations rather than actual measurements.

Given the fact that there are around 90 known species of cetacea (cetaceans include whales, dolphins and porpoises) there are likely to be huge variations in regards to overall penis size, genital length, testicle size and so on among various reproductive components.

Reproductive similarities and differences

When it comes to reproduction among various whale species there are certain similarities and differences that can be pointed out.

For example male whales, dolphins and porpoises all have a genital slit that is used to protect their penises from injury while minimizing drag as they swim.

As with humans and elephants cetaceans such as whales also lack a penis bone (baculum) which other male animals possess to assist them with sexual intercourse.

Reproduction among these marine mammals can vary from one species to the next.

Some whale species may migrate thousands of miles from their feeding grounds to their mating grounds in order to mate and give birth.

Other species may stay within a specific environment throughout the year.

The length of reproduction can also vary with birth cycles occurring every 2 – 6 years or more among various species and gestation periods lasting anywhere from 10 – 17 months.

After birth females will generally nurse their child by feeding it milk and nursing may continue for 6 months to 2 years with some species having even longer nursing periods.

If you would like to learn more about the mating and feeding periods of whales check out our articles on mating season and feeding season.

Other animals with interesting penises

1)When it comes to land animals it is believed that the African elephant has the largest penis of all with measurements of around 5 – 6 ft. long!

2) Sharks, snakes and lizards actually two penises or organs if you will.

While it is unknown as to why they possess two sex organs it is believed that these animal alternate the use of their sex organs in order to maximize reproductive success.

3) Unlike humans, elephants and cetaceans many species of placental mammals are known to have a penis bone (aka Baculum).

The purpose of the penis bone is to help the mammals penis maintain its hardness so that it can properly fertilize the females egg.

4) Most male species of bird do not have a penis.

Instead these animals have what is known as a cloaca and during reproduction the birds will touch their cloacae together in order to pass their semen along to the female and impregnate her.

5) The Argonaut has a detectable penis (actually a removable arm containing the males sperm) that can separate from the octopuses body in order to impregnate the female.

6) The Phallostethus cuulong (sometimes referred to as the penis headed fish) is a fish that carries its genitals on its head allowing it to grab onto the female fish with its mouth while fertilizing her.

7) The Goniobranchus reticulatus is a sea slug that is able to detach its penis after sex.

What makes this animal even more fascinating is that it is able to grow a new penis within 24 hours of detaching its old one.

8) The echidna (also known as the spiny anteater) has four penis heads, however it is unable to fit all four heads onto the females reproductive organs at the same time.

It is assumed that the extra heads may take turns in order to help impregnate the female echidna.