How do I use Group Chat?
Group Chat lets you chat with up to 256 people at once. It's a great way to stay in touch with family, friends or colleagues. Learn more about Group Chat features below:

Creating a group

You may create an unlimited number of groups. To create a group:

Open WhatsApp and go to the Chats screen. At the top of the Chats screen, tap the New Group button. Note: you will need to have an existing chat before creating a new Group Chat. Add group participants by selecting or typing the name of the contact. Tap Next once you are done adding participants. Add an icon for the group by tapping on the empty photo box. This will show up next to the group in your Chats list. Add a name for the group. Tap Create when you are finished.

Adding participants

You must be a group admin to add participants to an existing Group Chat. A group can have 256 participants. To add participants:

Go to the group in WhatsApp. Tap the subject of the group. Tap Add Participants. Search for or select contacts to add to the Group Chat. Tap Add to confirm.

Inviting to Groups via Links

If you are the group admin, you can invite people to join a group simply by sharing a link with them. To share a group invite link:

Go to the group in WhatsApp. Tap the subject of the group. Tap Group Invite Link. Tap to share the link within WhatsApp or to another app.

The admin can use the Revoke link option at any time to make the previous link invalid and create a new link. Anyone with WhatsApp can follow an invite link to join this group, so only share it with people you trust.

Note: Use this feature only with trusted individuals. It is possible for someone to forward the link to other people. If so, those other people can also join the group. In that case, the group admin will not be asked to approve them before they join.

Removing participants

You must be a group admin to remove participants from an existing Group Chat. To remove participants:

Go to the group in WhatsApp. Tap the subject of the group. Tap the participant you wish to remove. Tap Remove {participant} in the menu.

Assigning admins to a group

Any admin in the group can make a participant an admin. A group can have an unlimited number of admins. To make a participant an admin:

Go to the group in WhatsApp. Tap the subject of the group. Tap the participant you wish to make as an admin. Tap Make Group Admin.

Changing the group subject

Any of the group's participants can change its subject. To do so:

Go to the group in WhatsApp. Tap the subject of the group. Tap the group subject. Enter a new subject for the group, then tap Save.

Changing the group icon

Any of the group's participants can change its icon. To do so:

Go to the group in WhatsApp. Tap the subject of the group. Tap the current icon, then tap on Edit on the next screen. Choose to Take Photo, Choose Photo, or Search Web for a new image.

Muting group notifications

You can mute a group for a specified period of time. You will still receive messages sent to the group, but your phone will not vibrate or make noise when they are received. To mute a group:

On the chats screen swipe the name of the group to the left. Tap More and then Mute. Select a time period.

Exiting a group

If you exit a group, you will be removed from the group but will still see it in your Chats list, and you will be able to read the chat history. If you are the only group admin and you exit a group, a participant is chosen at random to become the new admin. To exit a group:

On the chats screen swipe the name of the group to the left. Tap More and then Exit Group. Confirm by tapping Exit Group.

Deleting a group

After you exit a group, you will see the option to delete the group. When you delete the group, you will no longer see the group in your Chats list and the chat history will be erased. To delete a group (after exiting a group):

On the chats screen swipe the name of the group to the left. Tap More and then Delete Group. Confirm by tapping Delete Group.

Learn more about Group Chat on: Android | Windows Phone | Nokia S40 | BlackBerry | Nokia S60 | BlackBerry 10

Cheers,

WhatsApp Support Team