Parole denied for Vanessa Coleman Copyright by WATE - All rights reserved Vanessa Coleman [ + - ] Video

Stephanie Beecken, WATE 6 On Your Side Reporter - KNOXVILLE (WATE) - Parole was denied Wednesday for one of the suspects convicted in connection with the 2007 murder and carjacking of a young Knoxville couple.

Vanessa Coleman was found guilty of facilitating the rape, kidnapping and murder of Channon Christian and Chris Newsom. She was sentenced to 35 years in prison.

Copyright by WATE - All rights reserved Vanessa Coleman

Copyright by WATE - All rights reserved Vanessa Coleman

A parole board in Nashville voted to deny her parole Wednesday afternoon.

During the parole hearing, many people were emotional and tearing up as the victims' families detailed what happened to Channon and Chris.

One board member asked about her journal entry where Coleman wrote after the murders she loved the fun and adventures she had in Tennessee.

Copyright by WATE - All rights reserved Gary and Deena Christian

Copyright by WATE - All rights reserved Gary and Deena Christian

"That statement has nothing to do with the case, sir, and that's all I can say," said Coleman.

Several people spoke asking to deny parole, including State Sen. Randy McNally.

"This was not a mistake. It was the cold blooded murder, torture, kidnapping, theft and then bragging about it," said Sen. McNally.

Deena and Gary Christian described the pain they still feel over the loss of their daughter.

"I miss my daughter. I would give anything I've got for 10 minutes [with her.] Coleman took her from me," said Gary Christian.

Copyright by WATE - All rights reserved State Sen. Randy McNally

Copyright by WATE - All rights reserved State Sen. Randy McNally

Coleman told the board she wasn't in control of the crimes and asked for parole so she could move to Kentucky live with her parents and get a job.

"I made a mistake, and I can take responsibility for my mistake, but I'm a changed person. My plans are to become a cosmetologist and do hair," said Coleman.

All five board members denied parole due to the seriousness of the offenses. She will not be up for parole again until December 2020.

The victim's families say they will be there to continue to fight for justice.

More than 45 people attended the parole hearing to oppose parole for Coleman. All five parole board members voted to deny parole.

A state appeals court on Tuesday upheld the convictions and rejected Coleman's bid for a new trial.

Coleman will be up for parole again in 2020.