washingtonpost.com: Jones v. Clinton Resources and Links
41. In January, 1994, Plaintiff visited her family and friends in Arkansas. While Jones was in Arkansas, Ms. Ballentine telephoned Jones to arrange a meeting for lunch. During the telephone conversation, Ballentine read to Plaintiff a paragraph from an article published in the January, 1994 issue of The American Spectator magazine regarding Plaintiff's hotel suite encounter with Clinton. Attached hereto, and incorporated herein, as Exhibit "A" is a copy of The American Spectator article.

42. The American Spectator account asserts that a woman by the name of "Paula" told an unnamed trooper (obviously Defendant Ferguson), who had escorted "Paula" to Clinton's hotel room, that "she was available to be Clinton's regular girlfriend if he so desired," thus implying a consummated and satisfying sexual encounter with Clinton, as well as a willingness to continue a sexual relationship with him. These assertions are untrue. The article, using information apparently derived from Ferguson, also incorrectly asserts that the encounter took place in the evening.

43. The American Spectator account also asserted that the troopers' "'official' duties included facilitating Clinton's cheating on his wife. This meant that, on the State payroll, and using State time, vehicles and resources, they were instructed by Clinton on a regular basis to approach women and to solicit their telephone numbers for the Governor, to drive him in State vehicles to rendezvous points and guard him during sexual encounters; to secure hotel rooms and other meeting places for sex; . . ." and various other things to facilitate Clinton's sex life including "to help Clinton cover-up his activities by keeping tabs on Hillary's whereabouts and lying to Hillary about her husband's whereabouts." Although this pattern of conduct by Clinton may be true, the magazine article concluded, evidently from interviews with troopers from Clinton's Security Detail, including Ferguson, that " all of the women appear to have been willing participants in the affairs and liaisons [emphasis added]."

44. Since Jones ("Paula") was one of the women preyed upon by Clinton and his troopers, including by Defendant Ferguson, in the manner described above, those who read this magazine account could conclude falsely that Jones ("Paula") had a sexual relationship and affair with Clinton. Jones' reputation within her community was thus seriously damaged.

45. Jones realized that those persons who already knew about the hotel room encounter could identify her as the "Paula" mentioned in The American Spectator article. She became extremely upset because, inter alia , she feared that the statements in the magazine would damage her relationship with her husband, her family, and her friends and acquaintances, some of whom might have believed that she had agreed to be Clinton's "girlfriend" at a time when she was engaged to Mr. Jones.

46. On January 8, 1994, at approximately 12:00 noon, Jones and Ballentine were dining at the Golden Corral Steakhouse in North Little Rock, Arkansas. Trooper Ferguson, who happened to be dining with his wife at this restaurant, came over to their table to talk to Jones. Since Jones believed that the ultimate source of the report in The American Spectator of the hotel suite encounter was Trooper Ferguson, she confronted him on this matter. Trooper Ferguson stated that he was sorry that Jones' first name had appeared in the magazine article but that he had purposely concealed her last name and place of employment from those to whom he recounted the incident. Trooper Ferguson also said that he knew Jones had rebuffed Mr. Clinton's sexual advances because, "Clinton told me you wouldn't do anything anyway, Paula."

47. Because the false statements appearing in The American Spectator article that Jones was willing to have sex with Clinton (and the innuendo that she had already done so when she left the hotel suite) threatened her marriage, her friendships, and her family relationships, Plaintiff spoke publicly on February 11, 1994, that she was the "Paula" mentioned in The American Spectator article, that she had rebuffed Clinton's sexual advances, and that she had not expressed a willingness to be his girlfriend. Jones and her lawyer asked that Clinton acknowledge the incident, state that Jones had rejected Clinton's advances, and apologize to Jones.

48. Clinton, who is now President of the United States of America responded to Jones' request for an apology by having his press spokespersons deliver a statement on his behalf that the incident never happened, and that he never met Plaintiff. Thus, by innuendo and effect, Clinton publicly branded Plaintiff a liar. Moreover, as recently as the week this Complaint was filed, Clinton, through his White House aides, stated that Plaintiff's account of the hotel room incident was untrue and a "cheap political trick."

49. Clinton hired an attorney, who, as Clinton's agent, said that Jones' account "is really just another effort to rewrite the results of the election [ i.e. for President of the United States] and . . . distract the President from his agenda." The attorney further asked the question: "Why are these claims being brought now, three years after the fact?" The attorney also asked how Jones' allegations could be taken "seriously." These comments by Clinton's counsel, on behalf of Clinton, imply that Jones is a liar

50. Dee Dee Meyers, White House Spokeswoman, said of Jones' allegations: "It's just not true." Thus, the pattern of defaming Jones continues to this date.

51. Clinton knows that Jones' allegations are true and that his, and his attorney's, spokespersons', and agents' denials are false.

52. The outrageous nature of Clinton's branding of Jones as a liar is aggravated in that a greater stigma and reputation loss is suffered by Jones by the statements of the President of the United States in whom the general public reposes trust and confidence in the integrity of the holder of that office.

53. Clinton, a member of the Arkansas State Bar, knew or should have known on May 8, 1991, and thereafter, that Arkansas law provides that harassment, including the touching or attempt or threat to do so which subjects the victim to offensive or potentially offensive physical contact, is a criminal violation of Arkansas Code Annotated 5-71-208.

54. While Jones was in Clinton's hotel suite, Jones was falsely imprisoned by Clinton's intentional restriction of her personal freedom of movement without legal right. Clinton's use of force in pulling Jones toward him, his words and acts, and the armed police guard outside the door, in conjunction with the impressive atmosphere of her being alone with the Governor of the State who was also her superior's boss, caused her to be initially and temporarily afraid to terminate the meeting.

55. The statements, acts, and omissions of Clinton's agents, servants, and employees who acted under his explicit and implicit instructions and supervision, during the pertinent periods herein when he was Governor of Arkansas, and after he became President, bind Clinton under the doctrines of agency, joint conduct, master-servant, respondeat superior , and conspiracy.

56. The actions of the Arkansas state employees, including Defendant Ferguson and other agents of Clinton were taken under color of state law.