Parent’s complaints send mayor and El Rancho High teacher Salcido on administrative leave
PICO RIVERA – Mayor Gregory Salcido, a history teacher at El Rancho High School, has been placed on administrative leave by the school district after a parent complained about Salcido’s classroom conduct.

UPDATE: Teacher Gregory Salcido caught on video degrading military

Salcido said he is being targeted because of his unconventional world views.

Parent Gerald Kelly, 42, said he complained to the El Rancho Unified School District Tuesday. He said his daughter Savanah, 16, told him Salcido threatened her, made inappropriate comments about race and insulted other students and parents.

Salcido denied making threats or derogatory comments toward students or parents, and said some of his remarks to his 54-student world history class were taken out of context and exaggerated.

“There’s no way this individual can truthfully say she was threatened, discriminated against or harmed,” said Salcido, who has taught for 14 years. “The examples (used in class) offended her father’s political sensibilities and now we’re in this situation. It’s a matter of conveniently altering semantics.”

John Lopez, assistant superintendent of human resources for El Rancho Unified, said he couldn’t comment on personnel matters. Salcido said he was placed on leave Tuesday afternoon.

“This is a positive thing for everybody involved, and we’re not treating Mr. Salcido any different because he’s the mayor,” said El Rancho School Board member Rachel Canchola. “This tells the student we’re taking the allegations seriously and tells the teacher we’re going to investigate it and go from there.”

Savanah Kelly said she was talking to a classmate when Salcido said, “shut up Kelly before I kill you.”

Salcido said he keeps discipline lighthearted by making over-the-top statements meant to be humorous.

“I can understand how that would bother a third party, but it’s out of context. That’s not at all what I meant and at no time did this individual feel threatened,” he said.

Students at El Rancho on Wednesday described Salcido as a popular, effective teacher who often jokes with students.

“He’s like one of the best teachers I’ve ever had,” said student Oscar Navarrete, 17. “He actually teaches. He doesn’t just go from the book.”

Gerald Kelly, a former Marine, said he was angered by his daughter’s recanting of Salcido’s classroom lecture content about topics like religion, the military and gay marriage.

“This is the mayor and he’s out here destroying these kids’ minds,” Kelly said. “Why allow him to lead this city when he stands for non-religious beliefs and that it’s OK to be against the Bible, (says it’s OK to be) homosexual and defames people in the military?”

Salcido, 41, said he blends traditional teaching methods with unconventional ones and called his lessons “intense.” He said he teaches students history by making parallels between the past and present.

His classroom discussions have brought up examples of religion shaping public policy and exploitation by governments of their fighting forces, he said.

Salcido said he believes gay marriage is a civil right and has been unabashed about his unorthodox views about institutional religion. In February, Salcido was criticized by local pastors for removing a Bible from the City Council dais, saying it violated the U.S. Constitution’s establishment clause.

“As a public figure I understand I’ve got to be able to take it, but that’s not going to make me back down from what I know is right,” Salcido said. “I’m not happy about the situation, however I support the school district’s desire to proceed with due diligence.”

bethania.palma@sgvn.com

562-698-0955, ext. 3028