Made In America Week Recap
Since President Donald J. Trump set foot in the White House, he has stood behind American businesses, strengthening our country and reinforcing our position amongst world leadership. The President dedicated this week to highlighting and engaging businesses across the country, expanding partnerships and products made within our borders. “Made in America Week” demonstrated President Trump’s commitment to better the shared American experience, and to unite a common pride in our country.

On Monday, President Trump hosted companies from across the country at the White House for the Made in America Product Showcase. In order to celebrate and highlight each state’s effort and commitment to American-made goods, businesses from each of the 50 states displayed their products made and produced in the United States. Products ranged from sandwiches, to wool blankets, to firetrucks; each business connected by the common thread of American excellence.

The President visited and conversed with members of each company assuring that the interest of workers in the United States would not be pushed aside for global projects. After visiting each display, President Trump addressed business leaders attending the day’s event in the East Room of the White House, recognizing the vital contributions of American workers and job creators to our Nation’s prosperity.

The President then signed a proclamation, declaring July 17 “Made in America Day” and July 16 through July 22, as “Made in America Week,” calling upon Americans to pay a special tribute to all those who work every day to make America great.

On Tuesday, Secretary Ryan Zinke and the Department of the Interior hosted the All-American Outdoor Experience. Following the concept of visionaries like President Theodore Roosevelt, the showcase displayed American-made RVs, boats, and other accessories that enhance the American outdoor experience.

On Wednesday, President Trump and Vice President Mike Pence, along with Department of Labor Secretary Alex Acosta, Director of the White House Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy Peter Navarro, and other members of the White House staff, hosted a Made in America Roundtable in the East Room of the White House. Twenty companies that manufacture their products in the United States attended the roundtable discussion to highlight the importance of manufacturing products in American factories using American workers.

President Trump also signed an Executive Order establishing a Presidential Advisory Council on Infrastructure. The purpose of the order is to advance infrastructure projects to create high-quality jobs for American workers, enhance productivity, improve quality of life, protect the environment, and strengthen economic growth. In pursuing its mission, the Council will make findings and recommendations concerning a myriad of subjects including; prioritizing the Nation’s infrastructure needs, developing funding and financing options capable of generating new infrastructure investments over the next 10 years, and promoting advanced manufacturing and infrastructure-related technological innovation.

On Thursday, President Trump, Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price, and Assistant to the President for Intragovernmental and Technology Initiatives Reed Cordish welcomed the CEOs of Corning, Merck, and Pfizer pharmaceutical companies to the White House to announce a new pharmaceutical glass packaging initiative. Corning, Merck, and Pfizer plan to return the $4 billion pharmaceutical glass manufacturing to the United States to create more than 4,000 new high-tech jobs for Americans.

On Saturday, the President traveled to Norfolk, Virginia, where he participated in the commissioning of the USS Gerald R. Ford. The USS Ford is the world's most advanced aircraft carrier and is a great asset to the US Navy, further cementing our position as the most powerful Navy in the world.

This week, in accordance with “American Heroes Week,” the President will be celebrating numerous Americans for their courage, outstanding achievements, and noble qualities.