UNU-WIDER : UNU-WIDER
Request for research proposals Regional growth and development for Southern Africa’s prosperity UNU-WIDER, together with SA-TIED partners the National Treasury of the Republic of South Africa (NT) and the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), invite proposals from qualified researchers for high quality economic and/or political economy... Closing date: wider.unu.edu

Request for research proposals Supporting development policies towards sustainable livelihoods, industrialization and resource mobilization in Tanzania In order to enhance the understanding of the dynamics, challenges, and opportunities in the focus areas outlined above, UNU-WIDER together with the UI invite proposals from qualified researchers under the three research themes, particularly in the... Closing date: wider.unu.edu

Seminar Charles Gore on Inequality Reduction as a Global Goal: The Nature and Logic of SDG 10 Charles Gore will present at the WIDER Seminar Series on 19 June 2019. Abstract – Inequality Reduction as a Global Goal: The Nature and Logic of SDG 10 An important feature of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) agreed as part of the 2030... UNU-WIDER, Katajanokanlaituri 6 B, Helsinki, Finland Past event

Vacancies Procurement Assistant UNU-WIDER is looking for an outstanding procurement or administrative professional with strong commitment and potential to support the Procurement Team of the Institute. Closing date: 14 June 2019, 23:59 UTC+3 Reference number: 2019/UNU/WIDER/PSA/PA/38 Closing date:

Request for research proposals Transforming informal work and livelihoods UNU-WIDER invites proposals from qualified researchers for papers examining the constraints to the growth of informal enterprises and livelihood enhancement for the working poor in the informal sector. Submission deadline: 15 July 2019, 23:59 UTC+3 Closing date: wider.unu.edu

Conference Transforming economies - for better jobs United Nations University World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU-WIDER) in partnership with the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) will organize a three-day conference on transforming... – United Nations Conference Centre, Rajadamnern Nok Avenue, Bangkok, Thailand None

WIDER Seminar Series The WIDER Seminar Series showcases the latest research on key topics in development economics. At the weekly sessions, early-career and senior researchers present recent and ongoing work related to UNU-WIDER’s current work programme. In... WIDER Seminar Series