030414 nsfpftexasemails

Emails, Dana Topousis, acting division director for public affairs, National Science Foundation, March 28-April 1, 2014

12:31 p.m.

March 28, 2014

NSF did fund this award in 2010 (NSF award #1010974). The Civilians, Inc., a Brooklyn, NY, theatre company, developed an innovative, out-of-the-box approach to exposing U.S. citizens to science. The project represents the unique cultural leverage of theater in its attempt to inspire the public’s imagination and curiosity about basic science and its relation to their everyday lives.

This venture, like other more traditional NSF-funded informal science education projects (e.g., interactive science exhibits, IMAX films, science-based television programming), aims to educate through a focus on understanding the scientific method, its applications, and its unique ability to extract knowledge about our complex natural world. It presents the pursuit of fundamental knowledge through basic research in a neutral manner that does not advocate any position regarding climate change or conservation research.

Thanks.

-Dana

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Friday, March 28, 2014 2:50 PM

To: Topousis, Dana

Subject: RE: Urgent inquiry for a fact check, PolitiFact Texas

Thanks. I see the amount listed is $697,177 and that the document says it’s a “continuing grant.” Does that mean more money has been, or will be, awarded for this production?

Who should I call with the project (play) itself?

What is your agency title?

g.

2:49 p.m.

A continuing grant means it was awarded in 2010 and the funds are for 2-5 years of the project (I believe this award is a 4-year award, so it expires in 2014). The grant started in 2010, when the grant funds would have been distributed to the grantee.

Regarding the award, you should contact the Principal Investigator at The Civilians, Inc., whose name is listed on the award as Marion Young. The number there is 718-230-3330.

You can say I’m an NSF spokesperson.

-Dana

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, March 28, 2014 4:31 PM

To: 'Topousis, Dana'

Subject: RE: Urgent inquiry for a fact check, PolitiFact Texas

Was this an unusual grant award or in step with previous awards for similar productions? Please be detailed.

12:16 p.m.

March 31, 2014

Like other projects NSF funds, “The Great Immensity” was highly rated by reviewers, who are external experts in the field who review proposals receive by NSF based on NSF criteria—intellectual merit and broader impacts. These external reviewers rate each proposal based on NSF’s criteria. The project in question represents the unique cultural leverage of theater in its attempt to inspire the public’s imagination and curiosity about basic science and its relation to their everyday lives. The play uses places and stories drawn from real interviews to help the public better appreciate how we benefit from science and to promote an inquisitive curiosity about the natural world, a curiosity that is an essential ingredient in basic science literacy.

NSF’s Research on Learning in Formal and Informal Settings (DRL) portfolio, which funded The Great Immensity, invests in projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM learning for people of all ages. It builds on educational research and practice and seeks to increase interest in, engagement with, and understanding of STEM by individuals of all ages and backgrounds through self-directed STEM learning experiences.

-Dana

11:42 a.m.

April 1, 2014

While the NSF research portfolio this falls under--Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)--contains projects at the intersection of science and the arts, NSF’s funding this kind of project – a theatrical production – is rare. There has been an increase in the number of funding proposals AISL has received and reviewed that describe projects at the science & arts interface.

Thanks for reaching out to NSF.

-Dana