0816 parentpftexas

Email, Rachel Zucker, Aug. 25, 2016

On Thu, Aug 25, 2016 at 5:44 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Hello from Austin. I write because on behalf of the Austin American-Statesman’s PolitiFact Texas project, I am fact-checking this claim by Lisa Moore, UT professor of English, in a recent NPR interview: “We already have concrete examples of faculty who have declined to apply for jobs here at the university or who, once offered jobs, have turned them down when they realized that this policy would go into effect, students changing their minds about coming to our graduate and undergraduate programs, and invited speakers declining to come when they realized that we couldn't guarantee that they would give their talk in a gun-free space.”

The other day, Professor Moore forwarded to me what she described as an email you sent in November to UT about your son not applying to the Plan II program (as pasted below). Is this an email from you and does it represent your reaction to the Texas law? Did your son not apply afterward? Anything else for us to consider? I ask these questions with the intent of considering your answers for our story, which I hope to complete soon. I would be happy to hear back by email or phone.

PASTE:

Dear UT, I want you to know that my son, Moses Goren, is a straight A student at Hunter College High School (in NYC) who has expressed interest in applying to your Plan II program at UT (Austin). He and I have decided, however, that he will not apply to any schools that have campus carry laws. We believe that guns should not be allowed on college campuses and that guns present a serious physical danger for faculty and students. If you were to make UT Austin a safer place by making it illegal to bring a gun on campus, I would eagerly and proudly have Moses apply to your esteemed school. Thank you, Rachel Zucker

?

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

6:08 p.m.

We visited UT Austin last year when I was there to give a lecture. We had a great time and were very impressed with the course offerings and high level of engagement in the graduate writing program and the Plan II undergrads. We had great food, enjoyed the weather, walked all over the place and saw a movie at the Alamo. But, despite all that, UT Austin is not on Moses's list of schools to which he is applying in a few months. Both of us feel even clearer about this than we did when I wrote that email. The rampant gun violence and lack of commonsense gun control in this country should be a source of unmitigated shame for our leaders and legislators. I heard Professor Moore speak on NPR and was nodding my head saying, "yes, yes, yes" to all she said especially her phrase "armed with reason." I fervently hope UT will come to its senses and ban guns on campus. As a college professor myself (I teach at NYU) I am certain that guns have no place on college campuses or in school. For both political reasons and safety reasons I will not spend my tuition dollars at an institution that is not willing to value the wellbeing and safety of my precious and wonderful child. All our children deserve to study and argue and learn and grown in gun-free zones.

…

Rachel