Hunting Licenses and Tags
Q: I lost my California Hunter Education Certificate. How can I get a copy? A: Duplicate hunter education certificates can be issued to any person who completed and passed a hunter education class after 1989. If the student took the class after that date, they should contact their nearest CDFW License Sales Office to obtain a duplicate. CDFW does not have records prior to 1989. If the class was completed prior to 1989, the hunter should contact the original instructor, club, or organization where the course was taught to obtain a duplicate. If the hunter is unable to obtain a duplicate through these means, they will have to repeat the course. Q: Who must show proof of hunter education when applying for a California hunting license? A: California requires hunter education training for ANYONE who has not formerly held a California hunting license, who does not have a hunter education certificate of completion, or who does not have a current, valid, hunting license or a hunting license issued in either of the two previous years from any state, province, European Country or South Africa. Q: Where can I find information about Hunter Safety/Education classes? A: Visit CDFW's Hunter Education page or call your nearest Hunter Education District Staff. Q: How old do you have to be to take a hunter education course? A: There isn't a minimum age requirement to take the course, but young children may find the course demanding. A Hunter Education Instructor may be able help you decide whether your child is old enough to take the course. Q: Can I take a hunter education course online? A: Yes and no. California does have an on-line course, however, the on-line course will not get you a valid hunter education certificate. There are currently four options for you. Hunter-Ed.com, Huntercourse.com, California Hunter Ed Course, and the International Hunter Education Association. These sites have an on-line course that you can run through at your own pace. Once you have completed one of the above on-line courses, you will still need to attend a 4 hour follow-up class with a certified hunter education instructor. The benefit of taking the on-line course is having the ability to study at a pace that works for you and to only have to take a 4 hour follow-up classroom session versus a 10+ hour class. A list of home study/on-line instructors is located on the Class Schedule page. Q: I don't have time to take a California Hunter Education course. What can I do? A: CDFW offers a comprehensive equivalency testing program at CDFW Offices. You may request information on this method of testing from the regional offices. There is a non-refundable, administrative fee required to take the examination. If you fail the examination, you must take a hunter education class to become certified. Warning! Not all states accept the equivalency certificate as proof of hunter education. All states will accept the certificate of completion that is awarded upon completion of a hunter education class. Q: Will you accept a Hunter Education Certificate from another state? A: Yes. Q: I have a hunting license from another country. Why won't you accept it as proof of hunter education? A: CDFW's Hunter Education Program Administrator determines which countries provide acceptable hunter education training. You may contact him by email at Robert.Pelzman@wildlife.ca.gov or by telephone at (916) 653-1235 for more information. Q: What will I learn in the Hunter Education Course and how long will it take? A: The Hunter Education Course consists of a minimum of 10 hours of classroom, homework, and field instruction in the following areas: firearms safety and handling, sportsmanship and ethics, wildlife management and conservation, archery, black powder, wildlife identification, game care, first aid, and survival. After a student has successfully completed the course of instruction and passed the final examination, they are awarded a Certificate of Completion. Parents are encouraged to participate with their children in the course and its related activities. There is not a minimum age requirement to take the course, but young children may find the course demanding. A fee may not be charged for an instructor's service; however, fees may be used to cover the purchase of training aids such as slides, flip charts, targets, and other training aids. The Hunter Education Instructor makes the final decision in determining whether a student is qualified to receive a Certificate of Completion. A student who is unsafe, or fails to demonstrate good sportsmanship will not be issued a Certificate of Completion. Q: Are senior citizens exempt from having to take a hunter education course? A: No. Q: Is a law enforcement officer (active duty, reserve or retired military) required to take a hunter education course even if he/she had firearms training? A: Yes. All first time California hunters must successfully complete a hunter education training course or pass an equivalency exam. Visit the Hunter Education page for more information.

Q: If I cannot use my hunting license can I get a refund? A: No. Hunting license fees are nonrefundable. Q: Why are hunting license fees nonrefundable? A: Hunting licenses may be used for hunting any legal game bird or mammal. The purchase of hunting licenses and tags is an investment in the continued existence of California's hunting heritage. Funds raised from the sale of these items are used to conduct surveys and research, perform habitat maintenance and improvement projects, and meet the administrative requirements necessary to conduct all hunting seasons. Any reduction in this funding impacts CDFW's ability to perform these duties. Q: I have a general deer zone tag (Zones A, B, or a non-premium D tag) that I want to exchange but the archery season has already begun, can I still exchange it?? A: No. Once the earliest season for that tag has begun, you cannot exchange it. You will have to purchase a Second Dear Tag. ( Section 708.4, Title 14 of the CCR) Q: Can I get a refund if the specific area where I hunt has been closed because of fire? A: No. Refunds will not be issued for emergency area closures due to fire, weather or other natural disasters. ( Section 708.2(b), Title 14 of the CCR) Q: I cannot use my hunting license or tag. Can I give them to someone else? A: No. By law you cannot transfer a license or tag to another person ( Fish and Game Code, Section 1052(a)).