Immigration Status Secured for Former Russian FSB Officers
MANAGING PARTNER MICHAEL WILDES IS PLEASED TO ANNOUNCE THAT HE ASSISTED IN SECURING IMMIGRATION STATUS FOR 2 FORMER FSB OFFICERS WHO DEFECTED AFTER SPYING FOR THE USA IN RUSSIA

Following a prolonged litigation battle, Michael Wildes, Managing Partner of Wildes & Weinberg P.C., assisted in securing immigration status for Janosh and Victorya Neumann. As detailed in an article published in the UK’s The Guardian newspaper and Newsweek magazine, the CIA invited Mr. and Ms. Neumann, former FSB officers, to come to the United States, in order to gain valuable insight into Russia’s organized crime families and corruption schemes involving high level Russian Law Enforcement Agencies and the Russian Government. They worked for the FBI and other US and UK intelligence Agencies for almost five years.

Leaving their lives and families behind in Russia, the couple arrived in the United States only for the U.S. Government to renege on its promises and seek their deportation. Michael Wildes and his firm worked with Mr. and Mrs. Neumann, local counsel, and government officials, and assisted in preparing their immigration case. Following a prolonged litigation battle, Michael successfully secured immigration status for Janosh and Victorya Neumann.

To see the full article released today in Newsweek, please click here.

Michael Wildes, a former federal prosecutor stated: "This marks the end of a remarkable journey for a couple who stuck their necks out for our interests. When I was approached by the FBI to step into this delicate matter I was honored to assist and guide this to a favorable conclusion. Individuals who are used as assets by our law enforcement and intelligence services place themselves in great jeopardy and deserve the protection and safety of our nation."

Janosh Neumann had this to say:

“We wanted to say thank you to Michael Wildes, his family, his team for over a year of dedicated hard work, time and all the effort put forth to succeed in this case. Michael, we greatly appreciate your professional help, personal involvement and friendship. Without your personal involvement and hard work it would have not been possible for us to secure our status. Michael Wildes and his firm’s expertise and experience helped us and together with our attorney Judy Snyder, we were able to reach a deal with ICE and USCIS. Wildes's professionalism and commitment meant a lot to us, and Michael Wildes and his firm provides a life example of how the U.S. legal system should function! We are absolutely sure, that Michael Wildes is one of the best immigration attorneys in the Country. Michael, you have a unique knowledge and ability to fix and resolve very complicated and unresolveable immigration situations and cases. I am personally honored to have you as an attorney and a friend.”

More than fifty six years since its inception Wildes & Weinberg continues to service a distinguished domestic and international clientele and covers all areas of U.S. immigration law, including employment and investment-based immigration, work permits, permanent residence for qualified individuals, family-based immigration, asylum applications, all temporary and permanent type visas, and US citizenship. Despite difficulties currently being encountered in dealing with U.S. immigration authorities, the firm has maintained an extraordinary track record for success in its cases.

Prior to joining the practice, which was founded in 1960 by Senior Partner, Leon Wildes, Michael’s father, who is best known for his successful representation of former Beatle John Lennon in his deportation proceedings, the circumstances of which inspired legislation, documentaries, and a newly authored book entitled John Lennon vs. The USA , Michael served in the U.S. Attorneys Office, EDNY. In addition, Michael is an Adjunct Professor of Business Immigration Law at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law, is considered an expert in the field of U.S. Immigration and Nationality Law, has testified on Capitol Hill in connection with anti-terrorism legislation, and is internationally recognized for his successful representation of many defectors who have provided difficult to obtain national security information to the U.S.

Michael rotates his time between his four offices (New York City, New York, Englewood, New Jersey, Los Angeles, California, and Miami, Florida) and is a regular participant on professional panels as well as a frequent commentator and legal analyst on network television and radio.

To learn more about Wildes & Weinberg, please contact Managing Partner Michael Wildes at Michael@wildeslaw.com