Royal Announcement: William & Kate Will Officially Be King & Queen
Take a look at your newest soon-to-be King and Queen of England! Today, Queen Elizabeth officially announced that she will be passing down her crown to her grandson Prince William and his wife Kate Middleton. This, of course, means that the Queen has skipped over her own son, Prince Charles, in the British monarchy’s line of succession. Bummer.

More: The royal family is hiring, & anyone can apply

While the drama surrounding the royal family has taken most of the attention away from their policies and image of regal stature, the Queen believes implementing a younger generation than her son is vital for the House of Windsor to thrive in the future.

“Her Majesty realized that William and Kate are the future,” said a palace insider. “She has spent 65 years making sure that the House of Windsor survives, and she sees William and Kate as having the energy and star quality to do the job in a modern world. Queen Elizabeth will always do what is best for the long-term health of the monarchy.”

More: Queen Elizabeth II has hired an equerry, & it's a milestone hire

Her Majesty has also said that she truly does not believe the monarchy has the “respect and power it once had.” The source continued, “In her eyes, William and Kate are the two people who can turn that around.”

Related:

For more news videos visit Yahoo View, available on iOS and Android.

So how does the King-to-be and forever-Prince feel about the decision? Unfortunately, the decision has caused a rift between William and his father Charles. According to the same insider, their relationship has been strained, but they will get used to it eventually. Just like classic Brits, they’ll push their feelings as deep down as possible!

More: Prince George & Princess Charlotte steal the show on royal trip to Poland

And, of course, what does this mean for the world’s most popular couple and their young family? Since Prince George and Princess Charlotte are only 4 and 2 years old, respectively, Kate is mostly concerned about her role as a mother. “She’s desperate to remain a hands-on mom and worries about being in the spotlight more,” says the palace insider.

So while the rest of the world is excited for the change and step forward, it’s important to remember that they are, in fact, still trying to be a normal family.