Roy Moore Backers Say George Soros Is Paying Women To Lie About Him
Nine women have accused Roy Moore of sexual misconduct. Some of Moore's supporters say those women are being paid to lie.

HENAGAR, Ala. ― Two weeks before Alabama’sSenateelection, some ofRoy Moore’s supporters say they are giving him a pass on the allegations of sexual misconduct against him because they think his female accusers are lying and being paid by billionaire Democratic donor George Soros.

“I do not believe the allegations,” said Edna Bogue, 72. “It’s George Soros.”

Bogue was one of about 200 people who came out to a Moore campaign event on Monday night in this tiny conservative town. She, like the other half dozen attendees HuffPost talked to, said the timing of the allegations against the Republican nominee seemed fishy. He has been in public office for decades, and Bogue said the fact thatnine women are publicly accusing him of sexual misconductseems politically calculated to deny Moore a U.S. Senate seat.

Asked why she thinks Soros has anything to do with Moore’s accusers, Bogue said she read about his influence on politics in a book by conservative author Sharyl Attkisson.

“She tells everything about where the money goes,” she said.

Illa Bong, a retiree from Fort Payne who was sitting nearby, said the allegations against Moore are “totally wrong” and that she, too, thinks Soros’ money is behind it. She speculated his money is being funneled through foundations to the women.

“These special little money foundations come in, and he puts all this money to the things that he wants to go his way,” said Bong. “I would guess, yes, that he was part of it.”

“Absolutely,” Bogue chimed in.

"I think he's putting money toward them," David Sipsy said of his belief that George Soros is paying women to accuse Roy Moore of sexual misconduct. More

To be clear, there is zero evidence that Soros is paying women to make up stories about Moore’s inappropriate sexual advanceson them. But the idea fits with other unfounded right-wing conspiracy theories about Soros being a ringleader of a secret radical left agenda.

The fake news site InfoWarsposted a video last year titled “George Soros Is About to Overthrow the U.S.” Former Fox News hostBill O’Reillyhas described Soros as “off-the-charts dangerous.” Some have notedan anti-Semitic streakto the theories about Soros, as the claims against him are similar to false claims that the Rothschild family secretly controls the world’s wealth. Breitbart News, a conservative website that serves asa platform for white nationalists, published tweets last year calling Soros “an octopus”― an image Nazis used to refer to Jews controlling the world in the 1930s and 1940s.

Moore has suggested that Soros is targeting him in his race against Democrat Doug Jones. Hetweeteda Breitbart story in September about a “George Soros-backed organization attacking Roy Moore.” The story was actually about the Campaign Legal Center, a nonpartisan legal group that’s received funding from Soros’ son, filing a complaint against Moore’s foundation for violating laws relating to charities.

"George Soros-backed Organization Attacking Roy Moore As Alabama Heads to Tuesday Vote" >>>https://t.co/am3OMvX8Qb#ALSen — Judge Roy Moore (@MooreSenate) September 23, 2017

The reality is that Soros is just a really rich guy who’s given lots of money to Democrats. He also gavea whopping $18 billionto his Open Society Foundations, his philanthropic organization that promotes democracy and human rights in 120 countries. The foundation hasspent more than $1.5 billion on democratic reforms in the United States, too.