Billionaire Koch Brothers Invest Millions More to Promote Tax Overhaul
Groups backing the Republican tax-overhaul plan invested tens of millions of dollars promoting the legislation only to see its popularity decline over time. That isn’t stopping one group of conservatives from investing millions more in marketing.

Conservative groups led by billionaire industrialists Charles and David Koch are beginning a multimillion-dollar public relations campaign to highlight the benefits of the freshly passed legislation. The brothers’ Koch Industries is one of the country’s largest private corporations. It operates refineries and manufactures paper towels and carpets among many other products

The legislation cuts the corporate tax rate to 21% from 35%, cuts individual tax rates across the board and aims to simplify the tax code. In 2019, about 48% of households will receive a tax cut of greater than $500, but those cuts shrink over time, according to the Joint Committee on Taxation.

Freedom Partners and Americans for Prosperity will go door to door across America, call people at home, hold town halls and put up nationwide TV, radio and digital ads about the tax legislation, which President Donald Trump is expected to soon sign into law.

The groups describe their plan as “a full-scale nationwide education campaign that will demonstrate the tremendous benefits of pro-growth tax reform, and show how this plan is directly helping Americans improve their lives.”

The effort comes amid dismal polling for the tax legislation. A new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll found that 41% of Americans surveyed viewed the bill as a bad idea, up from 35% in October.

That’s despite the Republican-aligned groups spending at least $30 million to market the bill as good for the middle class.

The Koch-led groups alone spent more than $20 million promoting the legislation, according to a fact sheet they provided.

Republicans on Wednesday said they believe Americans will warm to the legislation over time, as they see changes reflected in their own tax bills.

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, a New York Democrat, rejected that idea.

"The Koch Brothers have already spent tens of millions of dollars trying to persuade people this is a good bill," he said.

Tim Phillips, president of Americans for Prosperity, said the tax plan is “about to ignite a new era of growth, and we’re going to make sure that Americans understand how they and their community stand to benefit.”