3 Park Ln, Massapequa, NY
10

3 Park Ln

Massapequa , NY 11758



(516) 799-0606

Good food and very generous servings. The owner and his staff are nice as well. This is not a fancy restaurant so if you're looking for somewhere to go in jeans and sneakers, this place is perfect! Prices are very fair as well!

Regular Pizza had no flavor. Basically sauceless, the cheese had no flavor either. Grandma slice wasn't that great either . I rate alot of pizza spots I gota give this slice a 3.9 out of 10. No flop, weird smell on the crust. I'm giving 3 stars cause the place seemed clean and people seemed nice.

Really Good thin slice pizza and stuffed meat slice. Spotless mom and pop restaurant worth stopping in for. Great flavors from the sauce and better cheese, I even ate the crust and never do. Stop in and see for yourself.

Love their pizza and such friendly service all the time! I would definitely recommend anyone to check them out.

I went in on a weekend between the lunch and dinner rush. I stood at the counter for 5 min before any employee came from the back and even realized I was there. The pizza was good; not my type as I prefer a very thin crust pizza, but still good none the less.

Good pizza, especially the Grandma's Pie. My son loves the buffalo chicken pizza. Fast delivery 'Nuff said

Excellent pizza and friendly service. The other reviewers on here are ridiculous. This is one of the best pizza places on the island. Their square pie is not too thick. The sauce is great. Never too oily. You would think with all of the pizza places in the area it would be easy to find a good slice but it's the opposite. There are a few good places and this is one of them. They lose a star because they make you wait longer than the estimated time consistently. It's never busy too so i don't know what's up with that. They lose another star for lack of specialty slices.

I've never had a bad experience with this restaurant. Nicest people work here and deliver. Best Sicilian pizza around

They priced Gouged During Hurricane Sandy . When people called them out on it this was their reply ..".try going out buying everything, fighting trying to buy the last of thing to keep our store up and running. We could simply be cleaning our house rather then making food and cooking for you. the prices of cheese yeast and flour has risen with this hurricane because they cannot get deliveries. you complain about our prices rising we need to break even today to pay for our expenses. hotels have been riping everyone off for what a room and bathroom and people are okay with that. our true customers are understanding and thats all that matters. we are not here to be millionaires we're here to keep the lights and business running. we work 12 hours days for what" I WILL NEVER GO BACK TO THIS PLACE & THINK PEOPLE SHOULD BOYCOTT & TELL HIM WHY!!!