7465 Melrose Ave, Fairfax, Los Angeles, CA
266

7465 Melrose Ave

Los Angeles , CA 90046



(323) 592-3226

This restaurant is awesome. First of all you need to walk through a grill cheese kitchen to get in, and the staff completely knows where you're going, but they will ignore you while you wonder in the back and ask yourself where you're going, and then Tah Dahhhh you're in this super cool and secret restaurant. Food and drinks are excellent, staff is friendly and the whole atmosphere is trendy and cute. Would definitely recommend this place if you're staying to impress someone.

Great gimmick ... enter from the back of a fast food place ... pass the dry storage area and the restaurant is behind a old walk in door...service was good. unfortunately food was sadly disappointed.... the table bread was under proof... it was doughy, the salted potatoes was tough and chewy , I guess the cook tried to hold the temp for too long ... the smelt was tough and chewy again ... pre fried and fried again for service??? seriously where is the chef or sous chef? seems like there was no one check before the plates deliver to the guests..... and the cook has no standard .... no love....the skirt steak was tough - they notice it was under cook after they sliced it .. and they put back to the cook some more.... end up over cook. SAD... where is the supervision??

I was a big fan of Chef Greeny when he had The Foundry on Melrose, so when Mare opened, I had to try it. As has been explained ad nausem, you enter through the kitchen of Greenspan's Grilled Cheese and you are teleported onto a magical outdoor patio. The CRUDITÉ OF VEGETABLES is always fresh and tasty. The WHOLE BRANZINO is a must and I make them debone it for me because I'm incapable of trivial tasks. The SKIRT STEAK is also prepared perfectly and cut up to share. For SHELLFISH I get the black mussels in spicy sausage romesco broth, because it's FANTASTIC Go here and be happy.

Perfect date spot! Your date will be impressed with what a foodie you are knowing a secret place like this. It's like a secret garden. My hubby's cousins were impressed! So impressed that they have to revisit the entry and tape the whole experience for show and tell for their friends. Haha. Point for me. Now to the food- The menu was limited and the portion was small. I was looking forward to the pickled vegetable and bread that started the meal. The top of the baguette was burned and it was hard. Good for dipping in broth but hard to eat otherwise. No olive and no kumquat. The servers said they just didn't have this night. The octopus appetizer was flavorful. The noodle was ok. The fish was not impressive, but fresh regardless. Overall good experience if you are going on a date. It's cute and romantic. Food is decent but not impressive. It's worth trying or taking out of town friends to.

This is a secret restaurant and it's super cool. It's "secret" because it's disguised as a grilled cheese shop. You walk through the grilled cheese shop, through the kitchen and backdoor, to find yourself inside of a romantic and very hip restaurant. The awesome scene is complemented by delicious food - it's definitely a place you'll want to take a date! THE FOOD: The food is very good. I ate the mussels in white wine sauce, the crab fritters special, and the rainbow swiss chard. I will discuss them in that order. The broth for the mussels was delicious - I found myself going back over and over to drink it with my spoon. The mussels also came with noodles that you could mix into the dish. The noodles were clearly home made, as they were very well done; however, while I think they were very well executed I think I would prefer to just get more mussels. It seemed that the noodles were there to make the dish more filling as well as to allow the restaurant to provide a lot less food than you would receive at most other restaurants. It just was not enough mussels for me. Still, though, it was delicious. The mussels were also served with a hard boiled egg on the side, which was very odd. The crab fritters were AMAZING. Probably the best crab fritters I have ever had. After we ate the five of those little fritters I wanted more! It really was a fantastic dish, but at $16 for such a tiny appetizer it was really overpriced, particularly considering how it was not on the menu, so you don't expect it to be so much higher than all the other small plates which are around $10. Nevertheless, they were delicious. My only complaint was that the sauce on the side was unnecessary and extremely overpowering - particularly when mixed with the fennel that the fritters were served on. The rainbow swiss chard was great. It was extremely well executed, cooked to a perfection and with a delicious sauce that counterbalanced the strong chard flavor. Finally, the bread that was served before our food was brought was delicious. It was still warm from the oven when we got it! And it was great for dipping in the mussels broth. THE PRICE: While the crab fritters were way overpriced, everything else was not. The pricing here is extremely reasonable. You can share a nice vegetable side dish and a shellfish dish for a total of $30. Just be warned that if you come really hungry, you'll probably want to order at least one more dish and a dessert. But for such a nice restaurant you're getting quite the bargain. THE ATMOSPHERE AND SERVICE: Fantastic atmosphere with extremely friendly service. The secret nature of the place makes it super cool, and just the environment itself when you find yourself inside backs that up. The restaurant has string lights zigzagging above the tables that make the whole place glow at night. That coupled with the wooden walls give this place a classy and romantic look. Our waiter was also very friendly. He made great recommendations, was always there when we needed him, and had a great attitude. FINAL THOUGHTS (tl;dr): With such delicious food, a romantic and hip setting, a secret entrance, reasonable prices, and great service, you can't go wrong taking a date here.

Made a reservation for five at 9:30 p.m. for my friend's birthday. Really recommend making a reservation on their site. They are booked for almost every time and I was so glad we at least had something. It's great how this is such a hard spot to find, but they are booked to the max. Finding the store entrance is an adventure. They are located behind the kitchen of a grilled cheese shop called Greenspan's Grilled Cheese. Really interesting. Once you open the door behind the kitchen, you are greeted by workers under some lights and an open roof. So different from the grilled cheese shop they are behind! Ambience was great and decor was wonderful. They even have a little wooden foosball table in the waiting area. Food was definitely an experience. I got the shellfish, which is what they are known for. I got the basil pistou broth with mussels. Mussles were good and broth was light. The shellfish comes with unlimited noodles, so I recommend taking advantage of this. They give you these poached eggs that are still in the shell and you have to crack the egg into the noodles and mix them in. Was very intrigued by this concept. It makes the noodles really creamy and I thought this was really innovative. However, when eating the noodles with the broth, the creaminess would wash off, so you should either eat them separately then combine them in your mouth together, or break the egg in the broth to make it thicker. For dessert we got the chocolate chili crepe. It was really good. They had nutella inside the crepe and a coffee cream with chili. You can really feel the chili and it had a warm sensation in your mouth. Nothing I've ever had before, but definitely a dent in the wallet. Also, just to note on the service - our waiter was great and was really considerate of my friends vegetarian dietary needs. They also didn't charge my friend as much for leaving out the protein out of the dish. My other friend's order was forgotten, but they ended up giving it to us much later free of charge. Would recommend coming here for a food adventure!

Fun. I knew that the restaurant was hidden. But not this kind of hidden. Who's idea to make patrons go through this rough route..? But once you find the old wooden door... Voilà! Small but cozy. Lots of candles and greens. It made me want to ask someone, "Is this your patio?" That's how inviting it was. A glass of fruity vodka cocktail and fried smelt were perfect starters for our dinner. While munching delicious smelt, a bigger fish came in. That's my whole Branzino! The fish was dressed with pomegranate seeds and looked pretty. It tasted fresh but could've been seasoned better. I also had to taste Shellfish and pasta. A soft poached egg was placed on the pasta, and after destroying the egg, pour the shellfish sauce onto it. I liked the concept and looked great, but it could've been seasoned better. The service was good. We definitely sensed her effort to provide us a pleasant dining experience. Thank you. I may return to this restaurant even though I have to go through the rough route. Or do you have any other or another secret way to get to the restaurant? Tell me if you do. 3.5 stars.

Love! LOVE!! LOVEEEE!!!!! this place!!!!!!! Open roof, dim lights, cute decor all around - ugh!! I'm in LOVE! Perfect for 2, good for 3, and 4 should be your max! (Wouldn't mind renting this WHOLE place out for simply reception!! - it's just too darn CUTE! hehehe) (It's a little tricky to get here but it'll make you smile - its kind of fun ^^ and you'll def say out loud "WAHHH???" hehehe) Although DineLA was happening here, we decided to go with their set menu! - Arugula Salad: MUST ORDER!!!! (enough said!) - Rapini: not sweet but the crispy garlic was good! (Ask for extra garlic!) - Whole Branzino (bone in!) We killed it! Juicy, soft, and cooked perfectly!!! - Skirt Steak: drooool~~~~~ LOVE!!! Everything here is great! Will def be back!!!!

WAIT I DIDNT WANT GRILLED CHEESE! ..... OOOO So go through the back door through of your kitchen area and you'll find the resteraunt ? Cool. I can't take any of this stuff right ?? Ok just making sure. The entrance of Mare is beautiful and reminds of me of a rooftop metropolis in someones downtown condo complex. Waiting staff is on point and very receptive to answering menu questions. Dined here with my sister and had an awesome dinner . Portions are small (obviously) but its quite delicious. Had a full branzino , fried smelt, crab ravilioi (ridiculously small portion for $24, got to dock this review for it) and plenty of cocktails. Everything exceeded my expectation as far as taste goes except the ravioli and OVER SEASONED bread . Ravioli tasted premade and the bread looked/tasted like it was trying way to hard with the insane amount of Mediterranean spice blend. Otherwise I can't complain, awesome vibe and delicious entrees and apps. Must try on the resteraunt strip and if your still hungry after your small portion go downstairs and get a gourmet grilled cheese : )

There are not many restaurants that are disguised as a Grilled Cheese shop that you need to walk into the kitchen, then through a freezer door to get to an outdoor patio that is smartly decorated and inviting. It makes you feel special that you are in this small "speak easy" style foodie heaven The place has more people waiting around the foosball table than they have seating for but somehow they get people out and seat the hungry excited foodies To start we were served there delicious baguettes covered with seeds like an everything bagel that has a chewy crust and very tasty dough. The unusual spread and olive oil were good as well. It also was served with peppers and olives. A nice start They have delicious muddled drinks. My favorite was a whiskey muddled with soda, figs and I think chili and chocolate? Not sure but it was refreshing The printed menu is simple and not extensive but with their specials, there are enough choices for everyone The butter poached lobster is quite small for $25 dollars but was very good although the fig over powered the lobster. The ahi tuna pieces with herbs was also good but I do prefer more poke style Someone ordered their raw vegetables which I enjoyed dipping into the sauces. It was like a farmers market on a plate The best things we had were: Shrimp in a bowl with basil pesto broth and a poached egg that was flavorful, not to creamy and pure enjoyment Grilled Argentinian skit steak served medium rare with a side of spicy chimichurri sauce and a sea urchin butter. This was yum! I dipped the steak in the sauce and I mixed the sea urchin butter into the butter seasoned pasta- loved it! For dessert we had the chili chocolate crepe that was small but I liked the heat from the chili There were six of us. We brought two bottles of our own wine and lots of food and the bill with tax and tip per person was only 45 dollars! Now that is special! On the way out, one of the cooks at the Grilled Cheese shop handed us strips of crunchy bacon that were sweet, smoky and fantastic to lure us to come back and try a grilled cheese next time. I look forward to walk through that freezer door once again to see what new things Chef Eric Greenspan has to surprise us with -------------------- Fast forward to a year plus later- the place is not as busy as it was but still popular. The food was good and service was good however- after six of us being at the table only for an hour and a half - a host asked if we would mind leaving now so they can open the table for another party-!"WTF? Seriously? Based on that I am out of here

**NOTE: absolutely perfect date spot** Though, also note that if your date is a picky eater and/or has food restrictions, the extremely small/simple menu will undoubtedly lead to issues. However, they do have daily specials, so the menu isn't quite as small as it looks. As for the restaurant itself, it's patio-only seating and the entrance is hidden (there's a sign, but then you have to walk through the grilled cheese shop to get in--also thank you Yelp for helping me, or else I would've stood there confused for who knows how long). The patio is so cute, and is very romantic. I was there with a friend, but it was clear that the majority of the individuals dining at the restaurant were on dates. Also, when the bread is brought out before the meal, it's placed directly on the table with two tapenades and olive oil. Everything was delicious, but the top layer of the bread was coated in salt, making it impossible to eat too much--which was probably for the best honestly. We started out with the roasted potatoes and arugula salad. Both were great. As our main courses, I ordered the Skirt Steak with Oregano Chimichurri and Sea Urchin Butter. OMG easily my favorite steak dish I've ordered in ages. Cooked perfectly, flavors were on point, but still simple. My friend ordered the whole Branzino-- and take note: when they say WHOLE they literally mean a whole fish. She was not expecting this and was taken aback when she was handed a fish that still had a face. However, she once she got over the initial shock, she enjoyed the meal. Finally, for dessert we ordered the blood orange trifolo and the chocolate chili crepe. The blood orange was a "safer" option, but was fantastic. The chocolate chili crepe was amazing and really unique. I definitely recommend it and I will be back!

3.5 stars I celebrated a friend's birthday at Mare recently. This little gem is hard to find! You have to walk into Greenspan's Grilled Cheese and through their back kitchen/storage area to get to Mare. Mare is small, cozy, and romantic. The outdoor patio with stringed lights would make for a good date night. ;) They start you off with bread and some sauces, oil, and pickled vegetables. The bread was good so take advantage! The menu itself is small. I don't like seafood so I was pretty much limited to the steak. The steak was decently good and flavorful, but salty. Overall, Mare is a pretty nice and unique spot located in the heart of Melrose. It would be best for a small party; I wouldn't go with more than 5 people at most. Our waitress was really nice. Valet parking available.

Had a fantastic experience here last night with a group of 12 people. The group set menu for $40 is enormously good value. The food was really abundant and we were super full and happy at the end of the meal. Not only is the food abundant but it is excellent quality and very very tasty. Everything is served family style. I am gluten and dairy free and found this a very easy menu to work with, waiter was knowledgable and accommodating. They also had GF pasta for those of us who were GF and the waiter comped me a sorbet sampler for dessert. Cocktails here are excellent - I enjoyed one with mezcal, blackberries, rosemary and lime juice - oooohhhh so good and not too sweet like so many other places. The food we had was as follows: Apps Arugula Salad with red onion, cherry tomatoes, dates and capers. -Crudité of Market Vegetables, served with almond romesco and house ranch. -Fried Smelt with roasted lemon sauce and radicchio. MY FAVE - SO GOOD -Salt Roasted Potatoes served with bold aioli. -Rapini with garlic puree, chili threads and garlic chips. Fish course - a variety of different broths (curry, leek and white wine, etc, all very tasty) served with a variety of different shellfish (shrimp, mussels, clams), noodles on the side, and an raw egg provided if you'd like to cook it in your hot noodles and broth!! All really tasty and good, honestly we could have stopped here, we were full. Mains - PERFECTLY cooked skirt steak served with oregano chimichurri and sea urchin butter. HOLY SHIT THIS WAS GOOD - melt in the mouth, perfectly perfectly cooked KUDOS to whoever is on the grill whole branzino served with a fig-pomegranate glaze - ALSO super duper tasty Wow, really nailed it on these, exceeded expectations, sooooo good Dessert Blood Orange Trifolo, a semolina cake, with fruit compote and a blood orange curd - this came with plates of rosemary shortbread which everyone loved Chocolate chili crepe with Nutella, topped with coffee whipped cream and sea salt - people scarfed this down happily My (delicious) sorbet plate was extra. Service was awesome and unobtrusive as well. I highly recommend this place for a group night out.

I always say I love places that let me escape Los Angeles for a few hours and Mare did that for me. I loved the scheme of colors and the cozy, warm feeling especially with the lights and candles surrounding you. Food: You just try the fried octopus dish. It was good but other than that, everything fell a little short. The skirt steak I beg to differ wasn't good as it's a highlight dish on here (the butter served with it did not do it and chimichurri sauce was lacking.) The clams along with leek and white wine was okay (I thought the clams would be better quality) and finally I love sorbet and me and my best friend practically order this each time we go out ...we officially claimed this to be the worse sorbet ever. How do you go wrong on sorbet? Service: awesome...our waitress was a doll and they constantly filled water and took our plates. Overall: Nice place to experience and the entrance through the grilled cheese place is a trip lol but enough to go back? I don't know about that for me....

A restaurant with a cool, different concept, Maré is a wonderful place to take a date or for a nice outing. First of all, the entrance to this place is discreet and sure to wow whoever you're with. Walk in through the bright yellow grilled cheese shop into the kitchen, then go through the wooden door with a red ship symbol on it and you're transported into the world of Maré. It's like going into the damn Chamber of Secrets. The waiting area is so European. Dimly lit by string lights, foosball table, couch...You get it. We were promptly greeted by friendly employees and had to wait a little even though we had a reservation. Definitely book one online or through phone because they seem to always be full! Our server was very friendly from the start and we were promptly served delicious bread with a sort of fig paste (better with lemon juice provided), capers, and olive oil. From the start it was already quite the adventure! I ordered a shellfish entree with black mussels and spicy sausage romesco for the broth. The dish came with an endless amount of light pasta, with their perfectly poached egg mixed in (you could also put the egg in the remainder of the broth). The idea was that you would finish the shellfish first, then finish the rest of the broth with the noodles. Though this was all paired well and was a fun concept, I wish there was more texture to the broth so the light flavor of the pasta wouldn't be lost. The creaminess of the egg with the pasta would disappear once you dunked the noodles into the broth. The chef here likes to play with flavors and added nuts into a lot of the broths--for me, it was almonds. I don't totally agree with the choice, but the flavors of the dish were nevertheless well balanced and very delicious. They were also very accomodating for my vegan friend's dietary needs, so she paid less for a broth-and-pasta entree. One of my friend's order was forgotten about as well, which was made on the house. They were so nice about it so it wasn't a big deal at all. Verdict: fun, different, exciting. I want to take more people in my life on this experience, and I probably will! The prices are a little up there, but definitely affordable for this kind of restaurant.

This place initially confused me so much! It's located on Melrose, and there is a sign high up on the building. However, I couldn't find the entrance. We actually sat down at Umbrella Co. and tried to order something before the server told us were were in the wrong place. We looked really stupid pacing back and forth on the sidewalk trying to find this place. Finally, we went into Greenspan Grilled Cheese and asked how to get to Mare before we were actually able to. I love secrets like this. Amazing. You will have to find out on your own, and I recommend it so the surprise is not ruined. In any case, once we entered the restaurant, there was a beautiful little waiting area with overhead string lights, couches, and a ping pong table. People came around serving free delicious sangria! They don't take reservations, but we were a party of two and got seated in about 15 minutes. There is a larger room, which is indoor-outdoor. I had a prix fixe menu that had a choice of one appetizer, one seafood dish, and one meat dish. It also came with a dessert and two mixed drinks, so a really great deal. For parking, there is free parking if you go deeper into the side neighborhoods. Otherwise, there's a lot of permit parking areas, which make this strip of Melrose kind of annoying. 1. Bread: Freshly baked, it comes with amazing olive oil as well as a few side dips/hummus that area really good and whet the appetite. 2. Broccolini: This was quite good although not my favorite dish of the night. The broccolini was a bit overcooked and dry I thought, but still retained great flavor. 3. Pot of clams with chorizo romesco sauce: This was quite delicious! After the clams were finished, I drank the soup! 4. Branzino: This came out with the head and tail, the way fish should be served, always. It was cooked very well and the skin was very flavorful too! 5. Blood Orange Trifolo: Quite a good dessert, the stuff in the jar was full of fruits but was quite sweet. Luckily, it came with side cookies. 6. Chocolate chili crepe: This was actually very good, although I wish the crepe were slightly less done. 7. Mixed drinks: Delicious! Feria de Jalisco Tequila was awesome, as was the El Silencio Mezcal. Pricy, but good! I like surprises like this place. The food is very good and the vibe is hip and trendy. Just find the front door though.

4.5 stars Quirky and unique best describes this small, patio restaurant. But don't let the entrance through Greenspan's Grilled Cheese restaurant fool you. This place is something special. Service was friendly and efficient. First, complimentary bread is served directly on butcher paper with accompanying olive oil and extras. It makes for a nice spread, even before starting the meal. DineLA 3 course price - $29 APPETIZERS CRUDITÉ OF VEGETABLES - market vegetables with almond romesco and house ranch $11 A large variety of raw or slightly blanched veggies, all very fresh. The romesco sauce is delicious. ARUGULA SALAD - with red onion, cherry tomatoes, dates and capers $10 A fresh, sizable salad with light dressing. The dates add a nice bit of sweetness. ENTREE WHOLE BRANZINO -with fig pomegranate sauce $21 A big, meaty, delicate fish cooked perfectly. The sauce was a bit on the salty side. Enough to serve 2. DESSERTS BLOOD ORANGE TRIFOLO - with semolina cake, fruit compote and served with rosemary cookies $10 This is a take on an English trifle. There was a nice, flavorful mix of fruit and cake. CHOCOLATE CHILI CREPE - with Nutella and Coffee Whipped Cream $9 A rich, chocolaty crepe with light sweetened whipped cream. The Nutella was difficult to detect and the dessert is not spicy. This place is worth checking out, if you are looking for good food and a unique dining experience. parking - metered, valet, or limited street parking

DineLA January 2016 - what a deal!! $29 for dinner at a place that was named as one of the best DineLA deals AND best first date place?? I'm there. :D I've heard lots of good things about Mare and was curious to see what Taste on Melrose had transformed into. They don't take reservations for parties less than 6, so our party of 4 waited about 45 minutes on a Friday night. FOOD: - roasted broccolini - this was a bit overcooked, on the browner side and stringy, but flavor was good and I liked the garlic puree on the bottom - fried smelt - I like smelt, so this was yummy to me! - salt roasted potatoes - salty, duh but cooked perfectly - whole branzino - on the regular menu, this dish is $21, so totally getting a great deal! I didn't think I would enjoy the pomegranate fig glaze on it, but it really added great flavor to the skin. Fish was super moist and perfectly buttery and cooked really well, yum! - blood orange trifolo - served in a mason jar type thing, I enjoyed the graininess of the semolina cake at the bottom and all the fresh fruit and compote. On the tart side, very refreshing after a rich meal. SERVICE: Mare is busyyyy! Once we were seated, it took a little while for our server to come take our orders, but the food came out quickly. VENUE/PARKING: The space is not as big as Taste on Melrose was. They partition part of it off as a really cute waiting area and the tables inside the restaurant itself are packed pretty close together. Outdoor seating with a retractable tarp roof, the heat lamps do a pretty good job of keeping you warm. There's one restroom, but if you can, you can duck through the curtain to use Melrose Umbrella Company's toilets :P But you might get yelled at by some employees :P Parking is a bit tough in the area, meters can be found, but the residential streets are all permit only. Valet is $6. To find Mare, go through the Grilled Cheese restaurant, hang a right past the restroom and go up the step to the wooden door.

First time here was restaurant week and the service was incredible. However their rapini was not cooked properly, it retained way too much bitterness and was over salted. The sea urchin butter for the skirt steak is a very good idea, however, it is a bit too rich which makes it unpalatable after the second bite. What I'm rating this place on is the impressive location and ambiance. As well as the great service. We had to wait a bit longer than our reservation time and were offered sangria and grilled cheese downstairs!! I always order the seafood broth and pasta combo and each time I become more unimpressed because the noodles are just too soft. Great place to entertain nonetheless and their cucumber cocktail is delicious.