11 E Washington St, Lexington, VA
180

11 E Washington St

Lexington , VA 24450



(540) 464-4401

Cozy little place tucked into the Shenandoah. Super friendly staff, tasty food at a reasonable price. Ingredients were super fresh. It was a bit odd to have to pay for a reservation up front, but with the knucklehead stuff that goes on, I can understand the need...at least the fee got put towards the bill. Give 'em a try...very enjoyable experience.

UPDATE AFTER 4 DAYS FROM ORIGINAL REVIEW: On May 14, 2019 I received a hostile message from a Ben R. and appears to be a fake account. This person has no pictures or reviews. This is verbal harassment and furthermore puts into question as to who would take matters this far. Its obviously from someone with vested interest. Did it come from an employee, the owner or is it the kind of clientele the Red Hen attracts. Who knows?! Whoever you are, all you've done is further contribute to lowering the reputation of this restaurant, as if it wasn't low enough. Congratulations on your current and future lack of success! Here's the message I was sent: "you probably never went to this restaurant. You are just another Republican idiot who thinks you can get away with this bullshit. If you did go there, show us a receipt or go suck a big thumb." For the record, that not my party. It's concerning to me that this person turned a restaurant review into something political and he/she should seek out a psychiatric evaluation for the accusatory delusions going on inside their head.

A little too pretentious for me. Snobby people, rushed service and unimpressive food are impossible not to mention as a very bad experience. Not fine dining as I was told because the food is really not that great and the service can further be summarized as abrupt. When I see a five star rating here I am disappointed because that leaves no room for the other establishments that are simply better to have a higher rating. I would have given a three star for great service or great food making up for the other being sub par. In this case, they were both sub par.

What a great place! We started with the smoked salmon appetizer. Delicious. I had the pheasant entree, & it was wonderful, too. Rich & flavorful. Tom had the brisket & he was very pleased. Both entrees came with fresh local vegetables. For dessert we shared a piece of lemon meringue pie. REALLY strong lemon flavor with no crust to worry about! The setting was charming. It feels like it was once a church, but our waiter told us it was originally a bar. The evening was perfect.

Perfect! My brother and I ate at the Red Hen last night. Food was excellent and service was fabulous. Highlight was the olive oil cake and ginger coconut cocktails. I have just moved here after 25 years in NYC. The Red Hen is a little gem in Lexington. Now all Lexington needs is a good Ramen and pork bun place. Also a Vietnamese sandwich place.

Late night out with the wife while on vacation in Lexington, what a disappointment. Staff was rude, meal was awful and overpriced. I was not happy.

Unless you're a local, you'll probably visit the Red Hen for reasons other than finding just any old place for dinner. That aside, let me explain why you should eat here, and what to expect. First off, you may need reservations - which will cost you $45 per person. This was necessitated by their RSVP system being abused, so no money in advance = no reservation. Fortunately this fee goes towards you dinner bill, and any excess deposit funds will be refunded back to you (although with tip, tax and drinks, you'll likely spend all of it). The place is very small; maybe 6 or 7 tables, max about a dozen patrons. This is very much a farm-to-table joint that caters to foodies. Because of this concept, no menus are published online. This menu changes constantly anyway, so published menus won't help a lot. But if you email them, they'll send you a copy of whatever is currently being served. The people who are dropping 1 or 2 star reviews for the food probably never ate here, because my guest and I thought everything was excellent. Not only that, but the price point was very good - at least compared to fancier restaurants in Charlottesville or DC. And since it's such a tiny place, service also excelled. Ignore politics and just have dinner!

Great place. Fast, friendly and the food is great!!! If you're ever in Lexington VA this is the place to be.

Cozy atmosphere. Warm & friendly staff. Exceptional wine list. Well prepared and seasoned food. The high barrell truss ceiling made it feel open and not at all the smaller size it is. Loud noise was certainly not an issue here...being able to talk to my dining partner without having to raise my voice tends to be a rarity these days. We had the smoked salmon to start..with rye croutons, dill, a smoked oyster aioli and beautiful beet greens. For our entreés we went with the duck and Arctic char (and a side of the most delicious gratin style potatoes). Both were cooked to perfection. Everything complimented each other. We were stuffed but finished the meal with a scoop of citrus sorbet in a beautiful little pool of limoncello topped with what I believe was a salted orange slice.

We have never been disappointed here! Always creative, locally sourced delicious food and cocktails. We love sitting at 'the bar ' overlooking the compact kitchen and chatting with the chef and sous chefs. It amazes me what they can create in that tiny space! Service is excellent from Darrin and Jake.

MY GENUINE REVIEW WAS REMOVED BY YELP FOR THE SECOND TIME We've patronized The Red Hen several times over the time it's been situated in picturesque and historic Lexington, VA. We live maybe an hour away, which is the only reason we don't visit more often. All visits have exceeded our expectations of the dining experience. Locally sourced food is important to us and we know we can dine here and not only have that, but a delicious and fun meal. We often order 'outside of the box' for our normal dining, which has been fun. We enjoy the wine list, as winos, but also love the custom crafted cocktails on their mixology list. Leave the politics and those angry about what's happened here behind and come visit a wonderful place tucked in the VA Blue Ridge. Better call ahead or book a table on Yelp. Family and Graduation weekends fill quickly. Even when busy, the service is wonderful, another thing we appreciate quite a bit.

Great food awesome staff. Stopped in before our flight back home to meet a friend. Highly recommend

Slow service, food not very good. I was hoping for much better based on reviews. Not sure if they had friends click 5 stars but this is no better then a McDonalds fast food drive thru.

Is Sarah Huckabee Sanders now allowed into your restaurant since she is not going to be working for our great President or would you still kick her out for no reason, Liberal creep Stephanie?

I was visiting some friends in Lexington. They had made reservations and put down the ransom for seating. The place is small with only a few tables. I was expecting something interesting and I certainly got it. Unfortunately, it was not a good dining experience. The food was extremely expensive for what I got. I am not into plate art. I want something to eat, not to take photos of. If you are going to give half of a child's plate and then charge an exorbitant amount for it, I at least expect to so wowed by the food that I don't notice the cost. I have eaten at some great places that have food art and attentive service. I really didn't get either here. To me, the quality and taste is what I would get from a cafeteria meal. It was dry with little flavor. I like the farm-to-table concept of relying on local sources, however, when a Chef Boyardee type is doing the cooking it really doesn't matter if the garden is out back and the duck was swimming in a pond across the street. The one positive is it did look nice on the plate. Maybe I am just not urbane enough to appreciate the nuances of "fine dining", but maybe I am smart to enough to point out when it just doesn't meet the hype. The people that took us raved about how good it was while my companion and I shot glances of disbelief at each other.

Loved the atmosphere here. I knew that there was some political controversies before I made my reservation. That was my main purpose for coming. I was on a work assignment in the area and wasn't leaving without dinning here. The food was outstanding as were the cocktails. Absolutely loved the lemon meringue!

Amazing food and great service. Prices are fair and the quality of the dishes is very much up to par. I highly recommend this place!

New visitor to Lexington. Red Hen was my sit down choice for the weekend. Excellent Markers Mark Old Fashioned; and the dregs looked bejeweled with tiny bits of cherry. Salmon starter and pasta Bolognese were remarkable. The reason for my 3 hour trip was a bust due to weather, but the meal at Red Hen made my weekend. Excellent service; intimate atmosphere.

A small quaint eatery with fabulously prepared meals from the farm. Good meal with excellent, friendly service. Good wine selection. Nice atmosphere with a small outdoor patio. Right downtown Lexington. Love this place. Have been here several times. Not open on Mondays. Chef prepares everything fresh with a lot of creativity. Great service! Rustic charm.