Photos for KFC
Oops, we can't find your location

First, try refreshing the page and clicking Current Location again. Make sure you click Allow or Grant Permissions if your browser asks for your location. If your browser doesn't ask you, try these steps: At the top of your Chrome window, near the web address, click the green lock labeled Secure. In the window that pops up, make sure Location is set to Ask or Allow. You're good to go! Reload this Yelp page and try your search again. If you're still having trouble, check out Google's support page. You can also search near a city, place, or address instead. At the top of your Opera window, near the web address, you should see a gray location pin. Click it. In the window that pops up, click Clear This Setting You're good to go! Reload this Yelp page and try your search again. If you're still having trouble, check out Opera's support page. You can also search near a city, place, or address instead. Click Safari in the Menu Bar at the top of the screen, then Preferences. Click the Privacy tab. Under Website use of location services, click Prompt for each website once each day or Prompt for each website one time only. MacOS may now prompt you to enable Location Services. If it does, follow its instructions to enable Location Services for Safari. Close the Privacy menu and refresh the page. Try using Current Location search again. If it works, great! If not, read on for more instructions. Back in the Privacy dialog, Click Manage Website Data... and type yelp.com into the search bar. Click the yelp.com entry and click Remove. You're good to go! Close the Settings tab, reload this Yelp page, and try your search again. If you're still having trouble, check out Safari's support page. You can also search near a city, place, or address instead. At the top of your Firefox window, to the left of the web address, you should see a green lock. Click it. In the window that pops up, you should see Blocked or Blocked Temporarily next to Access Your Location. Click the x next to this line. You're good to go! Refresh this Yelp page and try your search again. If you're still having trouble, check out Firefox's support page. You can also search near a city, place, or address instead. Click the gear in the upper-right hand corner of the window, then Internet options. Click the Privacy tab in the new window that just appeared. Uncheck the box labeled Never allow websites to request your physical location if it's already checked. Click the button labeled Clear Sites. You're good to go! Click OK, then refresh this Yelp page and try your search again. You can also search near a city, place, or address instead. At the top-right hand corner of the window, click the button with three dots on it, then Settings. Click Choose what to clear underneath Clear browsing data. Click Show more, then make sure only the box labeled Location permissions is checked. Click Clear. You're good to go! Refresh this Yelp page and try your search again. You can also search near a city, place, or address instead. Oops! We don't recognize the web browser you're currently using. Try checking the browser's help menu, or searching the Web for instructions to turn on HTML5 Geolocation for your browser. You can also search near a city, place, or address instead.

Something broke and we're not sure what. Try again later, or search near a city, place, or address instead.

We couldn't find you quickly enough! Try again later, or search near a city, place, or address instead.

We couldn't find an accurate position. If you're using a laptop or tablet, try moving it somewhere else and give it another go. Or, search near a city, place, or address instead.