Morgenstern’s Finest Ice Cream
792

2 Rivington St

New York , NY 10002



(212) 209-7684

The pitch black Coconut Ash ice cream kicks ass! It wasn't too sweet, it tasted like coconut, and sometimes it tasted like avocado. It had a hint of salt. It was also smooth. Not fudge smooth, but definitely not the kind of ice cream that had bits of ice in it. The black ice cream tasted strange in a good way, and your teeth and lips could look funny while you're eating it, but it was a great experience! The ambiance was also brightly lit, with good theme color that matched that of an ice cream shop. TIPS: CASH ONLY

Went for the iconic coconut ash & ended up getting a scoop of Burnt Honey Vanilla as well. I seemed to just beat the rush of 20 people after me on a Saturday afternoon. I've heard this place can be pretty busy. Coconut Ash: Do not eat this while wearing white. Your mouth will be a bit black, your hands will be black, your napkins will be black. You might look like a demon, but all the better for selfies, right? Very subtle coconut flavor, almost doesn't taste like anything. Very slight gritty texture to it from the ash/charcoal/whatever gives it the color. Burnt Honey Vanilla: Amazing flavor, a perfect amount of sweetness, smooth and well-balanced. A double scoop of those in a Monster cone was about $8 (ouch). The ambience of the place is great, super cute bar-stools to sit and eat ice cream upon. I'll be back!

When I heard there was a "black" ice cream, I had to come and try it. The wait was relatively longer than your average ice cream shop. You had to receive a ticket and wait to be called. Once you are called, then you tell the server what type of ice cream you would like as well as what you would like to be served with : cone, cup, etc. I got the Coconut Ash ( the infamous "black" ice cream) and the Edible Schoolyard. The coconut ash had a very distinct taste yet I found it stained my teeth with black for a temporary time. For those whom want to try this, I think its worth a try but to be honest, I don't think I would get it as my go to.The Edible Schoolyard was basically mint chocolate but it was super fluffy and enriched with mint. Another con about this place was the serving vs. their price. The scoops weren't quite big yet the price was a bit on the pricy side.

I really wanted to like this place more. There are a lot of specialty shops in NYC so I've already had amazing, homemade, unique flavored ice cream. I had the Vietnamese coffee, which personally was too sweet for me. Also the crazy caffeine kept me up until the wee hours of the night, which is an experience I hope to never have again. It was decent, but I wouldn't go out of my way to the LES to get it again considering there are SO MANY ice cream shops in that area. I already have three others bookmarked to try. My friend really enjoyed her coconut ash scoop and claims I just got the wrong flavor. I've also heard their sundaes are top notch though so that might be more worth the trip.

First off, I'd like to give a suggestion. Turn down the heat! Way too hot inside for an ice cream place. The burnt honey was delicious. We felt obligated to try the coconut ash because that's what everyone talks about. I don't even like coconut but the coconut flavor was so mild you could barely taste it. The strawberry pistachio was heavenly. If you're a pistachio lover, that's the way to go!

Took us a while to order because of the line, but I think it was worth it! I ordered the iconic coconut ash and was super shocked at the color. I googled how its name and everything haha. The other flavors on the menu were equally, if not more, exotic as well. I also loved the taste. It was pretty basic, but the hint of coconut was delicious. I also liked that there was some grit in the ice cream, probably due to the coconut ash used in making the ice cream. Kinda steep price but whatever. The place had very few seats, which was annoying when waiting around cramped in the store with snow outside. The only thing that truly bothered me, however, was that I had black on my lip all day and none of my friends told me about it I'll be back.

Amazing Ice cream I tried the coconut ash and the Vietnamese coffee. It was so good I got back in line and bought the raspberry and the mango sorbets which were so fresh tasting. You can really tell they use quality ingredients. This is my new spot for ice cream in NYC.

Amazing taste if you're into the sweet, savory and cold delights. I have been here a few times before but my main goal was to try the coconut ash aka the black ice cream but it seems as if every time I go it's sold out unfortunately. Must be an amazing flavor that seems to be constantly selling out

Super hyped. Unique flavors. I've had better. I've been to Morgenstern's twice, about a year apart, both times were underwhelming. I get the hype; with flavors like Burnt Honey, Coconut Ash, Strawberry Balsamic Pistachio (yes, that's one flavor), and Vietnamese Iced Coffee you can't help but feel like you're discovering the next great ice cream frontier. The flavors are arranged on the menu in groups, so you have your vanillas, chocolates, strawberries, etc. Underneath each of those are more complex flavors, so under vanilla you have Burnt Honey, Madagascar, Bourbon, etc. It's not always clear, but some of those flavors are just the primary flavor with some fancy toppings mixed in, while others are actually pre-made flavors, made beforehand instead of just mixed together in front of you. More recently I came by on a Wednesday night after dinner, if you want to avoid the lines, weeknights are the time to go! We ordered the Strawberry Balsamic Pistachio and the Coconut Ash. The Strawberry was alright, very sweet and didn't taste much pistachio if any. The Coconut Ash was alluring at first with it's jet black color, but wasn't as rich as I'd heard. It tastes only mildly of coconut. If you can get past the grittiness (like eating super fine sand) you may enjoy this. I suppose just the idea of black ice cream intrigues people. I'll give Morgenstern props on their scoops, they are beautiful and Instagram worthy, everything down to the cups to the interior feels very on trend. They're doing some unique stuff, all the ice cream is made downstairs, and you're unlikely to find the same flavors anywhere else. I'd say it's worth a try, but not worth the ridiculous lines.

Had higher hopes before actually having the ice cream. I ordered the coconut ash, salted caramel pretzel and a peanut butter flavor. The coconut ash to me isn't that tasty. It's just a cool look for a picture and your tongue. The other two flavors were pretty good but nothing special in my eyes. My girlfriend is allergic to bananas and I really wanted their banana split so maybe I'll have to go back and give that a try.

Morgernstern's... home of the famous black ice cream that shows up on everyone's Instagram feed. After seeing this intriguing black ice cream all over Instagram, I knew I had to stop by and check it out. I came here on a Thursday night in November at around 9:00 pm and the line wasn't too long. I probably had to wait 2-3 minutes to order. There were at least 10+ different flavors of ice cream, which I thought it was great because I love ice cream parlors that offer a variety of different flavors. I, of course, ended up getting the coconut ash ice cream AKA the black ice cream. It was surprisingly just okay... it had a subtle hint of coconut that was not too overpowering. It had a strange grainy texture to it, which caught me off guard since I was expecting the ice cream to be smooth. Overall, I thought the coconut ash ice cream was all right. It wasn't anything special that made me be like, "Omg... I HAVE to come back to get this flavor again!" With that said, I would definitely come back to Morgenstern's to taste their other unique flavors.

The dominating aroma of the fully flavored durian banana ice cream is intensely satisfying. With each bite, the aroma grew stronger and I felt like i flew into heaven. It needs to change its name. You cannot even taste the banana, but that's okay.

This is some of the best ice cream in NYC hands down. Expect a line. And don't come if you are in a rush. One of the great things I noticed was how friendly the guy at the cash register was. He was happily chatting and giving out samples to the customers and even trying flavors with them. This made the experience super fun. BUT if you are in a bad mood or need to be somewhere pronto, I could imagine you'd feel annoyed. In that case, go somewhere else! If, on the other hand, you're down to wait and sample a bunch of amazing, unique ice cream flavors before finally deciding what you will actually buy and devour - then you are going to LOVE Morgensterns. We first tried the coconut ash, which I found surprisingly to taste quite bland. Favorites were the peanut butter, which was seriously incredible, as well as the sweet potato with marshmallows (pie in a cone essentially) and the refreshing pistachio green tea. I can't wait to return to try more flavors!

Wanted to see what the hype was all about with this ice cream place so my husband and I decided to come here after lunch to give it a try since we were around the area. Unfortunately, I had a terrible experience here. The longest ice cream line I've ever seen and been in. The store is small with bad architectural design and flow. About 30 minutes later, it was finally our turn to order and the male cashier ignored me bc he was too busy talking to the female customers in front of me, asking them for their number and if they wanted to hang out after work. Seriously? Alright, so we ordered the burnt hazelnut, coconut ash and green tea pistachio ice cream on two sugar cones. The whole time we were waiting, we only saw one worker making the ice cream and another worker refilling the ice cream. She was the slowest human ice cream maker ever while a million people are waiting for their orders, she's just taking her time. Everyone just looked upset in there except for the ones who are eating their ice cream of course. I saw her finish making an ice cream cone and just leaving it there to melt (not knowing that was actually mine), she continued making other people's orders and finishing up mine. 15-20 minutes later, when she handed the two ice cream cones to me, I was upset about my cone just sitting there for so long. Why didn't she just hand me the one cone that was done earlier? Here's what happened, I got to at lease take a pic of the two ice cream cones and had two licks before it all went downhill when we stepped out of the store. My burnt hazelnut was already melting before she handed it to me and somehow, she did a horrible job in scooping it on the cone. When I took my 3rd lick outside, the whole scoop of ice cream fell off the cone and onto the ground. I tried all 3 flavors and was greatly disappointed. The burnt hazelnut and coconut ash was weak on flavor, green tea pistachio had no green tea taste in it whatsoever, just tasted like pistachio. Not to mention, the coconut ash ice cream was a messy disaster! Black ice cream everywhere...never again!

I stumbled upon the store while I was trying to find my way back up from Chinatown. I heard a lot about the coconut black ash ice cream so I did not want to miss a photo op! The parlour itself is pretty cute, reminiscent of old school cafeterias and soda shops. There was no wait when I went, probably because it was weekday night and still early for ice cream. I ordered a scoop of the coconut black ash on a sugar cone. The ash didn't have a distinct taste but I felt like it added a little bit of a gritty texture to the ice cream. The ice cream itself was quite thick and smooth. I thought the flavor was balanced nicely too. It was not overly sweet and the coconut scent came through lightly. I was surprised because I had assumed that the flavor was more of a gimmick than anything else. I would not mind visiting again and trying different flavors.

My favorite icecream place ever! Like... seriously. Highly recommend the burnt honey vanilla and the coconut ash. Service can be kind of slow when you order but I promise you it's all worth it!

Somewhere down on the block, there stood a very long line. The line waiting for ice cream was well worth the wait. I remember when Ice Cream Week had me exploring for more ice cream parlors awakening the devilish fat cat within me. My girl friend asked me if we should head over somewhere else, but we all had to be patient as the line got inexplicably longer and colder as wind proceeded to slap my chipmunk cheeks. Mostly all those happy people that got their lovely ice cream walked out with coconut ash. It was a pitch black ice cream with a mildly sweet taste and it definitely stains your teeth, tongue, and lips. I've seen all those great reviews on mags and e-articles so why not? Best choice I've ever made. I got it in a cup with my sweet potato caramello scoop in a cup. My girl friend liked it very much because of the distinctive but very well combined flavor. The sweet potato one was interesting, however Morgenstern's got me addicted. My girl friend got the sugar cone with a scoop of buttermilk. My girlfriend said their ice cream was amazing, but despite their slow service, Morgenstern definitely doesn't disappoint in quality. Watching them scoop the ice cream to perfect little scoops was mesmerizing and really fun to watch though. I'd def recommend people not getting off that line. We all started somewhere there too. Moving forward is a gradual slow process. Saw some people get off the middle of the line to come back half an hour later for a longer line.

I have been going to morgensterns for a while now, but never bothered to write a review, I suppose enjoying a late night scoop on a winter night (without the lines and wait) compelled me otherwise... Don't get me wrong those crystallized molecules are always a treat,

I've been meaning to come here for months now, after my ice cream snob of a friend told me that this was his favorite ice cream place in the whole city. The interior is very simple and white, with a vintage vibe. There is a bar of sorts where you can sit and eat your ice cream as others cram around trying to order theirs. It was absolutely jam-packed on a snowy Saturday afternoon, but the wait went quickly. I sampled the Vietnamese Coffee and the Hazelnut flavors, which were both super rich and flavorful. The Vietnamese Coffee was particularly strong and delicious, and I would have gotten that if I weren't sharing a cup ($4) with my friend who dislikes coffee. We ended up getting the infamous Coconut Ash, which came out as black as squid ink yet tasted very light and summery. There were bits of ash or something in it that turned your mouth black. My friend described the flavor as reminiscent of coconut water, which I'd say is pretty accurate. Overall, Morgenstern's is a cute ice cream parlor, but the ice cream wasn't as amazing as I thought it would be. It's worth stopping by if you're in the area, but I wouldn't go out of my way to come back here.