0816 utaustinpftexas

Email, J.B. Bird, director of media relations/Digital Newsroom editor, The University of Texas at Austin, Aug. 25, 2016

From: Bird, J.B. [mailto:jbird@austin.utexas.edu]

Sent: Thursday, August 25, 2016 6:29 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Gardner, to your original questions – we confirm. Details below.

“We already have concrete examples of faculty who have declined to apply for jobs here at the university or who, once offered jobs, have turned them down when they realized that this policy would go into effect, students changing their minds about coming to our graduate and undergraduate programs, and invited speakers declining to come when they realized that we couldn't guarantee that they would give their talk in a gun-free space.”

1. Students - We can confirm we know of students changing their minds about coming based on campus carry. Our admissions office said when the law was announced they received about 10 calls and 10-15 e-mails with applicants saying that they were not coming or would not apply. We assume that we don’t hear from 100 percent of the people who make this decision.

That said, we did just admit the largest incoming freshmen class in UT’s history, with about 8,500 freshman. From what we have seen, though, the assertion is true that some individuals have chosen not to come because of the new state law.

2. Speakers – We can confirm. Administrators in the Provost’s Office say they have heard of a few cases of faculty speakers who have decided not to come to campus to give talks because of the law.

3. Faculty – The Provost’s Office confirmed hearing of a few people who decided not to interview and who stated that it was because of campus carry.

We have not tracked centrally instances of the second part of the faculty question, people "who, once offered jobs, have turned them down when they realized that this policy would go into effect" -- but your question was phrased as an OR statement, so we would confirm the overall assertion as true, based on the first part of the question.

More broadly, the university will closely monitor faculty recruiting to see if the law has a long-term impact.

J.B.

J.B. Bird

Director of Media Relations/Digital Newsroom Editor

The University of Texas at Austin