0115 blsdallaspftexas

Emails, Cheryl Abbot, regional economist, Chief, Economic Analysis & Information, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Dallas, Jan. 15-16, 2015

8:46 p.m.

Jan. 15, 2015

Gardner, as Dr Perry notes, he is using ‘total civilian employment’ data (household-based survey) rather than the ‘jobs’ data (payroll or establishment-based survey) that we previously reviewed while discussing the problems with using a sum-of-states approach. These surveys are the two components of our monthly U.S. Employment Situation release. It appears that in the Governor’s statement, the first reference was to ‘jobs’ (the payroll survey) and the second reference was to total civilian employment (derived from the U.S. household and the state Local Area Unemployment Survey {LAUS}). BLS discusses both the household and payroll surveys each month in our national and state releases, so that’s quite normal for everyone to do. However, we still run into the problem of comparing a single state’s estimate to a national estimate – state and national estimates are derived somewhat differently and\or the samples used for the estimates are intended to best represent each individual ‘area.’ Also keep in mind that as with our ‘jobs’ discussion, for the period Dr. Perry is using (December 2007 – November 2014), there are many states that have negative changes in their total civilian employment (24 states have yet to return to pre-recession employment levels). Please see the attachment with selected calculations for total U.S. employment and individual state employment. On a statewide basis, Texas by far leads all states, with total civilian employment growth of 1,410,440. California is a distant second with civilian (household) employment growth of 452,763. But as I mentioned, there are still 24 states with negative employment changes.

Using the official U.S. household employment series (Current Population Survey or CPS), total U.S. civilian employment is up 1,058,000 since December 2007. (As shown by Dr. Perry using the St. Louis Fed database.)

Cheryl

Regional Economist

Chief, Economic Analysis & Information

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

Dallas, TX

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Friday, January 16, 2015 9:45 AM

To: Abbot, Cheryl - BLS

Subject: RE: Texas reporter seeking elaboration for a fact check

Is there any flaw in using total civilian employment data to justify the statement Perry made using those figures?

10:43 a.m.

Jan. 16, 2015

Gardner, all I can say is that BLS produces the data and allows others to analyze and interpret it as they see fit. I have no problem with the use of the total civilian employment series (CPS\LAUS surveys) rather than the total jobs series (establishment\payroll survey), although strictly speaking, the first should reference ‘total civilian employment’ and the second ‘jobs.’ I’ve already explained how I believe the best comparison would be stated and that’s all I can do. (Using the specific data series that are most appropriate for selected comparisons, in this case CPS-U.S. and LAUS-States, and without any additional aggregation or disaggregation, something like ….the US rose\fell x.x percent during the period compared to a rise\decline of x.x percent in the state….).

Cheryl