NYC Health
Measles

Measles is a virus that causes fever and a rash. It is highly contagious and anyone who is not vaccinated against the virus can get it at any age.

Although measles is rare in the United States because of high vaccination rates, it is still common in other parts of the world. Measles is common in some countries in Europe, Asia, and Africa and is occasionally brought into the Unites States by unvaccinated travelers who return with measles infection.

If you are a medical provider, see our Measles Information for Providers.

Recent Outbreak in Brooklyn and Queens

As of June 10, 2019, there have been 588 confirmed cases in NYC since September.

Vaccination Requirement in Brooklyn

On April 9, the Health Commissioner ordered every adult and child who lives, works or resides in the following ZIP codes and has not received the measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine to be vaccinated:

11205

11206

11211

11249

On April 17, the Board of Health voted unanimously to adopt a resolution supporting the Commissioner's order and the vaccination requirement.

As of June 10, 27,607 doses of the MMR vaccine have been administered to people who are under 19 years old in Williamsburg and Borough Park since October.

People who demonstrate they are immune from measles or have a medical condition that prevents them from receiving the vaccine will not need to get vaccinated.

If the Health Department identifies a person with measles or an unvaccinated child exposed to measles in one of the above ZIP codes, that individual or their parent or guardian could be fined $1,000.

You can get vaccinated at a Federally Qualified Health Center near you, or at our immunization clinic in Fort Greene.

Further Guidance During the Outbreak

In addition to making sure you and your family have received the MMR vaccine, we recommend the following:

For Adults

Spending time in NYC outside of areas with reported measles : If you do not know if you or your family have been vaccinated, ask your health care provider for a blood test to check if you are immune. If you are not immune and do not have a medical reason why you cannot get the MMR vaccine, get vaccinated. Anyone born after January 1, 1957, who has not received a measles-containing vaccine, or who does not have a blood test providing that they are immune to measles, should receive one dose of the MMR vaccine.



: If you do not know if you or your family have been vaccinated, ask your health care provider for a blood test to check if you are immune. If you are not immune and do not have a medical reason why you cannot get the MMR vaccine, get vaccinated. Living, working or going to school in ZIP codes 11205, 11206, 11211 or 11249 : Measles vaccination is required, as ordered by the Health Commissioner. If you are unsure whether you have been vaccinated, ask your health care provider for proof of immunity or vaccination.

: Measles vaccination is required, as ordered by the Health Commissioner. If you are unsure whether you have been vaccinated, ask your health care provider for proof of immunity or vaccination.

Living, working, going to school or spending time in areas with reported measles (Borough Park, Sunset Park or Rockland County) but outside the above ZIP codes : If you do not know if you or your family have been vaccinated, ask your provider for a blood test to check if you are immune. If you are not immune and do not have a medical reason why you cannot get the MMR vaccine, get vaccinated.

: If you do not know if you or your family have been vaccinated, ask your provider for a blood test to check if you are immune. If you are not immune and do not have a medical reason why you cannot get the MMR vaccine, get vaccinated.

Traveling to another country that has reported measles: Get documentation showing you have been vaccinated or a blood test to make sure you have measles immunity. If you do not have records or do not know your immunity status, get the MMR vaccine prior to travel — ideally two weeks before departure.

For Children

Spending time in NYC outside of areas with reported measles : Vaccination is required for all children attending child care or school in NYC. The best way to protect your child from measles is to verify that they are up to date with their MMR vaccine. This group of children should get the vaccine on the standard MMR schedule — one dose on or after their first birthday, and a second dose before they enter school at 4 to 6 years of age.

: Vaccination is required for all children attending child care or school in NYC. The best way to protect your child from measles is to verify that they are up to date with their MMR vaccine. This group of children should get the vaccine on the standard MMR schedule — one dose on or after their first birthday, and a second dose before they enter school at 4 to 6 years of age.

Living or going to school in ZIP codes 11205, 11206, 11211 or 11249 : All children aged 6 months and older : They must be up to date on their MMR vaccine, as ordered by the Commissioner. Failure to comply may result in a fine of $1,000 for their parents/guardians. For infants 6 months to 11 months old, this extra, early dose of the MMR vaccine does not count toward the routine MMR vaccine series, and will need to be repeated after the child's first birthday.



: Living, working, going to school or spending time in areas with reported measles (Borough Park, Sunset Park or Rockland County) but outside the above ZIP codes : Infants aged 6 to 11 months : We recommend they receive an extra, early dose of the MMR vaccine. This dose would not count toward the routine MMR vaccine series, and will need to be repeated after the child's first birthday.

All children aged 12 months and older : They should be up to date on their MMR vaccine. These children must have received a minimum of one dose of the MMR vaccine. They can safely receive a second dose before they turn 4 and at least 28 days after their first dose. This early second dose counts toward the routine, two-dose vaccine series required for school.



: All children in NYC who are members of the Orthodox Jewish community, including those who do not live or go to school in areas with reports of measles : We recommend infants aged 6 to 11 months receive an extra, early dose of the MMR vaccine. This dose would not count toward the routine, two-dose vaccine series required for school.

: We recommend infants aged 6 to 11 months receive an extra, early dose of the MMR vaccine. This dose would not count toward the routine, two-dose vaccine series required for school.

Traveling to another country that has reported measles : Infants aged 6 to 11 months should receive a dose of the MMR vaccine before they travel. All other children should be up to date on their MMR vaccine and have documentation of their vaccine history or immunity to measles. Children should be vaccinated prior to travel — ideally two weeks before departure.

: Infants aged 6 to 11 months should receive a dose of the MMR vaccine before they travel. All other children should be up to date on their MMR vaccine and have documentation of their vaccine history or immunity to measles. Children should be vaccinated prior to travel — ideally two weeks before departure.

All infants under 6 months of age: They cannot receive the MMR vaccine. If the mother is vaccinated or immune, infants younger than 6 months of age are presumed to have some protection from their mother. Do not knowingly expose your infant to someone who is sick with the measles or any other contagious illness. If your infant has been exposed to someone confirmed to have measles, speak to your doctor immediately. They can administer immune globulin, a medication to prevent measles after a known exposure.

Measles Cases by Neighborhood, Age and Date

The following case counts are from September 1, 2018, to June 10, 2019.

Expand AllCollapse All Cases by Neighborhood Neighborhood Confirmed Cases New Cases Since June 3, 2019 Neighborhoods with Ongoing Transmission Borough Park 100 11 Sunset Park 16 3 Williamsburg 437 5 Neighborhoods without Ongoing Transmission Bensonhurst 3 1 Brighton Beach/Coney Island 5 None Chelsea/Clinton 1 None Crown Heights 4 1 Far Rockaway 1 None Flatbush 1 None Flushing 3 None Hunts Point, Longwood and Melrose 1 None Jamaica 2 None Midwood/Marine Park 5 None Port Richmond 3 2 Willowbrook 6 None Total 588 23 Cases by Age and Vaccination Status Age Range Unvaccinated With One

Prior MMR With Two

Prior MMR With

Unknown

MMR Total Under 1 year 89 2 None None 91 1 – 4 years 220 31 1 None 252 5 – 17 years 114 2 8 1 125 18 years and over 6 7 18 89 120 Total 429 42 27 90 588 Cases by Date Month New Cases June 2019 5 May 2019 86 April 2019 177 March 2019 160 February 2019 69 January 2019 34 December 2018 14 November 2018 28 October 2018 14 September 2018 1 Total 588 How Measles Spreads Measles is spread through the air when an infected person sneezes or coughs. A person will be contagious four days before the rash appears and for four days after the rash appears. They are no longer contagious on the fifth day after the rash started. The virus remains active and contagious in the air and on surfaces for up to two hours. Symptoms Symptoms usually appear 10 to 12 days after exposure to the virus. In some cases, symptoms may start as early as seven days or as late as 21 days. Early symptoms include: Fever

Cough

Runny nose

Red, watery eyes Three to five days after initial symptoms, a rash of red spots appears on the face that then spreads over the entire body. Anyone can become infected with measles, but the virus is more severe in infants, pregnant women and people whose immune systems are weak. Complications of measles include: Diarrhea

Ear infections

Pneumonia (infection of the lungs)

Encephalitis (swelling of the brain)

Premature birth or low-birth-weight in pregnancy

Death Prevention Vaccination is the best way to prevent measles. Anyone who has received two doses of a measles-containing vaccine is considered immune and highly unlikely to get measles. MMR Vaccine A child should get a measles vaccine on or after their first birthday. The vaccine is combined with mumps and rubella vaccines into one vaccine called MMR (measles, mumps and rubella). A second dose of the MMR vaccine is recommended before children enter school at 4 to 6 years of age. Infants ages 6 to 11 months should also receive the MMR vaccine before travelling internationally. For information on where you or your child can get vaccinated, call 311. Vaccination Requirements Citywide All children enrolled in pre-kindergarten, nursery school, daycare programs, and Head Start are required to receive one dose of the measles vaccine.



Children enrolled in grades K through 12 and college students are required to have two doses of the MMR vaccine.



Health care workers are required to receive two doses of a measles-containing vaccine, or have a blood test showing that they are immune.

Side Effects Most people who receive the MMR vaccine do not have any side effects. Some people experience mild side effects, such as fever, mild rash or swelling. Severe problems are very rare. Vaccine ingredients do not cause autism. More than 25 articles have been published since 1999 that have found no link between thimerosal-containing vaccines and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), as well as no link between the MMR vaccine and ASD in children.

Diagnosis and Treatment

There is no specific medicine to treat the measles virus. Most of the time, people with measles will get better on their own. For example, in some situations vitamin A may be recommended if a child is malnourished. Treatment may be given for the symptoms of the virus.

Additional Resources

More Information