012015 dillonpftexas

Emails (excerpted), Daniel Dillon, senior research associate, the Child and Family Research Partnership, Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs, University of Texas, Jan. 16 and 20, 2015

3:08 p.m.

Jan. 16, 2015

The official poverty rate comes from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) to the Current Population Survey (CPS) (U.S. Census). They sometimes issue weighting corrections and various adjustments that result in small differences in the numbers. I’m also not sure which years the DNC is using to define Perry’s time in office. Anyway, the numbers I’m seeing are slightly different than theirs—however there is a rise in the state poverty rate over Perry’s time in office if you just take the beginning and end of that time.

Here’s what I could find for the beginning of Perry’s term. The poverty rate in Texas was 16.2 in 2000 (see attached census doc) and 15.7 in 2001 (see https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/cpstables/macro/032002/pov/new25_008.htm). I’m not sure which one you want to call “the beginning of Perry policy” but the survey is usually conducted in March, so I believe the 2001 number would have been collected a few months into his official term. The most recent number I could find is the 2013 poverty rate, which is 16.8 for TX (also attached). I don’t think the 2014 number is out yet.

So to summarize, the poverty rate has gone up in TX from 15.7 to 16.8 from 2001 to 2013 (from what I’m seeing from the Census). It is important to note, however, that the overall poverty rate in the U.S. has also gone up during this time—from 11.6 in 2001 to 14.5 to 2013 (cited from the same data tables).

In general, it’s difficult to determine cause and effect with these sorts of numbers. Poverty rates are the result of many factors, so it’s hard to pin them on Perry or his policies directly. Policy choices do affect the poverty rate (the EITC lifted about 6.2 million out of poverty in 2013—this is captured using the Supplemental Poverty Measure which accounts for the effects of policies on the poverty rate, which the official measure does not do very well), but these policies are interacting with larger economic forces (for example, recessions or changes in the labor market as some industries rise and others decline). Poverty rates are also affected by population growth and migration into and out of the state. Since the population has grown a lot since Perry took office, the rate will be affected by whether these new TX citizens are disproportionately above or below the poverty line. All in all, it's difficult to pull these things apart and determine what’s driving what.

There is decades of debate on these issues so take this with a grain of salt, but in general I think economists would say that poverty is fairly responsive to the larger economy. This is especially true with downturns in the economy—economic shocks like recessionary periods have a notable effect on poverty. This happened under Perry’s term, whether he had anything to do with it or not. The same is true for growth. When the economy grows, poverty tends to decline. This has been the case in TX as well; the poverty rate has been dropping in recent years as we climb out of the recession. I realize this is out of the scope of your question, but this relationship between GDP (i.e. economic growth) and poverty is nuanced and hotly debated. No one really disputes that they are related, but in recent decades we’ve seen that when the economy does really well, those gains are generally captured by the top income brackets. Economic growth is doing less to pull up the bottom these days.

Finally, it’s worth pointing out that most anti-poverty programs are federal. Some states have their own anti-poverty policies (like state level EITCs, state-level minimum wage laws, or expanded Medicaid coverage. TANF also varies by state) but these are generally add-ons that the state does above and beyond the federal programs. The baseline approach to fighting poverty is largely designed and administered by the federal government.

Some additional thoughts from Cynthia: Poverty was at an all-time low when Clinton left office and they rose sharply during the recession. Perry's predecessor probably had more to do with poverty than Perry. But our poverty rates in Texas will be higher because we have a large number of single parents and of Hispanics, which have high rates of poverty. That said, we invest very little in our families. Our TANF amount has stayed basically flat, we don't have a state eitc, and a low minimum wage (and lots of folks who work below minimum).

...I think the conclusion is—yes, it has gone up under Perry. But it has also gone up in the U.S. overall. The economy was soaring in 2000. Then we suffered the worst economic downturn since the great depression and that affected poverty rates across the board. It’s hard to tell what Perry or his policies may have to do with it. Texas has a strong economy, but it also does little to help the poor. Making sense of all these different factors is complicated.

...

Daniel

From: Selby, Gardner

Sent: Tuesday, January 20, 2015 10:57 AM

To: Dillon, Daniel R

Subject: RE: Fresh inquiry, Statesman reporter

You used CPS data. A census bureau guide suggested we stick to one-year ACS figures. What’s the distinction?

12:15 p.m.

Jan. 20, 2015

…

The source of the numbers is an important distinction. The CPS (and more specially the ASEC of the CPS) is the source for official poverty estimates. This is what I gave you originally. You can see that the ACS shows a jump from 15.1% to 17.5% while the official numbers show a jump from 15.7% to 16.8% -- much less dramatic.

Neither one is right or wrong, they are just different surveys. Both are conducted by the Census, but the official poverty numbers always come from the CPS. See here for the distinction between CPS and ACS. https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/about/datasources/factsheet.html