052214 caltranspftexas

Emails, David Yam, branch chief, Erosion and Sediment control and Mitigation Branch, Office of Water Quality, Division of Environmental Planning and Engineering, California Department of Transportation, District 4, May 22, 2014

As I said, we’re trying to check this claim by Sen. Cruz of Texas: The Obama administration spent “$205,075 in” stimulus funds “to relocate a shrub that sells for $16.82.”

No federal stimulus funds were not used to relocate the 21,000 pound Manzanita plant at Doyle Drive. A cultivated ‘similar’ Manzanita plant can be purchased commercially, but not a ‘wild’ Manzanita plant found at the Doyle Drive Replacement project, which was listed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) as ‘ENDANGERED’ (10/05/2012).

Along those lines, I am interested in on-the-record information from CalTrans on how much it cost to uproot, move and replant the bush in question; the source or sources of those funds; and if it’s accurate that one can buy the bush for under $20.

The hard cost to uproot the 21,000 pound plant, move, replant and initially maintain the plant was approximately $148,000 (non-federal funds). The major cost for post relocation management per the MOA was $105,000 (Federal Urban Partner Agreement Funds (not federal stimulus funds). A 21,000 pound wild Manzanita plant cannot be purchased commercially.

Cruz drew the $205,075 total he aired from a CNSNews.com news story that added up figures in the memorandum of agreement. Separately, a San Francisco Chronicle news story pegged the moving costs at $175,000.

Another question: Did stimulus dollars help fund all this or no? (As noted, Stimulus funds were not used) If so, how much stimulus money was spent for the big move? (none)The CNSNews.com story said two stimulus grants have figured into the ongoing project to replace an approach to the Golden Gate bridge, which has a total expected cost of $1.045 billion, it reported. The $130 million in stimulus grants to the project, its story said, breaks down to $83.28 million awarded Dec. 24, 2009 (about a month before the bush was moved) and $46 million awarded Dec. 30, 2010.

The Doyle Drive Replacement project had multiple construction contracts and a tree removal/plant salvaging/relocation contract. The tree removal/plant salvaging/relocation contract had no federal funds and was separate from the main roadway contracts. The relocation of the wild Manzanita plant was done under the tree removal/plant salvaging/relocation contract.

...

Dave

2:53 p.m.

(Selby)

Where did the transplant dollars come from; what source?

11:53 a.m. PDT

The transplant (relocation work) dollars came from local Toll collection funds from the Bay Area Toll Authority.

Dave

David Yam

Branch Chief, Erosion and Sediment control and Mitigation Branch

Office of Water Quality

Division of Environmental Planning and Engineering

Caltrans District 4

Background

In October 2009, a single remaining 'wild' species of A. Franciscana was discovered along the connector ramp Southbound 101 and Park Presidio Boulevard within the work limits of the Doyle Drive project. Several federal and state agencies along with Plant specialists notified Caltrans that they believed they had discovered a remnant "wild" growing plant of Franciscan Manzanita thought to be extinct since 1947.

Testing and Research = Management Plan

San Francisco State University experts conducted extensive genetic and morphological testing and research at the UC Berkeley Herbarium to verify that the plant was indeed 'wild.' As a result, in late 2009, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) required Caltrans to develop a Management Plan for what was deemed a 'potential' endangered species. The approved Plan, a collaboration with at least 5 federal and state agencies, required the relocation of the plant (21,000 pounds) from its found location. In late January 2010, the newly discovered plant was successfully relocated to a location within the Presidio Trust.

Relocation and Management Costs:

Federal Stimulus funds were not used for the relocation of the endangered plant. Non-federal funds were used for the relocation work:

Relocation work - uproot 21,000 pound plant, transport, prepare target home location (14’X 12’X 3’ deep hole), plant and maintain initially - $148,000.000

*Plant Management as per MOA- $105,075.00

* Federal Urban Partner Agreement Funds (not stimulus)

Management Plan Value

Failure to meet the requirements of the Management Plan would have resulted in the shut down of the $90 million Doyle Drive roadway project that would have impacted the construction schedule for the overall $1 billion Doyle Drive Replacement project.

Current Status

Following a 12 month finding period, on October 5, 2012, the USFWS rendered a decision listing the 'wild' plant as an Endangered Species under the 1973 Endangered Species Act. (ESA).

Wild v. Cultivated

The newly discovered plant at the Doyle Drive site is one of 3 other the single remaining 'wild' species of A. Franciscana. The other wild species are located in Botanical gardens. The 'wild' nature is the significant differing factor from its 'cultivated' relatives that are easily purchased by the public. Cuttings from the 'wild' plant cannot be purchased by the public. The USFWS recovery plan for this plant includes planting cuttings from the Doyle Manzanita along with cuttings from the other wild botanical plants to encourage strong native strains of this plant that can sustain themselves in the natural environment. Although you can purchase a ‘similar’ plant at a nursery, you cannot purchase a wild endangered plant.