091014 lbeanpftexas

Emails, Lauren Bean, deputy communications director, Office of the Attorney General of Texas, Sept. 19 and Oct. 9, 2014

10:39 a.m.

Sept. 19, 2014

Gardner, here’s the full statement I sent Wayne for his article:

The State is not defending the hospital or the doctor in this case--or their alleged conduct. If the hospital or doctor have violated the law, then they will be held accountable and nothing in the State’s court filings oppose the plaintiffs on that front.

The ‘sole purpose’ of the State’s intervention is to defend the constitutionality of a state tort reform law that is being challenged in the plaintiffs’ lawsuits. The plaintiffs could have sued to recover damages without challenging the constitutionality of the law. If they had done that – or if they amend their pleadings to delete a challenge to the constitutionality of the law – then the State would not be a party to the case.

There are doctors and hospitals sued every day in the state of Texas in cases where the constitutionality of the law is not challenged. The State does not intervene in those cases because the constitutionality of the law is not in question.

If the State remains a party to this lawsuit for the sole purpose of defending the constitutionality of the law, the State will not be putting on any defense of any action by the hospital or any doctor.

The State will not put on any evidence or make any argument whether the Hospital’s actions or the doctor’s actions violate the law.

The State does not condone, support, or defend the actions of the hospital or doctor. The only thing the State will argue is that the law is not unconstitutional.

Lauren Bean

Deputy Communications Director

Texas Attorney General’s Office

4:15 p.m.

Oct. 9, 2014

We received no notification from counsel for the plaintiffs—despite the fact that notice is legally required when a plaintiff is challenging a state law in federal court.

The attached “PLAINTIFFS’ NOTICE OF CONSTITUTIONAL QUESTION” was filed with the federal district court. I downloaded this document off of PACER. As you can see, that notice claims that the notice was “served on the Texas Attorney General as required by Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 5.1…” However, the OAG has no record of actually receiving this notification.

Usually these notifications are either sent to our Public Information and Assistance Division or to an email address specifically established for this purpose (const_claims@texasattorneygeneral.gov). However, a search of both of these found no record of this notification.

Importantly, we were also not contacted by the defendants, anyone affiliated with the defendants, or defense counsel regarding this constitutional challenge to the State’s medical malpractice / tort reform laws.

The first time OAG learned of the challenge to the State’s tort reform statute was when Solicitor General Jonathan Mitchell read the March 10, 2014 Texas Lawyer article titled “Open Courts Challenge: Taking a New Aim at Tort Reform”.

Thanks,

Lauren