0416 apdpftexas

Emails, Brian Manley, assistant chief-chief of staff, Austin Police Department, April 13 and 15, 2016

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, April 12, 2016 5:40 PM

To: Manley, Brian

Subject: Statesman inquiry for a fact check

Good afternoon. I’m writing you with some urgency because Council Member Troxclair’s office provided me a document her chief of staff described as coming from you in January of this year, attached.

Make sense?

Troxclair, drawing on the document, has said an Austin resident is nine times more likely to be assaulted by a cab driver here than the driver for a ride-sharing service.

My questions:

--Would that be your read or interpretation of the information? Why or why not?

--As we check her “nine times” statement, is there anything else you’d recommend we consider?

I am trying to gather relevant information by midday Wednesday. I’d be happy to hear back by email or phone.

THANKS.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Manley, Brian

Sent: Wednesday, April 13, 2016 8:46 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: RE: Statesman inquiry for a fact check

Mr. Selby,

I have attached the email I sent to the council member’s office back in January and I believe this will answer your questions.

Take care,

Brian

Brian Manley

Assistant Chief-Chief of Staff

Austin Police Department

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Wednesday, April 13, 2016 6:05 PM

To: Manley, Brian

Subject: Following up

Thanks. It looks to me like the document you sent matches what I shared with you.

Does the department agree that these figures support the conclusion you’re nine times more likely to be assaulted in a cab than a ride-hailed vehicle? Why or why not?

9:57 a.m.

April 15, 2016

I believe my comments in the email to the councilmember answer your question below. You cannot calculate a rate without knowing your base number. Without knowing how many rides each provider gave, we cannot calculate a rate.