0215 natlmathscipftexas

Emails, Gregg Fleisher, chief academic officer; Tara Marathe, director of communications; National Math and Science Initiative, Feb. 26-27 and March 11-12, 2015

12:13 p.m.

Feb. 26, 2015

Yes, Dallas African American and Hispanics students are more likely to pass AP math and science exams than any other similar urban districts – twice as likely.

Gregg Fleisher

Chief Academic Officer

-----

Transforming Math & Science Education

nms.org

Join the National Math + Science Initiative in Making a Difference:

12:47 p.m.

Our statement referring to a minority student (African American or Hispanic) in Dallas being twice as likely to earn a qualifying score on an AP math or science exam as a minority student in other large urban districts is based on comparisons with similar districts in terms of size and percentages of low-income and African American and Hispanic students. There were 15,194 junior and senior African American and Hispanic students in Dallas in 2013-14, who earned 948 passing AP math and science scores. This rate of 62 minority passing exams per 1000 minority juniors and seniors is more than twice what we see in similar urban districts.

Our data sharing agreements with the College Board prevent us from sharing data for other districts, however these data can be verified through open record requests. Our criteria for classifying a district as a comparable large urban district are as follows:

· The district is at least half the size of Dallas in terms of the # of African American and Hispanic juniors and seniors (or about 7,500 African American and Hispanic juniors and seniors or more)

· The district is at least 75% minority (African American and Hispanic) in composition

· 75% of students are on free and reduced lunch programs

We hope this information helps.

Best,

Tara

Tara Marathe

Director of Communications

-----

Transforming Math & Science Education

nms.org

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Thursday, February 26, 2015 2:37 PM

To: Tara Marathe

Cc: Gregg Fleisher

Subject: RE: Inquiry for a newspaper fact check

What other districts did you compare Dallas to?

3:36 p.m.

Our other comparison districts include, but are not limited to the following:

Houston ISD

Los Angeles ISD

Newark Public Schools

Boston ISD

New York City DOE

DC Public Schools

Phoenix Union HS District

Atlanta Public Schools

Philadelphia School District

Detroit ISD

St. Louis City Schools

Chicago Public Schools

Miami Public Schools

Baltimore City Public Schools

San Diego

Louisville

San Antonio

Best,

Tara

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Thursday, February 26, 2015 5:24 PM

To: Tara Marathe

Subject: RE: Inquiry for a newspaper fact check

Unsure what you mean by not limited to. Are there additional districts? If so, what are they?

Thanks.

9:43 a.m.

Feb. 27, 2015

We reviewed smaller districts, but those listed below formed the basis of our comparison with Dallas. The analysis was done internally based on data from the College Board. The information provided below is what we are able to provide given our data sharing agreements with the College Board.

Best,

Tara

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Wednesday, March 11, 2015 11:53 AM

To: Tara Marathe

Subject: Following up

What additional information has the initiative posted—or might it provide—enabling me to show our readers precisely how your study reached its conclusions? Right now, it seems, I’m limited to quoting that conclusion without knowing how peer students in the comparable districts fared.

g.

5:32 p.m.

March 11, 2015

We looked at the state web sites where the urban districts below are located to get their 11th and 12th grade African American and Hispanic enrollment numbers. We then, through our data sharing agreement with the College Board, looked at how many African American and Hispanic students earned qualifying scores (3 or higher) on AP math, science, and English exams and looked at that ratio and compared with the results for Dallas students.

Best,

Tara

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Thursday, March 12, 2015 10:31 AM

To: Tara Marathe

Subject: Double checking

Is all of this story currently accurate?

11:44 a.m.

March 12, 2015

Our statement was that an African American or Hispanic student in Dallas is twice as likely to earn a qualifying score on an AP math or science exam as a minority student in similar large urban districts. The statement is based on comparisons with similar districts in terms of size and percentages of low-income and African American and Hispanic students.