0814 montanapftexas

Email, Shawn Regan, research fellow, Property & Environment Research Center, Aug. 8, 2014

12:10 p.m.

Several western states have recently introduced proposals to take control of certain federal lands within their borders. Utah passed a bill signed by Gov. Gary Herbert in 2012 calling on the federal government to relinquish title to federal lands in the state before the end of 2014. The bill, however, did not call for disposal of federal lands into private ownership, nor did it include national parks or designated wilderness areas. Other states, such as Montana, are considering similar bills, and many have created task forces to study the issue, but none have gone as far at Utah in demanding the transfer of federal lands to the state.

I don't know anything specific about the origins of Cruz's amendment to the Sportsmen's Act. It's important to note that the amendment, to some extent, reflects a sentiment in many western states that local control of public lands is more desirable than management by distant federal bureaucracies.

The amendment states that the federal government cannot own more than 50 percent of the total land area in a state, and that federal land agencies must identify lands for disposal if their land holdings exceed 50 percent. This would apply to only five states: Alaska, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, and Utah. It's worth noting that these are by no means the most oil- and gas-rich states, with the exception of Utah and Alaska. There is also little or no fracking in these states.

In those states with more than 50 percent federal land ownership, the secretaries of the Interior and Agriculture would be responsible for identifying excess lands for disposals. These almost certainly would not be national parks, wilderness areas, or other "pristine" federal lands, but would likely be lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management or Forest Service—many of which are already managed for logging, grazing, and energy development.

Hope this is helpful. PERC has published several reports in the past on state vs. federal land management, and we are in the process of updating that analysis. Let me know if I can provide anymore info.

Shawn Regan

Research Fellow

Property & Environment Research Center (PERC)