1115 rubiocamppftexasflorida

Emails, Alex Conant, communications director, Marco Rubio presidential campaign, Nov. 17, 2015

On Tue, Nov 17, 2015 at 12:26 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

Alex:

Hello from PolitiFact Texas. I write because I am trying to make sure we know the exact basis of Sen. Rubio’s claim in South Carolina that Cruz “proposed work permits.” Could it be that on this point, Sen. Rubio misspoke or such?

As you know, your text reply to Amy this morning said Rubio was talking about the “green card” amendments. But in South Carolina, Rubio may have indicated the green cards element was something apart from giving work permits to people here illegally.

Rubio, asked if Cruz was tougher on illegal immigration, replied in part: “In fact, when the Senate bill was proposed,” Cruz “proposed legalizing people that were here illegally. He proposed giving them work permits.” (We’re fact-checking the underlined statement.) Rubio said next: “He’s also supported a massive expansion of the green cards. He's supported a massive expansion of the H-1B program, a 500 percent increase. So, if you look at it, I don't think our positions are dramatically different."

It would help me if you pointed out the precise amendment you were thinking of in the text this morning. How would that amendment have legalized people living here illegally? If it helps, this web page seems to present Cruz’s amendments in one place.

Broadly, I’m now familiar with what Cruz said in committee and in interviews about the effect of adding his amendment removing the path to citizenship provisions. However, I’m not finding any indication Cruz proposed legalizing people that are here illegally. Did he?

I hope to complete our fact check soon.

Thanks.

g.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

11:47 a.m.

Hi there: Here's the press release where Ted Cruz proposed letting illegal immigrants gain legal status (instead of Green Cards); increase the # of green cards issues; and dramatically increase the number of temporary high-skilled visas (H-1Bs).

http://www.cruz.senate.gov/?P=PRESS_RELEASE&ID=105

On Tue, Nov 17, 2015 at 1:21 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

Thanks.

There is no proposal on that page to give work permits to immigrants living here illegally.

Let me know if there is anything else you’d like us to consider?

g.

From: Alex Conant

Sent: Tuesday, November 17, 2015 12:52 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Re: Following up from Texas for a fact check of Sen. Marco Rubio

Actually, 1322 does exactly that according to Cruz: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4CwVrfydjOI

On Tue, Nov 17, 2015 at 1:55 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

Am I right that 1322 left intact the existing language in the legislation providing for work permits and more?

If so, is that what Rubio meant saying Cruz proposed as much?

g.

1:22 p.m.

correct- Cruz proposed giving illegal immigrants legal status.