0916 ecppftexas

Emails, Emily Crane Pimentel, director of communications, Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, Sept. 14, 2016

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, September 14, 2016 10:59 AM

Subject: Urgent folo

Mr. Schaefer says governments will have more sway with the change; he and others noted the increased threshold for the board to reject GAC advice after the transition and, they wrote, that governments will also be voting members of the new Empowered Community, which is described as vested with the power to dismiss the board or individual ”directors” or reject or approve individual bylaw changes plus other powers. “Governments have not had a say in these matters before,” the paper says.

Link to paper below.

From: Schaefer, Brett

Sent: Tuesday, September 13, 2016 6:32 PM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: Re: Inquiry for fact check of claim by Sen. Cruz

There is a section in this paper discussing the expanded authority of the GAC:

http://docs.techfreedom.org/TF_White_Paper_IANA_Transition.pdf

From: Emily Crane Pimentel

Sent: Wednesday, September 14, 2016 11:50 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Governments:

The role of governments has not been increased as a result of the transition. The multistakeholder model will continue to appropriately limit the influence of governments and intergovernmental organizations to an advisory role in policy development. More than 170 governments actively participate as a single committee and must come to a consensus before policy advice can be issued. After the transition, there will be times where the ICANN Board must give special consideration to the public policy advice of governments. However, this will only happen when there is no objection from any government in the committee – which includes the United States. This is a stricter requirement than is currently in place for government advice.

Mr. Schaefer is correct that the GAC has not previously had an opportunity to participate in decisions of the recall of the ICANN Board, or reject Budgets or plans or other new powers. However, no other part of the ICANN community has previously had this opportunity either. These are all NEW powers of the community, and the GAC still does not participate in these on equal footing with the remainder of the community. The GAC is specifically "carved out" from participating in community powers that would challenge decisions based on GAC advice. The empowered community thresholds were developed so that the GAC's support is not needed to exercise any of the community's power. As Assistant Secretary Strickling has stated, the power of the Governments has not increased vis-a-vis the remainder of the community. This is true.

The details of what obligations the ICANN Board will have with regard to government advice after the transition is outlined here:

https://community.icann.org/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=58723827&preview=/58723827/58726377/Annex%2011%20-%20FINAL-Revised.pdf

Empowered Community:

The document linked below is from a previous working draft of the accountability proposal. The final details of the Empowered Community are outlined here:

https://community.icann.org/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=58723827&preview=/58723827/58726517/Annex%2001%20-%20FINAL-Revised.pdf

—

Emily Crane Pimentel

Director, Communications

Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)"

Date: Wednesday, September 14, 2016 at 1:02 PM

To: Emily Pimentel

Subject: RE: Urgent folo

Got it. I take your message as confirming but elaborating on what I shared earlier. What’s the publication date of the Annex 15 document you pointed out, and by what organization?

G.

(Pimentel)

12:10 p.m.

Clarifying, yes. The annexes were published on February 23, 2016. They are part of the final consensus proposal from the multistakeholder community that were sent to NTIA on March 10th, and approved by NTIA on June 9th.