0317 cppppftexas

Emails, Oliver Bernstein, communications director, Center for Public Policy Priorities, March 22-23, 2017

4:57 p.m.

Supplemental budget needs that arose in the interim are laid out by the LBB (as of January 2017). Not included: the TEA decision to have the state pay for the local option homestead exemption (wealthy homeowners in wealthy districts – see more at http://bettertexasblog.org/2017/02/texas-education-chief-gave-100-million-rich-homeowners/ ). Supplemental changes will be made in HB 2 or the Senate version.

Here, the LBB spells out just the $2 billion in GR supplemental changes (up or down). The Medicaid GR draws down additional federal match - $1.7 billion.

8:09 p.m.

Other than Medicaid spending rising, legislative cuts to other parts of the budget (especially education spending) would make the Medicaid percent of the total go up.

A related discussion came up on this topic during Senate Finance hearing this morning. Lots of Senators dismayed that HHS could overtake Education in the budget (All Funds). None of them acknowledging that state funding for the Foundation School Program is flat (while school taxes rise), and that cuts have been made to higher ed. And HHS heavily reliant on federal funding; take that out and it’s way lower than Education in the budget.

Sent: Wednesday, March 22, 2017

To: Oliver Bernstein

Subject: RE: Gauging Medicaid costs to the state budget

Looks to me right now like ALL FUNDS spending on Medicaid breaks out to 29.5 percent of total AF spending in 2016-17. But are you telling me below that the spending that gets TX to $216 b has yet to pass into law?

9:51 a.m.

March 23, 2017

Yes. The costs have been incurred by the various agencies (such as cleanup costs for natural disasters that were unforeseen in mid-2015). But there’s no money to pay those bills in the agencies’ existing appropriations. HB 2, SB 1266, or some other supplemental appropriation is needed to legally cover those already incurred expenses.

For Medicaid specifically: HHSC reports every month on the amount of money needed to pay Medicaid bills for the rest of the year – and the difference (All Funds and General Revenue) between that budgeted amount and the actual appropriations made by the Legislature. The 2015 Legislature didn’t cover medical inflation, only caseload growth. That’s what created much of the 2017 shortfall. The alternative to providing those supplemental funds is making massive Medicaid cuts between now and August 2017 – cuts to what providers are paid, or to benefits received, or to eligibility (this last one won’t generate much in reductions because TX coverage doesn’t extend much beyond the bare minimum required by federal law).