0717 blspftexas

Email, Cheryl Abbot, regional economist, chief, Economic Analysis & Information, Bureau of Labor Statistics, July 21, 2017

9:21 p.m.

I’m attaching a worksheet showing data from three different series of ‘Texas employment.’ The first TAB shows data from the Current Employment Statistics (CES) survey, a survey of business establishments which shows the total number of payroll jobs in the state. I downloaded both total nonfarm and total private nonfarm because some people reference private without specifying that tag. As you can see though, both job series are at all-time highs and have basically been rising at a steady pace since January 2010, following the Great Recession.

The second TAB shows total employment as measured by the Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) survey. LAUS data are used for Federal allocations to states and areas, as well as eligibility determinations for assistance. The LAUS program only publishes 4 series for each state: Civilian Labor Force, Employed, Unemployed, and Unemployment Rate. I downloaded the ‘employed’ data. As you can see from these charts, LAUS employment is at a near-record level. The level has declined in each of the last two months, but over the longer-term, it mirrors the CES jobs data with a steady rise since January 2010.

In order to get your final measures, civilian labor force participation rate and employment-population rate, I had to use the CPS modeled estimates because they are the only series that includes population estimates and ratios. That third TAB actually contains data for all 50 states and several CPS-based metropolitan areas. You can use the ‘FIPS Code’ column to filter to other states. I believe you will find that all of them, including Texas and the U.S., likely peaked sometime between the late 1980s and the late 1990s. Declining labor force participation rates, and the resulting lower employment-population ratios, have been an area of study for many years, but they have impacted all areas.

If you have other questions, let me know,

~Cheryl

Cheryl Abbot

Regional Economist

Chief, Economic Analysis & Information

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

Dallas, TX