01151614 cornynpftexas

Emails (excerpted), Megan Mitchell, communications director, U.S. Sen. John Cornyn, Jan. 15-16, 2014

11:14 a.m.

Jan. 15, 2014

…

Below, please fine two links that list the 25% figure. Please let me know if you need any additional material.

Best regards,

Megan

Page 2 :

http://www.cwfa.org/images/content/factsheet.pdf

Page 10:

http://childrenatrisk.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/02_The-State-of-Human-Trafficking-in-Texas.pdf

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Wednesday, January 15, 2014 12:16 PM

To: Mitchell, Megan (Cornyn)

Subject: RE: Fresh fact check

Thanks. Is there a particular source Cornyn relied on?

g.

12:15 p.m.

Both reports cite HHS.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) [mailto:wgselby@statesman.com]

Sent: Wednesday, January 15, 2014 1:20 PM

To: Mitchell, Megan (Cornyn)

Subject: RE: Fresh fact check

OK, so he relied on those reports, correct? Thanks.

12:23 p.m.

Yes, he relied on both reports which both cite the Department of Health and Human Services. My title is Communications Director.

Have a good day,

Megan

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, January 16, 2014 3:17 PM

To: Mitchell, Megan (Cornyn)

Subject: Following up

Hello again.

So far, I have not confirmed the senator’s claim, which may be an outdated overstatement.

Below you’ll see a response from a government official. Meantime, the cited report by Texas-based Children at Risk, a nonprofit focused on the “root causes of poor public policies affecting children, came out in 2009. It said: “In the last quarter of 2007, 30% of the calls received by the National Human Trafficking Hotline originated in Texas and 25% of all international victims certified by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services were located in Texas.”

If you have other information that played into Cornyn’s statement, or any experts you recommend we contact, please let me know. I will keep digging.

g.

EMAIL:

From: Wolfe, Kenneth (ACF)

Sent: Thursday, January 16, 2014 11:08 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Subject: RE: Texas reporter, urgent inquiry

Hello.

We are not able to calculate how many victims of human trafficking there are in the United States or a single state.

With regard to your larger questions, we provide statistics in annual reports to Congress. They are prepared by the Department of Justice, accessible through here: http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/orr/resource/publications-0. Here is a direct link to the Attorney General’s most recently published report.

We haven’t reported top recipient states because the information might be misinterpreted as the location of the trafficking, which is often not the case. Rather, we report the overall number of states to which we have sent letters:

In FY 2011, Certification and Eligibility letters were provided to victims or their representatives in 38 states, the District of Columbia, and Saipan. Certified victims came from 55 countries in the Americas, Asia, Africa, and Europe.

We also report trafficking hotline information on the top states from which calls are made to the national hotline, which appears on p. 40 of the FY 2011 AG’s report:

During FY 2011, the top five states with the highest call volume were (in order by highest volume): California, Texas, Florida, New York, and Illinois, together comprising 45 percent of the calls where the caller’s state was known.

I hope that information helps.

Kenneth J. Wolfe

Deputy director, Office of Public Affairs

Administration for Children and Families

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

Washington, D.C.

2:34 p.m.

Jan. 16, 2014

Thanks Gardner. My understanding is this is the most recent Texas specific data available at the time of our statement.

Again, thank you,

Megan