1017 grkuppftexas

Emails, Gary Krupkin, attorney, Oct. 9-11, 2017

On Mon, Oct 9, 2017 at 11:36 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Gary:

Hello again from Austin.

I write afresh this morning because we’re trying to verify this Colin Jost claim on the Saturday Night Live program: “There is a real law in Texas that says it’s illegal to own more than six dildos.”

As you know, when we did this recent fact-check, we learned about section 43.23 of the penal code which makes mention of a “person who possesses six or more obscene devices …”

It looks to us like this law remains on the books. Is that accurate? If so, is it still considered illegal for a vendor to have six or more in possession? Why or why not? Other recommended resources? As before, we seek on-the-record attributable information.

Thanks for any quick help.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Gary Krupkin

Sent: Monday, October 09, 2017 2:43 PM

I know that law is sometimes a vortex of confusing jargon and unintelligible statutes that confound and confuse. Frankly, they confuse just as many lawyers as laypeople. So, let me see if I can untangle the web.

Reliable Consultants v. Earle, 517 F.3d 738 (5th Cir., 2008), per curiam on rehearing en banc, 538 F.3d 355, 517 F.3d 738 held unconstitutional Texas Penal Code, sec. 43.21. For information purposes, 43.21 reads as follows:

SUBCHAPTER B. OBSCENITY

Sec. 43.21. DEFINITIONS. (a) In this subchapter:

(1) "Obscene" means material or a performance that:

(A) the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex;

(B) depicts or describes:

(i) patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including sexual intercourse, sodomy, and sexual bestiality; or

(ii) patently offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions, sadism, masochism, lewd exhibition of the genitals, the male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state or a device designed and marketed as useful primarily for stimulation of the human genital organs; and

(C) taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value.

(2) "Material" means anything tangible that is capable of being used or adapted to arouse interest, whether through the medium of reading, observation, sound, or in any other manner, but does not include an actual three dimensional obscene device.

(3) "Performance" means a play, motion picture, dance, or other exhibition performed before an audience.

(4) "Patently offensive" means so offensive on its face as to affront current community standards of decency.

(5) "Promote" means to manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same.

(6) "Wholesale promote" means to manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, or to offer or agree to do the same for purpose of resale.

(7) "Obscene device" means a device including a dildo or artificial vagina, designed or marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs.

(b) If any of the depictions or descriptions of sexual conduct described in this section are declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawfully included herein, this declaration shall not invalidate this section as to other patently offensive sexual conduct included herein.

Acts 1973, 63rd Leg., p. 883, ch. 399, Sec. 1, eff. Jan. 1, 1974. Amended by Acts 1975, 64th Leg., p. 372, ch. 163, Sec. 1, eff. Sept. 1, 1975; Acts 1979, 66th Leg., p. 1974, ch. 778, Sec. 1, eff. Sept. 1, 1979; Acts 1993, 73rd Leg., ch. 900, Sec. 1.01, eff. Sept. 1, 1994.

Sec. 5 stipulates that is it is illegal to "manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same." So, theoretically, any person that even lends or gives (as a gift, for instance), an obscene device to another person is culpable for criminal conduct.

Sec. 6 stipulates that it is illegal "to manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, or to offer or agree to do the same for purpose of resale." So, theoretically, any person that introduces an obscene device into the Texas stream of commerce is culpable for criminal conduct.

The 5th Circuit Court of Appeals held 43.21 unconstitutional. The effect is the same as the legislature repealing the statute. However, the Texas legislature has not repealed the statute, preferring instead, to leave it up to old, white guys to tell other old white guys that any old white guy (and everybody else), can enjoy a lovely dildo in the privacy of their own home AND, even buy a lovely dildo at their local Sara's Secret or Condoms To Go without criminal penalty, AND even have lovely dildos shipped into Texas from far-flung environs so that the old white guys and all other citizens of Texas can enjoy a lovely dildo or lovely dildos (plural).

There is no other law, of which I am aware, that can be used to ban, restrict, or otherwise impede the purchase, ownership, commercial sale, or enjoyable use of a lovely dildo or lovely dildos (plural), singularly or in conjunction with one another - meaning the use of multiple dildos in a private setting or even a single dildo if your completely vanilla.

I've been trying to get this holding across to various cities that are staunch in their position that lovely dildos are something that must never cross the lips of their repressed citizens. This is true even though their repressed citizens buy thousands of those lovely dildos from our stores and have them cross their lips on many occasions, I'd venture to say.

So, Citizens of Texas: feel free and unencumbered to buy, use, lend, or even rent your lovely dildos with abandon and pride in knowing that a group of old, white guys are more enlightened by the old, white guys that inhabit your legislature.

GPK

On Tue, Oct 10, 2017 at 12:26 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Thanks for the phone visit Monday.

Another aspect: Attorney Sirkin told me that he believes a Texas state district judge applied the law found unconstitutional by the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals after the court issued its ruling. Ring a bell? If so, provide details? If this happened, would it demonstrate that at least by one judge’s lights, the law remains very much in effect?

Thanks again.

g.

2:52 p.m.

A Texas district court rejected Reliable Consultants, and upheld by the mid-level appellate court. However, this was a "sport" opinion from an appellate court that does not carry much weight in Texas jurisprudence and is confined only to that particular appellate district. Let me see if I can get you the exact case citation.

GPK

3:01 p.m.

The case was Villareal v. State, attached below. The Court held that "Fifth Circuit precedent is not binding on Texas courts, and its constitutional. [I]n the absence of a controlling decision by the United States Supreme Court, Texas courts of civil appeals are bound by the pronouncements of the Texas Supreme Court on the law. ‘After a principle, rule or proposition of law has been squarely decided by the (Texas) Supreme Court . . . the decision is accepted as a binding precedent by the same court or other courts of lower rank when the very point is again presented in a subsequent suit between different parties.’ And, until the Supreme Court states to the contrary, its pronouncement is the law on an expressed issue."

Of course, the 13th Court of Appeals' decision is preposterous, which is what happens when you live in a city whose name means "Body of Christ." You just get completely fucked-up by the salt water washing in from the Gulf.

In any event, the answer to your question is that there does exist a Texas appellate court opinion that rejects Reliable Consultants. Morons.

On Oct 11, 2017, at 6:11 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Is there a smart direct way to confirm that since the 5th Circuit ruled in early 2008, the Texas bar on possessing six of more sexual devices has not been enforced or prosecuted?

g.

7:16 p.m.

Oct. 11, 2017

I imagine you’d have to check all 254 counties. However, there is a very small cadre of attorneys that specialize in dildo defense. As part of that group, I have not heard of any prosecutions. In Dallas, I haven’t heard of or defended any obscenity prosecution in at least 5 years. I’m almost ready to hang out a shingle that says, “Will lawyer for food.”