0518 jpattpftexas

Emails, Jerry Patterson, May 25-26, 2018 From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Friday, May 25, 2018 5:26 PM To: Jerry Patterson Subject: Queries for a fact-check

...

I write afresh because we’re fact-checking Lt. Gov. Patrick’s recent statement: “It’s against the law in Texas to let any loaded gun get in the hands of a child.”

It looks to me like you proved the Senate sponsor of the 1995 legislation resulting in the new misdemeanor for adults negligent about keeping dischargeable firearms from minors younger than 17.

I write wondering if you recall as much and can speak to why this proposal made it into law. Any other thoughts speaking to Patrick’s accuracy?

Some links:

Legislation, final version of House Bill 44 and “Actions,” 1995 regular legislative session, Texas Legislature Online (accessed May 25, 2018)

Report, bill analysis of committee substitute for HB 44, 1995 legislative session, House Research Organization, March 29, 1995

I hope to complete our fact-check Tuesday. Of course, I’d be happy to hear back by phone or email.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Jerry Patterson Sent: Friday, May 25, 2018 5:53 PM

Subject: Re: Queries for a fact-check

Well aside from the fact the LtGov is kind of paraphrasing the law, but yes there is a statute and I passed it the same session that I passed the CHL. I'm not sure if "loaded gun" was/is pertinent but Patrick's premise is accurate.

The genesis was a constituent Mom/Dad who lived very close to me in SE Houston, who's son was accidentally killed by a firearm that another child had taken from his parents/dads room. The accident may have happened in the accidental shooters house - I'm not sure.

I remember the NRA was neutral on the bill and were pleased that it wasn't a felony. If your gun was pilfered/borrowed by a kid, and used to kill another kid, most folks would suffer plenty so the misdemeanor v. Felony didn't really make much difference in my mind.

The parents of the deceased child, who I think went to the same school as my son, were there when it was passed. It was very sad. I remember them well, but can't recall their name. I'm sure they're on the hearing witness list .

…

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, May 25, 2018 6:04 PM

To: Jerry Patterson Subject: RE: Queries for a fact-check

Thanks. Is Patrick’s characterization too broad?

I didn’t know the NRA’s position but a TSRA representative testified against it, this HRO analysis says.

(Patterson)

7:32 p.m.

May 25, 2018

I don't think so it's too broad at all. It's a verbal point made in less than one sentence, not a reading of the statute.

10:20 a.m.

May 26, 2018

I think the TSRA may have gone neutral on the bill by the time of the Senate hearing. The big objection was requiring a trigger lock to be included or offered with each gun sale. Looking at the witness list I think the couple who lost their son was Jim and Linda Tarr. They lived close to me in SE Houston.