0918 cevpftexas

Emails, Chris Evans, communications director, Beto O’Rourke campaign, Sept. 5, 2018

On Wed, Sep 5, 2018 at 9:17 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Good morning. I write as we’re fact-checking Ted Cruz’s claim that Beto O’Rourke said he’s grateful that people are willing to desecrate or burn the American flag.

The Cruz campaign has offered as backup this edited video.

Can you tell us the event where O’Rourke took the question and offered his answer? Is there full video?

According to the Cruz campaign’s posted excerpt, an audience member brought up O’Rourke’s widely circulated comments about there being nothing more patriotic than NFL players kneeling in protest during the national anthem. Per the posted excerpt, the audience member then said: “I’m curious as to know if you hold the landmark Texas Supreme Court case – well, the Supreme Court case Texas versus Johnson -- to that same standard, where a man was charged for burning and desecrating an American flag on the state Capitol and do you disagree with the dissenting opinion that the American flag is a unifying symbol that should be respected and revered as it plays no politics? And I guess the reason I ask this question is as a voter, I don’t know how I would feel to have my own elected representative being open to kneeling on the Senate floor or encouraging and supporting acts that desecrate our American flag.”

Per the posted excerpt, O’Rourke replied that there’s nothing more American than standing up or kneeling for your rights. He went on to talk about civil rights demonstrations in the 1960s and legislation signed into law. He also attributed a quotation about nonviolent protest to Martin Luther King. He then talked about unarmed black men being killed, sometimes by law enforcement, including officers with the toughest jobs you can have. O’Rourke said next there’s something inherently American about someone willing to protest such behavior nonviolently. The excerpt cuts off there.

Did O’Rourke say more?

Did O’Rourke speak directly to the singled-out court case or burning or desecrating the flag?

What is O’Rourke’s position on that case, the noted dissent and on protests that involve desecrating or burning the flag?

As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories. We hope to complete this review soon.

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

9:59 a.m.

This is a blatantly false ad.

As you will see in the raw, unedited video (coming in a separate email) and transcript (below) from Beto's August 31 Congressional town hall, his answer had absolutely nothing to do with burning or desecrating the flag. The sentences used in the ad were not in regards to flag burning. And he certainly did not say he’s grateful that people are willing to desecrate or burn the American flag.

Transcript:

"...People have been willing to nonviolently and peacefully protest to seek political solutions to otherwise intractable problems. When you have unarmed black men in this country all too often being killed, and sometimes being killed by members of law enforcement. And those members of law enforcement, as I see a former Chief of Police for the El Paso Police Department, a former County Commissioner, someone who exemplifies the best of public service. Those are among the very toughest jobs that anyone in any community can hold. Those are also people who put their lives on the line securing and protecting their fellow citizens in these communities. But when there is use of force, when there is a life taken, and there is not accountability, there is not justice done. There's not the ability to prevent that from continuing to happen in the future. And someone is willing, is willing to call attention to that, to try to awaken our conscience to force us to do the right thing in the face of that injustice and violence. And to do so peacefully and nonviolently. I think that there is something inherently American about that. And so I am grateful that people are willing to do that. I understand that people can come down to a difference conclusion on this issue, and I respect that as well. That's American as well. But those are my feelings on the issue, and I'm grateful for the question."

I can also direct you to the Dallas Morning News' indepth reporting entitled, "Heavily Spliced Ted Cruz Video Falsely Depicts Beto O'Rourke Saying He's 'grateful' for flag burning"

https://www.dallasnews.com/news/politics/2018/09/04/heavily-spliced-ted-cruz-video-falsely-depicts-beto-orourke-saying-grateful-flag-burning

Madlin Mekelburg from the El Paso Times asked Beto about his stance. Here is her reporting:

“I don't think anyone should burn an American flag,” O’Rourke said. “I also don't think this is about flags. It's about people's lives. It's about civil rights. It's about making sure that everyone has an opportunity to succeed and that there is justice and accountability for everyone in this country."

https://www.caller.com/story/news/local/texas/state-bureau/2018/09/04/flag-burning-joins-take-knee-texas-red-hot-race-us-senate/1195967002/

Thanks,

Chris

On Wed, Sep 5, 2018 at 10:12 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Got it. When and where did the Caller reporter talk to O’Rourke?

Has he otherwise been asked about that Supreme Court case, the dissent and related issues?

10:34 a.m.

August 27 press gaggle in Austin after a town hall. The reporter's question was in reference to something Cruz had said earlier that morning:

"Stumping Aug. 27 in The Colony, Cruz likened kneeling during the national anthem to protesters burning the flag. "In Texas we believe in being respectful to the flag," he said. "The Supreme Court says you have the right to burn the flag. I don't know if Beto O'Rourke thinks burning the flag is as American as anything he can think of."