1017 gillilandpftexas

Email, Charles Gilliland, Helen and O.N. Mitchell, Jr. Faculty Fellow in Real Estate, Mays Business School, Texas A&M University, Oct. 2, 2017

From: Selby, Gardner

Sent: Friday, September 29, 2017 3:26 PM

Subject: Austin reporter, urgently seeking your analysis

Hello from Austin. I write on behalf of the Austin American-Statesman and the PolitiFact Texas fact-checking project seeking your analysis of a claim we’re checking.

The claim: A proposed Austin school district bond issue of $1.05 billion won’t entail a tax-rate increase.

The district says this will work because when it’s time to start repaying the proposed debt, revenue generated at the existing tax rate will be sufficient. Behind this, the district assumes a 5 percent interest rate on the bond debt and local assessed valuations escalating 7 percent a year for two years and 1.5 percent a year after that. The district documents here and here might be helpful.

Can you speak to the accuracy of the tax-rate claim?

Past that, the district says that absent the bond proposition taking effect (passing), the school board could reduce its tax rate by the degrees shown here. It’s also shared this document estimating the annual incremental tax effect of the sought bonds on property owners.

All told, I am trying to succinctly say how the district intends to do this and how that plan might go awry.

...

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

10:29 a.m.

Oct. 2, 2017

Any analysis forecasting the future depends on the assumptions underlying the analysis. Therefore, the evaluation of the results must focus on the assumptions about what will change and how it will change. Without exhaustive historical studies of the parameters of their model and an examination of the operating conditions of the district, I have no evidence to cast doubt on the assumptions underlying the their analysis. That kind of analysis it would entail to analyze the specific local effects of taxing unit policy issues is outside the scope of our normal research agenda. I’m sorry that we do not have the information needed to address your question.