1018 jbpftexas

Emails, Jordan Berry, consultant to Ken Paxton campaign, Oct. 30-31, 2018

What Human Trafficking ring did Ken Paxton takedown?

Backpage.com

How do you support that Backpage.com was the largest human trafficking ring?

This quote below is from the Senate Subcommittee report in 2017 on page four which gives a good overview. Here is a link to the complete report but below is the relevant info that shows Backpage was the leader in sex related ads and trafficking.

https://www.mccaskill.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/2017.01.10%20Backpage%20Report.pdf

Backpage is a market leader: In 2013, it reportedly net more than 80% of all revenue from online commercial sex advertising in the United States.22 According to the latest report from (National Center for Missing and Exploited Children) NCMEC, 73% of the suspected child trafficking reports it

receives from the public involve Backpage. 23 According to the Massachusetts Attorney General, “[t]he vast majority of prosecutions for sex trafficking now

involve online advertising, and most of those advertisements appear on Backpage.”24

The National Association of Attorneys General has sounded similar alarms concerning Backpage’s facilitation of sex trafficking. On August 31, 2011, 45 state

attorneys general sent a letter in which they described Backpage as a “hub” of “human trafficking, especially the trafficking of minors.”25Pointing to more than 50 cases over the previous three years involving individuals trafficking or attempting to traffic minors on Backpage, the attorneys general argued that Backpage’s screening efforts were “ineffective.” They requested documents from Backpage concerning the company’s public claims that it screens and removes advertisements linked to sex trafficking.26 Backpage provided no substantive response to that request.

What did AG Paxton do to takedown Backpage.com?

We launched the Human Trafficking and Transnational Organized Crime unit here at OAG in January 2016.

OAG and the California attorney general’s office initially partnered on an investigation of Backpage.com, the single largest purveyor of escort ads in the U.S., and a major facilitator of sex trafficking. Just a few months after created the Human Trafficking Unit, the Office of the Attorney General had nearly three dozen law enforcement personnel execute warrants to arrest CEO Carl Ferrer and raid the headquarters of Backpage.com.

You can find our press release announcing that arrest on October 6, 2016 here: https://www.texasattorneygeneral.gov/news/releases/ag-paxton-arrest-backpagecom-ceo-shows-texas-doesnt-tolerate-human-trafficking .

The investigation, including the federal government, culminated in the seizure and takedown of Backpage.com.

You can see several press releases from the U.S. Department of Justice mentioning our substantial role in the effort here:

The website was shut down in 92 countries and the company pled guilty to human trafficking and engaging in organized criminal activity in Texas. Backpage.com CEO pled guilty to money laundering and agreed to cooperate against co-defendants.

That is the biggest single victory ever achieved in the battle against human trafficking, given that Backpage.com:

hosted around 1 million ads for sex-trade-related services on any given day; https://techcrunch.com/2012/10/06/sex-trafficking-on-backpage-com-much-ado-about-statistically-nothing/ )

And was involved in a majority of child exploitation cases the public reported to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. ( https://www.portman.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/files/serve?File_id=5D0C71AE-A090-4F30-A5F5-7CFFC08AFD48 )

...

Jordan Berry

(W. Gardner Selby)

3:21 p.m.

Got it.

From what you've shared, it looks to me like the federal government shut down backpage. Two states, Texas and California, helped. What am I missing per Paxton's role?

Jordan Berry Tue, Oct 30, 3:32 PM (2 days ago)

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fwx0JCgX3Pk&feature=youtu.be

Ken Paxton: Trusted Leadership for a Safer Texas

(Selby)

12:54 p.m.

Oct. 31, 2018

We asked Professor Levy to assess the claim.

She replied by email: "That claim is inaccurate for two reasons. First, Ken Paxton did not shut down Backpage -- the federal government did. Under Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, at the time of Backpage's seizure, state attorneys general did not generally have the power to prosecute platforms (like Backpage) for content posted by third parties. (This changed in limited ways after FOSTA was passed -- which, crucially, happened after the federal government shut down Backpage.) The office of the Texas Attorney General is indeed listed as one of several "participating in and supporting the enforcement action," but, by virtue of Section 230, could not by any stretch be credibly considered a primary enforcer.

"As for whether Backpage.com was the 'world's largest human trafficking marketplace' -- there is absolutely no research to support that claim. First, as an empirical matter, for that claim to be true, you would need to examine every 'human trafficking marketplace' for comparison.

"Second, the general idea that Backpage was a cesspool of sexual exploitation is unfounded. It was certainly a place where law enforcement found a lot of victims -- but that might just be because it was a particularly visible venue (and thus a great resource of law enforcement and NGO's). No federal trafficking charges were filed against Backpage or its founders -- they were indicted in federal court on several counts of money laundering and facilitating prostitution."

G.

2:12 p.m.

Did the professor see the plea agreements? Should I contact her and share these pleas with her? TX OAG structured taking down backpage.com as an essential part of the Texas plea agreement (see page 12 of each plea). You use the word seize, we didn't say that.

I don't think she wants to be on record defending Backpage.com or downplaying the amount of child victims they profited from.

She says ''No federal trafficking charges were filed against Backpage or its founders -- they were indicted in federal court on several counts of money laundering and facilitating prostitution." Correct, but in the state plea, and she'll see this in the documents, Ferrer pleas, ''I am pleading guilty to the offense of Count 1: Trafficking of persons''.

Is the professor aware of any network that has exploited more trafficking victims?

https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/cheering-a-contempt-case_b_9623232

This op-ed notes ''We know from Covenant House‘s work with young and homeless sex trafficking survivors that many of them have been pimped out through Backpage.com. According to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, more than 70 percent of reports the center received of suspect child trafficking posts were tied to Backpage.com.''

In testimony before the U.S. Senate, National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, BackPage.com was involved in 73% of all child trafficking reports they received.

How can you argue that minors of trafficked children on one website isn't a cesspool? https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/11/us/backpage-sex-trafficking.html