1217 aicpftexas

Emails, Maria E. Frausto, senior communications manager; Walter A. Ewing, senior researcher, American Immigration Council, Dec. 14, 2017

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, December 14, 2017 1:45 PM

Subject: Urgently seeking expert comment and guidance for a PolitiFact Texas fact-check

Hello from the Austin newspaper where I work on fact-checks for the PolitiFact Texas project.

I write all of you with urgency seeking attributable on-the-record comment and guidance as we evaluate the accuracy of a July 2017 claim by Lupe Valdez, who’s now a candidate for governor of Texas.

Valdez, objecting to a new Texas law intended to bar "sanctuary" cities, said in July that Texas Department of Public Safety numbers show that 1.6 percent of crime is committed by unauthorized immigrants.

Valdez hasn't told us where she got her figure nor have we found such a figure on the DPS website.

Otherwise, we did see a "1.6 percent" reference in a 2015 National Immigration Council report, though the reference wasn't limited to Texas nor did it sweep in all unauthorized immigrants.

For our story, I am asking you if Valdez's "1.6 percent" figure holds up. Why or why not? Research recommendations?

I'd welcome a reply by email or an interview by phone (my number is below) as soon as possible. REPLY ALL if you’d like to engage with your fellow experts.

THANK YOU.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Maria Frausto

Sent: Thursday, December 14, 2017 2:27 PM

Also, did you contact the Texas Department of Public Safety?

Take care,

Maria E. Frausto

Senior Communications Manager

American Immigration Council

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, December 14, 2017 3:28 PM

Yes; the agency spokesman, Tom Vinger, solely pointed to this web page.

(Walter A. Ewing)

9:42 p.m.

That TxDPS web page gives no information on what share of crime is attributable to immigrants, undocumented or otherwise. It’s just raw numbers that don’t include the non-violent offenses which can render one a “criminal alien” (such as unauthorized re-entry into the United States, certain traffic offenses, and drug possession).

The only data I’ve seen on the relationship between immigration and crime is circumstantial (see pages 5-6 of our report, https://www.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/sites/default/files/research/the_criminalization_of_immigration_in_the_united_states.pdf). The closest we got was to use Census data to determine the incarceration rates of those immigrants who were most likely to be undocumented—and, invariably, immigrants had much lower rates than the native-born (pages 6-8 of our report).

Without knowing the source of the 1.6 percent figure used by Ms. Valdez, there is no way to judge its accuracy. But I don’t know of any source of information that would allow that precise of an estimate of the share of crime attributable to undocumented immigrants. If there is a solid source for those numbers, I’d love to know what it is.

Walter A. Ewing, Ph.D.

Senior Researcher

American Immigration Council