0917 dbpftexas

Emails, Drew Brandewie, director of communications, U.S. Sen. John Cornyn, Sept. 27-28 and Oct. 3, 2017

Sent: Tuesday, September 26, 2017 10:43 AM

To: Brandewie, Drew (Cornyn)

Drew:

Good morning. Sen. Cornyn (spotted arriving at Reagan National Monday; I was about to board the Southwest plane he left) wrote this month: “Under the Affordable Care Act (P. L. 111-148), premiums have increased by more than 105 percent since 2013, and one-third of all counties in the United States have only one option on their exchange.”

PolitiFact has confirmed the “one-third” element of this claim.

A reader asked us to fact-check the described increase in premiums.

PolitiFact Wisconsin recently checked a similar claim. This HHS report, meantime, indicates such a change national -- with a smaller uptick in Texas.

How did the senator reach his conclusion about premiums increasing 105 percent? Also, is there good research on how premiums would have changed absent the 2010 law?

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Brandewie, Drew (Cornyn)

Sent: Wednesday, September 27, 2017 2:25 PM

Hey Gardner,

He relied on the HHS report, pg. 4, column 4 (“percent increase, 2013-2017”) that notes 105% in the first line for the national average.

The Wisconsin check isn’t similar because in it, the President made his claim specifically in reference to the state of Wisconsin. ("These are sad but familiar stories in Wisconsin, where Obamacare premiums have doubled.”) In our letter, Sen. Cornyn is referring to nationwide, which is clear by the second clause of the sentence (“…and one-third of all counties in the United States have only one option on their exchange.”)

The Wisconsin check also isn’t similar because the President made the claim without noting a timeframe. In Sen. Cornyn’s letter, we specifically denote a time frame for the claim (premiums have increased by more than 105 percent since 2013).

Yes, the HHS report shows the uptick in Texas is slightly less than nationwide, but Sen. Cornyn’s didn’t make the claim about Texas. He made it about the nation.

And if I come across any research about increases absent the 2010 law I will send that your way. But the sentence you’re checking doesn’t claim anything or speculate about what might have happened in that hypothetical scenario. It makes a claim about an actual scenario, and nothing else.

Drew

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, September 27, 2017 3:27 PM

Got it.

The HHS report refers briefly to the contrast between what policies are required to cover under the Obamacare law versus what policies offered before the law took full effect. Of significance?

Sent: Thursday, September 28, 2017 11:25 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

It might be interesting info for some of your readers, but again he didn’t make a claim about what policies are required to cover before Obamacare versus now. Since his claim was specific to percent increase of premiums, and doesn’t have anything to do with what policies cover, I don’t see how it has any bearing on the accuracy of his claim.

4:06 p.m.

Oct. 3, 2017

Hey Gardner- my responses to each in red below.

Drew

--A reminder that the Obamacare law imposed coverage expectations not fully in place until 2014. “The Affordable Care Act (ACA) introduced many new regulations in the market for individual health insurance,” the report says. “These included a number of changes to the types of insurance products that could be offered and the rules insurers could use to vary prices based on customer risk,” a reference to the Obamacare law’s mandate that insurers cover pre-existing conditions without imposing additional purchaser costs. “In most states.” the report says, “these regulations increased insurance coverage requirements and would be expected, on average, to increase the price of ACA-compliant plans relative to pre-ACA plans all else equal.”

This is consistent with the Senator’s claim and provides at least one explanation for why premiums have increased (“…would be expected, on average, to increase the price of ACA-compliant plans”).

--“This analysis,” the report says, “does not account for the fact that the overall populations enrolling in the individual market in 2017 are different from those enrolling in 2013. Older and less healthy people are a larger share of the individual market risk pool now than in 2013. The changing mix of enrollees and adverse selection pressure has likely been a significant cause of the large average premium increases in the individual market over this four-year period,” the report says.

Similar to #1, this also is consistent with the Senator’s claim (“a significant cause of the large average premium increases”) and provides an explanation for why premiums have increased. And as with the other holes you’ve tried to poke in the sentence, he didn’t make a claim about the ages of the enrollees.

--The research didn’t consider premium changes in states including California and New York that set up their own online exchanges. “To the extent that trends are different in state-based exchanges,” the report says, “the national average increase may differ” from the report’s results.

There’s no evidence here that factoring in New York and California would have lowered the average below 105% - it’s more likely it would only have made the number higher, consistent with his claim.

--The report did not reach to checking premium changes on individual policies purchased privately, not through exchanges. In 2016, the report says, an HHS office estimated that the non-exchange individual market equaled 38 percent of total individual market enrollment.

The Senator’s claim was made about ACA plans only, purchased on the federal exchanges. (“Under the Affordable Care Act… one-third of all counties in the United States have only one option on their exchange.”) Premium changes on policies purchased privately aren’t relevant since he didn’t make a claim about non-ACA policies.

Separately, it looks to us like premiums in 2017 may have been up 84 percent from 2013, once you consider all the exchanges—not just the ones using the federal site—though that’s also only according to the analysis I shared Thursday, web link below.

As I said we relied on data from the Department of Health and Human Services, and I can’t speak to the veracity of an “analysis” from a blogger.

We’ve otherwise spotted only a 2014-2017 comparison of silver plan premiums posted by Kaiser here, indicating a 32 percent difference, provided I read right.

As I think I pointed out in an earlier note, his claim was made from 2013-2017 (above is 2014). More importantly, this study is one subset of the universe of all ACA plans – which was the subject of his claim. He didn’t make a claim about only silver plans from 2014-2017 – he made a claim about all ACA plans from 2013-2017. This is apples to oranges.