0218 kwardpftexas

Emails, Kyle Ward, CAE, executive director, Texas PTA, Feb. 28, 2018

3:25 p.m.

Good afternoon. I write on behalf of the Austin newspaper and the fact-checking PolitiFact Texas project because we’re reviewing the accuracy of a claim by U.S. Senate hopeful Beto O’Rourke, who said in Waco recently (about the 14-minute mark here) that “PTA meetings are now being conducted to help parents tell their kids” that if a guy with an AR-15 walks into their classroom, “you are supposed to create as much chaos as you possibly can. They want you to scream and yell and dance around and throw books and just keep moving.”

An O’Rourke campaign spokesman, Chris Evans, told us that O’Rourke was relying on a Washington State resident’s statement. Evans further told us this direction to parents comes from ALICE, a training system by the ALICE Training Institute that stands for “Alert Lockdown Inform Counter Evaluate.” During the training segment, Evans wrote, police officers explain that children should confront the shooter if need be and act aggressively. Evans said this has been reported on by various outlets including the Daily Dot and the CBC.

My queries to you:

In Texas and/or other states, are PTA meetings being conducted to help parents tell their children to react in the described ways?

If so, to what degree?

If not, does this clam have any element of truth?

What other experts or PTA leaders would you recommend we visit?

Any other factual points to consider?

As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories.

I hope to complete our story this week. I’d be happy to hear back soon by phone or email.

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

3:39 p.m.

Attached is a statement Texas PTA released today, which is our only formal statement about school safety to date. Texas PTA is not aware of and knows nothing about what Mr. O’Rourke allegedly said. Texas PTA has not organized or given direction for such meetings and trainings as described below.

Kyle Ward, CAE

Executive Director

Texas PTA

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Wednesday, February 28, 2018 4:24 PM

Subject: RE: Texas PTA Statement on School Safety

To what extent is the ALICE approach being discussed and encouraged at PTA meetings?

g.

4:48 p.m.

It is not. Texas PTA has no relationship with ALICE. I never heard of it until you emailed me. We have nearly 3,000 PTAs, and Texas PTA has communicated nothing about ALICE with them. The PTA you are referencing is in Washington State.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, February 28, 2018 4:50 PM

Subject: RE: Texas PTA Statement on School Safety

Is it fair to say you would know if a Texas PTA was talking up the ALICE approach or something similar?

4:58 p.m.

We are the second-largest PTA in the country. It would be impossible for me to say unequivocally a local PTA in Texas has never had an ALICE presentation. What I’m telling you is I’m unaware of such a presentation, and I know for sure Texas PTA did not endorse such a presentation.