0618 dgilmanpftexas

Emails, Denise Gilman, clinical professor, director, Immigration Clinic, University of Texas School of Law, June 13, 14 and 17, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner Sent: Tuesday, June 12, 2018 2:35 PM

Hello again. I write afresh because we’re now fact-checking a recent claim (brought to our attention by a reader) by Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas touching on the separation of children from parents arrested at the border: “There’s actually a court order that prevents keeping the kids with the parents when you put the parents in jail.”

Is this an accurate claim? Why or why not?

Anything incorrect or left out?

Any other recommended resources/experts?

As ever, we count on attributable on-the-record information for our stories. I am hoping to complete this review this week and would be grateful to hear back by phone or email.

MORE:

Cruz’s re-election campaign responded to our inquiry about this claim by saying: “In 1997, in a case called Flores v. Reno, the federal government entered into an agreement as part of litigation known as the Flores settlement or the Flores agreement. A copy of the original settlement terms can be found here. In short, the agreement put several restrictions on how the government can deal with unaccompanied minors (which includes children whose parents are being detained):

The government is required to release children from immigration detention without unnecessary delay to, in order of preference, parents, other adult relatives, or licensed programs willing to accept custody.

If a suitable placement is not immediately available, the government is obligated to place children in the “least restrictive” setting appropriate to their age and any special needs.

The government must implement standards relating to the care and treatment of children in immigration detention.

Cruz otherwise said—starting about the 10:20 mark of the interview fetchable by clicking here—that it’s the Trump administration’s decision to arrest adults for entering illegally that has led to separations that didn’t happen previously because families were detained and then released.

I am pasting my transcript of this part of the Cruz interview below.

CRUZ: “Nobody who cares about humanity, nobody who cares about compassion, would want to see a system that encourages illegal immigration.

“Now recently the press has been focusing a great deal on the issue you specifically asked about, about separating children from parents. Well, I’ll tell you there’s a reason why under the Obama administration that often didn’t happen. Because when they apprehended people here illegally, they just let them go. And when you let them go, you didn’t separate children from parents.

“You know, you think about it, when someone gets arrested for a crime, let’s say an American citizen gets arrested for a crime, for murder, for burglary, for whatever. If you’re arrested from a crime, you’re separated from your children, you’re put in prison. If you’re the only caregiver for that child, then you’ve got to find alternative care for those children, That is often another family member or, if need be, it’s a foster family or some other means to care for kids. That is the inevitable consequence of somebody being arrested for a crime.

“This is an issue that, I think, the media has largely constructed because what’s shifted is that the Trump administration is endeavoring if people cross illegally to arrest them, not to let them go--and so if they have kids, you know, there is actually a court order that prevents keeping the kids with the parents when you put the parents in jail. So when you see reporters, when you see Democrats saying, don’t separate kids from their parents, what they’re really saying is don’t arrest illegal aliens.”

Further thoughts?

Thank you for taking a look,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

8:37 a.m.

June 13, 2018

Good morning! It is correct that children cannot be held with their parents in federal prison after a criminal conviction. However, making this point is very misleading in the context of separation of migrant families at the southern border, most of whom are asylum-seeking families.

First, the prosecutions taking place against the parents in these cases need not take place at all and are likely unlawful. The prosecutions are for the misdemeanor crime of unlawful entry. The federal government has traditionally not aggressively pursued criminal prosecutions of these crimes, because they are expensive to prosecute and overwhelm the system, meaning that other more serious law enforcement work cannot take place, and the crime itself is not deemed serious. In the current zero tolerance context, the prosecutions are likely unlawful because they are targeted at asylum seekers who have the right to seek asylum after crossing into the United States in an irregular manner. See 8 USC 1158. US obligations as a party to the Protocol to the UN Refugee Convention also prohibit these prosecutions. In addition, the prosecutions seem specifically intended to separate families, which is an illegitimate purpose. Separation of a family can never be the sanction for a misdemeanor crime, given the constitutional focus on the fundamental right to family unity. In other words, the purpose of these prosecutions is to separate families to deter future families from migrating, as is made pretty clear in statements by the Attorney General and his leadership. The separations are not simply a collateral effect of criminal prosecutions that send parents to prison, leaving children unattended.

Second, the statement by Senator Cruz assumes that the parents are off in prison somewhere after the criminal prosecution and so the child remains behind unaccompanied and must be sent into federal care, but this is not the reality. The parents are being sentenced to time served in the criminal entry cases, so they never go off to prison at all. They are generally being held in the exact same facilities as their children during the day or two process of criminal hearing and sentencing. So they could be immediately reunited with their children after the sentencing. Instead, Health and Human Services is coming to pick up the children during the time that the parents are waiting to plead guilty or when they are in court pleading guilty. The separation is coming before parents are put in criminal custody, and many if not most parents are never sent to a federal prison at all.

Finally, not all separations are taking place after a criminal prosecution. We are still seeing families that present themselves at the bridge port of entry to the United States and are separated. Because these families did not cross into the United States irregularly, they are not subject to criminal prosecution at all. Yet they are separated.

In terms of Flores, it is true that the settlement allows children to be held in family detention centers for only about 20 days. It is unclear why Cruz is referencing that standard since it has nothing to do with putting parents in criminal jail. If he is referencing family detention centers in the statement about preventing “keeping the kids with the parents when you put the parents in jail,” then he is contradicting himself. The existence of family detention centers specifically allows for families to be held in immigration detention together, although it should be made clear that families can also just be released after processing at the border and need not be detained at all as they go through their immigration court proceedings. In any case, under current family separation policies, families are not being sent to these family detention centers inside the US and run by ICE but are being separated right away at the border while they are in border patrol facilities, so the 20-day rule is irrelevant.

The government can comply with its obligation to keep families together and comply with its obligation to hold families in family detention centers for no more than 20 days in one of two ways: 1) the government can process and release families together at the border (in this case the parent is almost always fitted with an ankle monitor and the family still must appear for court; studies show very high appearance rates in course if families are given information and especially if they obtain an attorney); 2) the government can send families to family detention centers where they must undergo a credible fear screening interview to determine whether they have a viable asylum claim; if they do, then they can be released to go live with relatives while their proceedings in immigration court go forward (again, the mother is usually fitted with an ankle monitor and there are ways to secure very high appearance rates). These two strategies were pursued until the Administration adopted a zero tolerance policy in April, so they are eminently workable. This administration canceled a small pilot program that provided housing and case management support to families to ensure participation in the proceedings that was shown to be very effective for those families released under option 1 or 2 above.

I hope this is helpful. I’d be happy to provide citations for much of the above but wanted to get something to you relatively quickly. Thank you.

Denise Gilman

Clinical Professor

Director

Immigration Clinic

University of Texas School of Law

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Wednesday, June 13, 2018 12:36 PM

Thank you.

Does any part of the Flores agreement require children to be separated from jailed parents?

8:28 a.m.

June 14, 2108

Absolutely not. The Flores settlement is found here - http://www.aila.org/File/Related/14111359b.pdf As you can see, the purpose of the settlement is to keep kids out of detention by reuniting them as quickly as possible with family, with preferential reunification with a parent. In the current separation cases, the parent is here and available, so the child should be released to and with the parent under Flores The only reason a parent becomes unavailable is that the government exercises its discretion to prosecute, in an unprecedented manner, in order to take the parent away temporarily for a criminal court hearing and time served. But even then, after the plea, the parent and child could be reunited and released or at least reunited and detained together. The government is making the parent unavailable and then treating the child as unaccompanied and placing the child in ORR custody and the parent in adult immigration detention; this result is not required by Flores and arguably is not permitted by Flores since Flores requires children to be released preferentially to a parent.

Litigation relating to Flores in the family detention context in the 9th circuit in California has imposed a rule of thumb 20-day limit on family detention, because kids are not supposed to be detained for lengthy periods under Flores. See http://www.aila.org/File/Related/14111359p.pdf Maybe Cruz is asserting that this rule means that after 20 days kids can no longer be detained with their parents. But this is misleading. Again, in the family separation cases, the kids are NOT being held with their parents in family detention centers. So the 20-day rule is not relevant at all. The kids are being forcibly removed from their parents at the border. And then the kids are sent to ORR and the parents to immigration detention. In addition, before the new zero tolerance policy, the government had implemented the decisions on Flores without difficulty by detaining families together and then releasing moms and kids from family detention centers together before the 20-day mark if they pass a credible fear interview. So Flores has never required separate detention and does not do so now. Now the government wishes to hold the parents indefinitely, so it seems to be arguing that it must therefore separate parents and kids since the kids can’t remain detained indefinitely under Flores. Instead, though, the government must comply with its obligations under Flores to release kids and must also comply with its constitutional obligations not to separate families. It can only do so by halting its practice of separating families at the border and either: 1) releasing families after processing at the border; or 2) where absolutely necessary detaining families in family detention centers and releasing them before 20 days (into the community if they pass a credible fear interview or upon deportation if they fail the credible fear interview).

In any case, the government’s position on the family separation has been that it is a natural consequence of criminal prosecutions for unlawful entry (which are not precedented, not required and are intentionally being used to separate families rather than as a genuine law enforcement mechanism for dealing with a misdemeanor crime). Flores really has nothing to do with separation as a result of a criminal prosecution. Flores is about immigration detention of kids in ORR shelters or in family detention centers. Flores in no way requires criminal prosecutions and separation as a result. The administration cannot claim that the separations are a natural result of criminal prosecutions in the normal course of business and then argue that actually it’s the immigration detention rules that dictate separation. Those are two completely different strands.

Thanks for your interest.

Denise

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Friday, June 15, 2018 11:37 AM

I am sharing elaboration from a Ted Cruz aide below who I had emailed with some of your responses.

Factually valid? The aide points to a particular portion of the Flores agreement.

Thank you again.

wgs

W. Gardner Selby

Editor

PolitiFact Texas

Austin American-Statesman

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)" Date: 6/14/18 11:50 AM (GMT-06:00)

To: "Jeffrey, Maria (Cruz)" Subject: Following up

Maria:

Can do (see below). Can you point to the language in Flores that backs up the senator’s claim?

We asked legal experts including Denise Gilman at the University of Texas School of Law if the Flores settlement requires the separation of children from parents.

Gilman replied by email:

Absolutely not. The Flores settlement is found here - http://www.aila.org/File/Related/14111359b.pdf As you can see, the purpose of the settlement is to keep kids out of detention by reuniting them as quickly as possible with family, with preferential reunification with a parent. In the current separation cases, the parent is here and available, so the child should be released to and with the parent under Flores The only reason a parent becomes unavailable is that the government exercises its discretion to prosecute, in an unprecedented manner, in order to take the parent away temporarily for a criminal court hearing and time served. But even then, after the plea, the parent and child could be reunited and released or at least reunited and detained together. The government is making the parent unavailable and then treating the child as unaccompanied and placing the child in ORR custody and the parent in adult immigration detention; this result is not required by Flores and arguably is not permitted by Flores since Flores requires children to be released preferentially to a parent.

Litigation relating to Flores in the family detention context in the 9th circuit in California has imposed a rule of thumb 20-day limit on family detention, because kids are not supposed to be detained for lengthy periods under Flores. See http://www.aila.org/File/Related/14111359p.pdf Maybe Cruz is asserting that this rule means that after 20 days kids can no longer be detained with their parents. But this is misleading. Again, in the family separation cases, the kids are NOT being held with their parents in family detention centers. So the 20-day rule is not relevant at all. The kids are being forcibly removed from their parents at the border. And then the kids are sent to ORR and the parents to immigration detention. In addition, before the new zero tolerance policy, the government had implemented the decisions on Flores without difficulty by detaining families together and then releasing moms and kids from family detention centers together before the 20-day mark if they pass a credible fear interview. So flores has never required separate detention and does not do so now. Now the government wishes to hold the parents indefinitely, so it seems to be arguing that it must therefore separate parents and kids since the kids can’t remain detained indefinitely under Flores. Instead, though, the government must comply with its obligations under Flores to release kids and must also comply with its constitutional obligations not to separate families. It can only do so by halting its practice of separating families at the border and either: 1) releasing families after processing at the border; or 2) where absolutely necessary detaining families in family detention centers and releasing them before 20 days (into the community if they pass a credible fear interview or upon deportation if they fail the credible fear interview).

In any case, the government’s position on the family separation has been that it is a natural consequence of criminal prosecutions for unlawful entry (which are not precedented, not required and are intentionally being used to separate families rather than as a genuine law enforcement mechanism for dealing with a misdemeanor crime). Flores really has nothing to do with separation as a result of a criminal prosecution. Flores is about immigration detention of kids in ORR shelters or in family detention centers. Flores in no way requires criminal prosecutions and separation as a result. The administration cannot claim that the separations are a natural result of criminal prosecutions in the normal course of business and then argue that actually it’s the immigration detention rules that dictate separation. Those are two completely different strands.

On the same topic, Rick Su of the University of Buffalo School of Law called Cruz’s statement misleading because, he said by email, it’s premised on Cruz’s assumption that there are only two options when it comes to children and their parents. But there are many, he wrote, even after factoring in the Flores agreement and the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008, both of which require that children be placed in the "least restrictive setting."

Su wrote that it’s “misleading of Cruz to suggest that there are only two options--release or separation--when there are in fact more.”

Su added: “Let's be frank though. The Trump administration is not pursuing separation because its hands are tied, or even as a last resort in order to carry out some other policy. It is pursuing separation purposefully and directly as a policy because, as administration officials have acknowledged, it is a deterrent in itself. Under that logic, even if the Flores agreement did not exist, there would still be deterrence-related interests in forcing separation. It is precisely the psychic and emotional harm that separation creates that the administration want to inflict on migrants in order to convince them to take voluntary departure (and not pursue an immigration claim) and convince others not to make the journey with their families. There have been many statements where Trump and administration officials have admitted as much. This, of course, is why people are troubled; the children and suffering are purposefully being used to punish and deter immigration violations. Even the criminal justice system, which locks up parents, does not treat the separation from family as part of the punishment or to serve a deterrence effect.”

We also connected with Peter Schey, the attorney who heads the center that helped represent plaintiffs in the dispute leading to the Flores agreement. By phone, Schey called Cruz’s claim “completely inaccurate,” saying the Flores agreement in no way suggests children must be separated from parents. Notably too, he said, parents can (and do) opt out from Flores’ rights related to children being released to others. Schey further said the 2008 statute (also noted by Su) explains why minors have lately been put in the custody of DHS. Schey said federal authorities have been separating children from parents “in order to create the harshest situation possible with the idea that word will filter back to Central America and this will discourage families from coming to seek asylum in the U.S.” He stressed nothing in Flores requires separations.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Jeffrey, Maria (Cruz) Sent: Friday, June 15, 2018 11:11:40 AM

Hi Gardner,

Thanks for sending. Here is our response:

Senator Cruz’s statement was that a court order “prevents keeping the kids with the parents when you put the parents in jail.” In those cases, when adults with minor children are apprehended and detained, the minor children must be placed in “the least restrictive setting appropriate to the minor’s age and special needs,” per Section IV of the Flores agreement. Adult detention centers are not the least restrictive setting for children, and Section VI of the agreement further requires a presumption in favor of releasing minor children, with preference given to non-detained parents or other family members who are willing to take custody of the minor child. If a suitable placement is not immediately available, the child is held in the custody of the Office of Refugee Resettlement, which offers less restrictive settings than adult immigration detention facilities.

Courts that have interpreted and applied the Flores agreement have held that the agreement unambiguously applies both to minors who are accompanied and unaccompanied by their parents. They have also held that the settlement does not provide release rights to accompanying adults. See, for example, Flores v. Lynch, available at https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2016/07/06/15-56434.pdf.

We understand that the immigration activists you contacted are telling you that the government is not required to detain the adult parents of minor children who are apprehended and charged with illegal entry. But regardless of the accuracy of that, they're not actually addressing the Senator's remark. The fact that the government could up and decide to not enforce criminal laws is not relevant to the accuracy of Senator Cruz’s statement, which assumed that the adult parents were being detained. Our point is simple and 100% correct: When the parents are detained, the Flores agreement compels placing the child with another family member or in another less restrictive setting.

Best,

Maria

11:09 p.m.

June 17, 2018

The description of Flores is correct, but nobody on either side has argued that children should be held in adult immigration detention centers, so I’m not sure what the reference is intended to mean in the context of family separation. The choice is not between holding children in an adult detention center or releasing the parents at the border without more. There are family detention centers where parents and children are detained together for processing; parents and children are also often processed and released with the parent wearing an ankle monitor.

Most importantly, the senator’s staff continues to evade the fact that it is almost certainly a constitutional violation to separate families without any process or finding of lack of fitness on the part of the parent. See the recent judicial decision from California - https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/judge-lets-aclu-lawsuit-challenging-family-separation-go-forward-n881081 And the fact of the criminal prosecution of the parent does not change that reality. It simply is not lawful to sanction a misdemeanor unlawful entry crime with indefinite separation from your child. So, while it is unlawful to hold children in adult detention centers, it is also unlawful to use criminal prosecutions (or adult immigration detention) to separate families. So, the government cannot justify its separation by the purported unlawfulness of holding kids and parents together. Instead, it must abide by its obligations not to separate parents and children in the first place through criminal prosecution or any other strategy not set out in the law for addressing situations involving unfit parents. In other words, it must comply with its obligations not to separate families AND not to hold kids in inappropriate facilities.

And it is quite clear that the criminal prosecutions are intended to separate families; the separations are not just an unavoidable consequence of prosecutions that lead to adult detention, so the violations implicated by family separation are intentional. See https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2017/03/07/dhs-is-considering-separating-mothers-and-children-who-cross-the-border-illegally/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.5a6ad4470fa2; https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/how-the-trump-administration-got-comfortable-separating-immigrant-kids-from-their-parents; https://www.justice.gov/opa/press-release/file/956841/download. (It is also very important to note that we continue to see children taken from their parents even where there is no criminal prosecution at all – I am working with a separated family of asylum seekers from DRC who presented at the port of entry and so could not be prosecuted at all).

Finally, it is important to emphasize that the senator’s original statement and the follow-ups disingenuously conflate the criminal prosecutions and immigration detention. They also portray the actual process taking place inaccurately. The process is this: 1) parents and child are detained in border facility; 2) children are taken from parents while the family is still at the border facility before any criminal charges brought and before parent is sent to adult immigration detention; 3) children are taken into ORR custody and are taken away from the border facility by ORR officials; 4) parent is criminally prosecuted and given a sentence of time served, which really is just the time spent at the border facility; 5) the parent is returned to the border facility but the child is already gone with ORR; 6) the parent is sent to adult immigration detention where he/she will usually spend several months even if successful in passing an asylum screening interview and securing release on bond; 6) parent will be reunited with child only when/if released from immigration detention.

The original statement from Cruz is about jail, which suggests criminal imprisonment. And the follow up from the staffer below ends with a statement about the need to enforce “criminal laws.” However, the Flores standards are about civil immigration detention.

Most likely, this slide back and forth between mentions of the civil and criminal frameworks is used, because the criminal prosecutions are what justifies the separations, since the families could be held together in immigration detention in the family detention centers. However, the parents are in fact never held in any federal prison but are instead held only in immigration facilities the entire time; yet their children are taken from them anyway. See https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/zero-tolerance-immigration-prosecutions-family-fact-sheet And they are done with the criminal proceedings very quickly, in a matter of a day or two, and could be reunited with their children immediately through release after prosecution or placement in family immigration detention, but they are not. So the criminal proceedings are the justification for separation but do not in fact require separation.

It seems that the invocation of Flores is really a complaint with the 20-day rule of thumb limit on family immigration detention. But that is not a question about non-enforcement of the criminal laws. A parent could be criminally prosecuted in a day or two and then reunited with the child in family detention or reunified and released. But the administration is pushing for more complete separation as a punitive deterrence strategy and so does not simply separate families for the very brief criminal process and then send families to family detention where they will be released in about 20 days. Instead, after prosecution, it sends parents to adult immigration detention where they will be separated for weeks or months or even permanently from their children. Immigration detention is not intended to be punitive or criminal at all but rather is intended as an administrative measure. But the administration is using the original criminal charge combined with immigration detention to force a lengthy or indefinite separation as a punitive matter that exceeds any punishment that would be allowed under the criminal laws.

I apologize for the lengthy email. There is really quite a bit of misinformation being offered, and it is quite troubling when permanent harm to children is the result.

Thank you for looking at the issue.

Denise