0318 cruzpftexas

Emails, Catherine Frazier, senior communications adviser, Ted Cruz campaign, March 8-9, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, March 07, 2018 10:55 AM

Subject: For a fact-check, any other backup?

Catherine:

If Sen. Cruz has any other bases for saying Rep. O'Rourke favors open borders and wants to take our guns, let me know?

wgs

W. Gardner Selby

Editor

PolitiFact Texas

Austin American-Statesman

10:20 a.m.

March 8, 2018

I think our sourcing covers it. Thanks.

9:39 p.m.

If not too late you can add this comment from me:

The bill Congressman O’Rourke has cosponsored would ban hundreds of thousands of firearms commonly used by law abiding Texans all over the state for competition, hunting and self-defense. The people of Texas deserve an explanation from him as to how his support for criminalizing the future sale, transfer and possession of such firearms, does not amount to coming after their guns.

On Mar 9, 2018, at 9:49 AM, Selby, Gardner wrote:

Catherine:

I read the legislation. It doesn’t look to me like it results in anyone who lawfully owns a gun losing that gun. Is there a provision that says otherwise?

G.

9:59 a.m.

Did you see my comment? Please include that. Like I said O’Rourke needs to explain how making it illegal to purchase such firearms doesn’t amount to “coming after their guns”

On Fri, Mar 9, 2018 at 10:06 AM, Selby, Gardner wrote:

I got the comment, of course. I didn’t get an answer to my follow-up question yet.

10:13 a.m.

that's my answer!

Catherine Frazier

Ted Cruz for Senate

10:25 a.m.

to be clear - O'Rourke's support for a ban of semi-automatic weapons, absolutely amounts to coming after law-abiding Americans' guns. It is a blatant violation of the 2nd Amendment.

Catherine Frazier

Ted Cruz for Senate

On Fri, Mar 9, 2018 at 11:11 AM, Selby, Gardner wrote:

I can’t yet see language in the proposal that causes guns to be taken. Point it out?

11:29 a.m.

Gardner - bills that seek to make traditional, everyday firearms illegal - firearms utilized by millions of law-abiding Americans - are bills that seek to take away those Americans' rights to their guns. People get that. Please use the quote I gave you earlier. Thank you.

Catherine Frazier

Ted Cruz for Senate

On Fri, Mar 9, 2018 at 11:32 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

That measure targets assault weapons. It excludes dozens if not hundreds of other weapons including handguns, shotguns and rifles.

On the border claim, we haven’t spotted evidence that O’Rourke wants an open border. He is against President Trump’s envisioned wall. He also questions existing fencing. Is there evidence he wants a wide-open border?

Thanks again.

G.

12:22 p.m.

From me: We stand by every claim made in our ad and welcome the opportunity to have Congressman O'Rourke to explain how he is not for open borders or taking away law-abiding Americans' guns.

On Guns:

I know it's convenient for the left to call semi-automatic weapons "assault weapons" and appreciate your efforts to carry that water for them, but the measure - filed again last week - targets 205 firearms commonly used by law abiding citizens for self-defense, recreation, and competition. I've included the latest bill and the description given by the cosponsors.

https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/5087/cosponsors?r=1

The law would make it “unlawful for a person to import, sell, manufacture, transfer, or possess, in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce, a semiautomatic assault weapon.” Note that the ban wouldn't apply to any weapon that was "lawfully possessed" when the ban goes into effect.

"The Assault Weapons Ban of 2018 will prohibit the sale, transfer, production, and importation of: semi-automatic rifles and pistols with a military-style feature that can accept a detachable magazine; semi-automatic rifles with a fixed magazine that can hold more than 10 rounds; semi-automatic shotguns with a military-style feature; any ammunition feeding device that can hold more than 10 rounds; and 205 specifically-named and listed firearms." (You can see the list of the 205 specifically-named firearms starting on page 4 of the PDF.)

On borders:

O'Rourke has time and again opposed efforts to secure the border, said that we don't need more border security, and that the border is as secure as it's ever been. Texans should hear from him how he wants to secure the border, if at all. Some examples that indicate his support for open borders:

On April 20, 2017, O’Rourke tweeted, “We already have a border wall that we don’t need.” https://twitter.com/BetoORourke/status/855196194183815169

On Jan 25, 2017 O'Rourke tweeted: "Less than zero. That's the amount of immigration we have from MX." https://twitter.com/BetoORourke/status/824350219269787657 -- The fact that there is a net outflow of Mexican immigrants does not mean there is no Mexican immigration. It also ignores immigration from Central America.

Opposed a measure to double the size of border patrol and add fencing https://www.c-span.org/video/?c4671115/orourke-corker-hoeven-amdt-6272013

TRANSCRIPT: Mr. Speaker, I rise today to warn my colleagues about the Corker-Hoeven amendment within the Senate's immigration bill. To my colleagues who are concerned with the fiscal health of our country, I call your attention to this provision, which will commit $50 billion to double the size of the Border Patrol, add 700 miles of walls and fencing between the U.S. and Mexico at a time when we have record-low northbound apprehensions and net migration from Mexico is zero. To my colleagues who cherish our civil liberties and our constitutional rights, can you live with a $50 billion militarized buildup within the United States where more than 6 million of your fellow citizens live?

Said the border is "secure as it's ever been":

"I think it is really important for this panel and the country to know the border is as secure as it has ever been." https://homeland.house.gov/hearing/subcommittee-hearing-what-does-secure-border-look/

---------- Forwarded message ----------

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com>

Date: Fri, Mar 9, 2018 at 3:15 PM

Subject: Sharing comments from author's spokesman

To: Catherine Frazier <catherine@tedcruz.org>

I’ve been emailing with Richard Luchette, who’s communications director for the House author of the proposed measure.

Luchette has offered comments on what is in the proposal and Cruz’s accuracy, PASTED BELOW.

Let me know if you have more to share per O’Rourke wanting to take our guns?

G.

PASTE

The Cruz ad says, “He wants to take our guns.” His spokesperson doesn’t give any justification for that claim in the quote below. Seems like Lyin’ Ted is at it again…

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, March 09, 2018 2:26 PM

I just fielded a follow-up reply from Catherine Frazier stating that 205 guns that would be banned by the measure are commonly used for self-defense.

Comment/guidance/other resources?

Frazier wrote:

“I know it's convenient for the left to call semi-automatic weapons ‘assault weapons’ and appreciate your efforts to carry that water for them, but the measure - filed again last week - targets 205 firearms commonly used by law abiding citizens for self-defense, recreation, and competition. I've included the latest bill and the description given by the cosponsors.

https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/5087/cosponsors?r=1

“The law would make it ‘unlawful for a person to import, sell, manufacture, transfer, or possess, in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce, a semiautomatic assault weapon.’ Note that the ban wouldn't apply to any weapon that was ‘lawfully possessed’ when the ban goes into effect.

"The Assault Weapons Ban of 2018 will prohibit the sale, transfer, production, and importation of: semi-automatic rifles and pistols with a military-style feature that can accept a detachable magazine; semi-automatic rifles with a fixed magazine that can hold more than 10 rounds; semi-automatic shotguns with a military-style feature; any ammunition feeding device that can hold more than 10 rounds; and 205 specifically-named and listed firearms." (You can see the list of the 205 specifically-named firearms starting on page 4 of the” legislation, she wrote.)

2:15 p.m.

Ok. They’re either lying or they don’t know what they’re talking about. The term ‘assault rifle’ comes from the Sturmgewehr 44 (which translates to ‘assault rifle 44’), a weapon the Germans developed for World War II. At the conclusion of the war, the Sturmgewehr became the inspiration for other assault rifles, including the AK-47 and the M16. I just think it’s really important to point out that this isn’t a term ‘the left’ invented.

Second, the bill clearly states we’re talking about semi-automatic weapons with at least one military-style feature – it also clearly states what those features are (I can pass them along if you need them). The idea that we’re putting all semi-automatic weapons under the same umbrella is something I first saw on Infowars and I guess the Cruz campaign is running with it now. The fact is it’s a lie to try and scare people.

Lastly, it looks like you already have this in what you sent me, but again anyone who owns an assault weapon when the law goes into effect can keep it. They are lying in the ad.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, March 09, 2018 3:37 PM

Got it, thanks.

What’s incorrect about Frazier’s reference to 205 firearms?

Also, is your title communications director?

G.

2:58 p.m.

Yes on communications director.

They’re right that there are 205 firearms that are named and banned under the bill. Again, if you already own one of those models, you can keep it or sell it (provided the purchaser passes a background check). But that’s totally up to the owner.

I’d also point out that there are also 2,258 legitimate hunting and sporting rifles and shotguns that are named by make and model and specifically exempted from the ban. There are a couple other exemptions too – antique weapons, weapons used by the military and law enforcement, weapons owned at the time of the bill’s enactment, and any firearm that is operated by a bolt, pump, lever, or slide action.

END PASTE

3:54 p.m.

Thanks - those who suggest that a ban of common semi-automatic weapons isn't an attempt to take away guns are the ones who are lying. The majority of Americans want to preserve and exercise their constitutional freedom to bear arms and defend themselves, and the so-called "assault weapons" ban is a clear violation of that liberty.

On Fri, Mar 9, 2018 at 3:55 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

The legislation doesn’t take guns legally held now. It bans them going forward. If I misread, please say how.

4:07 p.m.

Thank you for making my point. That is taking away their guns - if firearms are banned moving forward and people prevented from being able to buy them, that amounts to taking them away. Americans have a right to keep and bear arms and this violates that right.

Catherine Frazier

Ted Cruz for Senate

4:23 p.m.

additionally - O'Rourke said in an event only a few weeks ago "none of our fellow citizens should have an AR-15." https://drive.google.com/file/d/1yPvZychkJQzdSup98YEC3YK3LaHv8mZ0/view?usp=sharing

That's not saying he wants to ban the sale of new ones. That's saying no one should have them. It’s not unreasonable to assume he’s saying he wants to come for them.

Catherine Frazier

Ted Cruz for Senate

4:27 p.m.

Additionally, according to the Texas Tribune:

U.S. Rep. Beto O’Rourke, D-El Paso, called for a complete ban on assault rifles, no matter the person's age.

https://www.texastribune.org/2018/02/23/we-asked-every-texas-congress-about-latest-gun-regulation-talks/

He should explain how that doesn't amount to taking away guns.