0718 rwpftexas

Email, Hanna Allred, communications director, U.S. Rep. Roger Williams, July 23, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Monday, July 23, 2018 3:51 PM



Hanna:



Good afternoon. I write as we’re trying to fact-check Rep. Williams’ claim on the Fox Business Network that he’s never voted ‘’Present.’



After a reader brought the “never” statement to our attention, we queried Josh Tauberer of GovTrack.us who responded with the attached spreadsheet showing votes by members of the Texas delegation. Best we can tell, the sheet doesn’t show any Williams’ votes of “Present” on nonprocedural matters though it looks like various Texas members voted “Present” at different times. Anything else leap out?



I will paste below my partial transcript of the FBN interview. Anything to add? What date did that interview take place?



A note: We rely on attributable on-the-record information for all our stories.



PASTE:



Williams, appearing on “Mornings with Maria,” brought up Democrats who voted “Present” on a measure in favor of preserving Immigration & Customs Enforcement.



“That vote they took yesterday was surprising,” Williams said, “because those that vote present, they’re not representing their districts. So I think it will hurt them come November.”



Maria Bartiromo replied: “Why did they vote present when we know present basically means no?”



“Present means you’re not even there,” Williams said. “You’re elected to represent your district and you’re not representing anyone when you vote present--”



“--But how do you justify that?” Bartiromo said. “How do you justify voting present?”



Williams: “Well, I never voted present. So I don’t know that I can justify it. It’s the chicken way out is the only way I know we can put it.”



I’d be happy to hear back soon from him or you,



g.



Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

2:59 p.m.

As your research shows, and to the best of my knowledge, Congressman Williams has never voted “Present.” The interview on Fox Business occurred on Thursday, July 19 at 8:30am EST.



Best,



Hanna Allred

Office of Congressman Roger Williams (TX-25)