0717 teapfftexas

Emails, Lauren Callahan, information specialist IV, Texas Education Agency, July 17, 2017

1:27 p.m.

Sure thing, our cost of recapture reports are on our School District State Aid Reports page: https://tea4avfawcett.tea.state.tx.us/Fsp/Reports/ReportSelection.aspx

Just choose Cost of Recapture and then the year you’d like. Please keep in mind that the 2017-2018 report is preliminary and will be for quite a while – you can look at previous years to see how many preliminary/near final/final “runs” occur before the final figure is determined. I’m told by our finance team that the Austin ISD figure for 2017-2018 will likely go up a little, as it is dependent upon tax rates.

Based on prior years’ reports, I would expect the first “near final” figures for the 2016-2017 school year to be calculated in the early fall.

Let me know if you need anything else.

Thanks,

Lauren

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)"

Date: Monday, July 17, 2017 at 3:19 PM

Subject: Following up

Lauren:

I shared differences in the respective recapture estimates by the state and Austin district with the Austin district.

Nicole Conley replied: “It's a matter of data elements so you would have to ask TEA what data elements they use. I presume they don't have most current info like enrollment or TCAD Preliminary or Certified values. I think they used a rolled up estimate of property value growth. When we adopted the budget, we used Preliminary certified values from TCAD. I suspect because TEA is computing statewide, they may not have up to date info. We are in the process of computing based on final certified values that we just got from TCAD so our numbers may change but not substantially. If anything, they might go up a bit since the values came in a little higher.”

From the TEA’s vantage point, does Conley raise valid explanatory points?

g.

Here is my email to Conley:

Thanks. When I asked the Texas Education Agency about how much AISD could be paying in recapture, spokeswoman Lauren Callahan guided me to this web page. When I punched in the right information for the Austin district’s preliminary 2017-18 figure, I got a June TEA estimate of $513 million, which is about $21 million less than the district’s estimate, correct?

Discuss?

G.

4:30 p.m.

Yes. We use different estimates of local property tax collections as well as different estimates of student counts, both of which affect the estimate of recapture. Our numbers tie together when all final data is reconciled.