080618 cruzpftexas

Emails, Emily Miller, Ted Cruz campaign, Aug. 6, 2018

(PolitiFact Texas)

Sent: Monday, August 06, 2018 10:37 AM

…

On another front, we’re interested in how Sen. Cruz reached his conclusion that Beto O’Rourke is open to abolishing ICE.

(PolitiFact Texas)

11:26 a.m.

It looks to me like the Cruz TV ad I mentioned earlier draws on a Texas Tribune story for the claim that Beto O’Rourke is open to abolishing ICE.

This Tribune story and this longer excerpt from an O’Rourke appearance quote O’Rourke saying he’s against abolishing ICE.

Is there other information behind Cruz’s ad claim?

I hope to complete our fact-check of this Cruz claim today.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

(PolitiFact Texas)

1:26 p.m.

We’ve found a few instances of O’Rourke speaking to ICE’s abolition.

A July 2 Texas Tribune news story quoted O’Rourke initially saying he’s open to doing away with ICE or changing how it performs and giving its enforcement duties to another entity and then directly saying he opposes abolishing ICE.

From the story:

“Asked about abolishing ICE Friday at a town hall in San Antonio, O'Rourke discussed the need to eliminate fear in immigrant communities under Trump and to find a better way to enforce immigration laws. ‘And if that involves doing away with this agency, giving that responsibility to somebody else, changing how this agency performs, I’m open to doing that,’ O’Rourke said.

“Yet he went on to flatly answer no when directly asked if he would abolish ICE, explaining that he does not currently know enough about how immigration law would be enforced without the agency.

“‘I understand the urgency of this,’ O’Rourke said in conclusion. ‘I just want to make sure that we’re constructive in how we talk about meeting this challenge and that I understand what abolishing ICE would mean in terms of enforcing our laws going forward.’”

Earlier, on June 30, 2018, Patrick Svitek posted a tweet quoting O’Rourke’s responses at greater length.

According to Svitek, O’Rourke agreed with whoever asked him about ICE that there’s got “to be a better way of enforcing our laws, not using those tactics that instill fear, that do not reflect the best of us, not separating children from their parents at the border and keeping them in cages. And so if there’s another, better way to enforce our immigration laws--and I hope we’re all on the same page that we want to make sure that laws are enforced, we want to make sure that our laws reflect who we are and that we change those laws to make sure that we make the most out of all of us--then I’m open to that.”

O’Rourke’s reply went on: “And if that involves doing away with this agency, giving that responsibility to somebody else, changing how this agency performs, I’m open to doing that.”

Next, someone asked: “So would you abolish ICE?” O’Rourke replied: “No. So let me be really clear: I don’t know enough about how we would perform those same enforcement functions, if through another part of the Department of Homeland Security. But if you’re saying abolish the tactics that I just described, yes. I don’t know if you have to abolish the agency to do that…” He added: “I just want to make sure that we’re constructive in how we talk about meeting this challenge and that I understand what abolishing ICE would mean in terms of enforcing our laws going forward.”

Since then:

--A July 6, 2018, Houston Chronicle news story said O’Rourke had stopped short of calling for ICE’s elimination but was willing to discuss the idea. According to the story, O’Rourke said it doesn’t matter if agencies like ICE and Homeland Security are eliminated if such moves don’t address practices including the separation of children from parents at the border. “I want to make sure we are ending the practices of taking kids from their families,” O’Rourke said. “I want to focus on ending the practices.”

A day earlier, a Longview News-Journal news story quoted O’Rourke saying in a phone interview that he would join discussions of ICE’s future and how it fulfills its mandate.

More recently, O’Rourke was asked in an interview posted online July 25, 2018: “Some of your Democratic colleagues are saying just abolish ICE altogether. A bridge too far for you?”

O’Rourke replied on ABC Radio’s Powerhouse Politics Podcast: “I just don’t understand it. It’s not clear to me what that would accomplish.” He elaborated that abolishing the agency wouldn’t solve the separation of children from parents or the annual deaths of migrants near the border. “Abolishing ICE does nothing to solve any of those issues,” O’Rourke said, in contrast to making changes in federal policy. The question is asked about the 20:30 mark of the podcast.

Anything else to consider?

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

On Mon, Aug 6, 2018 at 2:32 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

This is the one email I’ve fielded offering backup. I’ve shared with you the items we found. If there’s anything more that led to the claim, let us know?

gs

W. Gardner Selby

Editor

PolitiFact Texas

Austin American-Statesman

From: Emily Miller Sent: Monday, August 6, 2018 1:42:16 PM

Subject: Houston Chron

The Houston Chronicle agreed Beto was “open” to abolishing ICE, -- which is what we said in the ad.

https://www.chron.com/news/politics/texas/article/Rep-Beto-O-Rourke-Abolishing-ICE-nothing-13104670.php

"It will come through thoughtful policy that brings people from both parties together to address some of these outstanding issues," he said.

The sentiment echoes comments O'Rourke made earlier this month on the campaign trail.

At the time, the El Paso Democrat said he was "open" to "doing away" with ICE, "giving that responsibility to somebody else," or changing how the agency performs, but ultimately said the move alone would not solve the problem— remarks that Ted Cruz seized on to attack O'Rourke.

Thank you,

Emily

(Miller)

2:53 p.m.

I forwarded you TWO press releases from our campaign, but will try again by sending these links to them:

https://www.tedcruz.org/press-releases/beto-orourke-open-to-abolishing-ice-for-border-security/

https://www.tedcruz.org/press-releases/beto-orourke-votes-against-support-for-ice-officers/

Thank you,

Emily