0218 spieckermanpftexas

Emails, Lee Spieckerman, communications consultant to George P. Bush campaign, Feb. 15, 2018

2:27 p.m.

First, I must say that I personally find this line of inquiry appalling, given that Commissioner Bush’s military service is well documented and previous (politically motivated) questions about this were long ago publicly answered. Apparently, Jerry Patterson, bereft of ammunition in his feckless effort to win back his old job, has adopted the “if you throw enough horse manure at the wall, some will stick” strategy. How uplifting that Patterson and his cronies have brought the toxic national political environment to Texas. Just what our voters are looking for.

That said, below are answers in your questions about the Commissioner’s military experience and attached is documentation.

Is Commissioner Bush a retired Navy officer?

Commissioner Bush was honorably discharged from the U.S. Navy on May 9, 2017, having achieved the rank of Lieutenant.

It’s been reported that Bush spent months in Afghanistan under another name. Is this accurate? What additional detail can you provide?

Correct. Commissioner Bush served in Afghanistan under an alias due to force protection concerns. I’m not sure what “additional details” you’re seeking, but attached are relevant documents relating to his service in support of Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. If you have questions about decisions relating to force protection measures, you should address them to Joint Special Operations Command.

When did Bush serve in the Navy Reserve?

Commissioner Bush received his Navy Reserve Direct Commission on May 21, 2007. He was honorably discharged just shy of 10 years later on May 9, 2017.

Can you provide relevant records showing his time of service?

Attached are:

· May 15, 2007, letter congratulating Commissioner Bush on his selection as an intelligence officer in the Navy Reserve Direct Commission Officer program.

· DD Form 2014, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty – completed once Commissioner Bush returned from active duty in Afghanistan and was transferred back into the Reserves. Note the dates of service for active duty in Afghanistan were June 18, 2010, to Feb. 4, 2011.

· Certificate for the Joint Service Commendation Medal for meritorious service from Aug. 13, 2010, to Jan. 5, 2011, while serving a Joint Task Force in Afghanistan.

· Citation to Accompany the Award of Joint Service Commendation Medal - describes in detail his meritorious achievement as a Deputy Chief of Operations for a Joint Task Force in support of Operation Enduring Freedom from Aug. 13, 2010, to Jan. 5, 2011. Quotes of note: “During this period, Lieutenant Junior Grade Bush demonstrated superior leadership in the delivery of unparalleled intelligence support to combat missions of National significance” and “Lieutenant Junior Grade Bush’s superb management in a dynamic operational environment translated into the successful integration of intelligence with combat operations.”

· Certificate for the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal dated March 17, 2010.

· Certificate for the ISAF Nato Medal for Commissioner Bush’s service in Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom from Aug. 1, 2010 to Jan. 1, 2011.

· Certificate of Appreciation issued by the Joint Task Force Commanding Officer Col. Vanek that Commissioner Bush supported at Bagram Airfield in Afghanistan.

· Certificate of Honorable Discharge from the U.S. Navy, dated May 9, 2017. Commissioner Bush obtained the rank of Lieutenant.

I’ve also attached pictures of Commissioner Bush’s military service medals, which he proudly displays on his office wall, and of the flag that he flew on Christmas day, Dec. 25, 2010, over Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan, in his wife Amanda’s honor.

Always happy to be of help.

Lee Spieckerman

Spokesperson

Texas Land Commissioner George P. Bush Campaign

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, February 15, 2018 2:53 PM

Thanks; I’d fielded some of this from the government today. I’ll also pass what you sent to my colleague Jonathan Tilove.

I want to make sure too that Bush didn’t earn, through points, more than the presented nearly 10 years of service. Any information on that?

At moment, it looks to me like Bush resigned from the Navy Reserve, as you share, but he’s not a retired officer. To qualify for that, he’d both need 20 years of service and have to be 60 years old, provided I’m reading relevant materials accurately. Here’s a website pointed out to us by Karen Suich, a Navy public affairs officer.

Anything to add?

Remind me of your campaign title?

As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our fact-checks.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

7:57 p.m.

Thank you for conveying my note to Jonathan.

To your last question, as noted in my signature block, I’m spokesperson for the Texas Land Commissioner George P. Bush campaign.

You correctly outlined the definition of a “retired” member of the armed forces. As documented in my previous email, Commissioner Bush was honorably discharged but is not technically “retired” under Department of Defense regulations. I think that the campaign used the term “retired” in campaign materials in the civilian, colloquial sense, meaning that The Commissioner is no longer active in the military. There was no intent to imply that he was receiving retirement pay and benefits, etc.

I think this and the previous memo fully address your questions. Reach out to me any time I can be of assistance.

Lee Spieckerman

Spokesperson

Texas Land Commissioner George P. Bush Campaign