1117 peritzpftexas

Email, Aki Peritz, former CIA analyst, Nov. 1, 2017

On Wednesday, November 1, 2017, 6:08:52 PM EDT, Gardner Selby wrote:

I’m a reporter for the Austin, TX daily newspaper and PolitiFact Texas. I saw your NPR piece and wanted to ask if you have, or can point to, an authoritative list of vehicular attacks globally, especially ones attributed to ISIS. We are fact-checking Rep. Michael McCaul, who told Fox News on Tuesday that the New York bike path assault "was the ninth vehicle assault used by ISIS." Is this accurate? Why?

8:13 p.m.

Nice to hear from you. Several points about Rep. McCaul's comments:

1. If I had to guess, one of his staffers found that datapoint (or made up that datapoint) and entered it into his speech. One only needs to peruse the wikipedia entry on this topic to find that this figure is subject to interpretation: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vehicle-ramming_attack#List_of_vehicle-ramming_attacks. Is it only an ISIS attack if the group claims it, or is it a different metric? There were a number of vehicle ramming attacks in France in 2014 that may or may not have been ISIS related.

2. Usually a good place to start for 'authoritative' terrorism statistics is the University of Maryland's START database: http://www.start.umd.edu/. However, even these statistics aren't updated consistently.

3. In terms of was NYC-is-an-ISIS-attack metric, it's rather odd at this stage to include it as an official ISIS attack when the group hasn't formally claimed it as one. While fidelity to the truth is not the Islamic State's strong suit, they haven't yet done so despite all the fanboys cheering it on on social media. Of course, the perpetrator reportedly did it because he was "inspired by" ISIS, which broadens the field of what is ISIS and what isn't considerably.

4. As I tried to argue in the NPR piece, this is nothing new. DHS has been warning about this since 2010. the Israelis claim there have been 60 vehicle attacks since Sep 2015 http://mfa.gov.il/MFA/ForeignPolicy/Terrorism/Palestinian/Pages/Wave-of-terror-October-2015.aspx

5. Do Iraqi civilians and soldiers count in this metric? ISIS has been using suicide carbombs for a long time, against military and civilian targets. Let us not be so ethnocentric as to forget those individuals as well.

Hope this helps.

Aki