0718 tpppftexas

Emails, Jim Henson, director, Texas Politics Project, Daron Shaw, professor of government, University of Texas, July 16-18, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Monday, July 16, 2018 5:21:03 PM

To: Henson, James R; Shaw, Daron R

I hope this note finds you both someplace cooler than here. I write because we’re fact-checking an email blast from the Republican Party of Texas stating that a recent poll showed Beto O’Rourke 2 percentage points behind Ted Cruz.

Ring any bells?

We haven’t heard back from the party. Its email blast attributed this to Stephen Wong, the party’s political director: “You’ve probably seen how ecstatic the far-left has been the last 24 hours. First there was a poll showing Francis ‘Beto’ O’Rourke within 2pts(!) of Senator Cruz.” Then, Wong noted, O’Rourke reported raising more money than Cruz’s campaign reaped in the year’s second quarter.

The current compilation of Texas U.S. Senate polls on the Real Clear Politics website indicates that in three polls taken since early June, Cruz led by five, nine and 10 percentage points, respectively. Before that, according to the compilation, three polls taken since mid-April 2018 placed Cruz ahead, chronologically and respectively, by three, seven and 11 percentage points:

Thanks for your help. As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories.

G.

From: Henson, James R Sent: Tuesday, July 17, 2018 7:53 AM

The April Quinnipiac at Cruz +3 is the closest one I've seen...

jh

8:03 a.m.

July 17, 2018

For our story, any comments on the poll passed along by the GOP as backup?

Here:

https://www.politicususa.com/2018/07/10/beto-orourke-pulls-virtual-tie.html

Thanks,

G.

From: Henson, James R Sent: Tuesday, July 17, 2018 8:07 AM

I don't have much to say about that poll. But you might find this handy: https://texaspolitics.utexas.edu/blog/look-spring-polling-vs-fall-voting-texas

Best,

JH



From: Shaw, Daron R Sent: Tuesday, July 17, 2018 11:50 AM



GS,



A couple of things to note.



First, it is standard practice for campaigns, especially those for incumbent candidates, to drive contributions and volunteers by highlighting the threat to their preferred candidate. What Senator Cruz is doing—telling potential donors and volunteers that he might lose—is not unusual; in fact, it’s probably smart politics. Moreover, the campaign’s specific use of polls is also standard. Polls convey important information about the state of the race, and are taken seriously by those with resources (money, time, and expertise).



Second, the communication (at least as I read it) doesn’t say “public polls” or “scientifically valid probability samples based on live interviewers.” It simply says that a poll shows O’Rourke within 2 points. Thus, I’m not sure the appropriate standard is whether the RCP average includes a poll showing this. Maybe it’s an internal poll, or one from another GOP campaign. Or perhaps its an IVR or lesser known type of poll. And I don’t know that the campaign has an any obligation to provide this poll to the news media.



Third, and more esoterically, one could claim that the margin of error surrounding some of the public polls is consistent with the spirit (if not the precise number) of the email. For example, the April Quinnipiac poll showing Cruz up 3 points was 961 RVs; that’s a margin of error of roughly 3 points. So the result is really as follows: if we did 100 polls, 95 of them would show Cruz between 44 and 50, and O’Rourke between 41 and 47. The margin this varies between Cruz +9 and O’Rourke +3.



Now, the reality is that we have six public polls since spring 2018, and all of them show Cruz winning by between 3 and 11 points. The chances of this happening if O’Rourke is actually winning is statistically infinitesimal. But that’s not what Cruz’s campaign is claiming.



Sorry for rambling, but it’s an interesting subject!



Sincerely,



Daron



11:55 a.m.

July 17, 2018

Thanks. To be clear, the email blast noting the poll came from the Republican Party of Texas—not Cruz’s camp.



By phone today, Chris Wilson, pollster for Cruz’s camp, offered a critique. He suggested, for instance, that the cited poll greatly under-sampled Republicans. Make sense?



I see that the Tribune poll showed a five-point margin. Could that fairly be read to be a two-point margin?



Appreciated,



G.

(Selby) 10:15 a.m., July 17, 2018

Any thoughts on the poll covering responses gathered over more than four months?

(Daron Shaw)

11:51 a.m.

July 17, 2018

If you assume that your universe is static and that opinion is static, it isn’t statistically problematic.

12:05 p.m.

July 17, 2018

Polls that sample RV populations or adults are going to show a much better result for the Democrat than a sample of LVs. The issue, of course, is that LV models rely on attitudinal measures and are thus much more reliable as Election Day nears.

...

No, I don’t think the UT-Trib poll can be fairly read as a two-point margin. But it can be read as a margin that is likely between 2 and 8 points.

DRS

3:06 p.m.

July 17, 2018

Daron, Jim:

I fielded some replies on that poll from Drew Linzer, who directs Civiqs. For our story, further thoughts at your end?

Thanks again,

g.

From: Drew Linzer

Sent: Tuesday, July 17, 2018 11:45 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Hi, I'll reply to these questions in order.

1. Responses are from interviews conducted online with individuals in the Civiqs Survey panel. The panel is opt-in. Respondents self-report their home state and voter registration status. Selected panelists are sampled and interviewed daily based upon our research methodology: https://civiqs.com/methodology/

2. The lengthy timeframe enables Civiqs to perform long-term daily tracking in a sustainable, methodologically rigorous manner. Traditional polls will conduct large numbers of interviews over a small number of days with lengthy gaps between polls: for example, 500 interviews might be completed over a three day fielding period, but then pollsters will wait weeks before another poll is conducted. Instead, we spread out our interviews across more days, and remain in the field continuously. We then use specialized trendline fitting statistical models to produce our final results. The model is described more fully in the "Daily Tracking Models" section of our methodology statement. The result is a much more refined, and always up-to-date estimate of current public opinion: https://civiqs.com/results.

3. The Texas U.S. Senate poll results imply a sample that is 31% Democrat, 36% Republican, 33% Independent. It's true that a more Republican sample would produce a larger lead for Cruz over O'Rourke.

4. All of our results are based on the same tracking data and model, updated daily.

5. Full results are available on a subscription basis. We release results for selected questions at https://civiqs.com/results.

6. The Texas U.S. Senate poll was not commissioned or sponsored by any client. Civiqs polls on over 250 questions of political interest each day. Civiqs fields surveys to our own research panel, with no independent sponsor.

Best wishes,

Drew

On Tue, Jul 17, 2018 at 9:13 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Thanks. I will review.

FOLLOW-UP QUERIES:

If I read right, the cited margin in the Texas race draws on responses gathered online over more than 16 months and from volunteers self-identifying as Texans and registered voters. I get all of this right?

Why the lengthy timeframe? Any strengths/weaknesses to it?

Chris Wilson, who polls for Sen. Cruz, told me by phone that the Civiqs sample in Texas appears to have been plus-4 Republican when, he said, it’s wise in Texas to poll at +10 Republican or so. Is Wilson right on both fronts? Why or why not?

Does Civiqs have recent short-term poll results for the Texas U.S. Senate race? We’re aware of results compiled here by Real Clear Politics.

I think you’re saying the full Civiqs poll and results are only available to subscribers. Correct?

Who sponsored (or who is sponsoring) the Texas U.S. Senate poll?

Anything else you suggest we consider?

Thanks again,

g.

From: Drew Linzer

Sent: Tuesday, July 17, 2018 10:36 AM

To: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Hi,

Civiqs is an online polling firm that conducts daily tracking surveys on issues and campaigns across the United States. You can read more about our company and our research methodology on our website: https://civiqs.com/ and https://civiqs.com/methodology/.

We release many of our survey results publicly, here: https://www.civiqs.com/results

Other results are available to subscribers only, including the TX-Sen poll that you mentioned in your email.

We have been polling the TX-Sen race daily, since February 16, 2017, and have collected over 12,000 total responses. The survey population is self-identified registered voters currently residing in the state of Texas.

The information included in the tweet you linked, and the followup tweets here:

https://twitter.com/markos/status/1016389087006097413

https://twitter.com/markos/status/1016391788536389632

are screenshots taken from our results website, showing the state of the race, according to our surveys, as of July 4, 2018.

Is there anything else I can help you with?

Thanks for the inquiry,

Drew

Drew Linzer, PhD

Chief Scientist, Civiqs

civiqs.com

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Wednesday, July 18, 2018 11:53 AM

It looks to me like the April Quinnipiac survey had a margin of error of 3.6 percentage points. Am I reading that right? I can change what you said as directed.

G.

1:17 p.m.

July 18, 2018

I think I said roughly 3 points, but you can change the analysis to the following…

“…So the result is really as follows: if we did 100 polls, 95 of them would show Cruz between 43 and 51, and O’Rourke between 40 and 48. The margin this varies between Cruz +11 and O’Rourke +5.”