0717 mclarkpftexas

Email (excerpted), Meredith Clark, assistant professor, Frank W. and Sue Mayborn School of Journalism, University of North Texas, July 20, 2017

On Thu, Jul 20, 2017 at 1:19 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Happy Thursday. At Kathleen McElroy’s suggestion, I write hoping you can help us analyze the accuracy of a claim for the PolitiFact Texas project and the American-Statesman.

We are trying to check this Mark Cuban claim, originally made in the tweet here: “Twitter reaches only 15 percent of the population.”

A stock analyst, Perry Gold, guided us to Twitter’s internal metrics covering the first quarter of 2017 as posted by the company. According to the posted figures, Twitter had 70 million monthly active U.S. users in the quarter, up three million from the last four months of 2016, the company noted in its April letter to shareholders. That letter also said: “Increases in audience and engagement were driven by organic growth (reflecting some seasonal strength), product improvements (including better relevance in the timeline and notifications), and marketing.”

Some perspective: The U.S. population was 323 million as of July 2016 including nearly 249 million residents age 18 or older, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. So you could roughly assert, unscientifically it seems to me, that 22 percent of all Americans engaged with Twitter in the first few months of 2017. Removing minors from the equation perhaps leaves open the speculation that up to 28 percent of adults used Twitter in the quarter.

How to improve this analysis?

Perhaps monthly active users is not the best metric?

Please let me know if you think you can help this week.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

1:28 p.m.

...For my own work, I usually refer to Pew's numbers.

However, I'm not a quantitative scholar. My colleague, Deen Freelon... is a Big Data expert. He's the person you want for a more scientific breakdown of the numbers.

I get where you're going with this analysis, but conceptually, it's a little more complicated. Cuban's claim rests on the the assumption that everyone has an equal probability of seeing any other user's tweets, which we don't, because of Twitter's algorithms and our own decisions on whom to follow, re-tweet, mute, block, etc.

And Twitter's numbers don't communicate "reach," either. No matter the number of "active" users on the platform, simply logging in to Twitter doesn't necessarily mean you're 1) an actual person and 2) reading anything posted there. The active word phrase here is "potential reach."

A better metric might be the average of unique impressions Trump's tweets get from users in the States. Perhaps the company could provide that info? I have a contact who does analytics at Twitter; I'm happy to put you in touch with him.

Kind regards,

MC