1018 kogerpftexas

Email, Gregory Koger, professor of political science, University of Miami, Oct. 17, 2018

3:32 p.m.

I write afresh on behalf of PolitiFact Texas to share a debate claim by Beto O'Rourke, the Democratic nominee for a Texas U.S. Senate seat, and his basis--and to seek your guidance and analysis for our story.

O'Rourke said in debate Tuesday: “There’s only one other senator from either party over the last 25 years who has a worse record, who has a worse record on bipartisanship. In other words, Ted Cruz has a harder time working with members across the aisle than almost anyone else to get anything done.”

By email, Chris Evans of O’Rourke’s campaign told us the senator based his statement on a bipartisan lifetime index posted online by the Lugar Center, in Georgetown University’s McCourt School of Public Policy

At moment, the claim seems to be supported by the Lugar Center’s online post of lifetime “bipartisan index” scores of senators covering 1993 through 2016.

How else would you recommend we gauge the bipartisanship of Sen. Ted Cruz? Any recommended experts? Your own analysis?

As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories. We hope to complete our review soon..

Thanks,

W. Gardner Selby

PolitiFact Texas

3:54 p.m.

I think Rep. O'Rourke is making a fair statement. It is based on the Lugar Center's bipartisanship index, which is based on a measure of how often a senator cosponsors legislation introduced by members of the other party, and how often s/he attracts cosponsors of the opposing party to his own bills.

It is appropriate to measure bipartisanship at this stage of the process, as senators are free to introduce and support bills without constraint. In contrast, a measure based on roll call votes is subject to concern that the set of roll call votes is carefully managed by party leaders to exclude a lot of controversial issues, but also areas of bipartisan cooperation.

Additionally, O'Rourke's claim is fair because it resonates with Senator Cruz's record as a senator. From the day he was sworn in as a U.S. senator, Cruz seemed intent on running for president as the only national politician willing to fight his own party for conservative goals. That is, he sought to make every other Republican senator look like a weak sell-out by publicly opposing bipartisan compromise, particularly on the fiscal year 2014 budget. He was the public leader of the Republicans who advocated for a government shutdown in October 2013. This shutdown was bad for the Republican party's image and for the governance of the country, but Cruz achieved his personal goal of displaying his willingness to blow up bipartisan compromises.

Gregory Koger

Professor of Political Science

University of Miami

www.as.miami.edu/personal/gkoger