0118 braunpftexas

Emails, Eric Braun, senior director, User Engagement, Farm Progress, Jan. 25 and 31, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, January 24, 2018 3:01 PM

Subject: Texas reporter, inquiry for a fact-check

Good afternoon. I’m a reporter for the Austin American-Statesman where today I spotted your recent news story on feral hogs. We’d like to fact-check this statement in the story: “Texas is home to more feral pigs than any other state — an estimated 50 percent to 75 percent of all feral swine in the nation.”

How did you reach those conclusions and percentages?

We rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories.

Thanks for a quick reply,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

8:33 a.m.

Jan. 25, 2018

Here’s the response from Logan. Let me know if you have any questions off of this. Seems like a fair range based on the numbers available.

Eb

---------------

Hey Ron:

Fair question, tough topic. When it comes to the ever-changing feral swine population (worldwide), every number thrown out there is based upon an estimate (of course). I have accumulated so much research on feral hogs in recent years it is hard for me to put my finger on all of it, and worse, things like population numbers are extremely varied and always changing.

That said, for the purpose of this most recent article I used info from USDA-APHIS' Gail Keirn at their Wildlife Research Center for U.S. feral swine population numbers (see below), and for populations numbers in Texas I relied on Texas A&M Extension (AgriLife) study (see below) that sets the state population at a wide range (1-4 million).

For the purpose of illustration, I took those numbers into consideration when trying to apply a percentage number of Texas population versus U.S. population, and that is where I offered the estimate of between 50-75 percent of U.S. feral swine population reside in Texas.

The number, however, is simply an estimates based upon the best available and most recent numbers (also estimates) from state and federal agencies.

Accordingly, if the U.S. population is estimated as much as 6 million feral swine (USDA-APHIS), and the Texas population is as much as an estimated 4 million feral swine (Texas Agrilife), then I believe my percentage would be on target. If we take the lower estimated figures instead of the highest, then that percentage would, of course be less. Again, the range is wide and all numbers are estimated. I should have pointed that out in retrospect.

Here is the contributing info for my data and conclusions:

USDA-APHIS Wildlide Service

Gail Keirn, a public affairs specialist at the USDA-APHIS-WS National Wildlife Research Center, says "population estimates for the number of feral swine in the continental U.S. vary, but they are likely between 5 and 6 million invasive wild pigs in at least 35 states."

Feral Hog Polulation

Population Growth, Density and Harvest - Texas AgriLife

Population Growth and Density Population dynamics (i.e., survival, reproduction, density, etc.) of feral hogs is poorly understood. Often, the number of feral hogs are reported from 1 to 4 million in Texas. These estimates are not based on scientific studies. However, the number of feral hog observations and increased damage reported throughout Texas suggests the state-wide population is growing and expanding its range. Here, we assess population attributes and suitable habitat to better understand the extent of the feral hog epidemic and action required to reduce their impact to agriculture and wildlife management.

LubbockAvalache-Journal

New report highlights state's feral hog problem

A Texas A&M University report compiled by scientists and biologists doesn’t attempt to pinpoint the exact number of hogs in the state, but rather highlight suitable habitat and attributes related to the growing population for historical estimation purposes.

The findings are startling, predicting a massive rise in the population without proper control in a state featuring more places for the swine to call home than most people may realize. The bottom line is this, according to the study: If left unchecked, the state’s feral hog tally — which was averaged at roughly 2.6 million animals — will more than triple in five years.

LIVE SCIENCE

Feral Pigs Going Hog-Wild in US

Texas may have the most wild hogs of any U.S. state, and the situation is expected to worsen, despite the $7 million per year that Texans spends to keep the animals' numbers down, the AP reports. A recent study by Texas A&M University found that the number of feral pigs is likely to triple in five years in the state of Texas if serious efforts aren't made to reduce feral-pig populations.

...feral-pig reproduction is no laughing matter. The animals may start reproducing when they’re just 6 months old, and their litters average about six sows, reports Mississippi State University. They produce an average of 1.5 litters per year.

Eric Braun

Senior Director, User Engagment

Farm Progress

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, January 25, 2018 8:35 AM

Subject: RE: Texas reporter, inquiry for a fact-check

This is very helpful. Are there web links to any of the cited information? I’m especially interested in the federal official’s analysis. Where did Keirn say as much and when?

9:04 a.m.

Keirn- Looks like she is quoted here: http://blogs.plos.org/ecology/2017/02/01/invasive-wild-pigs-leave-a-swath-of-destruction-across-u-s-and-they-keep-spreading/

This is a piece from her directly 5 years ago quoting an over 5 million population. https://www.usda.gov/media/blog/2013/04/30/feral-swine-ripping-and-rooting-their-way-across-america

Here’s the most recent thing I could find from the USDA, it’s saying the population is now 6-million-plus. https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/resources/pests-diseases/feral-swine/sa-fs-history

Texas Agrilife - https://invasivespecies.wa.gov/documents/squealonpigs/FeralHogPopGrowthDensity&HarvestinTX.pdf

LA-J - http://lubbockonline.com/outdoors/2013-03-31/leschper-new-report-highlights-states-feral-hog-problem

Live Science - https://www.livescience.com/28560-feral-pigs-running-wild.html

Eric Braun

Senior Director, User Engagement

Farm Progress

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Tuesday, January 30, 2018 3:55 PM

Eric:

I am circling back to you for our fact-check.

We’ve now had a chance to connect with the USDA and Texas authorities. There seems to be concurrence so far that one third to one half of the nation’s feral hogs ramble in Texas, not 50 percent to 75 percent. Gail Keirn’s reply to us about the share of feral hogs living in Texas lies below.

Anything else you think we should consider?

Thanks again,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

6:28 a.m.

Jan. 31, 2018

The data on feral hog populations are based on estimates from a variety of sources and they tend to give very large ranges for their figures. We see how our reporter, who was going off of an earlier 2017 report saying the population was 5-6 million, got to the 75% top number in his range. The 2012 Texas A&M report the USDA cites also says that up to 4 million feral hogs live in Texas. Even with the USDA now saying there are currently 6 million-plus feral hogs nationally that’s six year gap for the ever-expanding Texas herd. That said, if 30-50% is the official estimate from the USDA we will update our story with that correction.

Thanks,

Eric Braun

Senior Director, User Engagement

Farm Progress