0818 carterpftexas

Emails, Emily Taylor, communications director, U.S. Rep. John Carter, Aug. 27, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Friday, August 24, 2018 4:21 PM

To: Taylor, Emily Subject: Inquiry for a PolitiFact Texas fact-check

Emily:

Good afternoon. I just spoke with Congressman Carter as we’re fact-checking a claim that he hasn’t held a town hall in five years.

Carter told me that he’s lately held multiple district events in front of crowds that were opened up to questions without restriction.

What schedule detail can you provide that speaks to the accuracy of the claim?

I hope to complete this fact-check Monday.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

9:18 a.m.

Aug. 27, 2018

At the following events, among many others, Congressman Carter took questions from his constituents. Topics included WEP/GPO, barracks funding at Ft. Hood, legalizing marijuana, career and technical education, and the recent WOTUS ruling.

August 23: Killeen Chamber of Commerce

August 17: Military Officers Association of America

August 7: Temple Kiwanis Club

August 14: American Legion Post 133

The Temple Daily Telegram covered the American Legion event, and below is an excerpt:

“Town Hall

After the presentation, Carter took a few minutes to discuss congressional business and field questions from the audience.

He said he’s working with the U.S. Army to develop a program that will help veterans transition from the military to the workforce.

“One of the issues we have with (veterans) is the transition period between when they get out of the service and when they go back to being an ordinary citizen. That transition is hard,” Carter said. “Even though they learn some skills while they’re in the military, they can’t convert those skills to civilian jobs because people wanted them to be certified in whatever position they were in.”

The new program, which will be tested at Fort Hood for 18 months, will allow soldiers to receive certification for civilian jobs before leaving the military.

“We put together a program … for every soldier so that they can go get additionally certified to go directly out of the Army into a job,” Carter said.

A veteran in the audience asked if there is any chance of increased payments to retired and disabled veterans. He said it has been more than a decade since he has seen a significant increase.

Carter said additional funding is not likely to come available soon as funding is currently focused on ramping up the military.

“We’re really aiming everything toward rebuilding our depleted force from over the last eight years,” Carter said.

He does, however, believe such discussions will be on the horizon.

“You don’t keep soldiers if you don’t have a decent retirement for them and decent disability payments, so it’s going to be an up-and-coming conversation,” Carter said. “I don’t know of anybody who is on top of that right now. I’ll be glad to support it and move forward on it when it happens, but it takes 218 of us to get it done.”

Emily Taylor

Communications Director

Congressman John Carter (TX-31)

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Monday, August 27, 2018 10:30 AM

Thanks. In the cited period, the five years, I wonder if the congressman held town halls open to all constituents – live or electronic (conference call). If so, could you provide specifics?

G.

From: Taylor, Emily Sent: Monday, August 27, 2018 2:22 PM

Telephone town halls are an effective tool to reach thousands of constituents at one time, therefore, Congressman Carter has hosted 25 telephone town halls in the last 5 years, his last one was on June 18, 2018. The last four alone have reached 71,471 constituents. Also, Congressman Carter holds Facebook Live town halls, where constituents can tune in online and ask real time questions or submit questions on our website if they’re unable to tune in during the live event. Here is an example of one of those events: https://www.facebook.com/judgecarter/videos/1822464811200552/ . These events are promoted in our e-newsletters.

Emily Taylor

Communications Director

Congressman John Carter (TX-31)

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Monday, August 27, 2018 2:25 PM

Can you point me to the e newsletters?

2:42 p.m.

https://carter.house.gov/carter-courier1/