0318 ptsapftexas

Email, Liz Hedreen, president, Lake Washington PTSA Council, March 9, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Thursday, March 8, 2018 4:44:39 PM

Good afternoon. I write on behalf of the Austin, Texas newspaper and the fact-checking PolitiFact Texas project. Shannon Parthemer of the Lake Washington district provided your email address to my inquiry.

The other day in Texas, Democratic U.S. Senate hopeful Beto O’Rourke said (about the 14-minute mark here) that “PTA meetings are now being conducted to help parents tell their kids” that if a guy with an AR-15 walks into their classroom, “you are supposed to create as much chaos as you possibly can. They want you to scream and yell and dance around and throw books and just keep moving.”

An O’Rourke campaign spokesman, Chris Evans, told us O’Rourke was relying on a Redmond, Washington resident’s statement on Facebook.

I have since learned that the Lake Washington district, like many, teaches ALICE to staff and students. I am reaching out to you to ask if PTA meetings have taken place along the lines of what O’Rourke said and what the mother wrote on Facebook.

As ever, we count on attributable on-the-record information for our stories.

I would be happy to visit by phone if that’s easier. I am trying to complete our story Friday.

11:11 a.m.

I did not attend the PTA meeting that this mother is referring to, so I cannot speak to what she heard. We have 41 PTSAs in our school district and each one runs their own meetings, so I don't have specific knowledge about what topics they have covered. Speaking for my own experience as a parent, I can tell you that I have listened to a presentation about ALICE training in PTSA meetings at my own children's school (Lake Washington High School), where they detailed out what ALICE entails.

Here is a link to a communication that our district Superintendent Dr. Traci Pierce sent to families soon after the Florida violence. https://www.lwsd.org/programs-and-services/communications/connections-e-newsletters/connections-february-20-2018

Thank you for your inquiry.

Liz Hedreen

Liz Hedreen

LWPTSA Council President