1018 austinwaterpftexas

Emails, Susan Garnett, public information specialist senior, City of Austin Watershed Protection Department, Oct. 12, 2018

3:12 p.m.

Oct. 11, 2018

Thanks for the phone interview this afternoon as we review the accuracy of the claim by mayoral candidate Alex Strenger that 60 percent of Austin’s “waterways are found to be contaminated with fecal matter and deemed unsafe to swim.”

It looks to us like Strenger based his claim on this study, released in August.

Is the claim accurate? Why or why not?

You mentioned the possibility of reviewing water sampling results to deliver an up-to-date sense of the degree to which waterways have too much e. Coli to be safe for swimming. That would be helpful.

How does the city gauge if a waterway has too much contamination to rule out safe swimming?

Which waterways are considered not safe for swimming due to pollution?

Anything more to consider?

Other recommended sources?

For all our stories, we rely on attributable on-the-record information. I hope to complete this story Friday afternoon.

Thanks,

wgs

W. Gardner Selby

1:55 p.m.

Oct. 12, 2018

Todd Jackson passed your inquiry along to the Watershed Protection’s PIO team and we’ve provided a response to your questions below. Please let me know if you need any additional information.

Thanks and have a great weekend!

From: Gardner Selby Sent: Thursday, October 11, 2018 3:12 PM

To: Jackson, Todd

Subject: Urgent inquiry for a PolitiFact Texas fact-check

Thanks for the phone interview this afternoon as we review the accuracy of the claim by mayoral candidate Alex Strenger that 60 percent of Austin’s “waterways are found to be contaminated with fecal matter and deemed unsafe to swim.”

It looks to us like Strenger based his claim on this study, released in August.

60 percent of Austin’s “waterways are found to be contaminated with fecal matter and deemed unsafe to swim”.

Is the claim accurate? Why or why not?

About 50% of Austin’s creeks exceed the TCEQ criteria for contact recreation at any given time, based on our historic E. coli data. Contact recreation is an activity that increases the chance of swallowing water, such as swimming or splashing. Note that this is not a standard that allows for the determination of safe or unsafe swimming, but rather a state-level indicator of long-term potential of fecal contamination. The higher the E. coli count, the more likely there is fecal contamination and the higher the risk there is for waterborne illness. Any natural body of water will have some amount of fecal matter due to fish and wildlife, and the fecal matter from warm-blooded animals such as birds, bats, dogs, deer and other mammals will include E.coli.

How does the city gauge if a waterway has too much contamination to rule out safe swimming?

Austin does not make a swim/no-swim determination for any of its waterways. This is a very difficult risk to assess due to the high variability of bacteria data, strong influences of weather, and the fact that it takes 24-hours to get a result. Our routine monitoring data does not indicate safe or not safe to swim, but rather provides a background value for risk of fecal contamination.

Which waterways are considered not safe for swimming due to pollution?

Austin does not make a swim/no-swim determination for any of its waterways. This is a very difficult risk to assess due to the high variability of bacteria data, strong influences of weather, and the fact that it takes 24-hours to get a result. Our routine monitoring data does not indicate safe or not safe to swim, but rather provides a background value for risk of fecal contamination.

Anything more to consider?

There are risks for swimming in any natural water body, so best practices are strongly encouraged:

Avoid swimming after heavy rainfall.

Do not swim in water that looks discolored, murky, or smells unpleasant.

Make sure you can see submerged hazards

Look for posted warning signs and follow the advice on them.

Avoid swallowing water or putting your head under water if you are unsure about its quality.

Avoid swimming if you have an open wound or infection.

Other recommended sources?http://txrules.elaws.us/rule/title30_chapter307_sec.307.7

http://txrules.elaws.us/rule/title30_chapter307_sec.30

7.4

Susan Garnett

Public Information Specialist Senior

City of Austin | Watershed Protection Department

4:16 p.m.

This data represents approximately 45 watersheds, 125 sites, for the past 30 years or so. The TCEQ assessment criteria for primary contact recreation is used as a guidance threshold, and the locations that exceed it change frequently, so there is no static list. Please visit the City’s open data portal to see collected data.

...

Susan