1018 dillerpftexas

Emails, Dan Diller, policy director, The Lugar Center, Oct. 17, 2018

2:16 p.m.

Good afternoon. I write from Austin on behalf of the PolitiFact Texas fact-checking project because it may be that the Lugar Center's work figures into a claim leveled in debate Tuesday by Rep. Beto O'Rourke, the Democratic U.S. Senate nominee from El Paso.

O'Rourke said of Republican Sen. Ted Cruz: "There’s only one other senator from either party over the last 25 years who has a worse record, who has a worse record on bipartisanship. In other words, Ted Cruz has a harder time working with members across the aisle than almost anyone else to get anything done.”

A web search suggests that the center has regularly graded bipartisanship among senators. What research bears on the accuracy of this claim?

We rely on attributable on-the-record information for all our stories. I'd be gratified to hear back very soon.

Cheers,

wgs

W. Gardner Selby

PolitiFact Texas

3:04 p.m.

Nick Taylor forwarded your email to me. I am policy director at The Lugar Center, and I oversee the Bipartisan Index and our other good government work.

I am happy to talk to you about our methodology or answer other questions you may have.

The statements you included in your e-mail below are correct from our point of view.

Our Index uses a set formula to measure how often members of Congress co-sponsor bills introduced by the other party and how often they get members of the other party to co-sponsor their own bills. The formula is objective. In other words, we do not look at a member or a particular bill and decide whether they are bipartisan. Members succeed and fail on the index according to objective measurements of how often they cross the line to work with the other party at bill introduction. A Member's score will go up if they secure opposite party co-sponsors or seek out a good bill to co-sponsor that was introduced by the other side.

On that basis, Ted Cruz does have the second worst lifetime score (239th out of 240 Senators) over the period covered by our Index (1993-2016). That is a fact.

One note: sometimes very conservative or very progressive members will defend a bad score on the Bipartisan Index by touting their ideological purity and refusal to compromise. We believe compromise is an essential part of the legislative process. But beyond that, 50% of the Bipartisan Index score measures a Senator's ability to get broad support for their own ideas (as evidenced by co-sponsors attracted from the other party to their bills). So in essence if a member brags about a low Bipartisan Index score, they are bragging that their own bills have a limited appeal. They are acknowledging that they are offering "message bills" designed to appeal to the base, rather than making a real attempt to address problems through legislation.

Glad to answer questions.

Dan Diller

(PolitiFact Texas)

3:16 p.m.

Very helpful, thanks. I spotted 2017 scores on the site. Those are not incorporated into the lifetime results, correct?

Any thoughts on Cruz ranking 85th in 2017?

Are there other efforts to gauge bipartisanship?

Thanks again,

G.

(Diller)

3:34 p.m.

Correct. 2017 is not included in the lifetime scores. When we get to the end of this Congress, 2017 and 2018 will be folded into the lifetime scores.

We regard scores for the first year of a Congress to be "interim" scores.

Senator Cruz's 2017 score of -1.03 is still considered to be very poor.

As for other measures, there are vote studies that measure one's place on the ideological spectrum. But that is not the same thing as bipartisanship. We believe that members can be very liberal and very conservative and still be bipartisan. They just have to make the effort to look for good bills introduced by the other party and be open to writing bills that could appeal to some open minded members of the other party.

For example, we found that about 70% of the 240 Senators since 1993 had at least one Congress where they were above 0.00 (meaning they scored above the historical baseline on the Index for a member in their circumstances). Obviously a lot of those Senators were considered very liberal or very conservative. Yet in those Congresses, they showed they were capable of being bipartisan. Bipartisanship is not the province of centrists. It is an attitude you bring to office that says, "I believe what I believe, but I am willing to consider and test other ideas and strategies. And I am willing to work hard and compromise a little to try to sell my ideas to people who don't initially agree with me."

(PolitiFact Texas)

3:46 p.m.

Why is that score very poor?

(Diller)

3:50 p.m.

First, anything below 0.00 is considered partisan because it is below the historical baseline. Anything below. -.05 is considered poor. Anything below -1.00 is considered very poor. Usually -1.00 will rank in the bottom 20% of any Congress, as it does in this case.