1018 cevpftexas

Email, Chris Evans, communications director, Beto O’Rourke campaign, Oct. 2, 2018

On Tue, Oct 2, 2018 at 11:20 AM Gardner Selby wrote:

Chris:

Good morning. I write seeking Beto O'Rourke's backup for his statement at the Willie Nelson concert-rally about foster children.

At about the 56:40 mark of the campaign's video of the rally, O'Rourke said:that in Texas, "you can be too gay to adopt" a foster child "who needs a loving home."

How did O'Rourke reach this conclusion?

What law or laws would he seek to change as senator to address this?

As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories. I am hoping to complete this story soon.

THANKS,

W. Gardner Selby

PolitiFact Texas

512-940-7979

2:25 p.m.

Unfortunately, HB 3859 made it legal in Texas to deny an adoption to someone because of their sexual orientation. Under the law, foster care agencies in Texas are free to exclude same-sex couples from adoptions or discriminate against prospective parents based on their sexual orientation.

HB 3859 was signed into law by Governor Abbott on June 15, 2017. This at a time when there are around 30,000 kids in Texas's foster care system.

From the Texas Tribune:

"Faith-based adoption agencies in Texas would be able to reject prospective parents on religious grounds under a bill the state House approved Tuesday"

https://www.texastribune.org/2017/05/09/foster-care-hb-3859/

https://www.texastribune.org/2017/05/21/senate-passes-religious-protections-child-welfare-agencies/

From CNN:

"They would have liked to adopt domestically, but state-funded agencies in Texas, where they live, are free to exclude same-sex couples."

https://www.cnn.com/2018/02/23/health/lesbian-couple-sues-hhs/index.html

From NBC News:

https://www.nbcnews.com/feature/nbc-out/license-discriminate-texas-governor-signs-controversial-adoption-bill-n773286

From Salon:

https://www.salon.com/2017/05/10/texas-freedom-to-serve-childen-act-lgbt-adoption/

From TribTalk:

https://www.tribtalk.org/2017/06/23/the-deadly-consequences-of-texas-hb-3859/

From the Human Rights Campaign, the nation's largest LGBTQ Civil Rights Group:

https://www.hrc.org/blog/Texas-Gov-signed-HB-3859-into-law

From Lamda Legal:

https://www.lambdalegal.org/hb3859

Beto is a co-sponsor of bipartisan legislation in the House to address this injustice. H.R. 2640, the Every Child Deserves a Family Act, prohibits adoption or foster care placement agencies that receive federal funding from using the sexual orientation of a prospective parent in determining placement. He would similarly work on S. 1303 in the Senate.

Beto is also a co-sponsor of bipartisan legislation in the House that would ensure full federal nondiscrimination protections extend to LGBTQ Americans. H.R. 2282, the Equality Act, amends the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to include sexual orientation among prohibited classes. He would similarly work on S.1006 in the Senate.

Thanks,

Chris

--

Chris Evans

Communications Director

(Selby)

6:10 p.m.

Sharing below. This is the legislator who authored the 2017 measure:

---------- Forwarded message ----------

From: James Frank

Date: Tuesday, October 2, 2018

Subject: Texas reporter, urgent inquiry for a PolitiFact Texas fact-check

To: Gardner Selby

Dear Gardner:

I am traveling today but wanted to offer a response to your inquiry. You may print the following in response.

“Representative O’Rourke’s characterization of Texas prohibiting adoption of foster children by same sex couples is completely false. Texas law welcomes same sex couples to provide foster or adoptive homes. I am disappointed that Rep. O’Rourke is so unfamiliar with his own state’s CPS system that he is not aware of the great work that many in the LGBT community are already doing in Texas.

If he is referring to legislation that I carried in the 85th session to protect the ability of faith-based organizations to continue to serve children in our state, then he sorely misunderstands what the legislation actually does.

I introduced House Bill 3859 to ensure that Texas will continue to have a diverse range of foster care providers. Many children in the system rely on organizations and foster families that are trained and verified by faith-based groups. These groups have been threatened by legal action for simply following their religious beliefs. We see this happening now in Philadelphia, where the city ceased all foster-care placements through Catholic Social Services due to the Church’s teaching on marriage.

Nothing in HB 3859 would stop a same sex couple from adopting or serving as foster parents in Texas. In fact, a there is a specific provision of the law that requires the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services ensure child welfare services providers are available to offer services that a faith-based provider declines to provide.

There are existing providers today who place children in same sex households or who assist foster children in accessing services (such as contraception) that, for religious reasons, a faith organization might decline to provide.

Thus, this law ensures that providers of every stripe are free to serve children without fear of having to shut down due to legal actions.

We need all-hands on-deck to help provide safe and loving homes to children, especially children who are legally free to be adopted. I applaud anyone willing to do this work and serve children.”

Thanks,

James

(Evans)

6:28 p.m.

Can an adoption group in Texas decline to place a child with a family solely based on the sexual orientation of the potential parents? Yes, they can. It's that clear.

He says it in his own response...

"a faith-based provider declines to provide."

"a faith organization might decline to provide."