0518 teapftexas

Emails, Lauren Callahan, media relations and social media manager, Texas Education Agency, May 11, 2018

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)"

Date: Thursday, May 10, 2018 at 5:43 PM

Subject: Inquiry for a fact-check

Folks:

Good afternoon. I write because we’re fact-checking this recent claim by a candidate: “There are some counties in Texas where the first day of hunting, you have to shut down the schools because people are going to go hunting.”

Is the agency aware of school districts or individual schools that shut down because residents are going hunting?

What information is available that speaks to such actions?

Other research recommendations?

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

1:16 p.m.

As outlined in rule in the annually-adopted Student Attendance Accounting Handbook, a district is required to adopt its local school calendar. (See Section 3.8 in the adopted 2017-2018 calendar – starting on page 68 – for guidance given to districts regarding calendar adoption.)

Per TEC 25.081 (and as outlined in the Student Attendance Accounting Handbook), a district is required to adopt a calendar that allows for, at minimum, 75,600 minutes of operation during the school year. There are some provisions in Chapter 25 of the Education Code that districts are required to follow when adopting a calendar – for instance, they may not schedule school on Memorial Day, they may not schedule the last day of the school year prior to May 15, and they must follow the first day of instruction laws outlined in TEC 25.0811 unless they are a district of innovation and have exempted themselves from that statute or qualify for one of the exemptions listed in the statute.

Otherwise, all decisions made by a district regarding calendar adoption are done at the local level. While districts may consult agency staff for guidance as they adopt a local calendar, they do not submit the calendars to us for approval once they are adopted. Therefore, the agency is not aware of any specific reasoning behind the decisions made by school boards in adopting school calendars. As long as a district is following the laws outlined in Chapter 25 of the Education Code and the rules provided in the Student Attendance Accounting Handbook, they may schedule their calendars in a way that would allow them regular school breaks, such as those to observe holidays or dates that are important in their local communities.

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)"

Date: Friday, May 11, 2018 at 1:18 PM

Has anyone at TEA heard of a school or district closing to let people go hunting?

1:24 p.m.

Setting a school calendar is a local decision. Districts make those decisions locally and do not have to notify the agency of specific reasons for school closure.