1117 kilgourpftexas

Emails, Phoebe Kilgour, press secretary, Everytown for Gun Safety, Nov. 16 and 20, 2017

On Thu, Nov 16, 2017 at 11:06 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Good morning. I write on behalf of the Austin daily newspaper and the fact-checking PolitiFact Texas project to seek the details of some Everytown research and to request any other relevant data.

We are fact-checking the recent claim by state Rep. Eddie Rodriguez, D-Austin, that “perpetrators of domestic violence accounted for 54% of mass shootings between 2009 and 2016, according to the advocacy group Everytown for Gun Safety.”

Can you quickly share with us the research that resulted in the 54 percent statistic? Any other relevant data? Recommended experts?

As ever, we rely on attributable, on-the-record information.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

10:09 a.m.

Nov. 16, 2017

Here is the link to the report he referenced: https://everytownresearch.org/reports/mass-shootings-analysis/.

Best,

Phoebe

On Mon, Nov 20, 2017 at 1:09 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Will take a look. Are the detailed results in the report such that we can revisit the math? Past that, would you have an expert who can speak to any caveats as well as other solid research?

g.

12:58 p.m.

Nov. 20, 2017

You can download an appendix that includes each of the shootings reflected in the report -- that should be enough to revisit the math. The office is pretty quiet this week, but if there are questions you want a response to, I can try to get email responses.

Thanks,

Phoebe

On Mon, Nov 20, 2017 at 2:04 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Phoebe:

I remain interested in more expertise.

From the report’s appendix, it looks to me like 13 of the tallied shootings, 8 percent, occurred after a domestic dispute or involved a shooter previously charged with or linked to domestic violence, based on Everytown’s summaries. My own breakdown, drawing only from the summaries, indicates six variations in those charges or links – including charges that led to convictions; charges expunged; charges dismissed; and charges pending. I’d be happy to elaborate.

Is there more detailed information behind the report’s 54 percent conclusion?

3:29 p.m.

Our analysis indicates 54 percent of the shootings involved a shooter killing an intimate partner or family member as part of the mass shooting incident. Does that clarify things?

Thanks,

Phoebe

4:06 p.m.

Attached is the raw data from the report, so that you can double check. Responses to your questions are in red below!

Thanks,

Phoebe

On Mon, Nov 20, 2017 Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

I saw that. Is there a break-out of those incidents so anyone could double-check? The appendix is not presented by this metric.

Separately, the legislator who we’re fact-checking notes, Everytown says twice in the report that 54 percent of mass shootings “relate to” domestic violence. Is it fair to say the intended meaning of those statements in the report is that those mass shootings (the 54 percent) each involved family members? See his letter to us here. Yes, the intended meaning is that in 54 percent of the shootings we analyzed, the victims included family members and/or intimate partners.

I have read, I think, that many shootings (across the board) involve someone a person knew, though I am not yet aware of research focused on family members alone. I wonder if it’s fair to say most shootings in general involve family members. I am not aware of any research on this. Does that diminish the significance of a finding that about half of mass shootings involve family? Absolutely not.

Put another way: Has Everytown conducted research (or Is your team aware of research) on domestic violence as a predictor of mass shootings? I just heard back from James Alan Fox, who writes otherwise. Clearly, domestic violence and firearms are a dangerous combination. I'm not aware of anything on this specific question, though.

As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information. I’d be happy to visit directly with a researcher if that appeals.

Thanks again,

G.

On Mon, Nov 20, 2017 at 5:09 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Thanks.

Column D in the spreadsheet is washing out for me, numbers-wise. Each entry says REF! Might be a glitch at my end.

I don’t see a column in the spreadsheet indicating previous charges or convictions for domestic violence. Do I miss something there?

g.

5:26 p.m.

Thanks for following up. The version I sent earlier is what we're comfortable sharing at this point. If you'd like to chat further about your question, I'm happy to, but it would need to be on background for now.