0718 ssmithpftexas

Emails, Steven S. Smith, Kate M. Gregg Distinguished Professor of Social Sciences, professor of political science; director, Weidenbaum Center on the Economy, Government, and Public Policy, Washington University, July 25-26, 2018

On Jul 25, 2018, at 5:44 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) <wgselby@statesman.com> wrote:

Professor Smith:

I hope you’re someplace cooling.

I write with some urgency tonight as we fact-check Texas U.S. Rep. Roger Williams’s recent claim that he’s never voted “Present” on issues before the House.

Williams’ claim appears to be backed up by information on this spreadsheet provided by GovTrack.us.

I am reaching out to you to ask generally why House members sometimes vote “Present” instead of yea or nay.

Also, the information provided by GovTrack.us indicates that from 1990 into July 2018, 26 Texas members of the House accounted for more than 680 non-procedural votes of “Present” by members of both parties. We sifted the information further to find that since Williams joined the House in 2013, 11 House Democrats had voted “Present” 20 times -- topped by Rep. Joaquin Castro, D-San Antonio, voting “Present” five times. In those years, the research indicates, no Texas Republicans in the House voted “Present” on non-procedural issues

Any idea why only Democrats voted “Present” in the shorter timeframe?

Anything else you’d recommend we consider in reviewing this claim?

We rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories. I am trying to complete this story Thursday.

Give my best to the Weidenbaum retreaters around you -- and to Gloria.

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

9:46 p.m.

July 25, 2018

Voting “present” is rare and has not been studied systematically. Abstaining has received more systematic attention. I will look into this a little tomorrow morning.

Voting present is semi-rare, but there are two kinds of circumstances that seem to be most frequently associated with voting present.

The first circumstance involves party strategy. There have been a few times in recent decades when the minority party leadership has asked its members to vote “present" in order to force majority party members to vote with their own leadership in a difficult situation.

The second circumstance involves individual political calculation. At times, a legislator may want to avoid committing to the “yea” or “nay” position without reducing his or her rate of voting participation. The legislator will be counted as having voted but without having committed to either side. This probably can be rationalized as having unacceptable alternatives, but it avoids adding a vote for or against a cause, group, or constituency.

A reasonable hypothesis is the Texas Democrats, caught between a liberal House party and leadership and a more conservative constituency, found themselves in the second circumstance more than Republicans and most other Democrats.

Steven S. Smith

Kate M. Gregg Distinguished Professor of Social Sciences,

Professor of Political Science, and

Director, Weidenbaum Center on the Economy, Government, and Public Policy

Washington University

6:43 a.m.

July 26, 2018

New thoughts this morning:

1. I looked at the data. When I drop votes on quorum calls and approval of the journal, I end up with fewer than 300 “present” votes. It looks like GovTrack does not treat quorum calls and journal approval as procedural votes, but they are not direct votes on policy alternatives. Frankly, I would not trust GovTrack’s coding on procedural votes, but dropping quorum calls and journal approval votes gets you closer to votes on policy alternatives.

2. Looking through the data, I spotted eight Republicans who voted “present” on a resolution “recognizing the commencement of Ramadan,” which, ignoring those who voted “present," passed unanimously. I wonder if there are a few cases in which voting present lets the party look unanimous while letting a few members “off the hook” on a politically tricky vote. I guess this fits in my second category.

Steve