0918 frazierpftexas

Emails (excerpted), Catherine Frazier, senior communications consultant, Ted Cruz campaign, Sept. 5, 2018

On Sep 5, 2018, at 9:09 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Good morning.

We’re fact-checking Ted Cruz’s claim that Beto O’Rourke said he’s grateful that people are willing to desecrate or burn the American flag.

The Cruz campaign has offered as backup this edited video.

Can you tell us the event where the video excerpt posted here was recorded by the campaign? Is there a fuller version?

According to the campaign’s posted excerpt, an audience member brought up O’Rourke’s widely circulated comments about there being nothing more patriotic than NFL players kneeling in protest during the national anthem. Per the posted excerpt, the audience member then said: “I’m curious as to know if you hold the landmark Texas Supreme Court case – well, the Supreme Court case Texas versus Johnson -- to that same standard, where a man was charged for burning and desecrating an American flag on the state Capitol and do you disagree with the dissenting opinion that the American flag is a unifying symbol that should be respected and revered as it plays no politics? And I guess the reason I ask this question is as a voter, I don’t know how I would feel to have my own elected representative being open to kneeling on the Senate floor or encouraging and supporting acts that desecrate our American flag.”

Per the posted excerpt, O’Rourke replied that there’s nothing more American than standing up or kneeling for your rights. He went on to talk about civil rights demonstrations in the 1960s and legislation signed into law. He also attributed a quotation about nonviolent protest to Martin Luther King. He then talked about unarmed black men being killed, sometimes by law enforcement, including officers with the toughest jobs you can have. O’Rourke said next there’s something inherently American about someone willing to protest such behavior nonviolently. The excerpt cuts off there.

Did O’Rourke say more?

Did O’Rourke speak directly to the singled-out court case or burning or desecrating the flag?

As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories.

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

9:55 a.m.

Our release posted the full video on top of the excerpt and posted his words in context. I’ve included below. I’ve also included the full question to show that the questioner was explicitly asking about flag burning.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: "My question is with regards to your remark that there is nothing more patriotic than for NFL players, when discussing NFL players kneeling during the national anthem. And I'm curious as to know if you hold the landmark Texas Supreme Court case — well the Supreme Court case -- Texas versus Johnson, to that same standard, where a man was charged for burning and desecrating an American flag on the state Capitol. And do you disagree with the dissenting opinion that the American flag is a unifying symbol that should be respected and revered, as it plays no politics. And I guess the reason I ask this question is, as a voter I don't know how I would feel to have my own elected representative being open to kneeling on the Senate floor or encouraging and supporting acts that desecrate our American flag."

O'ROURKE: "My comments about there being nothing more American were about being — there's nothing more American than standing up for, or in this case kneeling for, your rights under the Constitution. When the women and men who are serving in Afghanistan, in Iraq, in Syria tonight, the gentleman who served in Vietnam — when they serve this country, they're not serving a president, they're not serving a political party. They swear their allegiance to the Constitution. This idea that we are a country of laws and that no woman and man is above or below those laws. When some people are treated differently because of their race — and we're reminded of the fact that it is not just in the distant past. For someone born in 1972 such as I, that might be the Freedom Riders in the 1960s who rode those Greyhound buses through Mississippi and Alabama and Georgia, and in so doing as African-American women and men, took their lives into their hands, put them on the line. And in many cases those who stood up for civil rights lose their lives in the process. Many were beaten to within an inch of their lives to ensure better civil rights for every single American. They got us a lot closer than we were before. Witness the Voting Rights Act from 53 years, the civil rights act from 54 years ago. Those would not have been signed into law by LBJ if people had not protested, if Rosa Parks had not moved from the back of the bus to the front of the bus. If our young fellow Americans of different colors did not have the audacity and the boldness and the courage to sit at lunch counters, knowing that they would be humiliated, knowing that they would be spat upon, knowing that they would be dragged out in front of their fellow human beings. They did all of that to stand up for the equal treatment under law of everyone. Now, part of the genius of this country, and I think no one expresses it more brilliantly than MLK Jr., is that in the face of injustice, in the face sometimes of violence, in the face of the very real possibility that you will lose your life in the process, people have been willing to non-violently and peacefully protest to seek political solutions to otherwise intractable problems. When you have unarmed black men in this country all too often being killed, and sometimes being killed by members of law enforcement — and those members of law enforcement — as I see a former chief of police for the El Paso Police Department, a former county commissioner, someone who exemplifies the best in public service — those are among the very toughest jobs that anyone in any community can hold. Those are also people who put their lives on the line, securing and protecting their fellow citizens in these communities. But when there is use of force, when there is a life taken and there is not accountability, there is not justice done, there's not the ability to prevent that from continuing to happen in the future, and someone is willing — is willing — to call attention to that, to try to awaken our conscience, to force us to do the right thing, in the face of that injustice and violence and to do so peacefully and non-violently — I think that there is something inherently American about that. And so I — I — I'm grateful there are people willing to do that. I understand that people can come down to a different conclusion on this issue and I respect that, as well. That's American, as well."

VIDEO: Beto O’Rourke “Grateful” for People Who Burn American Flag

When asked about views on flag-burning, Beto says “there is something inherently American about that… I’m grateful there are people willing to do that”

HOUSTON, Texas – On Monday, Congressman Beto O’Rourke was asked in a town hall what his views were surrounding the burning of the American flag. He ultimately answered: “I think there is something inherently American about that and so I’m grateful there are people willing to do that. “

Video of his response may be viewed here and below.

“Congressman O’Rourke not only called burning the U.S. flag ‘inherently American’ but also said he was ‘grateful’ for those willing to commit such an act,” said Cruz campaign spokesperson Catherine Frazier. “His position is an appalling display of disregard to those who have put their lives on the line to preserve the very freedoms the American flag represents. Texans certainly do not share such views which have no place in the Lone Star State.”

Transcript of O’Rourke’s response is below and full video of the exchange may be found here.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: What’s your view of the burning of the American flag?

O’ROURKE: “My comments about nothing more American, is that there is nothing more American than standing up for or in this case kneeling for your rights under the constitution. When the men and women serving in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria, the gentleman who served in Vietnam. When they serve this country, they are not serving a President, they are not serving a political party, they are serving the constitution. This idea that we are a country of laws and that no woman or man is above or below those laws…..When there is use of force, there is a life taken and there is not accountability, there is not justice done, there is not the ability to prevent that from continuing to happen in the future and someone is willing to call attention to that, try to awake our conscious and to force us to do the right thing, in the face of that injustice and violence and to do so peacefully and non-violently. I think there is something inherently American about that and so I’m grateful there are people willing to do that.”

###

On Sep 5, 2018, at 9:56 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Will review.

Where was the town hall? Is there a full video of the town hall? We would like to see full context.

10:10 a.m.

...

here is the link, it should start where his answer begins https://www.facebook.com/BetoORourkeTX16/videos/319145305300692/?t=1838

Catherine Frazier

Ted Cruz for Senate

On Wed, Sep 5, 2018 at 10:02 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

We’re also hearing from O’Rourke’s campaign that the event at issue was Friday, not Monday (which is what your press release says). I also have not spotted a video of a town hall Friday.

On Sep 5, 2018, at 10:25 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

We are posting this in advance of completing our fact-check.

11:08 a.m.

Thanks, and I’ll go ahead and share with you the points that I’ve said to others...

The question three times refers explicitly to flag burning (as I sent you earlier), and following Beto’s long filibuster on civil rights (which he’s said before), he explicitly says “that” is “inherently American” and “I’m grateful there are people willing to do that.” Reasonable people would assume “that” refers to the question he was asked. Which was regarding his views of burning the flag as a form of protest.

Not a word he says limits it to NFL kneeling. He says “non-violent,” but both kneeling and flag burning are “non-violent.” Some could argue that there is ambiguity, but there is no way it is objectively “false” given that the Q was explicitly about flag burning. O’Rourke was asked that Q, and that was his answer.

On Wed, Sep 5, 2018 at 11:25 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

We just posted this too.

At moment, it seems to me that O’Rourke did not address the parts of the crowd member’s question about that famous Texas case. He basically reaffirmed what he’d said before about being supportive of nonviolent protest.

O’Rourke’s campaign separately brings to our attention (to our inquiry) an earlier O’Rourke reply to a reporter’s question. O’Rourke reportedly said: “I don't think anyone should burn an American flag. I also don't think this is about flags. It's about people's lives. It's about civil rights. It's about making sure that everyone has an opportunity to succeed and that there is justice and accountability for everyone in this country."

Are you aware of times O’Rourke has spoken about flag burners?

G.

12:51 p.m.

no, but if that is the case then why did he not say that in his answer?

If you are fact checking our claim about this town hall, we portrayed his words correctly. If he wants to clarify further, that is his prerogative.