0518 blspftexas

Email, Cheryl Abbot, regional economist, chief, Economic Analysis & Information, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Dallas, May 10, 2018

From: Selby, Gardner

Sent: Thursday, May 10, 2018 4:29 PM

To: Abbot, Cheryl - BLS

Subject: Urgent fact-check inquiry about Austin's rank for jobs gained

Cheryl:

Hello again. I write with fresh urgency mindful to seek the latest best BLS information as we evaluate Austin Mayor Steve Adler’s claim that Austin is “creating more jobs than any other city in the country.”

An Adler aide points out that according to BLS figures, Austin saw 3.6 percent jobs growth between March 2017 and March 2018, which breaks out to the fastest growth rate among 50 major metro areas, as presented locally here.

Does this analysis and conclusion hold up, factually? How would this ranking change by including all MSAs?

We’ve noticed otherwise that Austin isn’t tops nationally in raw jobs gained.

Further thoughts for our story? Research recommendations?

I’d be happy to hear back soon by phone or email. As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our fact-checks.

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

(Abbot)

5:51 p.m.

It appears they are referencing a supplemental table of the Bureau’s monthly release, METROPOLITAN AREA EMPLOYMENT AND UNEMPLOYMENT, March 2018. In that table we show over-the-year change in nonfarm employment for metropolitan areas with a Census 2010 population of 1 million or more. When I counted the rows in that table (which can be sorted on any column), I came up with 51 areas, so pretty close to their 50 reference. Further, the Austin metro area does rank 1st in over-the-year percentage job growth (3.6 percent) among those 51 areas. And even on a net change basis, Austin ranked 11th on our table (jobs up by 36,800), competing with the likes of NYC, LA, DFW, and Atlanta among others. The Bureau produces a similar table for all 388 metropolitan areas that we measure. That table is located here and it, too, may be sorted on any column. If you rank all 388 areas by over-the-year percentage change in jobs, Midland comes in at 1st with an annual increase of 9.9 percent. Austin tied for 27th with a couple of Idaho areas, all with the 3.6-percent annual growth rate.

Let me know if you need anything else,

Cheryl Abbot

Regional Economist

Chief, Economic Analysis & Information

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

Dallas, TX