1118 klovpftexas

Email, Kayleigh Lovvorn, media relations specialist, Office of the Texas Attorney General, Nov. 1, 2018

8:55 a.m.

Thank you for reaching out to our office regarding human trafficking cases. We have this information for you (including details about the Backpage.com case):

We launched the Human Trafficking and Transnational Organized Crime unit here at OAG in January 2016.

OAG and the California attorney general’s office initially partnered on an investigation of Backpage.com, the single largest purveyor of escort ads in the U.S., and a major facilitator of sex trafficking. Just a few months after launch of the human trafficking unit, OAG had nearly three dozen law enforcement personnel execute warrants to arrest CEO Carl Ferrer and raid the headquarters of Backpage.com.

You can find our press release announcing that arrest on October 6, 2016 here: https://www.texasattorneygeneral.gov/news/releases/ag-paxton-arrest-backpagecom-ceo-shows-texas-doesnt-tolerate-human-trafficking .

The investigation, including the federal government, culminated in the seizure and takedown of Backpage.com.

You can see several press releases from the U.S. Department of Justice mentioning our substantial role in the effort here:

The website was shut down in 92 countries and the company pled guilty to human trafficking and engaging in organized criminal activity in Texas. Backpage.com CEO pled guilty to money laundering and agreed to cooperate against co-defendants.

That is arguably the biggest single victory ever achieved in the battle against human trafficking, given that Backpage.com:

Hosted around 1 million ads for sex-trade-related services on any given day; https://techcrunch.com/2012/10/06/sex-trafficking-on-backpage-com-much-ado-about-statistically-nothing/ )

And was involved in a majority of child exploitation cases the public reported to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. ( https://www.portman.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/files/serve?File_id=5D0C71AE-A090-4F30-A5F5-7CFFC08AFD48 ) .

We do not have original jurisdiction in most criminal cases, but our office has been part of around 20 human trafficking cases that concluded with pleas or trials and resulted in over 250 years of prison time for human traffickers. In addition, the office currently has around 20 more cases pending in around 7 different counties. Just a few of those cases that have captured headlines are:

State v. Johnny Ray Matlock , a continuous trafficking case involving the continuous sex trafficking of two underage girls and two adult women wherein the defendant confined the women to hotel rooms, deprived them of sleep and food, and forced them into prostitution. This case resulted in several convictions and a 60-year prison sentence.

State v. Kendrick Nelms , a case involving the forced prostitution of a 14-year-old girl in Austin, Dallas, and San Antonio. The case resulted in a conviction and a 40-year prison sentence.

State v. Jovan Miles , a case involving the continuous trafficking of a 15-year-old girl in Corpus Christi and Houston. The case resulted in conviction and a 40-year prison sentence.

Apprehension and arrest of Issac Lynn Williams, a case in which Williams and accomplice Deborah Cooper trafficked a 17-year-old girl for prostitution using Backpage.com.

Thank you and hope you have a lovely November 1!

Kayleigh Lovvorn

Media Relations

Communication Division