0818 mjhegarpftexas

Email, Christian Walker, campaign manager, M.J. Hegar campaign, Aug. 24, 2018

On Thu, Aug 23, 2018 at 4:32 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

TO: MJ HEGAR

Good afternoon. I write on behalf of the Austin American-Statesman where I work on fact-checks for the PolitiFact Texas project.

In this case, I seek your factual back-up for your claim this week on “Capital Tonight,” about the 4:10 mark, that John Carter “hasn’t held a town hall in five years.”

How did you reach that conclusion?

I’d be happy to hear back soon by phone or email. We rely on attributable on-the-record information for all our stories.

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

12:19 p.m.

Aug. 24, 2018

Following up on this.

The last town hall referenced was in 2013, described in the Texas Observer here: https://www.texasobserver.org/in-salado-the-tea-party-contemplates-the-nations-future-and-rep-john-carters-not-in-it/

This was also referenced in a more recent Austin American-Statesman article:

“Central Texas reps skip town halls,” Jonathan Tilove, Austin American-Statesman, 2/18/2017:

Frustrated by U.S. Rep. John Carter's failure to schedule a town hall meeting with his constituents during next week's Presidents Day “district work period,” Felicia Miyakawa of Round Rock took matters into her own hands, scheduling a town hall meeting for Carter for next Wednesday, whether he shows up or not.

…

“Constituent services is a top priority of the congressman,” said Corry Schiermeyer, Carter's spokeswoman. “The congressman appreciates the invitation, but he is unable to attend.”

…

Miyakawa said Carter's staff has told her and others that he hasn't done live town hall meetings since the shooting of U.S. Rep. Gabby Giffords, D-Ariz., at a public meeting with constituents in 2011.

“I wouldn't say that is ‘the’ reason, but it would be correct to say it contributes to the many reasons,” Schiermeyer said. “Mostly town halls are not nearly as effective, and you can't reach nearly as many people as a tele-town hall.”