0218 lcallahanpftexas

Emails, Lauren Callahan, media relations and social media manager, Texas Education Agency, Feb. 1, 6 and 14, 2018

From: Callahan, Lauren

Sent: Thursday, February 01, 2018 4:44 PM

TEC §28.004 establishes the local school health advisory council to make decisions related to health education at the local level.

Specifically, TEC §28.004(e)-(i-1) read as follows:

(e) Any course materials and instruction relating to human sexuality, sexually transmitted diseases, or human immunodeficiency virus or acquired immune deficiency syndrome shall be selected by the board of trustees with the advice of the local school health advisory council and must:

(1) present abstinence from sexual activity as the preferred choice of behavior in relationship to all sexual activity for unmarried persons of school age;

(2) devote more attention to abstinence from sexual activity than to any other behavior;

(3) emphasize that abstinence from sexual activity, if used consistently and correctly, is the only method that is 100 percent effective in preventing pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases, infection with human immunodeficiency virus or acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and the emotional trauma associated with adolescent sexual activity;

(4) direct adolescents to a standard of behavior in which abstinence from sexual activity before marriage is the most effective way to prevent pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases, and infection with human immunodeficiency virus or acquired immune deficiency syndrome; and

(5) teach contraception and condom use in terms of human use reality rates instead of theoretical laboratory rates, if instruction on contraception and condoms is included in curriculum content.

(f) A school district may not distribute condoms in connection with instruction relating to human sexuality.

(g) A school district that provides human sexuality instruction may separate students according to sex for instructional purposes.

(h) The board of trustees shall determine the specific content of the district's instruction in human sexuality, in accordance with Subsections (e), (f), and (g).

(i) Before each school year, a school district shall provide written notice to a parent of each student enrolled in the district of the board of trustees' decision regarding whether the district will provide human sexuality instruction to district students. If instruction will be provided, the notice must include:

(1) a summary of the basic content of the district's human sexuality instruction to be provided to the student, including a statement informing the parent of the instructional requirements under state law;

(2) a statement of the parent's right to:

(A) review curriculum materials as provided by Subsection (j); and

(B) remove the student from any part of the district's human sexuality instruction without subjecting the student to any disciplinary action, academic penalty, or other sanction imposed by the district or the student's school; and

(3) information describing the opportunities for parental involvement in the development of the curriculum to be used in human sexuality instruction, including information regarding the local school health advisory council established under Subsection (a).

(i-1) A parent may use the grievance procedure adopted under Section 26.011 concerning a complaint of a violation of Subsection (i).

The TEKS for high school Health I includes the following:

(8) Health behaviors. The student analyzes health information and applies decision-making skills to promote the development and practice of safe behaviors. The student is expected to:

(A) analyze the relationship between the use of refusal skills and the avoidance of unsafe situations such as sexual abstinence;

(B) analyze the importance and benefits of abstinence as it relates to emotional health and the prevention of pregnancy and sexually-transmitted diseases;

(C) analyze the effectiveness and ineffectiveness of barrier protection and other contraceptive methods, including the prevention of STDs, keeping in mind the effectiveness of remaining abstinent until marriage;

(D) analyze the importance of healthy strategies that prevent physical, sexual, and emotional abuse such as date rape;

(E) analyze the importance of abstinence from sexual activity as the preferred choice of behavior in relationship to all sexual activity for unmarried persons of school age; and

(F) discuss abstinence from sexual activity as the only method that is 100% effective in preventing pregnancy, STDs, and the sexual transmission of HIV or acquired immune deficiency syndrome and the emotional trauma associated with adolescent sexual activity.

(15) Personal/interpersonal skills. The student analyzes, designs, and evaluates strategies for expressing needs, wants, and emotions in healthy ways. The student is expected to:

(A) demonstrate strategies for communicating needs, wants, and emotions;

(B) examine the legal and ethical ramifications of unacceptable behaviors such as harassment, acquaintance rape, and sexual abuse; and

(C) communicate the importance of practicing abstinence.

Student are not required to take high school health.

We don’t really collect any data on this topic. We ask a question on the annual school health survey about whether a district/charter school implemented or changed a policy, program, or practice as a result of a SHAC recommendation and what topics were addressed. Sex education is one of the answer choices. The school health survey can be accessed on our website (midway down the page) at https://tea.texas.gov/Texas_Schools/Safe_and_Healthy_Schools/Coordinated_School_Health/Coordinated_School_Health_Requirements_and_Approved_Programs/

Let me know if you need anything else.

Thanks,

Lauren

Lauren Callahan

Media Relations and Social Media Manager

Texas Education Agency

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Date: Thursday, February 1, 2018 at 4:47 PM

Thanks. I shall review. How long has Health not been required to graduate from high school?

5:07 p.m.

Feb. 1, 2018

Since the 2009-2010 school year after the passage of HB 3 in the 81st Legislative Session.

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)"

Date: Monday, February 5, 2018 at 5:02 PM

Subject: Two queries

Lauren:

Why does the agency do the annual school health survey?

The answer to question 23 on the latest survey (pictured here) indicates 52 percent of districts and charter schools don’t require all students to take Health to graduate. Am I reading that right?

Thanks,

g.

2:12 p.m.

Feb. 6, 2018

The Texas Education Code, §38.0141 requires districts to provide information to the agency, including statistics and data, relating to student health and physical activity and information described by TEC, §28.004(k), presented in a form determined by the commissioner. TEA meets this requirement using the school health survey.

Clarification on the second question: 52% of the survey respondents indicated that they don’t require health as a graduation requirement. Not all districts responded to the survey.

Let me know if you need anything else.

3:54 p.m.

Feb. 13, 2018

Lauren

What’s the best way to gauge what students are taught in abstinence-only classes versus abstinence-plus classes?

Would it be this portion of the TEKS, the bulk of which I am pasting below?

I hope to complete our fact-check by midday Wednesday.

g.

...

PASTE:

(8) Health behaviors. The student analyzes health information and applies decision-making skills to promote the development and practice of safe behaviors. The student is expected to:

(A) analyze the relationship between the use of refusal skills and the avoidance of unsafe situations such as sexual abstinence;

(B) analyze the importance and benefits of abstinence as it relates to emotional health and the prevention of pregnancy and sexually-transmitted diseases;

(C) analyze the effectiveness and ineffectiveness of barrier protection and other contraceptive methods, including the prevention of STDs, keeping in mind the effectiveness of remaining abstinent until marriage;

(D) analyze the importance of healthy strategies that prevent physical, sexual, and emotional abuse such as date rape;

(E) analyze the importance of abstinence from sexual activity as the preferred choice of behavior in relationship to all sexual activity for unmarried persons of school age; and

(F) discuss abstinence from sexual activity as the only method that is 100% effective in preventing pregnancy, STDs, and the sexual transmission of HIV or acquired immune deficiency syndrome and the emotional trauma associated with adolescent sexual activity.

END PASTE

9:04 a.m.

Feb. 14, 2018

Since the content of human sexuality instruction is determined at the local district level, the TEKS won’t necessarily be an accurate gauge of what might be taught in an abstinence-only course versus an abstinence plus course. I don’t think we have a way to make that determination at the state level.