1117 fridelpftexas

Email, Emma E. Fridel, doctoral student, Northeastern University School of Criminology and Criminal Justice. Nov. 27, 2017

11:31 a.m.

Let me provide some context on the definition of mass murder before presenting statistics.

Mass murder has many competing definitions, but for our purposes, we define mass murder as four or more victims intentionally killed, excluding unborn children and the offender, within a 24-hour period. While some data sources define a mass shooting as four or more victims shot—but not necessarily killed—we define it as a mass murder committed exclusively with a firearm.

Out of 287 solved mass murders in the United States from 2006 to 2016, 62 or 21.60% involved perpetrator(s) with a history of domestic violence prior to the incident. We define a history of domestic violence to include behaviors before the incident in question—in other words, killing family members during the incident itself is not included in this measure. Breaking this down by type of murder, 47 of 156 (30%) of family massacres, 3 of 49 (6%) of felony massacres, 4 of 54 (7%) of public massacres, and 8 of 28 (29%) of “other” massacres involved perpetrator(s) with a history of domestic violence.

For solved mass murders exclusively involving firearms (mass shootings), 33 of 106 (31%) of family massacres, 1 of 34 (3%) of felony massacres, and 3 of 50 (6%) of public massacres involved perpetrator(s) with a history of domestic violence. Overall, 41 of 205 (20%) solved mass murders exclusively involving firearms involved perpetrator(s) with a history of domestic violence.

This information is drawn from the enhanced USA TODAY mass murder database, collected by Northeastern doctoral student Emma Fridel. More information on mass murder and the enhanced USA TODAY dataset can be found in her recent publication in the Journal of Interpersonal Violence (See http://journals.sagepub.com/eprint/SR858HKfMs9n5exGqATW/full). The original USA TODAY dataset without expanded variables such as domestic violence history can be found at https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2013/09/16/mass-killings-data-map/2820423/.

Enhanced USA TODAY data citation: Fridel, E. E. (2016). Mass murder in the United States: 2006-2016. Northeastern University (Original dataset: Adapted from Overberg, P., Hoyer, M., Hannan, M., Upton, J., Hansen, B., & Durkin, E. (2016). “Explore the data on U.S. mass killings since 2006. USA Today.”). Retrieved from http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2013/09/16/mass-killings-data-map/2820423/

Description of dataset:

A team of USA TODAY researchers first identified potential incidents in the United States from the FBI’s SHR, subsequently utilizing media accounts, court documents, academic journal articles, and books to substantiate and add information. Local law enforcement records obtained through Freedom of Information Act requests further validated data in 30% of all cases. Each data point was corroborated by multiple sources, which were compiled into a single document to assess the quality of information. In case(s) of contradiction among sources, official law enforcement or court records were used, when available, followed by the most recent media or academic source. Case information was subsequently compared with every other known mass murder database to ensure reliability and validity. Even further, the author conducted independent searches and personally verified data for all cases in the data set (Fridel, 2016). The USA TODAY database, therefore, has been substantiated by both official and open sources, with at least three groups verifying case information (the newspaper research team, other mass murder database research groups, and the author). The USA TODAY data are also complete in terms of case coverage; the data- base contains all cases fitting its definition and time period identified in the databases of the Congressional Research Service, Gun Violence Archive, Stanford Geospatial Center and Stanford Libraries, Mother Jones, Everytown for Gun Safety, and the New York City Police Department report on active shooters.

An additional advantage of the data set is its broad range of information. While verifying case information, doctoral student Emma Fridel also expanded the scope of variables to include a range of offender, victim, and incident characteristics. As opposed to reporting only basic offender/victim demographics and weapon information as do most other mass murder data sets, the enhanced USA TODAY data include variables addressing prior mental health diagnoses and treatment, criminal history, drug use, military experience, marital status, number of children, occupation and employment status, location population, family strife, and financial troubles. The enhanced USA TODAY database contains information on 318 incidents, 390 offenders, and more than 1,500 victims in the United States from 2006 to 2016.

Best,

Emma E. Fridel

Northeastern University

School of Criminology and Criminal Justice

Doctoral Student