0918 cevpftexas

Email, Chris Evans, communications director, Beto O’Rourke campaign, Sept. 25, 2018

12:09 p.m.

Beto did not say law enforcement is the new Jim Crow and did not call police officers the new Jim Crow. It is absolutely false to say that he did. The video and transcript both show that he did not call police modern-day Jim Crow.

As Beto has done at many forums in the past, he outlined how institutionalized inequity -- in education, in economics, in health care, in the justice system, in housing, in transportation -- has been referred to as the New Jim Crow.

Here is the full unedited video from the Prairie View A&M town hall:

https://www.facebook.com/betoorourke/videos/1034096830083522/

While Beto has spoken about what some call the New Jim Crow at town halls across the state, he also mentioned it in his Houston Chronicle Op-Ed:

"The jail I visited is not an outlier. Rather, it is part of the world’s largest prison population. One that is disproportionately comprised of people of color, though we know that people of all races use illegal drugs at roughly the same rate. Many have called this the New Jim Crow, and for good reason. One in four black children have had a parent in the criminal justice system, compared to just four percent of white children. That rate is nearly two times what it was in the 1980s. And it begins with a school-to-prison pipeline that starts as early as kindergarten, where a black child is four to five times as likely to be suspended or expelled as a white child."

The Prairie View A & M event was a public town hall broadcasted to HBCU campuses across the state. Beto was on stage with Roxann Thomas Chargois, the Western Area Director of The Links, a group of 15,000 professional women of color in 288 chapters located in 41 states.

Thanks,

Chris

--

Chris Evans

Communications Director

(Gardner Selby, PolitiFact Texas)

12:43 p.m.

How police act, and what they do, seems to be a key part of the "new Jim Crow" definition in general. Make sense?

In his statement at the Prairie View event, O'Rourke referred to police stops, searches and shootings. Those mentions precede his reference to new Jim Crow.

Is there more to consider here?

1:48 p.m.

No, Beto is talking about an institutionalized system as I outlined in the previous email. The system of institutionalized inequity -- in education, in economics, in health care, in the justice system, in housing, in transportation -- has been referred to as the New Jim Crow. Not police officers.

Senator Cruz falsely alleges Beto called police modern-day Jim Crow. Beto did not call police modern-day Jim Crow.

You can listen to town hall after town hall after town hall on Facebook and you'll find Beto outlining systemic inequities and his solutions for changing them. He will talk about mandatory minimums, the war on drugs, private prisons, the prohibition on marijuana, the school-to-prison pipeline, the rate of suspensions, the wealth gap, the achievement gap, pre-school enrollment, the rate of maternal mortality. You will not find him calling police modern-day Jim Crow.

Thanks,

Chris

1:58 p.m.

His statement at Prairie View focused on the criminal justice system. If there's any part of his reply that you think demonstrates the wider view you've shared, please advise.

2:20 p.m.

Exactly, the system. He literally says those words.

"That system"

Full transcript here:

https://www.usnews.com/news/best-states/texas/articles/2018-09-25/ap-fact-check-orourke-jim-crow-remark-goes-beyond-police

"O’Rourke did not call police officers the "modern-day Jim Crow,” as Cruz claimed."

https://www.dallasnews.com/news/2018-elections/2018/09/21/fact-check-ted-cruz-beto-orourkes-statements-senate-debate

"The context shows that O'Rourke is speaking about about the broader criminal justice system — including incarceration and the legal system — not just police."

https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/elections/fact-check-ted-cruz-claims-beto-o-rourke-called-police-n912136