0514 cecilepftexas

Emails on behalf of Cecile Richards from Lauren Collins Peterson, co-author, “Making Trouble: Standing Up, Speaking Out and Finding the Courage to Lead,” May 14-15, 2018

On Mon, May 14, 2018 at 5:26 PM Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Thanks for calling back. We’re fact-checking White’s claim as highlighted below. We also are interested in whether Cecile Richards has endorsed or supported any Texas candidate for governor to date.

Democratic governor hopeful Andrew White mentioned Cecile Richards in Friday’s Democratic gubernatorial debate in response to a question from Gromer Jeffers of the Dallas Morning News, the moderator.

White initially told Jeffers that as governor, he’d veto anti-abortion legislation and also approve legislation rolling back abortion limits put in place by Republicans.Jeffers followed up: “Wendy Davis, the 2014 nominee for governor, told her social media followers not to trust you. She didn’t trust you on this issue. Aimee Cunningham also doesn’t trust you on this issue. You’ve read her piece in TribTalk. How do you respond to that?”

WHITE: “Do you know, do you know who trusts me on this issue?”

JEFFERS: “Tell me.”

WHITE: “Cecile Richards, the former president of Planned Parenthood, recently came out and said there is room in her movement for people with this perspective. And do you know who they are? They are people like Joe Biden and Tim Kaine. So this issue is, in my opinion, not really an issue. Again, my personal opinions are not what’s important in this election and I have made that clear this entire time. So I would listen to Cecile and I think that her leadership in this process is worth listening to.”

White later told us he was referring to a point in Richards’ appearance on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” April 17, 2018.

In that interview, Joe Scarborough asked Richards: “What can someone who’s pro-life learn from this book? Because, I mean, obviously there are a lot of pro-life women out there running as well and what message in here is universal?”

Richards replied: “I think the universal message is that women can’t wait until it’s their turn. I really do think that’s true. We now see women in the United States Senate, 23 women, in record numbers, but still we’re debating over basic health care issues for women. Also, I think a lot of this book too is really, Joe, about the fact that you can be pro-life and you can also understand that that isn’t something necessarily that government should be deciding for every woman in America. And that’s overwhelmingly where people are.”

Did White accurately reference what Richards said?

Any elaboration?

I would be happy to hear back soon. As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories.

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Lauren Collins Peterson

Sent: Tuesday, May 15, 2018 6:43 AM

Hi Gardner! Sorry for the delay. Below is a response from Cecile. Let us know if you have any questions!

Lauren

Abortion is a deeply personal issue. I have known and worked with many people, including politicians, who believe that abortion is not a decision they would make - and they also respect the important right of women to make their own decisions about their pregnancy. Vice President Biden and Senator Kaine, regardless of their personal views, have been consistent in their strong support for women's health and rights. That is not the case for Mr. White. I support Planned Parenthood Texas Votes' endorsement of Lupe Valdez.

On Tue, May 15, 2018 at 11:04 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Got it.

Following up with an eye on completing our story today:

For what specific comments or based on what actions did Cecile reach her conclusion about Andrew White’s lack of consistency?

Put another way, is she only saying here that White hasn’t had the elected office experience and opportunities to cast public votes that would demonstrate the mentioned consistency?

g.

10:52 a.m.

Sure. Cecile is referring to the accounts of people on the ground in Texas, including Planned Parenthood Texas Votes, who have raised concerns when it comes to his consistency on reproductive rights, and women's ability to trust that he would support their access to health care as governor.