0919 jcvapftexas

Emails, Jim Fellinger, press secretary, Concerned Veterans for America, Sept. 29 and Oct. 4, 2017

3:20 p.m.

As I mentioned, we are fact-checking Sen. Cruz’s claim that he’s done 17 town halls in Texas this year.

His spokesman, Phil Novack, told us this week the three events hosted by Concerned Veterans for America were open for the general public to register and attend.

I am interested in additional detail from CVA about how public access was organized for the events.

Were people screened ahead of time--or could anyone go?

Could anyone attending ask the senator a question or were the questions screened or restricted in some way?

We’d appreciate hearing more detail about each of the three events.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

Sent: Friday, September 29, 2017 4:00 PM

-This event was open to the public, the events had a registration page that was advertised publicly.

-Participants were given the opportunity to ask questions by submitting question cards that were handed out at the beginning of the event.

-These events involved a discussion about bringing greater health care choice to the Department of Veterans affairs.

4:04 p.m.

If I read correctly, questions were submitted indirectly (perhaps through a moderator?) and limited to greater health care choice within the Department of Veterans Affairs?

What can you tell us about each event per the people who got to ask questions and the range and number of questions taken by Cruz?

Has CVA posted video of the Texas events online?

Anything else seem relevant?

4:35 p.m.

Questions were submitted by participants at the beginning of the event and individuals were called on by the moderator. We addressed questions related to health care at the VA since that was the focus of the event.

The events each lasted and hour, Houston ran just a bit longer, so we attempted to fit as many questions into that timeframe as possible.

You can view our video of the McKinney event here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3FhQvBqbegQ

You can view our video of the Houston event here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6w6Agr_ZbUc

4:48 p.m.

...the Austin video is available here on our facebook page: https://www.facebook.com/ConcernedVetsforAmerica/videos/1275912479197540/

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)"

Date: Wednesday, October 4, 2017 at 11:11 AM

To: Jim Fellinger

Subject: Following up

Two follow-up topics:

--Was there CVA or Cruz screening of individuals who tried to register for the Cruz CVA events or, alternatively, did everyone who signed up get admitted to each gathering? If there were limits or screens, what were they?

--I see here that CVA described as a Koch-fueled group. Was that accurate? Would it still be so? What’s the fullest description of what CVA would like to see happen per veterans services?

I hope to complete our story today.

Thanks,

g.

11:11 a.m.

Oct. 4, 2017

No, there was no screening of individuals who registered for the event, we advertised the link online and allowed anyone who registered to enter.

We don’t reveal the names of our contributors, but it has been widely reported that what you are saying is accurate.

CVA wants to restructure the VHA’s existing medical facilities into a government-chartered nonprofit corporation to give the VHA the ability to more efficiently and effectively respond to the health care needs of veterans. We want to expand veterans’ health care choices by creating a veterans’ health insurance program, allowing veterans to use their benefits inside or outside of the VA system. We also would like to see better oversight of the VA health care system while increasing transparency regarding the VA’s performance.

Best,

Jim