0518 giffordspftexas

Emails, Ari Freilich, staff attorney & California legislative affairs director, Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, May 25, 2018

From: Ari Freilich

Sent: Friday, May 25, 2018 2:22 PM

Subject: RE: Texas reporter, urgent inquiry for a fact-check

Hi Gardner,

I received your request for information regarding Texas's child access prevention law. I'm a staff attorney at Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.

Texas is one of the 27 states that have a child access prevention law on the books in some form that can make adults legally accountable for letting minors gain unsupervised access to firearms. Importantly, Texas's law applies and can be used to hold adults accountable for irresponsible behavior even if the minor did not actually misuse the adult's firearm to commit harm. However, Texas's law is weaker than many other states in two major ways:

· First, it only applies to adults who leave readily operable loaded firearms accessible to unsupervised minors. As a result, Texas's law would likely not apply even if an adult left an unsupervised minor home alone with an unloaded firearm out on the table right next to a box of ammunition.

· Second, Texas's child access prevention law only applies to adults who leave loaded firearms accessible to unsupervised minors aged 16 and under. Because the Santa Fe shooter was 17 years old, his parents would not be subject to this law even if they left loaded firearms out for their son to use without supervision.

We recently submitted an open letter to Governor Abbott urging him to support efforts to strengthen this and other laws in Texas to make these tragedies less frequent and less lethal.

Best,

Ari

--

Ari Freilich

Staff Attorney & California Legislative Affairs Director

Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence

On Fri, May 25, 2018 at 12:30 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Got it.

Is the specific Texas statute the one I am pasting below, which is section 46.13 of the state penal code?

If so, what is the significance of the phrase “with criminal negligence?” Does that phrase weaken the statute in a significant and/or unusual way?

If that’s not the relevant law, what is?

PASTE:

A person commits an offense if a child gains access to a readily dischargeable firearm and the person with criminal negligence:

(1) failed to secure the firearm; or

(2) left the firearm in a place to which the person knew or should have known the child would gain access.

G.

2:46 p.m.

Yes, Penal Code Section 46.13 is the relevant statute. (You pasted subsection (b) of 46.13 above, but the other subsections provide the exceptions I describe above). You're right that the "criminal negligence" language is somewhat limiting here. Texas defines "criminal negligence" (in Penal Code section 6.03) as follows:

A person acts with criminal negligence, or is criminally negligent, with respect to circumstances surrounding his conduct or the result of his conduct when he ought to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the circumstances exist or the result will occur. The risk must be of such a nature and degree that the failure to perceive it constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that an ordinary person would exercise under all the circumstances as viewed from the actor's standpoint.

If an adult's firearm storage practices did not constitute criminal negligence as described above, Texas's child access prevention law would not apply.