0718 txchschoolassnpftexas

Emails, Bruce Marchand, Ed.D., director of operations, Texas Charter Schools Association, July 30-31, 2018

On Jul 30, 2018, at 2:57 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

We earlier fielded this reply from a TEA spokeswoman.

From: Callahan, Lauren

Sent: Friday, July 20, 2018 11:24 AM

Gardner,

Charters and school districts receive funding from state, local, and federal sources. In Texas, the primary source of funding for school districts and charter schools is the Foundation School Program (FSP), which statutorily requires a local share (property taxes) be considered before the State share fills in the remainder (funded primarily through State sales taxes).

For charter schools, it is true that 100% of their FSP funding comes from the State because they do not have authority to levy a property tax. The statutory basis for charter school funding is Texas Education Code Section 12.106. For school districts, the percentage of State/Local contributions vary by district.

Let me know if you need anything else.

Lauren

Lauren Callahan

Media Relations and Social Media Manager

Texas Education Agency

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Wednesday, July 18, 2018 1:39 PM

Lauren:

Good afternoon. A tweet we spotted says that in Texas, “charters get 100% state $/pupil funding while district schools (95% students) get about 1/3 funding from state w/ rest coming from local prop taxes (which is why those taxes are so high).”

It further says districts are “getting less b/c scarce $ going to charters.”

Are both parts of this claim factually accurate? Why or why not?

If charters get all student aid from the state, what’s the statutory basis and history behind that?

Other recommended resources or experts on this topic?

As ever, we rely on attributable on-the-record information for our stories.

Thanks,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Bruce Marchand

Sent: Monday, July 30, 2018 3:25 PM

Yes I was away from my email for a bit and I was going to tell you that chapter 12 in the education code details the basis for funding charters as well as everything else you want to know about charters!

Dr. Bruce Marchand

Director of Training

Texas Charter Schools Association

On Jul 30, 2018, at 4:58 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

I failed to ask: Is the representative’s tweet accurate?

From: Bruce Marchand Sent: Monday, July 30, 2018 5:39 PM

I’m assuming you mean the TEA rep. Yes the only clarification I would make is her statement at the end that district contributions vary which is correct; the reason for that is that there are adjustments made for small size districts. Those districts receive a higher per pupil amount of money from the state then do larger districts to offset their small numbers. Think state funding for ISD’s as balance scale; the more local revenue they generate, the less state aid they receive. On the opposite side, if they generate less per pupil then average then the state will offset that with a higher per pupil contribution. Again, for charter purposes, everything is based on a state average for tier 2 funding.

Dr. Bruce Marchand

Director of Training

Texas Charter Schools Association

On Jul 30, 2018, at 5:43 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

I meant: Is the tweet accurate?

From: Bruce Marchand Sent: Monday, July 30, 2018 5:52 PM

Sorry about that. Districts get less because the dollars follow the students., so her premise is not accurate. Again, about 40% of ISD revenue comes from the state, not 1/3. Property taxes aren’t high because charters are taking dollars from ISDs, if that is what she is implying.

Dr. Bruce Marchand

Director of Training

Texas Charter Schools Association

On Jul 30, 2018, at 5:53 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Setting aside her last assertion, the rest is solid?

From: Bruce Marchand Sent: Monday, July 30, 2018 5:56 PM

Yes - squishy solid if there’s such a thing.

Dr. Bruce Marchand

Director of Training

Texas Charter Schools Association

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) Sent: Tuesday, July 31, 2018 4:02 PM

What strikes you as solid and what seems squishy?

(Marchand)

4:24 p.m.

July 31, 2018

Solid part is that charters are 100% funded by the state (actually about 97%). The squishy part is the implication that “100% funded charters” have something to do with high property taxes and that districts get less money because that money is going to charters.

The money follows the student, but if a district has fewer students, then they should have fewer expenses in regards to teachers, classrooms, etc.