0917 tcallagpftexas

Emails, Tim Callaghan, assistant professor, Health Policy and Management, Texas A&M University, Sept. 28 and Oct. 2, 2017

4:58 p.m.

Sept. 28, 2017

I’m not aware of any other solid analyses on this particular questions but I’d be happy to share my thoughts on the rest of this. Senator Cornyn is absolutely correct in pointing out that insurance premiums have gone up for ACA plans since 2013 but there are a few caveats that need to be acknowledged. First, at least some of the increase in those premiums since 2013 has occurred because insurance companies incorrectly priced their plans during the first year of exchange operations. Many insurers incorrectly predicted the number of young and healthy vs. older and sicker Americans who would sign up for coverage and then had to adjust their plans to make them viable in subsequent years. Second, even as premiums have gone up, the burden of this increase has been lessened by the ACA’s tax credits for many Americans as was noted in several of the articles you linked to. Thus, while premiums have gone up, the full brunt of the 105% increase has not been felt by large segments of exchange enrollees. Next, it needs to be noted that at least some of the increase in premiums in the past year has been caused by the actions of the Trump administration and Republicans in Congress and their efforts to repeal and replace the ACA and undermine it bureaucratically. Uncertainty over whether or not the ACA would continue to exist as discussed here, here, and here could be responsible for higher premiums and thus the 105% Senator Cornyn references could actually grow once 2018 is taken into account. This could further be complicated by Trump administration efforts to undermine enrollment as discussed here and here. Please let me know if you have any additional questions or if you need anything else from me and I’ll be happy to elaborate further. Please also let me know when the story is published if you choose to use any of the information here.

Best,

Tim Callaghan

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Monday, October 2, 2017 3:25 PM

Thank you for your reply the other day.

Can you possibly take a hard look at the final chart on this data activist’s web page suggesting an 84 percent difference in premiums—in contrast to 105 percent? Does the research behind the figure stand up? Why or why not?

I appreciate.

g.

4:51 p.m.

First, I should say that although Gaba is a data activist, he is quite rigorous with his methods and usually has as good or better data than what is publicly available most places. Since some of Gaba’s data comes from his own sources, as noted with Covered California in his post, I can’t speak to the data’s validity, that said, I speak to the broader points in the post below. I hope this helps.

Best,

Tim Callaghan

In general, it does appear that the data supports Gaba’s claims. Whereas the HHS report is based on 39 states using the federal platform, Gaba includes states with their own marketplaces and demonstrates that the rate drops. This is because, as Gaba notes, many of these states excluded from the federal report had guaranteed issue laws on the books prior to the ACA and thus had higher costs baked into their 2013 premiums. With higher initial costs, the difference from 2013-2017 is much smaller. Overall, this suggests that the true rate increase is smaller across the 50 states than suggested in the HHS report. Even with Gaba’s point however, an 84 or 105% rise is quite large and the root cause of it can be traced back to what I mentioned in my previous email.

5:48 p.m.

Oct. 2, 2017

I agree with pretty much everything Gail is saying here. As I said in my last email, I can't speak to the specific numbers Gaba is using since some of them are imputed or come from sources. His broader points on using all states and pointing out the guaranteed issue differences are worthwhile. I hope this helps.

Best,

Tim

Sent from my iPhone

From: Wilensky, Gail

Sent: Friday, September 29, 2017 2:32 PM

I agree with analysis done to include all states and not just the states that use healthcare.gov. The increase is 94% not 105%.

I also agree with his statements that states that already had “guaranteed issue” (meaning everyone is charged the same irrespective of expected use or health status and may or may not allow for variations for age groups) and which also required broad coverage had smaller increases than states which had not had adopted such policies. Of course, these were the most expensive states for health insurance in the country before the ACA and it’s not a surprise that the rules of the ACA regarding expansive benefits and guaranteed issue didn’t affect them much.

I do not buy into his analysis that includes New York. He back into that estimate based on newspaper reports and not on any real data. I don’t find the results credible and it is not an acceptable way to make an estimate. If you can’t get the numbers you need, then you need to just say that..This is hokey at its best.

Hope this helps…

Gail

Doesn’t change the basic conclusion of “mostly true” for Cornyn.

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Monday, October 02, 2017 3:21 PM

Thanks.

But I didn’t realize the other day, there’s a chart at the very bottom here--http://acasignups.net/17/08/22/aspes-105-increase-report-even-more-misleading-i-thoughtand-raises-another-important-point —indicating the increase across the 50 states was 84 percent. That seem to hold up? Does it change your thinking at all below?

G.

From: Wilensky, Gail

Sent: Monday, October 02, 2017 5:21 PM

The New York numbers are still not real and the California ones are unverifiable. Since this is someone who has a “grudge” rather than being an objective researcher, I am uncomfortable with his data manipulations.