0618 cruzpftexas

Emails, Maria Jeffrey, press secretary, Sen. Ted Cruz, June 12 and 15, 2018

12:47 p.m.

Thanks for your inquiry about the court order Sen. Cruz referenced in the “Think” interview. In 1997, in a case called Flores v. Reno, the federal government entered into an agreement as part of litigation known as the Flores settlement or the Flores agreement. A copy of the original settlement terms can be found here. In short, the agreement put several restrictions on how the government can deal with unaccompanied minors (which includes children whose parents are being detained):

The government is required to release children from immigration detention without unnecessary delay to, in order of preference, parents, other adult relatives, or licensed programs willing to accept custody.

If a suitable placement is not immediately available, the government is obligated to place children in the “least restrictive” setting appropriate to their age and any special needs.

The government must implement standards relating to the care and treatment of children in immigration detention.

Best,

Maria Jeffrey

Press Secretary

Sen. Ted Cruz

From: "Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)" Date: 6/14/18 11:50 AM (GMT-06:00)

To: "Jeffrey, Maria (Cruz)" Subject: Following up

Maria:

...Can you point to the language in Flores that backs up the senator’s claim?

We asked legal experts including Denise Gilman at the University of Texas School of Law if the Flores settlement requires the separation of children from parents.

Gilman replied by email:

Absolutely not. The Flores settlement is found here - http://www.aila.org/File/Related/14111359b.pdf As you can see, the purpose of the settlement is to keep kids out of detention by reuniting them as quickly as possible with family, with preferential reunification with a parent. In the current separation cases, the parent is here and available, so the child should be released to and with the parent under Flores The only reason a parent becomes unavailable is that the government exercises its discretion to prosecute, in an unprecedented manner, in order to take the parent away temporarily for a criminal court hearing and time served. But even then, after the plea, the parent and child could be reunited and released or at least reunited and detained together. The government is making the parent unavailable and then treating the child as unaccompanied and placing the child in ORR custody and the parent in adult immigration detention; this result is not required by Flores and arguably is not permitted by Flores since Flores requires children to be released preferentially to a parent.

Litigation relating to Flores in the family detention context in the 9th circuit in California has imposed a rule of thumb 20-day limit on family detention, because kids are not supposed to be detained for lengthy periods under Flores. See http://www.aila.org/File/Related/14111359p.pdf Maybe Cruz is asserting that this rule means that after 20 days kids can no longer be detained with their parents. But this is misleading. Again, in the family separation cases, the kids are NOT being held with their parents in family detention centers. So the 20-day rule is not relevant at all. The kids are being forcibly removed from their parents at the border. And then the kids are sent to ORR and the parents to immigration detention. In addition, before the new zero tolerance policy, the government had implemented the decisions on Flores without difficulty by detaining families together and then releasing moms and kids from family detention centers together before the 20-day mark if they pass a credible fear interview. So flores has never required separate detention and does not do so now. Now the government wishes to hold the parents indefinitely, so it seems to be arguing that it must therefore separate parents and kids since the kids can’t remain detained indefinitely under Flores. Instead, though, the government must comply with its obligations under Flores to release kids and must also comply with its constitutional obligations not to separate families. It can only do so by halting its practice of separating families at the border and either: 1) releasing families after processing at the border; or 2) where absolutely necessary detaining families in family detention centers and releasing them before 20 days (into the community if they pass a credible fear interview or upon deportation if they fail the credible fear interview).

In any case, the government’s position on the family separation has been that it is a natural consequence of criminal prosecutions for unlawful entry (which are not precedented, not required and are intentionally being used to separate families rather than as a genuine law enforcement mechanism for dealing with a misdemeanor crime). Flores really has nothing to do with separation as a result of a criminal prosecution. Flores is about immigration detention of kids in ORR shelters or in family detention centers. Flores in no way requires criminal prosecutions and separation as a result. The administration cannot claim that the separations are a natural result of criminal prosecutions in the normal course of business and then argue that actually it’s the immigration detention rules that dictate separation. Those are two completely different strands.

On the same topic, Rick Su of the University of Buffalo School of Law called Cruz’s statement misleading because, he said by email, it’s premised on Cruz’s assumption that there are only two options when it comes to children and their parents. But there are many, he wrote, even after factoring in the Flores agreement and the Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008, both of which require that children be placed in the "least restrictive setting."

Su wrote that it’s “misleading of Cruz to suggest that there are only two options--release or separation--when there are in fact more.”

Su added: “Let's be frank though. The Trump administration is not pursuing separation because its hands are tied, or even as a last resort in order to carry out some other policy. It is pursuing separation purposefully and directly as a policy because, as administration officials have acknowledged, it is a deterrent in itself. Under that logic, even if the Flores agreement did not exist, there would still be deterrence-related interests in forcing separation. It is precisely the psychic and emotional harm that separation creates that the administration want to inflict on migrants in order to convince them to take voluntary departure (and not pursue an immigration claim) and convince others not to make the journey with their families. There have been many statements where Trump and administration officials have admitted as much. This, of course, is why people are troubled; the children and suffering are purposefully being used to punish and deter immigration violations. Even the criminal justice system, which locks up parents, does not treat the separation from family as part of the punishment or to serve a deterrence effect.”

We also connected with Peter Schey, the attorney who heads the center that helped represent plaintiffs in the dispute leading to the Flores agreement. By phone, Schey called Cruz’s claim “completely inaccurate,” saying the Flores agreement in no way suggests children must be separated from parents. Notably too, he said, parents can (and do) opt out from Flores’ rights related to children being released to others. Schey further said the 2008 statute (also noted by Su) explains why minors have lately been put in the custody of DHS. Schey said federal authorities have been separating children from parents “in order to create the harshest situation possible with the idea that word will filter back to Central America and this will discourage families from coming to seek asylum in the U.S.” He stressed nothing in Flores requires separations.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Jeffrey, Maria (Cruz) Sent: Friday, June 15, 2018 11:11:40 AM

Hi Gardner,

Thanks for sending. Here is our response:

Senator Cruz’s statement was that a court order “prevents keeping the kids with the parents when you put the parents in jail.” In those cases, when adults with minor children are apprehended and detained, the minor children must be placed in “the least restrictive setting appropriate to the minor’s age and special needs,” per Section IV of the Flores agreement. Adult detention centers are not the least restrictive setting for children, and Section VI of the agreement further requires a presumption in favor of releasing minor children, with preference given to non-detained parents or other family members who are willing to take custody of the minor child. If a suitable placement is not immediately available, the child is held in the custody of the Office of Refugee Resettlement, which offers less restrictive settings than adult immigration detention facilities.

Courts that have interpreted and applied the Flores agreement have held that the agreement unambiguously applies both to minors who are accompanied and unaccompanied by their parents. They have also held that the settlement does not provide release rights to accompanying adults. See, for example, Flores v. Lynch, available at https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2016/07/06/15-56434.pdf.

We understand that the immigration activists you contacted are telling you that the government is not required to detain the adult parents of minor children who are apprehended and charged with illegal entry. But regardless of the accuracy of that, they're not actually addressing the Senator's remark. The fact that the government could up and decide to not enforce criminal laws is not relevant to the accuracy of Senator Cruz’s statement, which assumed that the adult parents were being detained. Our point is simple and 100% correct: When the parents are detained, the Flores agreement compels placing the child with another family member or in another less restrictive setting.

Best,

Maria