0118 usdapftexas

Emails, Gail Keirn, public affairs specialist, Legislative and Public Affairs, USDA-APHIS-WS National Wildlife Research Center, Jan. 26, 2018

11:23 a.m.

Thank you for your interest in the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Wildlife Services program and our work related to invasive feral swine. The USDA National Feral Swine Damage Management Program which is led by Wildlife Services is a collaborative effort among states, tribes, other federal agencies, universities, stakeholders, landowners and organizations to manage feral swine damage in the United States.

We appreciate you highlighting this important wildlife damage management issue. Please see our responses to your request below.

Feel free to contact me if we can be of further assistance.

Regards,

Gail

GAIL KEIRN

Legislative and Public Affairs

USDA-APHIS-WS National Wildlife Research Center

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, January 26, 2018 9:10 AM

To: Keirn, Gail M - APHIS

Subject: Texas reporter, urgent inquiry about feral hog populations

Good morning. I just left you a voice mail because we’re fact-checking the statement here that Texas is home to as much as 75 percent of the nation’s feral hogs.

[This statement is not accurate. Although Texas is one of the states with the largest feral swine populations, the percentage is probably closer to 30-50%.]

For our story, due today, we seek attributable on-the-record information pertinent to the claim.

My queries:

What is the feral hog population in the U.S. as of what date?

Feral swine have been reported in at least 35 states. Their population is currently estimated at over 6 million and is rapidly expanding. Range expansion over the last few decades is due to a variety of factors including their adaptability to a variety of climates and conditions, translocation by humans, and a lack of natural predators.

What is the feral hog population of Texas and other individual states?

Texas Parks and Wildlife estimates there are more than 1.5 million feral swine in Texas. A 2012 report by Texas A&M University estimated the feral swine population in Texas between 1.8 and 3.4 million with the average being 2.6 million. You can see feral swine distribution maps by visiting the National Feral Swine Damage Management Program’s website.

How are such counts or estimates reached?

The accurate estimation of wildlife populations is difficult and requires considerable investment of resources and time. Estimates are based on modeling, mark-recapture data, reported accounts by states, and removal data.

Other research suggestions?

USDA Wildlife Services National Wildlife Research Center scientists are conducting numerous studies on feral swine including modeling disease spread, population estimation, developing of an oral toxic bait, damage assessments and damage cost estimates, an evaluating the effectiveness of management methods, etc.

In 2016, the National Agricultural Statistics Service administered a survey designed by USDA Wildlife Services researchers to more than 9,500 producers in 11 States: Alabama, Arkansas, California, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Texas. About 4,300 producers of corn, soybeans, wheat, rice, peanuts, and sorghum responded to the survey. Survey results indicate that feral swine damage to crops exceeds $190 million in the United States annually. Though large, this number represents only a small fraction of the total damage by feral swine because it includes damage to only six crops.

It’d be great to hear back soon by phone or email.

THANKS,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin)

Sent: Friday, January 26, 2018 11:19 AM

To: Keirn, Gail M - APHIS

Subject: Specific follow-up

A specific query: What’s meant below by “mark-recapture?”

12:22 p.m.

...it is a technique used to estimate animal populations. . A portion of the population is captured, marked, and released. Later, another portion is captured and the number of marked individuals within the sample is counted. Since the number of marked individuals within the second sample should be proportional to the number of marked individuals in the whole population, an estimate of the total population size can be obtained by dividing the number of marked individuals by the proportion of marked individuals in the second sample. The method is most useful when it is not practical to count all the individuals in the population.