0718 tcruzpftexas

Emails, Catherine Frazier, senior communications adviser; Emily Miller, spokesman, Ted Cruz U.S. Senate campaign, July 20 and 25, 2018

(Frazier)

2:04 p.m.

July 20, 2018

Quick follow up: Saw that DeLeon in CA said something similar on Wednesday but want to point out that was after jeffs quote on Tuesday. Also want to note that he said “only major party candidate”

"He is the only major party candidate in America to call for impeachment. Elizabeth Warren hasn't done it. Bernie Sanders hasn't done it. Nancy Pelosi hasn't done it. This is a fringe candidate in the Democrat Party," Cruz campaign manager Jeff Roe said Tuesday afternoon.

https://www.dallasnews.com/news/politics/2018/07/17/time-impeachment-says-beto-orourke-after-donald-trump-summit-russias-putin

On Wed, Jul 25, 2018 at 9:31 AM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Emily:

We’ve learned more about aspects of Cruz’s impeachment claim. I’m sharing below.

First, a California Senate candidate called for Trump’s impeachment in June. Kevin de León called for Trump to be impeached immediately, the Sacramento Bee reported in a June 21 news story. De León, facing incumbent Democrat Dianne Feinstein on the November ballot, was quoted saying: "What this president has done easily surpasses what Richard Nixon did back in Watergate. ... What I've seen to date easily, in my mind, qualifies for impeachment."

Experts told us it’s possible too that other candidates have advocated impeachment.

Meantime, an O’Rourke campaign spokesman, Chris Evans, responded to us by email that O’Rourke has answered questions about impeachment but has not “called” for impeachment. Evans said: “He has not brought it up at town halls or rallies, has not sent fundraising or petition emails on it, has not posted social media advocating for it, and has not used his current position of public trust to do so through floor speeches, letters, or resolutions. In fact, when called to the floor of the House of Representatives to vote on impeachment, Beto voted against it.”

In December, O’Rourke joined most House members in voting to table an impeachment resolution offered by Rep. Al Green, D-Houston.

Anything more to offer regarding Cruz’s claim that O’Rourke is the only Senate candidate to call for Trump’s impeachment?

What’s your job title with the campaign?

We hope to complete this fact-check today.

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

From: Emily Miller Sent: Wednesday, July 25, 2018 12:06 PM

Gardner,

I hope you will be fact checking Evans's statement because it leaves out the multiple times in the last nine months that Rep. O'Rourke has told reporters on the record that he would vote to impeach Pres. Trump. Here is some research for you to be sure to include in your story.

November 22, 2017 - Reuters:

O’Rourke, 45, said Trump’s surprise victory last year was a big reason he decided to run for the Senate. He said Trump’s racially charged rhetoric and divisive governing style have led him to support impeachment. “I’m now convinced beyond the shadow of a doubt that Donald Trump is unfit for that office,” O’Rourke told Reuters in an interview.

O’Rourke also said that, “This country cannot afford this man as president right now”

May 7, 2018 on on Showtime’s “The Circus”

Q: You are running as a Democrat. There has been talk among Democrats that they should pursue impeachment proceedings if they win back the House and Senate. Where do you stand on that?

O’Rourke: I think that this is a legitimate topic for us to be talking about. I have seen too much to think that this president is fit to serve this country in that office.

Q: Would you vote to impeach him right now?

O’Rourke: I would, yeah.

April 10 on KFYO radio

When Hasty asked O'Rourke whether or not he believes there is enough evidence to support impeachment of the president, O'Rourke replied: “The answer is yes. Because I want to be straight with you. I've seen an attempt, no matter how ham-handed, to collude with a foreign government in our national election. I've seen an effort to obstruct justice in the investigation of what happened in the 2016 election.”

July 17, 2018 to Dallas Morning News

"Standing on stage in another country with the leader of another country who wants to and has sought to undermine this country, and to side with him over the United States — if I were asked to vote on this I would vote to impeach the president," O'Rourke, a three-term congressman from El Paso, said in response to a question from The Dallas Morning News. "Impeachment, much like an indictment, shows that there is enough there for the case to proceed and at this point there is certainly enough there for the case to proceed."

July 19: “DFW for Beto”* fundraising for O’Rourke campaign off his call for impeachment with link to Hill Reporter story: Beto O’Rourke, the Senate challenger to Ted Cruz, is calling for the immediate impeachment of Donald Trump following the President’s summit with Russian President Vladimir Putin. O’Rourke: “Impeachment, much like an indictment, shows that there is enough there for the case to proceed and at this point there is certainly enough there for the case to proceed.”

*DFW for Beto describes itself as a “grassroots organization whose primary objective is to excite our community about Beto's campaign.” The group says that, “All donations are sent directly to the campaign itself. We coordinate closely with Beto's campaign, although we act independently.”

Thanks,

Emily

Emily Miller

On Wed, Jul 25, 2018 at 12:11 PM, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

I didn’t spot O’Rourke calling for impeachment in that Reuters story.

(Miller)

12:30 p.m.

I cut and pasted it for you below. You should contact the Reuters reporter - Andy Sullivan - if you dont believe his reporting and the quote from Beto.

Emily Miller