0818 cevanspftexas

Emails, Chris Evans, communications director, Beto O’Rourke campaign, Aug. 15-16, 2018

5:03 p.m.

Good afternoon, Gardner,

Thanks for reaching out. I'm going to address your two requests separately with this chain dedicated to the question on PAC money.

Beto O'Rourke has not taken any money from PACs in his campaign for the US Senate. According to the Federal Election Commission, he has received $0.00 in contributions from PACs.

To see the publicly available FEC-mandated reports, click the little white arrows in the gray circles on the right of each report and it will show the total contributions from PACs as $0.00 for each and every single reporting period.

https://www.fec.gov/data/reports/house-senate/?data_type=processed&committee_id=C00501197&type=S

I have attached our most recently filing as an example.

Additionally, the FEC has regularly confirmed on the record that Congressman O'Rourke's campaign has not received any money from PACs. Please let me know if you have questions.

Thanks,

Chris

--

Chris Evans

Communications Director

On Thursday, August 16, 2018, Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

Is it accurate to say O’Rourke accepts donations bundled by special-interest PACs like what’s described here? If so, why does he accept them?

We’re noticing otherwise that Sen. Cruz’s campaign reports no PAC contributions in this cycle. Any data on that front?

g.

4:08 p.m.

Our campaign does not accept PAC donations. The FEC does not consider the story you identified to be PAC money and they are happy to confirm that for you as they have on the record several times. Each contribution was made by an individual following individual contribution limits and the reporting requirements mandated for individuals such as name, address, employer.

Senator Cruz absolutely takes PAC money. Quite a lot of it. From various accounts.

In tallying Cruz's numbers, his team takes into account three groups: Ted Cruz for Senate, a re-election campaign committee; the Jobs, Freedom, and Security PAC, a leadership PAC; and Ted Cruz Victory Committee, a joint fundraising committee that sends contributions to the re-election campaign and his leadership PAC. Both direct donations to Cruz’s campaign committee as well as transfers from the joint fundraising committee to his campaign committee are subject to the same contribution limits as O’Rourke’s campaign account. The leadership PAC can receive up to $5,000 from an individual donor per year.

https://apps.texastribune.org/features/2018/ted-cruz-beto-orourke-fundraising-texas-midterm-2018/