0718 winterpftexas

Emails, Winter, July 12, 2018

On Thu, Jul 12, 2018 at 5:16 PM Selby, Gardner wrote:

Hello from the Austin newspaper where I focus on fact-checks for the PolitiFact Texas project. As part of that, it looks to me like you’ve tallied 98 Starbucks stores in Houston. In contrast, this Starbucks site indicates 51 Houston stores, provided I read right.

Any idea why your count is nearly double the other count? Can you also provide your full name?

We’re checking a claim that Houston has more brothels than Starbucks stores.

We also count on attributable on-the-record information for all our stories.

Thank you,

g.

Want our fact checks first? Follow us on Twitter.

W. Gardner Selby

Reporter / News

Austin American-Statesman

PolitiFact Texas

4:27 p.m.

Firstly, my full legal name is just Winter, nothing else.

Now, as to the heart of your question, the answer depends on how you define the questions itself, or how you choose to make your statement in your article.

I refresh my database completely about once a month, and the last time was on June 5. In that table, I have 155 Starbucks that are in listed as being in the city of Houston. However, you will not see all those on my Houston page, because I only wisit company-operated stores.

When you filter by those, there are 93, with the other 62 being licensed out to other companies.

If you actually counted on my Houston page 98 stores, the discrepancy is that 5 stores had closed (as of June), but I have been slow to track closures (I am doing that more aggressively now).

I have no idea where the 51 number comes from, but it is wildly low. My guess is that the Starbucks store locator limits the number of results, but it is not a useful resource for your type of question anyway, because it will return stores across all of the suburbs, and you'd have to click on each entry to find out what city that store is in.

Much easier and reliable to do it my way, with a computer program--the only inaccuracies in my numbers are stores that have just recently closed, or stores that have opened but not been listed yet (usually takes a few days).

On Thu, Jul 12, 2018 at 5:31 PM Selby, Gardner (CMG-Austin) wrote:

This is interesting, thanks. For our story, would you be willing to provide your June 5 list of Starbucks stores in Houston including those owned by the company and not—or provide two lists? We’d credit you and provide web links to the lists linked to our pending fact-check of the claim that we spotted here.

G.

4:44 p.m.

COMPANY OWNED

4:45 p.m.

LICENSED