Barefoot Billy's Key West
Click for Details Book Now Jet Ski Tour Jump on one of Barefoot Billy's Yamaha Waverunners and cruise around the island on a 28 mile, 2-hour guided jet ski tour. Look out for an array of Florida Keys' wildlife as you speed your way through our Caribbean waters. Breathe in the excitement as you race from the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico and back to the Atlantic.

Click for Details Book Now Flyboard Experience the feeling of weightlessness and a sense of freedom like no other as you fly above the water. One-on-one flight lessons on a Flyboard wil have you taking off, hovering, and landing in minutes. One of the most exhilarating experiences you can have in Key West. Discounts available for parties with multiple flyers.

Click for Details Book Now Parasailing Glimpse dolphins and sea turtles playing as you soar hundreds of feet above the tranquil waters of Key West. Take in the spectacular 360-degree views and feel the warm sea breezes during this memorable parasailing adventure.

Click for Details Book Now Clear Bottom Kayak Tour Join us on a fun look through the clear lens of a glass bottom kayak. Flat clear shallow water welcomes all skill levels to enjoy this 90 minute tour. Gently cruise through warm Key West waters with our marine science oriented and history loving guides.

Click for Details Book Now Paddle Board Tour Observe the world on top of the water and the world beneath it at the same time. Flat clear shallow water welcomes all skill levels to enjoy this 90 minute tour. Gently cruise through warm Key West waters with our marine science oriented and history loving guides.

Click for Details Book Now Snorkel Gear Rental Rent snorkel gear right on the beach and get ready to discover the beautiful underwater world of the Florida Keys. Encounter schools of tropical fish, living coral heads, sea sponges and more as you snorkel through the crystal clear waters of Key West.

Click for Details Book Now Paddle Board Rentals Experience the feeling of walking on water and getting the best view of marine life at the same time. Paddle boarding provides a unique ability to observe both the world on top of the water and the world beneath it. Reserve your paddle board rental today through Barefoot Billy's.

Click for Details Book Now Schooner Sunset Sails Enjoy the world-famous sunset sail aboard the majestic Schooner Western Union, the oldest working wooden schooner in the United States. There's no other sailing vessel quite like her in the world.

Click for Details Book Now Scooters Discover all the hidden gems of Key West the local way! Scooters provide easy and convenient transportation to just about everything the island offers. Barefoot Billy's has daily and extended rental plans.

Click for Details Book Now Bicycle Rentals Barefoot Billy's bicycle rentals are the perfect way to see Key West at your own pace. Cruise around the island with ease on one of our rental beach cruisers. Plus, you will never have a problem finding a place to park. We offer daily and extended rentals.

Click for Details Book Now Bar Stroll What do you get when you combine five of Key West's top bars, five complimentary drinks, and a free souvenir t-shirt? One unforgettable day in paradise! The Key West Bar Stroll.

Click for Details Book Now Snorkel Trip Barefoot Billy's snorkel trips are the best in Key West! Snorkel North America's only living coral reef system and encounter schools of tropical fish, sea turtles and more. Barefoot Billy's provides the snorkel gear and some of the best snorkeling venues in the world.

Click for Details Book Now Fishing So you want to go fishing? The waters of Key West offer up everything from tarpon and shark to grouper and wahoo. Barefoot Billy's offers up light tackle, bottom fishing, offshore, and flats fishing trips so that you can reel them in.

Click for Details Book Now Dry Tortugas Experience the pirate-riddled history, the vast marine life, the clear blue-green waters, and the sheer beauty that is the Dry Tortugas National Park. Explore the living reef and search for sunken treasure with the complimentary snorkel gear or investigate Fort Jefferson and the history that lies within.

Click for Details Book Now Kayak Rentals Relax and enjoy the sights and sounds of Mother Nature as you paddle through the crystal clear Caribbean waters or through unspoiled mangrove ecosystems. Barefoot Billy's kayak rentals include kayak, paddle and personal flotation devices.

Click for Details Book Now Hobie Cats Imagine the sensation of having the warm trade winds fill your sail as you maneuver across the pristine waters surrounding Key West. Barefoot Billy's brings that dream into reality with hourly hobie cat rentals - book yours today!

Click for Details Book Now Jet Ski Rentals With Barefoot Billy's jet ski rentals you can race through warm Caribbean waters, jump some waves, and explore Key West from the water! Hourly jet ski rentals are available - reserve some fun today.

Click for Details Book Now Helicopter Tour Take an aerial tour of the most beautiful beaches, ocean life, and nature preserves that the Florida Keys has to offer on a Helicopter tour around Key West. With four different tour packages to choose from - one is sure to please every adventurer in your party.

Click for Details Book Now Scuba Diving Living coral reef, diverse and plentiful marine life, and an abundance of shipwrecks are just some of the reasons that Key West is one of the most popular scuba dive destinations in the world. Book your SCUBA adventure with Barefoot Billy's today!

Click for Details Book Now Catamaran Sunset Sail Watch the sky turn from blue to the most brilliant oranges, reds and yellows aboard a spacious catamaran on a famous Key West Sunset Sail. Enjoy free beer, wine and champagne.

Click for Details Book Now Ghost Tour For over 16 years, the master storytellers at Key West Ghost & Mysteries Tours have been bringing the islands most bizarre and unexplained tales to life. Encounter the haunted and hidden dark side of Key West.

Click for Details Book Now Glass Bottom Boat Go beneath the waters of Key West on this glass bottom boat and discover breathtaking coral formations and ocean life without getting wet. Ocean Vue Adventures delivers the wonders of the bottom of the ocean during their two-hour glass bottom boat tour.