Wisconsin Legislature: AB179: Bill Text
CORRECTED COPY

LRB-2736/1

TJD : kjf

2019 - 2020 LEGISLATURE

April 18, 2019 - Introduced by Representatives Steineke , Vos , Allen , August ,

Ballweg , Born , Brooks , Dittrich , Duchow , Edming , Felzkowski , Gundrum ,

Horlacher , Hutton , Jagler , James , Katsma , Kerkman , Kitchens , Knodl ,

Krug , Kuglitsch , Kulp , Kurtz , Loudenbeck , Macco , Magnafici , Murphy ,

Mursau , Neylon , Novak , Nygren , Oldenburg , Ott , Petersen , Petryk ,

Plumer , Pronschinske , Quinn , Ramthun , Rodriguez , Rohrkaste ,

Sanfelippo , Schraa , Skowronski , Snyder , Sortwell , Spiros , Stafsholt ,

Steffen , Summerfield , Swearingen , Tauchen , Thiesfeldt , Tittl , Tranel ,

Tusler , VanderMeer , Vorpagel , Wittke and Zimmerman , cosponsored by

Senators Roth , Fitzgerald , Bernier , Cowles , Craig , Darling , Feyen ,

Kapenga , Kooyenga , LeMahieu , Marklein , Nass , Olsen , Petrowski ,

Stroebel , Testin , Tiffany and Wanggaard . Referred to Committee on Health.

AB179,1,3 1 An Act to create 253.109 and 940.01 (1) (c) of the statutes; relating to:

2 requirements for children born alive following abortion or attempted abortion

3 and providing a penalty. 253.109 and 940.01 (1) (c) of the statutes;

Analysis by the Legislative Reference Bureau

This bill requires any health care provider present at the time an abortion or

attempted abortion results in a child born alive to exercise the same degree of

professional skill, care, and diligence to preserve the life and health of the child as

a reasonably diligent and conscientious health care provider would render to any

other child born alive at the same gestational age and to ensure that the child born

alive is immediately transported and admitted to a hospital. A health care provider

or an employee of a hospital, physician's office, or clinic where abortions are

performed or induced who has knowledge of a failure to comply with the

requirements of the bill must immediately report the failure to an appropriate law

enforcement agency. Any person who violates the requirement to exercise

professional skill, care, and diligence or to ensure the child is transported and

admitted to a hospital is guilty of a felony with a penalty of a fine not to exceed

$10,000, imprisonment not to exceed six years, or both. The mother of the child born

alive, however, may not be prosecuted. This bill specifies that a woman upon whom

an abortion was performed or attempted may bring a claim for damages, including

damages for personal injury and emotional and psychological distress, against a

person who violates or attempts to violate the requirements of the bill.

The bill also makes intentionally causing the death of a child born alive as a

result of an abortion or an attempted abortion a felony with a penalty of life

imprisonment, which is the same penalty as first-degree intentional homicide. The

mother of the child born alive may not be prosecuted under this provision in the bill.

Under current law, an individual who undergoes a live birth is considered born

alive. “Live birth” is defined as the complete expulsion or extraction from his or her

mother, of a human being, at any stage of development, who, after the expulsion or

extraction, breathes or has a beating heart, pulsation of the umbilical cord, or

definite movement of voluntary muscles, regardless of whether the umbilical cord

has been cut and whether the expulsion or extraction occurs as a result of natural

or induced labor, a cesarean section, or an abortion. Under current law, whoever is

born alive as a result of an abortion is considered to have the same legal status and

legal rights as a human being at any point after the human being undergoes a live

birth as the result of natural or induced labor or a cesarean section.

Because this bill creates a new crime or revises a penalty for an existing crime,

the Joint Review Committee on Criminal Penalties may be requested to prepare a

report.

The people of the state of Wisconsin, represented in senate and assembly, do

enact as follows:

AB179,1 1 Section 1 . 253.109 of the statutes is created to read: 253.109 of the statutes is created to read:

AB179,2,3 2 253.109 Requirements relating to a child born alive after abortion. (1)

3 Definitions. In this section: In this section:

AB179,2,4 4 (a) “Abortion” has the meaning given in s. 253.10 (2) (a). (a) “Abortion” has the meaning given in s. 253.10 (2) (a).

AB179,2,5 5 (b) “Born alive” means undergoes a live birth, as defined in s. 990.01 (19j). (b) “Born alive” means undergoes a live birth, as defined in s. 990.01 (19j).

AB179,2,6 6 (c) “Health care provider” has the meaning given in s. 146.81 (1). (c) “Health care provider” has the meaning given in s. 146.81 (1).

AB179,2,9 7 (2) Requirements of health care providers. Any health care provider present

8 at the time an abortion or attempted abortion results in a child born alive shall do

9 all of the following: Any health care provider presentat the time an abortion or attempted abortion results in a child born alive shall doall of the following:

AB179,2,13 10 (a) Exercise the same degree of professional skill, care, and diligence to

11 preserve the life and health of the child as a reasonably diligent and conscientious

12 health care provider would render to any other child born alive at the same

13 gestational age. (a) Exercise the same degree of professional skill, care, and diligence topreserve the life and health of the child as a reasonably diligent and conscientioushealth care provider would render to any other child born alive at the samegestational age.

AB179,3,3 1 (b) Observing the exercise of skill, care, and diligence required under par. (a),

2 ensure that the child born alive is immediately transported and admitted to a

3 hospital. (b) Observing the exercise of skill, care, and diligence required under par. (a),ensure that the child born alive is immediately transported and admitted to ahospital.

AB179,3,7 4 (3) Reporting of violations. A health care provider or an employee of a

5 hospital, physician's office, or clinic where abortions are performed or induced who

6 has knowledge of a failure to comply with a requirement under sub. (2) shall

7 immediately report the failure to an appropriate law enforcement agency. A health care provider or an employee of ahospital, physician's office, or clinic where abortions are performed or induced whohas knowledge of a failure to comply with a requirement under sub. (2) shallimmediately report the failure to an appropriate law enforcement agency.

AB179,3,9 8 (4) Criminal penalty; no penalty for mother. (a) Any person who violates sub.

9 (2) is guilty of a Class H felony. (a) Any person who violates sub.(2) is guilty of a Class H felony.

AB179,3,12 10 (b) The mother of a child born alive under circumstances described in sub. (2)

11 may not be prosecuted for a violation of this section, an attempt to violate this section,

12 or a conspiracy to violate this section. (b) The mother of a child born alive under circumstances described in sub. (2)may not be prosecuted for a violation of this section, an attempt to violate this section,or a conspiracy to violate this section.

AB179,3,18 13 (5) Civil remedies; injunctions. (a) A woman upon whom an abortion was

14 performed, induced, or attempted may bring a claim for damages, including damages

15 for personal injury and emotional and psychological distress, against a person who

16 violates or attempts to violate sub. (2). A woman who brings a claim under this

17 paragraph may be awarded objectively verifiable monetary damages for all injuries

18 and damages equal to 3 times the cost of the abortion or attempted abortion. (a) A woman upon whom an abortion wasperformed, induced, or attempted may bring a claim for damages, including damagesfor personal injury and emotional and psychological distress, against a person whoviolates or attempts to violate sub. (2). A woman who brings a claim under thisparagraph may be awarded objectively verifiable monetary damages for all injuriesand damages equal to 3 times the cost of the abortion or attempted abortion.

AB179,3,21 19 (b) A woman who has been awarded damages under par. (a) shall, in addition

20 to any damages awarded under par. (a), be entitled to punitive damages for a

21 violation that satisfies a standard under s. 895.043 (3). (b) A woman who has been awarded damages under par. (a) shall, in additionto any damages awarded under par. (a), be entitled to punitive damages for aviolation that satisfies a standard under s. 895.043 (3).

AB179,3,24 22 (c) 1. Notwithstanding s. 814.04 (1), a woman who recovers damages under par.

23 (a) or (b) may also recover reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection with the

24 action. (c) 1. Notwithstanding s. 814.04 (1), a woman who recovers damages under par.(a) or (b) may also recover reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection with theaction.

AB179,4,4 1 2. If a defendant prevails in an action under par. (a) and the court finds the

2 action was frivolous or brought in bad faith, notwithstanding s. 814.04 (1), the

3 defendant may recover reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection with

4 defending the action. 2. If a defendant prevails in an action under par. (a) and the court finds theaction was frivolous or brought in bad faith, notwithstanding s. 814.04 (1), thedefendant may recover reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection withdefending the action.

AB179,4,5 5 (d) A contract is not a defense to an action under this subsection. (d) A contract is not a defense to an action under this subsection.

AB179,4,7 6 (e) Nothing in this subsection limits the common law rights of a person that are

7 not in conflict with sub. (2). (e) Nothing in this subsection limits the common law rights of a person that arenot in conflict with sub. (2).

AB179,4,10 8 (f) A prosecuting attorney with appropriate jurisdiction or the department of

9 justice may bring an action for injunctive relief against a person who has

10 intentionally or recklessly violated this section. (f) A prosecuting attorney with appropriate jurisdiction or the department ofjustice may bring an action for injunctive relief against a person who hasintentionally or recklessly violated this section.

AB179,4,15 11 (6) Enforcement authority. The department of justice or the district attorney

12 may investigate any allegation of or institute, manage, control, and direct, in the

13 proper county, any prosecution for a violation of this section. For this purpose, the

14 department of justice shall have and exercise all powers conferred upon district

15 attorneys in such cases. The department of justice or the district attorneymay investigate any allegation of or institute, manage, control, and direct, in theproper county, any prosecution for a violation of this section. For this purpose, thedepartment of justice shall have and exercise all powers conferred upon districtattorneys in such cases.

AB179,5,3 16 (7) Confidentiality in court proceedings. (a) In every proceeding brought

17 under this section, the court, upon motion or sua sponte, shall rule whether the

18 identity of any woman upon whom an abortion was performed or induced or

19 attempted to be performed or induced shall be kept confidential unless the woman

20 waives confidentiality. If the court determines that a woman's identity should be

21 kept confidential, the court shall issue orders to the parties, witnesses, and counsel

22 and shall direct the sealing of the record and exclusion of individuals from

23 courtrooms or hearing rooms to the extent necessary to safeguard the woman's

24 identity from public disclosure. If the court issues an order to keep a woman's

25 identity confidential, the court shall provide written findings explaining why the

1 woman's identity should be kept confidential, why the order is essential to that end,

2 how the order is narrowly tailored to its purpose, and why no reasonable less

3 restrictive alternative exists. (a) In every proceeding broughtunder this section, the court, upon motion or sua sponte, shall rule whether theidentity of any woman upon whom an abortion was performed or induced orattempted to be performed or induced shall be kept confidential unless the womanwaives confidentiality. If the court determines that a woman's identity should bekept confidential, the court shall issue orders to the parties, witnesses, and counseland shall direct the sealing of the record and exclusion of individuals fromcourtrooms or hearing rooms to the extent necessary to safeguard the woman'sidentity from public disclosure. If the court issues an order to keep a woman'sidentity confidential, the court shall provide written findings explaining why thewoman's identity should be kept confidential, why the order is essential to that end,how the order is narrowly tailored to its purpose, and why no reasonable lessrestrictive alternative exists.

AB179,5,7 4 (b) Any person, except for a public official, who brings an action under this

5 section shall do so under a pseudonym unless the person obtains the written consent

6 of the woman upon whom an abortion was performed or induced, or attempted to be

7 performed or induced, in violation of this section. (b) Any person, except for a public official, who brings an action under thissection shall do so under a pseudonym unless the person obtains the written consentof the woman upon whom an abortion was performed or induced, or attempted to beperformed or induced, in violation of this section.

AB179,5,9 8 (c) This section may not be construed to allow the identity of a plaintiff or a

9 witness to be concealed from the defendant. (c) This section may not be construed to allow the identity of a plaintiff or awitness to be concealed from the defendant.

AB179,5,12 10 (8) Construction. Nothing in this section may be construed as creating or

11 recognizing a right to abortion or as making lawful an abortion that is otherwise

12 unlawful. Nothing in this section may be construed as creating orrecognizing a right to abortion or as making lawful an abortion that is otherwiseunlawful.

AB179,2 13 Section 2 . 940.01 (1) (c) of the statutes is created to read: 940.01 (1) (c) of the statutes is created to read: