Washington Post Claims 29 Mass Murders By Concealed Carriers… But They LIED.
Christopher Ingraham was apparently hired by the Washington Post to be the gun control propagandist for their so-called “Wonkblog,” and seems to find himself debunked on our pages with boring regularity.

Today, he attempted to assert that concealed carry permit holders have committed 29 mass murders, using the propaganda of the Violence Policy Center.

Let’s take a look at the actual claims made by VPC… something Ingraham clearly didn’t do.

Michael Joe Hood shot three in 2010, not 2007. This was not a mass shooting (the FBI definition of a mass shooting is four or more), and with his documented history of mental illness, Hood should not have had a concealed carry permit, and there is some dispute over whether he did. He did not use a concealed weapon.

Jason Hamilton had a previous domestic violence conviction, and should not have been able to own any firearms. His attack did not involve concealed weapons. We can find no credible confirmation at all that Hamilton had title II weapons or a concealed carry permit, as VPC claims via a singular erroneous news report.

Terrance Hough, a Cleveland firefighter who shot five people for setting off fireworks in the street, did not use a concealed weapon.

Guillermo Zarabozo really did use a concealed weapon to murder four people in an act of piracy on the high seas. He is the first person on this list with a concealed carry permit who used a concealed weapon to commit mass murder.

Charles Johnson shot three people. This was not a mass shooting.

Aaron Jackson murdered his wife and two children before committing suicide. He did not use a concealed weapon.

Troy Brake shot three people to death, and beat a fourth victim to death. This again, was not a mass shooting by FBI standards, although it was a mass killing.

Frank Garcia did not have a concealed carry permit at all. He had a handgun ownership permit only.

Michael McLendon carried out a horrific attack that killed ten people before he took his own life. None of his victims was shot by a handgun, concealed or otherwise.

Jiverly Wong was a concealed carry permit holder who used concealed weapons to commit a mass shooting. He is the second person on this list with a concealed carry permit who used a concealed weapon to commit mass murder.

Richard Poplowski ambushed police officers who came to his home with a rifle. He did not use a concealed weapon in his firefight with police.

George Sodini is the third person on this list with a concealed carry permit who used concealed weapons to commit mass murder.

Paul Michael Merhige is the fourth person on this list with a concealed carry permit who used concealed weapons to commit mass murder.

William Maxwell murdered his wife and two children with a handgun before committing suicide. The handgun was not concealed, and his concealed carry permit was irrelevant.

Justin Matern murdered his estranged wife and children before committing suicide. He did have a concealed handgun permit, but it was irrelevant to the crimes.

Christopher Speight did kill eight people and injure several more. With a rifle. That he had a concealed carry permit was irrelevant to the crimes he committed.

Gerardo Regalado “came in running” with handgun when he shot seven women in Hialeah, Florida. His handgun was not concealed prior to the attack.

Omar Thorton was fired for theft, then returned to the job and shot eight co-workers to death before taking his life. He is the fifth person on this list with a concealed carry permit who used concealed weapons to commit mass murder.

I cannot find any evidence that Tan Do had a concealed carry permit.

Ian Stawiki is the sixth person on this list with a concealed carry permit who used concealed weapons to commit mass murder.

Paul Clifford Moore shot three people; again, this is not a mass killing by FBI standards. He retrieved a weapon from inside his own home and used it inside his own home against the victims. Concealed carry played no part in the murders.

Kevin Cleeves shot three people… once again, the VPC is adding crimes that are not mass killings. Because of a prior domestic violence conviction in Arizona, Cleeves was not eligible to possess or use a firearm, much less have a concealed carry permit.

Andrew Engeldinger did NOT have a concealed carry permit when he committed mass murder in Minneapolis. Permit applications were found at his home, but he had not applied.

Ferdarius Shine did not commit a mass shooting, killing three people. He opened fire in his own home, so a concealed carry permit was irrelevant, and there is some dispute as to whether or not he actually had a permit.

Dennis Clark murdered four people with a shotgun. Again, concealed carry was not in any way relevant to the crime.

Pedro Vargas began his attack in his apartment by committing arson, and then started shooting. Again, concealed carry was not relevant to his crimes.

Aaron Alexis, the Washington Navy Yard killer, used a shotgun in the commission of his crimes. Concealed carry was not relevant.

Kenneth Allen Keith killed three (again, less than the FBI minimal definition of a mass shooting… during a robbery attempt.

Craig Hicks killed three Muslims in Chapel Hill, NC. This was not a mass shooting, and concealed carry was not relevant as Hick ambushed the family in their home.

Christopher Ingraham, an anti-gun propagandist apparently hired for that purpose by the Washington Post, used a propaganda report by the rabidly anti-gun Violence Policy Center (VPC) to assert concealed carriers were responsible for “at least” mass murders.

Of those 29 alleged mass murders carried out by concealed carry permit holders, precisely six mass murders (using the accepted FBI definition of a mass murder, which is four or more victims) were carried out by concealed carry permit holders using concealed handguns.

Seven of the claimed “29 mass shootings” were not mass shootings.

Between four and eight of the “concealed carry permit holders” did not have concealed carry permits.

The Violence Policy Center has a long and well-documented history of “reports” that are nothing more or less than propaganda.

Any reporter that uses such overt and unverifed propaganda should be terminated, along with their editors.