Doug Jones for U.S. Senate
Economy

The most productive, innovative people I know are entrepreneurs who have had the courage to turn an idea into a business that makes their community better and grows jobs. Small businesses are truly the backbone of the American economy. We must support the growth of small and mid-sized businesses that make up our communities here in Alabama. We need to streamline regulations and reduce the impediments to their success.

Education is the key

We must invest sufficient resources to ensure that our educational system provides the skills, knowledge and tools necessary for our children to succeed in a 21st Century economy. Further, we must focus on life-long training and education that meets the needs of employees and employers as the economy continues to grow and change. Providing a quality education to all children is the key to a long-term thriving economy.

While our economy has generally recovered from the depths of the Great Recession, some people have been left behind. All Americans should have a place in this economy, and tax breaks or loopholes for the wealthiest among us hurt our ability to invest in education and other needs for lower to moderate income families. It is unconscionable to talk about lowering taxes on the wealthy while cutting funding for education, nutrition, childcare, housing and infrastructure—the very things that empower people to participate meaningfully in our economy and our democracy.

When Franklin Roosevelt proposed the New Deal, much of our state was in abject poverty, without electricity or even clean water. We must remember that those advancements were the result of U.S. government investments in the people of Alabama to improve the infrastructure of the state while creating jobs and improving our standard of living.

I believe that Washington can still work for the people to ensure wider economic prosperity and the American Dream of ensuring our children have a better life than we do.

A Living Wage

People in Alabama should not have to work two or three jobs just to provide food, housing and other necessities for their families, often foregoing healthcare and other needs. I strongly support ensuring working Alabamians receive a living wage for their hard work. It is past time. They are then less reliant on the government and those dollars help lift the economy.

Equal Pay for Equal Work

Today’s champion for equal pay is Lilly Ledbetter and her battle for equality in Gadsden, Alabama. In the Senate, I will work to extend the spirit of the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act to make it mandatory that two people, doing the same job with the same qualifications, are paid equally – regardless of their gender.