Independent (2r or 2x) Charter Schools
What is an Independent Charter School?

Independent charter schools, sometimes referred to as 2r or 2x charter schools, are charter schools that are not authorized by a public school district. Each of the following have authority to authorize a charter school in Wisconsin:

The common council of the city of Milwaukee

The chancellor of any institution in the University of Wisconsin System

Each technical college district board

Waukesha County Executive

College of Menominee Nation

Lac Courte Orielles Ojibwa Community College

UW- System Office of Educational Opportunity The terms "2r" or "2x" refer to the section of the charter school law within s. 118.40 that grants these entities authority to authorize charter schools. All independent charter schools are considered non-instrumentality schools since since the employees of the school are not employed by any school district but are instead employed by the operating organization of the charter school. The terms "2r" or "2x" refer to the section of the charter school law within s. 118.40 that grants these entities authority to authorize charter schools. All independent charter schools are considered non-instrumentality schools since since the employees of the school are not employed by any school district but are instead employed by the operating organization of the charter school.

For more in-depth information on independent charter schools see: Wisconsin Legislature Chapter 118.40 quick reference or Wis. Stats. Chapter 118.40(2r) and (2x).

Authorizer Requirements:

All independent authorizers shall notify the state superintendent of their intention to establish a charter school by February 1 of the school year preceding the opening of the charter school. State law prohibits independent authorizers from authorizing a virtual charter school. Independent authorizers and limits, if any, on school location and pupil residency are listed below:

Charter Authorizer School Location Pupil Residency Number of Charter Schools City of Milwaukee (2r) Statewide Statewide Unlimited The chancellor of any institution in the UW System (2r) Statewide Statewide Unlimited Each technical college district board (2r) Statewide Statewide Unlimited Waukesha County Executive (2r) Waukesha County Statewide Unlimited College of Menominee Nation (2r) Statewide Statewide No more than 6 schools between these two authorizers Lac Courte Orielles Ojibwa Community College (2r) Statewide Statewide Office of Educational Opportunity (UW System) (2x) Statewide Statewide Unlimited

Independent Charter School Membership Information

List of Independent Charter Schools

Independent Charter Schools Program Calendar