Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs
« Back to list of experts

Aaron holds a B.A. from Virginia Tech, and a M.P.P. and Ph.D. from George Mason University School of Public Policy. Aaron currently holds a special appointment as an Assistant Professor at Curry College.

Aaron's research interests include illicit financial networks, the effectiveness of economic statecraft, technology transfer, and the role of innovation within formal and informal networks.

Aaron Arnold is an associate of the Project on Managing the Atom. Prior to joining MTA, Aaron spent nine years as a non-proliferation and counterproliferation consultant to Department of Defense, Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of Justice. His work primarily focused on proliferation threat finance and sanctions evasion.

12 items « first « prev 1 2 next » last »

2016

May 24, 2016 "The True Costs of Financial Sanctions" Journal Article, Survival, issue 3, volume 58 By Aaron Arnold, Associate, Project on Managing the Atom In this journal article for Survival, Aaron Arnold argues that the success of financial sanctions rests largely on the dominance of the US dollar and the correspondent banking system. Yet emerging trends could undermine Washington’s capacity to employ this tool.

March 22, 2016 "The Real Threat to the Iran Deal: Tehran's Banking System" Op-Ed, The Diplomat By Aaron Arnold, Associate, Project on Managing the Atom In this op-ed for The Diplomat, MTA Associate Aaron Arnold argues that the key to ensuring long-run stability of the nuclear agreement will be reintegrating Iran’s banks in the global system.

2015

December 17, 2015 "What about the integrity of Iran’s financial system?" Op-Ed, The Hill By Aaron Arnold, Associate, Project on Managing the Atom "At a press conference in Vienna this week, Yukiya Amano, director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, delivered the agency’s final assessment on Iran’s nuclear program. The result of a 12-year investigation, the report concludes that Iran undertook a range of activities prior to the end of 2003 relevant to the development of nuclear weapons and some activities after 2003. The agency also concludes that there are no “credible indications of activities in Iran relevant to the development of a Nuclear explosive device after 2009.” This is hardly unexpected news, especially considering the U.S. intelligence community came to the same conclusion in its 2010 National Intelligence Estimate on Iran. Probably more important than the findings, however, is that the conclusion of the IAEA’s investigation is an important first step to Iran re-establishing financial relations with the rest of the world..."

September 29, 2015 "Banks will Help Ensure Iran Keeps Promises on Nukes" Op-Ed, Conversation By Aaron Arnold, Associate, Project on Managing the Atom and Nikos Passas "In a speech before the UN General Assembly on September 28, Iran’s President Hassan Rouhani heralded the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action as a new chapter in Iran’s relations with the rest of the world. After a heated and largely politicized national debate, Congress is set to move forward with nuclear agreement. This treaty limits Iran’s nuclear enrichment capabilities over the next decade in exchange for sanctions relief."

August 3, 2015 "Just How Vulnerable Is Iran to Sanctions?" Op-Ed, The National Interest By Aaron Arnold, Associate, Project on Managing the Atom "Although this phased-approach to sanctions relief under the JCPOA ensures that Iran does not receive benefits without first implementing its nuclear commitments, uncertainties remain. The agreement does not affect U.S. and EU non-nuclear sanctions, such as those that target human rights abuses, support for terrorism, and money laundering. One question is whether or not relief from nuclear-related sanctions will affect the usefulness of non-nuclear sanctions."

AP Images May 26, 2015 "How to Know if Iran Breaks its Word: Financial Monitoring" Op-Ed, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists By Aaron Arnold, Associate, Project on Managing the Atom and Nikos Passas In this new oped for the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientist, MTA Associate Aaron Arnold and colleague Nikos Passas consider the role of banks in monitoring and verifying proliferation-related transactions. He outlines steps that the P5+1 and Iran can take in a final agreement that will allow them to remain vigilant about proliferation financing.

April 22, 2015 "Three Myths about the Iran Sanctions" Op-Ed, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists By Aaron Arnold, Associate, Project on Managing the Atom "Speaking from the White House earlier this month, President Obama announced details of a framework agreement between Iran and the P5+1—the United States, Russia, China, France, the United Kingdom, and Germany—that limits Iran’s path to building a nuclear weapon over the next 10 to 15 years. Although negotiators will finalize technical details between now and the June 30 deadline, the parameters provide Iran with sanctions relief in exchange for limits on its uranium enrichment, converting its Arak heavy water reactor, limiting the number and type of centrifuges, and agreeing to intrusive inspections. Should Iran cheat or fail to uphold its end of the bargain, however, the United States and its allies reserve the right to “snap-back” into place tough economic and financial sanctions..."

March 23, 2015 "Current State of Global Sanctions Against Iran" Op-Ed, Iran Matters By Aaron Arnold, Associate, Project on Managing the Atom In this op-ed for Iran Matters, Aaron Arnold provides a crucial update on the status of the economic sanctions placed on Iran. He argues that in the short term, a lack of sanctions relief will continue to damage the Iranian economy and undercut efforts by the Rouhani Administration to revitalize growth. However, he points out that new developments in the global economy, such as the creation of an alternative to the SWIFT financial messaging system pushed by Russia and China, will possibly degrade the effectiveness of sanctions in the long run.

February 25, 2015 "Aaron Arnold interviews Nikos Passas on Iran's Verification Regime" Media Feature By Aaron Arnold, Associate, Project on Managing the Atom After Professor Nikos Passas (Northeastern University) led an MTA Seminar on February 25, titled "Illicit Flows: What They Hide and How to Counter Them", MTA Associate Aaron Arnold interviewed Pasass on Iran's Verification Regime.