CLEAR CHOICE: While Michael Bennet’s Taking On DC Dysfunction & Getting Things Done, Darryl Glenn Is Too Extreme For CO
Denver, Colorado – The fringe of the Republican Party got their candidate tonight in Darryl Glenn, who might be the most far-right conservative Senate nominee our state has seen in decades. Glenn makes Ken Buck look like a moderate – he’s simply too extreme for Colorado.

Darryl Glenn won the nomination thanks to a last-minute television ad campaign financed entirely by the special interest group Senate Conservatives Fund, and a slew of high-profile endorsements from Ted Cruz and Sarah Palin. No surprise, because Glenn’s made clear he shares their extreme ideology:

Darryl Glenn supports Donald Trump for president , calling him a “patriot,” and has repeatedly said Ted Cruz should be the next Supreme Court Justice.

, calling him a “patriot,” and has repeatedly said Glenn denies humans contribute to climate change , and wants to give massive tax breaks to millionaires and billionaires .

, and wants to give . He would defund Planned Parenthood and outlaw a woman’s right to choose , even in cases of rape and incest.

and , even in cases of rape and incest. He is against comprehensive immigration reform .

. Glenn even says, “I don’t know any elected Democrats that I get along with,” and “I’m tired of hearing about Republicans reaching across the aisle.”

While Darryl Glenn thinks that the problem with Washington is there’s too much bipartisanship, Michael Bennet has taken on Washington dysfunction and worked with anyone, from either political party, in order to get things done for Colorado:

Michael Bennet worked with Republicans and Democrats to help write comprehensive immigration reform .

. He’s challenged the status quo in Washington , by fighting to permanently ban members of Congress from ever becoming lobbyists, end automatic congressional pay raises and pass bipartisan legislation to prevent another government shutdown.

, by fighting to permanently ban members of Congress from ever becoming lobbyists, end automatic congressional pay raises and pass bipartisan legislation to prevent another government shutdown. He’s working to make college more affordable , increase the minimum wage and ensure equal pay for equal work.

, increase the and ensure for equal work. And he fought to protect funding for the CDC center in Fort Collins that is responding to the Zika virus, and is fighting to fully fund America’s response to the outbreak.

“There’s a clear choice in the Colorado U.S. Senate race: while Darryl Glenn endorses Donald Trump, thinks Ted Cruz should be our next Supreme Court Justice and believes the problem with Washington is ‘Republicans reaching across the aisle,’ Michael Bennet takes on dysfunction in Washington and works with both political parties in order to get things done for Colorado,” said Bennet campaign spokesman Andrew Zucker.” Like Donald Trump, Darryl Glenn is a climate change denier who wants to cut taxes for billionaires and defund Planned Parenthood. Glenn would outlaw a woman’s right to choose, even in cases of rape and incest, and is even against fixing our broken immigration system. Darryl Glenn in the Senate would rubber stamp Donald Trump’s agenda – he’s too extreme for Colorado.”

DARRYL GLENN SUPPORTS DONALD TRUMP FOR PRESIDENT AND HAS CALLED HIM A “PATRIOT”

Glenn: Donald Trump Is A “Patriot.” In April 2016, Glenn was asked at a 9News televised debate about Donald Trump and said: “You know, the one thing that my faith teaches me is to treat everybody with grace, honor, and respect, and dignity. And I think that’s important. You know, he’s a patriot. It’s important for everybody to get involved in this country. Because when I think about the last election cycle, so many Christians sat on the sidelines, and they’re wondering why things are going this way. It’s time for each and every one of us to step up. It’s time for us to stop judging one another and really focus in on the fact that we have a country that’s at stake. Whether it’s Mr. Trump or anybody else, we need to rally. The Supreme Court’s at risk. It’s our opportunity to take this country back.” [9News Debate, 4/5/16]

Glenn: “I Will Vote [For] And Endorse Donald Trump.” In May 2016, Glenn said at the Foothills Republicans Senate Forum: “I will vote [for] and endorse Donald Trump.” [Foothills GOP Forum, 5/12/16]

GLENN SAID TED CRUZ SHOULD BE THE NEXT SUPREME COURT JUSTICE

Glenn: “I Am Personally Going To Lead The Fight To Make Sure [Ted Cruz Is] Our Next Supreme Court Justice.” In June 2016, the Denver Post reported: “He also landed Cruz a standing ovation for this line: ‘If he cannot be our next president of the United States of America, I am personally going to lead the charge to make sure he’s our next Supreme Court justice.’ Cruz demurred politely.” [Denver Post, 6/25/16]

GLENN DENIED HUMANS CONTRIBUTED TO CLIMATE CHANGE

Glenn: “I Do Not Believe That Man Is Contributing” To Climate Change. Colorado Republican U.S. Senate candidate Darryl Glenn reiterated his belief last week that humans are not contributing to global warming. Asked about the issue by KNUS 710-AM’s Jimmy Sengenberger Show May 7, Glenn, an El Paso Couty Commissioner, said: Glenn: Climate change, we can debate that until the cows come home, for lack of a better way of stating that. The bottom line is, I do not believe that man is contributing to that factor. We need to stand up for energy independence, and Colorado needs to lead the nation.” [Huffington Post, Jason Salzman, 5/19/16]

GLENN WANTS TO GIVE MASSIVE TAX BREAKS TO MILLIONAIRES AND BILLIONAIRES

Glenn Supported A Flat Tax. “Glenn said he wants ‘a fair and equitable tax code, either flat tax or fair tax.’ He said corporate taxes must be cut and he wants as little income earned tax credit as possible. ‘Right now,’ he said, ‘our tax code is wealth redistribution.” [Pueblo Chieftain, 4/24/16]

A Flat Tax Would Shift Tax Burden from the Rich to the Non-Rich, Would “Be Financed By Some Combination of Higher Taxes on the Middle Class And Larger Budget Deficits.” According to a report by the Economic Policy Institute, lower tax rates for the wealthy under a flat tax would have to be financed by some combination of higher taxes on the middle class and larger budget deficits. A flat tax that raises the same revenues as our current tax code would shift a significant portion of the tax burden from the rich to the non-rich. According to Citizens for Tax Justice, under a flat tax, the fortunate few with incomes above $200,000 would see their taxes fall by an average of $53,940. [“Falling Flat: The Dubious Case for a Flat Tax,” Economic Policy Institute, 1/17/96]

According to a report by the Economic Policy Institute, lower tax rates for the wealthy under a flat tax would have to be financed by some combination of higher taxes on the middle class and larger budget deficits. A flat tax that raises the same revenues as our current tax code would shift a significant portion of the tax burden from the rich to the non-rich. According to Citizens for Tax Justice, under a flat tax, the fortunate few with incomes above $200,000 would see their taxes fall by an average of $53,940. [“Falling Flat: The Dubious Case for a Flat Tax,” Economic Policy Institute, 1/17/96] HEADLINE: “Flat Tax Plan Scored As Windfall For Rich.” In July 1982, the AP reported: “A congressional tax analyst said Tuesday that replacing the graduated income tax with a flat-rate system and no deductions would produce a major windfall for the rich at the expense of middle-income families.” [AP, 7/28/82]

In July 1982, the AP reported: “A congressional tax analyst said Tuesday that replacing the graduated income tax with a flat-rate system and no deductions would produce a major windfall for the rich at the expense of middle-income families.” [AP, 7/28/82] Robert Reich: “A Flat Tax Lowers Tax Rates On The Rich And Increases Taxes For Lower-Income Workers.” In March 2016, Robert Reich, professor of public policy at UC-Berkeley, wrote in the Huffington Post: “Cruz also proposes a 10 percent flat tax. A flat tax lowers tax rates on the rich and increases taxes for lower-income workers.” [Huffington Post, op-ed, 3/22/16]

In March 2016, Robert Reich, professor of public policy at UC-Berkeley, wrote in the Huffington Post: “Cruz also proposes a 10 percent flat tax. A flat tax lowers tax rates on the rich and increases taxes for lower-income workers.” [Huffington Post, op-ed, 3/22/16] Citizens For Tax Justice: Flat Tax Means That The Rich “Will Pay Far, Far Less In Taxes.” According to a report from Citizens for Tax Justice: “The first part of that claim is largely true. Since Armey’s plan does not tax income from interest, dividends, or capital gains, those taxpayers who live completely off of investment income would be taken off the rolls entirely. The second part of the claim is, by any serious accounting, wrong. Armey’s plan has two parts: It replaces the progressive income tax with a flat tax, and it replaces business taxes with a consumption tax. Both elements would dramatically shift the tax burden from the wealthy toward the middle class and the poor. If not for stunning misrepresentations, this would be obvious to everyone. Our personal income tax now starts with a zero effective rate on lower-income families (families of four currently earning up to about $23,200 pay no income taxes) rising to a 39.6 percent top marginal rate on the incomes of the richest 1 percent. Replace that with a flat rate of, say, 20 percent and clearly the rich will pay far, far less in taxes. That has to be made up somewhere.” [Citizens for Tax Justice, accessed 5/12/16]

According to a report from Citizens for Tax Justice: “The first part of that claim is largely true. Since Armey’s plan does not tax income from interest, dividends, or capital gains, those taxpayers who live completely off of investment income would be taken off the rolls entirely. The second part of the claim is, by any serious accounting, wrong. Armey’s plan has two parts: It replaces the progressive income tax with a flat tax, and it replaces business taxes with a consumption tax. Both elements would dramatically shift the tax burden from the wealthy toward the middle class and the poor. If not for stunning misrepresentations, this would be obvious to everyone. Our personal income tax now starts with a zero effective rate on lower-income families (families of four currently earning up to about $23,200 pay no income taxes) rising to a 39.6 percent top marginal rate on the incomes of the richest 1 percent. Replace that with a flat rate of, say, 20 percent and clearly the rich will pay far, far less in taxes. That has to be made up somewhere.” [Citizens for Tax Justice, accessed 5/12/16] Under A Flat Tax Plan, “The More You Make, The Bigger Your Tax Break.” In June 2015, CNN reported: “The short answer is probably yes. But a lot depends on how much money you make — the more you make, the bigger your tax break. The plan that Paul described in a Wall Street Journal column Thursday would tax everyone – businesses and and individuals – at a flat 14.5% rate.” [CNN, 6/18/15]

GLENN WOULD DEFUND PLANNED PARENTHOOD AND OUTLAW A WOMAN’S RIGHT TO CHOOSE, EVEN IN CASES OF RAPE OR INCEST

Glenn: “I Will Defund Planned Parenthood.” In March 2016, Glenn said at the Republican Women of Weld Forum: “I am an unapologetic Christian, constitutional conservative, pro-life, Second Amendment-loving American that will beat Michael Bennet. I will defund Planned Parenthood. I will make sure that we kill sanctuary cities. We need to make sure we defund those, too.” [Republican Women of Weld Forum, 3/30/16]

Glenn Supported Overturning Roe v. Wade. In 2010, Glenn answered a questionnaire from Pikes Peak Citizens for Life. One of the questions was “Do you want Roe v. Wade and Doe v. Bolton to be overturned?” Glenn answered “Yes.” [Pikes Peak Citizens for Life, 2010]

Glenn Was 100% Pro-Life Even In Cases Of Rape And Incest. In June 2016, Colorado Right to Life did a blog post on their June 2016 Pro-Life Candidates. They noted that “no candidate who supports abortion for any reason ‘is pro-life.’” In running down the candidates, they said: “Darryl Glenn (R) has pledged to be 100% pro-life according to answers to the CTRL survey.” They also noted that Keyser supported abortion in cases of rape and incest, and “CTRL considers him pro-abortion (because he favors the killing of an innocent unborn child in some cases).” [Colorado Right to Life, 6/7/16]

GLENN OPPOSES COMPREHENSIVE IMMIGRATION REFORM

Glenn Did Not Support The 2013 Senate Gang Of Eight Immigration Reform Bill. In June 2016, Glenn wrote on a Denver post questionnaire: “Do you support the Senate’s 2013 passage of a comprehensive immigration reform authored in large part by the Gang of 8 that includes Colorado’s Democratic Sen. Michael Bennet and Florida’s Republican Sen. Marco Rubio? Why or why not? No, as it grants amnesty to people who are living in this country illegally.” [Denver Post, 6/8/16]

GLENN WOULD NOT BE BIPARTISAN IN THE U.S. SENATE

Glenn: “I’m Tired Of Hearing About Reaching Across The Aisle.” In April 2016, Glenn said on The Ross Kaminsky Show on 630KHOW: “It’s about laying out a vision that is applicable to everyone. And that’s why I challenge all of the people in the Republican field – and even people in office right now. I’m tired of hearing about reaching across the aisle. What we need to do as conservatives and as Republicans is actually lead.” [The Ross Kaminsky Show, 4/12/16]

Glenn: “I Don’t Know Any Elected Democrats That I Get Along With.” In April 2016, Glenn was asked to name his favorite Democrat at a 9News televised debate and he said: “Well, was it elected? Because I was going to say the same thing, because I don’t know any elected Democrats that I get along with.” [9News Debate, 4/5/16]