FACT CHECK: Latest ad continues Cortez Masto’s extreme partisanship
**Updated August 29, 2016

CLAIM: Opposes woman’s right to choose even when health is at risk (CQ, 5/13/15, H.R. 36, vote 222, 5/13/15).

FACT: Catherine Cortez Masto is once again outright lying about Dr. Heck’s record. H.R.36, the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, which addressed late-term abortions, included exceptions for health of the mother, rape and incest:

www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/house-bill/36/text q=%7B%22search%22%3A%5B%22hr36%22%5D%7D&resultIndex=1

“(B) EXCEPTIONS.—Subparagraph (A) does not apply if—

“(i) in reasonable medical judgment, the abortion is necessary to save the life of a pregnant woman whose life is endangered by a physical disorder, physical illness, or physical injury, including a life-endangering physical condition caused by or arising from the pregnancy itself, but not including psychological or emotional conditions;

“(ii) the pregnancy is the result of rape against an adult woman, and at least 48 hours prior to the abortion—

“(I) she has obtained counseling for the rape; or

“(II) she has obtained medical treatment for the rape or an injury related to the rape; or

“(iii) the pregnancy is a result of rape against a minor or incest against a minor, and the rape or incest has been reported at any time prior to the abortion to either—

“(I) a government agency legally authorized to act on reports of child abuse; or

“(II) a law enforcement agency.

Latest ad continues Cortez Masto’s extreme partisanship

Cortez Masto puts politics ahead of women’s health in Nevada

She favors three Planned Parenthood clinics ahead of 26 Federally Qualified Health Centers in Nevada

“As a husband, a father of two daughters, and a physician, women’s health is a vital priority for Dr. Joe Heck. Serving as an emergency room physician, he treated women who were victims of rape, sexual assault, and domestic violence. Dr. Heck earned the respect of his patients, their families, and the medical community for his willingness and ability to handle these emergency situations professionally and effectively,” said Heck spokesperson Brian Baluta. “While Catherine Cortez Masto demonstrates her extreme partisanship with this ad, putting politics and campaign contributions ahead of women’s health, Dr. Heck served on the front lines of our health care system and understands moving federal funding to Community Health Centers will improve health care for women across Nevada.”

Continues on Zona Bellezza website.

CLAIM: Dr. Joe Heck voted to defund Planned Parenthood.

FACT: Dr. Heck voted to move federal funding for women’s health from Planned Parenthood to Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHC) commonly called Community Health Centers (CHC), which are far better positioned to provide such care. In Nevada, there are three Planned Parenthood facilities with no presence in rural Nevada. In contrast, there are 26 FQHCs with coverage across the state. As a strong supporter of women’s health, Dr. Heck believes it would be a better use of taxpayer funds to devote resources to the 26 community health centers that actually serve Nevada.

Dr. Heck is pro-life with the exceptions of rape, incest, or if the mother’s life is in danger. He supports the current law, known as the Hyde Amendment, that states no taxpayer funds may be used to provide abortions except in cases of rape, incest, or if the mother’s life is in danger.

While recognizing that Planned Parenthood does provide health care services to women, he believes that same ban on taxpayer funds should extend to Planned Parenthood as there is not always a sufficient “fire wall” between abortion services and health care services.

CLAIM: Dr. Joe Heck “tried to shutdown the government to eliminate Planned Parenthood funding.”

FACT: The ad cites an article that highlights two House votes taken more than 10 days prior to the deadline to pass a government funding measure. Dr. Heck voted for the two bills cited. However, he voted for the final measure to fund the government. To claim he “tried to shut down the government” is false based on the actual voting record. (H.R. 719 http://clerk.house.gov/evs/2015/roll528.xml )

CLAIM: Dr. Heck is against a woman’s right to choose.

FACT: Dr. Heck, like many Nevadans, is pro-life. Because Nevada and the nation are deeply divided on this issue, he supports the current law, known at the Hyde Amendment, that states no taxpayer funds may be used to provide abortions except in cases of rape, incest, or if the mother’s life is in danger.

CLAIM: Dr. Heck “supports overturning Roe v. Wade”

FACT: Dr. Heck has never stated he supports overturning Roe v. Wade, nor has he ever voted to do so. As a physician who is also pro-life, Dr. Heck has concerns about the upheaval of the legal precedent.

# # #