UW-ESS All Faculty Directory
Steig teaches environmental earth science, isotope geochemistry and paleoclimatology at both the graduate and undergraduate levels. With his graduate students, postdocs, and lab staff, he uses various methods to develop time series of past environmental changes as a context for understanding contemporary and possible future change. The major focus in the last ten years has been the analysis of ice cores from Antarctica, including the ITASE spatial array of shallow cores, the recently-completed WAIS Divide deep core, and the South Pole ice core. Results from these projects have included new discoveries about both past and current climate change and glacier change in Antarctica. He has also led ice core projects in Greenland and in alpine British Colubmia. He has worked on the development of novel methods for measuring nitrogen isotope concentrations in atmospheric "odd-N" species (HNO 3 , NO 2 , NO), and the Δ17O oxygen isotope anomaly in H 2 O. Research support is from the U.S. National Science Foundation, NOAA, and foundations including the Leverhulme Trust.

Steig has been a contributor to science planning for glaciological and solid-earth geosciences in the polar regions, to international efforts to track pollution in the Arctic, and to archive and sample allocation at the National Ice Core Laboratory. He has been a long-serving member of the NSF-funded Ice Core Working Group and the steering committee for the International Partnerships in Ice Coring Sciences (IPICS) initiative. Steig served as Associate Editor (2001-2004) and Senior Editor (2005-2008) of the journal Quaternary Research. He is active in public education, and has given lectures to international organizations such as the Nature Conservancy and the Arctic Circle. He contributes annually to the Pacific Science Center's Polar Science Weekend, led by the UW's Applied Physics Lab. He is a founding member and contributor to the influential climate science web site, "RealClimate.org"

More information on Steig's research is available at the lab web pages and the research group web pages listed above. Check the "Dissertations" page to find out about our former students, and what they are doing now at NCAR, NASA, and unversities around the world.

Selected Papers

Last Modified:

February, 2015