Clinton holds base support, exit polls say
Highlights of results from exit polls conducted for The Associated Press and television networks in Tuesday' primaries in Ohio, Texas, Rhode Island and Vermont:

Race and gender

Sen. Hillary Clinton won the support of her base in Ohio, Texas and Rhode Island. She won among white women and older voters in those states, while Sen. Barack Obama won his usual strong victory among blacks.

White men have been a key swing group in this year's Democratic primaries. Clinton won the white men in Ohio, tied with Obama for their votes in Texas and came close in Rhode Island. Clinton won 67 percent of the votes of Hispanics in Texas. Blacks were one in five voters in Ohio and Texas, while Hispanics were a third of voters in Texas.

Seventeen percent of Democrats in Ohio said gender was important to their vote, and they voted 60 percent for Clinton.

Evangelicals

Thirty-eight percent of voters in the Ohio Republican primary and 47 percent of voters in the Texas Republican primary were white, evangelical Christians, and Sen. John McCain ran close to former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee among those voters. Huckabee won among the most conservative voters in Texas, but McCain was able to narrowly win their votes in Ohio.

Superdelegates

Roughly six in 10 Democratic voters Tuesday said "superdelegates" -- party leaders and elected officials who get to cast votes at the party nominating convention this summer in Denver -- should vote based on results of the primaries and caucuses rather than for the candidate they think has the best chance to win in November.

Even among Clinton's voters, about half said the superdelegates should follow the results of the primaries and caucuses. Obama's supporters were more likely to say so. Clinton is trailing in pledged delegates and, depending on how the remaining primaries go, it's possible her only chance for the nomination is if many superdelegates support her at the convention.

The economy

The economy was big in Ohio Democratic voters' minds -- 59 percent said it's the most important issue facing the country, more than said so in any of the other 25 Democratic primaries with exit polls this year. Clinton won among those Ohio voters most concerned about the economy. More than half of Rhode Island Democrats and nearly as many in Texas picked the economy as the top issue out of three choices. In Vermont, almost as many voters picked Iraq as selected the economy -- the first Democratic contest this year in which Iraq was considered about as important as the economy.

Few voters Tuesday viewed the nation's economy positively. But Texas Democrats were relatively optimistic, with one in seven saying the economy is in good condition -- as many as have said that in any other state.

Results were from statewide samples of voters in 40 precincts each in Ohio and Texas and 20 each in Rhode Island and Vermont as well as a telephone survey of early voters in Texas. Fieldwork by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International. Sample sizes ranged from 964 voters in the Rhode Island Democratic primary, with a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 5 percentage points, to 2,048 in the Texas Democratic contest, margin of sampling error plus or minus 3 percentage points.