School of Arts and Sciences - Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
CV

Michael D. Bordo is a Board of Governors Professor of Economics and director of the Center for Monetary and Financial History at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey. He has held previous academic positions at the University of South Carolina and Carleton University in Ottawa, Canada. Bordo has been a visiting professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, Carnegie Mellon University, Princeton University, Harvard University, and Cambridge University, where he was Pitt Professor of American History and Institutions. He is currently a Distinguished Visiting Fellow at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University. He has been a visiting scholar at the International Monetary Fund, the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, and Dallas, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, and the Bank for International Settlement. He is a research associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts. He is also a member of the Shadow Open Market Committee. He has a BA degree from McGill University, an MSc in economics from the London School of Economics, and PhD from the University of Chicago in 1972. He has published many articles in leading journals and eighteen books on monetary economics and monetary history. His latest book is The Historical Performance of the Federal Reserve: The Importance of Rules. Stanford CA: Hoover Institution Press 2019.He is editor of a series of books for Cambridge University Press: Studies in Macroeconomic History.

Selected Publications

with Owen Humpage and Anna J. Schwartz, “The Historical Origins of US Exchange Market Intervention”. International Journal of Finance and Economics, Vol. 12, No. 2, April 2007, pp. 109-132.

with Oliver Jeanne, “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices: Does “Benign Neglect Make Sense?” International Finance (December 2002).

with Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad Martinez-Peria. “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy (April 2001).

with Christopher J. Erceg and Charles L. Evans. “Money, Sticky Wages and the Great Depression.” American Economic Review (December 2000).

with Anna J. Schwartz. "Monetary Policy Regimes and Economic Performance: The Historical Record." Chapter 2 of the North Holland Handbook of Macroeconomics edited by John Taylor and Michael Woodford. North Holland, New York. (1999).