Jon Ossoff Announces Congressional Bid in Georgia
Endorsed by U.S. Reps. John Lewis and Hank Johnson, Ossoff’s campaign has lined up more than $250,000 in financial commitments from supporters

ATLANTA, GEORGIA — Democrat Jon Ossoff announced today that he will seek election to the U.S. House of Representatives in the expected Sixth Congressional District Special Election this spring.

Ossoff has been endorsed by U.S. Reps. John Lewis and Hank Johnson and has lined up more than $250,000 in financial commitments from supporters.

A Georgia native who grew up in the Sixth District, Ossoff served Georgia as a national security staffer in Congress for five years before leaving government for the private sector.

Since 2013, he has been managing partner and CEO of a small business that produces investigations targeting corrupt officials and organized crime for international news organizations.

Ossoff has been active in Georgia politics since his youth and has managed or advised six winning Congressional campaigns in Georgia since 2006. His mother, Heather Fenton, is co-founder of NewPower PAC, an organization that works to elect women to local office across Georgia.

Over more than five years as a Congressional aide, Ossoff drafted and managed legislative initiatives that passed the House and Senate and helped to craft major defense and consumer protection legislation.

Ossoff participated six times in the Congressional appropriations process, helping deliver millions of dollars of education and transportation resources to Georgia, and he conducted Congressional oversight of the Pentagon and the U.S. Department of Justice.

In 2015, after entering the private sector, Ossoff led a team that secretly filmed and exposed more than 30 corrupt judges taking bribes in Ghana. This year, producing a documentary for the BBC, he led a team that exposed atrocities committed by ISIS in Iraq.

“I have known and worked with Jon for many years. Jon is committed to progress and justice and he knows how to fight the good fight,” said Congressman Lewis. “We should unite behind Jon and send a clear message that Donald Trump doesn’t represent our values.”

“Jon is tireless and effective. When Jon was on my staff he delivered millions in education and transportation funding for Georgia, investigated malfeasance in government contracting, and worked on highly classified national security policy. Jon has the skills and experience to win this election and hold Trump to account,” said Congressman Johnson.

“Donald Trump is an embarrassment and a threat to prosperity and health, justice, and security in the Sixth District,” said Ossoff. “I’m running to stop him and to fight for our community in Congress.”

Ossoff earned a Bachelor of Science degree from Georgetown University’s School of Foreign Service and a Master of Science degree from the London School of Economics.

The campaign's web site is ElectJon.com.

Contact:

Jon Ossoff for Congress: (770) 609-5592