I want to vote absentee
Who can Request an Absentee Ballot?

Any qualified elector (U.S. citizen, 18 years of age, who has resided in the district in which he or she intends to vote for at least 10 days) who registers to vote is eligible to request an absentee ballot. Under Wisconsin law, voters do not need a reason or excuse, such as being out of town on Election Day, to vote absentee. Any voter who prefers to vote by absentee ballot may request one. You have several options for requesting an absentee ballot and casting your vote.

Request an Absentee Ballot by Mail

If you are a registered Wisconsin voter, you can download the Application For Absentee Ballot (EL-121). Just complete the form and mail it to your municipal clerk's office. You can find your clerk at MyVote WI: myvote.wi.gov by searching for your voter record or performing an address search. You can also find your clerk by searching through the list of all Wisconsin municipal clerks. Your application must be received by the clerk no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Thursday before the election in order for an absentee ballot to be SENT to you. You will also need to provide a copy of your acceptable photo ID with your request. If you have not previously provided a copy of photo ID, photo ID must accompany your first application by mail. More information about photo ID can be found at www.bringit.wi.gov.

If you are not already registered, you will need to register to vote before an absentee ballot can be sent to you.

Voters who are indefinitely confined, meaning they have a difficult time getting to the polls due to age, illness, infirmity, or disability, may request that a ballot be automatically sent to them for each election. Indefinitely confined voters do not need to provide a photo ID with their absentee ballot request. If you or someone you know are indefinitely confined you will make this designation in box 6 of the Application for Absentee Ballot (EL-121). More information on the exceptions to the photo ID law can be found at: http://bringit.wi.gov/are-there-exceptions-new-law

Military and Overseas voters have additional options for absentee ballot delivery. Click here for Military. Click here for Overseas. Military and permanent overseas voters do not need to provide a photo ID with their request.

Request an Absentee Ballot by E-Mail, Online, or by Fax

Regular Wisconsin voters may also request that a ballot be sent to them by sending an e-mail or fax to their municipal clerk. Registered voters may also use www.myvote.wi.gov to request their absentee ballot by clicking "Vote Absentee." This request must be made no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Thursday before the election in order for an absentee ballot to be SENT to you. If you have not previously provided a copy of photo ID, photo ID must accompany your application. More information about the photo ID requirement can be found at www.bringit.wi.gov .

Instructions for Completing Absentee Ballot

You can find detailed instructions for completing your absentee ballot here: Uniform Instructions for Absentee Voters.

Deadlines for Returning Your Absentee Ballot

Your completed absentee ballot must be delivered no later than 8 p.m. on Election Day. The U.S. Postal Service recommends absentee ballots be mailed one week before Election Day to arrive in time.

In-Person Absentee Voting at your Municipal Clerk's Office (Early Voting)

You can also vote absentee at your local municipal clerk's office. If you apply for an absentee ballot in your municipal clerk's office, or another designated location for in-person absentee voting, you will vote your ballot immediately in the clerk's office, seal your ballot in the proper envelope, and return it to a member of the clerk's staff. No ballots may be taken out of the clerk's office.

You will need to show your acceptable photo ID for voting when voting by in-person absentee ballot. More information about acceptable photo IDs can be found at www.bringit.wi.gov .

When can I Vote an In-Person Absentee Ballot?

Each city, village and town in Wisconsin is responsible for setting the dates and hours of in-person absentee voting for their municipality. To find the dates and hours for in-person absentee voting where you live, contact your municipal clerk.

Who is my Municipal Clerk?

The municipal clerk is the clerk for the City, Village or Town in Wisconsin where you reside. If you do not know who your municipal clerk is, or where the clerk's office is located, please use the MyVote Wisconsin website: myvote.wi.gov to locate your clerk's contact information. You can also find your clerk by searching a list of all Wisconsin Municipal Clerk Contact Information .

Back to Voter Information Center