Jon Ossoff for Congress
NATIONAL SECURITY

Jon is a former national security professional who understands the threats America faces and the complexity of international politics.

When he was a national security staffer on Capitol Hill, Jon held a top secret security clearance and worked with our military and intelligence community to keep Georgians safe.

In Congress, Jon will push for a tough, smart foreign policy that protects our national security while avoiding reckless, destabilizing missteps like the Iraq War.

While on Capitol Hill, Jon worked on classified naval, cyber, air, and counterrorism programs. He embarked with the US Navy during multinational military exercises, worked closely with senior officers to improve readiness and capabilities, and helped draft annual defense legislation.

As an investigative film executive, Jon has managed high-risk operations in conflict zones. Last year, one of his investigative teams documented evidence of war crimes on the front line in Iraq. His teams have also exposed the corrupt theft and black market sale of foreign aid funded by American taxpayers.

Jon will investigate Russian interference in American politics and defend the NATO alliance, which remains essential to our national security. He will stand with our allies and oppose Russian meddling and expansion in Europe.

Jon will oppose unnecessary military intervention overseas and will only support the use of force where US national security is at stake.

While on Capitol Hill, Jon worked with a joint Congressional-DOD task force to combat sexual assault in the military. It remains a crisis of epidemic proportions. Jon will make ending military sexual assault a core goal of his service in Congress.

Jon will back efforts to destroy ISIS without deploying regular US ground forces. He will work to ensure that law enforcement, intelligence agencies, and the military have the resources and authorities necessary to prevent terrorism without sacrificing privacy and human rights.

Jon will vigorously oppose the torture of detainees and prisoners of war in US custody.

Destroying ISIS

Our top priority must be to ensure the safety and security of the United States, Americans abroad, and our allies, which means prioritizing the identification and destruction of ISIS and its leadership no matter where they hide. That includes authorizing special operations and targeted strikes to kill ISIS leadership. That aggressive, targeted effort overseas should be complemented by a strong, constitutional counterterrorism policy to protect our territory and the territory of our allies from threats that are homegrown and that seek to infiltrate our borders. We need robust intelligence-sharing relationships with our allies, and we need to continue to target ISIS in Syria and Iraq, applying U.S. airpower in coordination with local partners, such as the Kurds, and the very limited deployment of U.S. special operations forces. What we should not do is get drawn into a ground war in Iraq and Syria. We can accomplish our objectives in Iraq and Syria through the use of airpower in coordination with those local partners.

Attacking ISIS’ Roots

Coalition forces should redouble efforts to destroy ISIS’ capacity to generate military power, which relies upon the production of black market oil, hostage taking, and support from key financiers. These criminal activities generate the cash that ISIS then uses to obtain weapons, control territory, and export terrorism. We must continue to attack oil production infrastructure in ISIS-controlled territory and support efforts by allied local forces to halt ISIS’ ability to export oil, especially across the Turkish border. U.S. and coalition air forces should continue airstrikes on ISIS oil production facilities and oil supply convoys. U.S. and partner law enforcement agencies must also target other black market revenue streams, like the sale of antiquities. Coalition forces and regional governments must also coordinate with Turkish authorities to crack down on the supply of weapons to ISIS by eliminating key smuggling routes, while targeting ISIS’ local small arms production capacity. Additionally, we must target ISIS’ financiers while continuing to pressure Gulf states to stamp out the “unregistered charitable organizations” used to channel funds to ISIS.

Fighting Radicalization Online

We must do a better job of creating strong intelligence partnerships that share key information to uncover and stop attacks before they happen, identify home-grown threats, and target online websites and forums that spread hatred and make it possible for ISIS to recruit and promote itself globally. We can and must use our extensive cyber resources to identify threats early.

Increasing Intelligence Sharing

We need to increase our outreach and coordination efforts with European allies and intelligence partners around the world. It’s vital that we have clear and effective channels established to coordinate intelligence among our allies, while ensuring the secrecy of U.S. intelligence sources and methods are protected. We must strengthen agreements and procedures that streamline intelligence sharing with our European allies, and step up intelligence sharing between federal and local law enforcement agencies at home.

Stronger Involvement From Our Allies

Victory over ISIS – and liberation of large parts of Syria and Iraq – requires that like-minded nations throughout the Middle East and the world working together in strong partnership. The United States has assembled a broad coalition of nations to destroy ISIS. Yet while the United States and Western European allies take active roles in the fight against ISIS, some Arab states have not pulled their weight, offering only token support. We should increase diplomatic and economic pressure on partners – especially Gulf states – to dedicate more financial and military resources to the fight against ISIS. By putting pressure on our less cooperative partners in the region we can build a more effective fighting coalition.

Strengthening the Military

While Congress has yet to authorize defense spending for FY 2018, our priority must lie in funding our special operations forces, naval, and air forces so they can effectively and precisely target ISIS leadership and provide close air support for local partners such as the Kurds while minimizing civilian casualties. Congress will need to sustain significant resources for U.S. forces fighting in the region for the continued fight against ISIS.