Rep. Ellison Statement on President Trump’s Muslim Ban
WASHINGTON, D.C. –Rep. Keith Ellison (D-MN) issued the following statement after the Trump administration announced plans to sign an executive order that would impose severe limitations on immigration and refugee resettlement from Muslim majority countries.

“Minnesotans know that our country is at its best when our policies reflect our values of generosity and inclusion. We’ve opened our doors to immigrants and refugees from around the world, including Somalia and Sudan, and our community is better for it. They’re are our teachers, our doctors, and our small business owners. They’re our friends and neighbors.

“This executive order runs contrary to everything we cherish about America.

“President Trump’s Muslim ban will threaten the lives of thousands of refugees seeking asylum. It will make it harder to fight extremists in the Middle East who frame the conflict as a religious war between Christianity and Islam. It will undermine our international credibility and diplomatic strength. It will encourage resentment and fear between Americans of different faiths. And it will lead to more hate crimes and attacks on racial and religious minorities.

“The order will also give preference to Christians fleeing Muslim-majority countries. These people are genuine refugees who deserve our compassion and support, but this preference is further proof that Donald Trump’s administration is actively trying to divide people.

“We can resist this radical agenda. But we have to stand together. As progressives. As immigrants. As neighbors. As Americans.

“Tonight my spirit is with the Somali, Sudanese, and other immigrant communities in my district. I share their grief. Thousands of Americans have relatives and friends in the countries Trump has blacklisted, and I share in their anguish as well.

“To everyone afraid of what this executive order will mean for you and your country, I say: “You are not alone. We are with you. And we will fight for you.”