END IT 2017
× Terms & Conditions

What information do we collect?

We collect information from you when you register on our site, make a donation or fill out a form.When donating or registering on our site, as appropriate, you may be asked to enter your: name, e-mail address, mailing address, phone number or credit card information. You may, however, visit our site anonymously.

What do we use your information for?

Any of the information we collect from you may be used in one of the following ways:

To improve customer service

(your information helps us to more effectively respond to your customer service requests and support needs)

(your information helps us to more effectively respond to your customer service requests and support needs) To process transactions

Your information, whether public or private, will not be sold, exchanged, transferred, or given to any other company for any reason whatsoever, without your consent, other than for the express purpose of delivering the purchased product or service requested.

Your information, whether public or private, will not be sold, exchanged, transferred, or given to any other company for any reason whatsoever, without your consent, other than for the express purpose of delivering the purchased product or service requested. To send periodic emails

The email address you provide for order processing, may be used to send you information and updates pertaining to your order or donation, in addition to receiving occasional company news, updates, related product or service information, etc. Note: If at any time you would like to unsubscribe from receiving future emails, we include detailed unsubscribe instructions at the bottom of each email.

How do we protect your information?

We implement a variety of security measures to maintain the safety of your personal information when you place an order We offer the use of a secure server. All supplied sensitive/credit information is transmitted via Secure Socket Layer (SSL) technology and then encrypted into our Database to be only accessed by those authorized with special access rights to our systems, and are required to keep the information confidential.After a transaction, your private information (credit cards, social security numbers, financials, etc.) will not be stored on our servers.

Do we use cookies?

Yes (Cookies are small files that a site or its service provider transfers to your computers hard drive through your Web browser (if you allow) that enables the sites or service providers systems to recognize your browser and capture and remember certain information We use cookies to help us remember and process the items in your shopping cart and understand and save your preferences for future visits.

If you prefer, you can choose to have your computer warn you each time a cookie is being sent, or you can choose to turn off all cookies via your browser settings. Like most websites, if you turn your cookies off, some of our services may not function properly. However, you can still place orders by contacting customer service.

Do we disclose any information to outside parties?

We do not sell, trade, or otherwise transfer to outside parties your personally identifiable information. This does not include trusted third parties who assist us in operating our website, conducting our business, or servicing you, so long as those parties agree to keep this information confidential. We may also release your information when we believe release is appropriate to comply with the law, enforce our site policies, or protect ours or others rights, property, or safety. However, non-personally identifiable visitor information may be provided to other parties for marketing, advertising, or other uses.

Childrens Online Privacy Protection Act Compliance

We are in compliance with the requirements of COPPA (Childrens Online Privacy Protection Act), we do not collect any information from anyone under 13 years of age. Our website, products and services are all directed to people who are at least 13 years old or older

Online Privacy Policy Only

This online privacy policy applies only to information collected through our website and not to information collected offline.

Your Consent

By using our site, you consent to this privacy policy.

Changes to our Privacy Policy

If we decide to change our privacy policy, we will post those changes on this page, and/or update the Privacy Policy modification date below.

Refund Policy

The END IT Movement online store accepts returns and exchanges on merchandise that HAS NOT BEEN WORN, ALTERED OR WASHED, and with ALL ORIGINAL tags attached. Returns must be received within fourteen (14) days of receipt.

All shipping charges are non-refundable.

Customer is responsible for return shipping.

The END IT Movement online store reserves the right to refuse a refund or exchange if merchandise received is not in its original condition or outside the fourteen (14) day return period.

Contact Customer Service for availability of desired exchange item(s) at [email protected]

Ship your return or exchange through an insured, trackable carrier, as END IT Movement cannot be responsible for lost or damaged packages.

An email notification will be sent to you once your package has been received by END IT Movement.

Refunds will be issued to the original form of payment within five (5) business days of receipt of your return (please note that your banking institution may require additional days to process and post this transaction to your account once they have received the information from END IT Movement).

Contacting Us

If there are any questions regarding this privacy policy you may contact us using the information below.

//www.enditmovement.com

P.O. Box 511

Alpharetta, GA 30009

United States

515 Garson Drive

Atlanta, GA 30324

United States

[email protected]

This policy was last modified on 16 February 2016