Alan Grayson For U.S. Senate
Pay For Performance Act Grayson became the first House freshman in the 111th Congress to pass a substantive bill.

Defying Citizens United Rejecting the corrupting influence of big money in elections, Congressman Grayson was the top small ­donor fundraiser in the House.

Tax Extensions Nine tax extensions introduced by Congressman Grayson became law, including deductions for mortgage insurance, state and local sales taxes, tuition, and for charitable giving from retirement plans.

Boosting Grant Dollars Congressman Grayson created a Grant Notification System to help schools, non­profits and others compete for federal grant money.

Congressionally­-Directed Spending Congressman Grayson increased targeted federal spending here by more than 500% in 2009, a year when we needed it the most.

Audit The Fed Grayson showed true bipartisanship by championing a 26­ year­ old bill by Congressman Ron Paul (R­-Texas) to audit the Federal Reserve.

Saving Our Schools Congressman Grayson’s vote helped to deliver more than $200 million in additional federal money to Orange County schools.

Boosting Tourism Congressman Grayson broke through years of procedural logjams to pass the Travel Promotion Act.

Firefighter Grants Congressman Grayson’s office helped Orange County land a $6.5 million firefighter grant, enough to pay for 45 new first responders.

Wage-Theft Protection Working closely with Osceola County Commissioners, Congressman Grayson helped enact Florida’s toughest wage­theft ordinance, a measure badly needed in a low­ wage tourist corridor.

Blocked TSA Privatization Grayson helped beat back a proposal to privatize federal security officers with the Transportation Security Administration at Orlando International Airport.

SunRail Funding Working with fellow Central Florida lawmakers, Congressman Grayson helped secure a $93 million grant from the federal government to expand the passenger train system 17 miles south into Osceola County.

Senior Tax Assistance Congressman Grayson increased tax counseling for the elderly by $2.8 million.

Demilitarized Police One year after Grayson unsuccessfully tried to halt military equipment, such as tanks and bazookas, from being given to police departments, President Obama placed Grayson’s amendment into effect through an executive order.