H.R.2900 - 113th Congress (2013-2014): OPTION Act of 2013
Here are the steps for Status of Legislation:

There is one summary for H.R.2900. Bill summaries are authored by CRS.

Shown Here:

Introduced in House (08/01/2013)

Offering Patients True Individualized Options Now Act of 2013 or OPTION Act of 2013 - Repeals Title I of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (relating to health insurance and health coverage expansion) and any amendments to it made by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010. Restores provisions of law amended or repealed by such provisions.

Amends the Internal Revenue Code with respect to health savings accounts (HSAs) to: (1) eliminate the high deductible health plan coverage requirement for HSA participants, (2) increase to $10,000 the maximum dollar amount of the tax deduction for payments to an HSA, and (3) permit Medicare (title XVIII of the Social Security Act) eligible individuals to contribute to an HSA.

Allows an HSA rollover to a Medicare Advantage Medical Savings Account (MSA).

Repeals the additional tax on HSA distributions not used for qualified medical expenses.

Eliminates the 10% floor and the 2% miscellaneous itemized deduction floor on itemized medical expense deductions, and the prescribed drug limitation on certain tax benefits for medical expenses.

Allows physicians a tax credit for providing charity care and anyone a tax credit for contributions or gifts for medical care for the indigent.

Extends continuation coverage under COBRA (health insurance continuation benefits under the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985).

Excludes from gross income HSA distributions for charitable purposes.

Amends title II (Federal Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Benefits) (OASDI) of the Social Security Act (SSA) to require the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to establish a procedure to enroll a Medicare Part A beneficiary in the Medicare Reform Premium Assistance Program (established by this Act) to buy private health insurance.

Directs the Secretary to begin phasing out, over ten years, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) and the Office of the Administrator of such Centers and eventually transfer their duties and responsibilities to an office and official within the Department of the Treasury.

Amends SSA title XVIII (Medicare) and the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA) to allow certified medical professionals to assess the nature and extent of an emergency room patient's illness or injury to determine whether an emergency medical condition exists (triage).

Amends the Public Health Service Act to allow the sale and purchase of individual and group health insurance policies across state lines. Sets forth requirements for and restrictions on such policies.

State Health Flexibility Act of 2013 - Amends SSA titles XIX (Medicaid) and XIX (Children's Health Insurance Program) (CHIP) to repeal and replace these programs with a program of block grants to states for health care services to indigent individuals.

Requires states receiving such block grants to pay for health-care-related items and services provided to a citizen, legal resident, or an alien not lawfully admitted for permanent residence or otherwise permanently residing in the United States under color of law, if: (1) such health-care-related items and services are necessary for the treatment of an emergency medical condition, (2) the individual meets all necessary eligibility requirements for health-care-related items and services under the block grant program except for any immigration status requirement, and (3) such items and services are not related to an organ transplant procedure.