H.R.3610 - 113th Congress (2013-2014): Stop Exploitation Through Trafficking Act of 2014
Summary: H.R.3610 — 113th Congress (2013-2014)

There are 2 summaries for this bill. Passed House amended (05/20/2014) Introduced in House (11/21/2013) Bill summaries are authored by CRS

Shown Here:

Passed House amended (05/20/2014)

(This measure has not been amended since it was reported to the House on May 13, 2014. The summary of that version is repeated here.)

Stop Exploitation Through Trafficking Act of 2014 - (Sec. 2) Amends the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to authorize the Attorney General to give preferential consideration in awarding Community Oriented Police Services (COPS) grants to an application for hiring and rehiring additional career law enforcement officers that involves a non-federal contribution exceeding the 25% minimum, or from an applicant in a state that has in effect a law that: (1) treats a minor who has engaged in, or has attempted to engage in, a commercial sex act as a victim of a severe form of trafficking in persons; (2) discourages the charging or prosecution of such individual for a prostitution or sex trafficking offense, based on such conduct; or (3) encourages the diversion of such an individual to appropriate service providers, including child welfare services, victim treatment programs, child advocacy centers, rape crisis centers, or other social services.

(Sec. 3) Amends the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 (VTVPA) to require the Attorney General's annual report on federal agencies implementing provisions regarding the Interagency Task Force to Monitor and Combat Trafficking with respect to the number and amount of restitution orders for convictions of specified federal trafficking offenses to include the following offenses: (1) sex trafficking by force, fraud, or coercion or with a minor; (2) sexual exploitation of children; (3) the selling and buying of children; (4) transportation with intent that the victim engage in illegal sexual activity; (5) coercion or enticement to travel for illegal sexual activity; and (6) transportation of minors for illegal sexual activity. Requires such report to include the age, gender, race, country of origin, country of citizenship, and description of the role in the offense of individuals convicted under each offense.

(Sec. 4) Amends the VTVPA to require the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS), beginning in FY2017, to make grants annually for a national communication system to assist victims of severe forms of trafficking in persons in communicating with service providers. Directs the Secretary to give priority to grant applicants that have experience in providing telephone services to victims of severe forms of trafficking in persons.

(Sec. 5) Amends the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 to include victims of a severe form of trafficking in persons among those eligible for the Job Corps without being required to demonstrate eligibility.

(Sec. 6) Authorizes the United States Marshals Service to assist state, local, and other federal law enforcement agencies, upon the request of such an agency, in locating and recovering missing children.