H.R.7 - 113th Congress (2013-2014): No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion and Abortion Insurance Full Disclosure Act of 2014
Here are the steps for Status of Legislation:

Summary: H.R.7 — 113th Congress (2013-2014)

There are 3 summaries for this bill. Passed House amended (01/28/2014) Reported to House without amendment, Part I (01/23/2014) Introduced in House (05/14/2013) Bill summaries are authored by CRS.

Shown Here:

Passed House amended (01/28/2014)

No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion and Abortion Insurance Full Disclosure Act of 2014 - Title I: Prohibiting Federally Funded Abortions - (Sec. 101) Prohibits the expenditure of funds authorized or appropriated by federal law or funds in any trust fund to which funds are authorized or appropriated by federal law (federal funds) for any abortion. (Currently, federal funds cannot be used for abortion services, except in cases involving rape, incest, or life endangerment.)

Prohibits federal funds from being used for any health benefits coverage that includes coverage of abortion (thus making permanent existing federal policies).

Prohibits the inclusion of abortion in any health care service furnished by a federal or District of Columbia health care facility or by any physician or other individual employed by the federal government or the District.

Excludes an abortion from such prohibitions if: (1) the pregnancy is the result of rape or incest; or (2) the woman suffers from a physical disorder, injury, or illness, including a life-endangering physical condition caused by or arising from the pregnancy itself, that would place her in danger of death unless an abortion is performed, as certified by a physician.

Applies such prohibitions to District of Columbia funds.

Title II: Application Under the Affordable Care Act - (Sec. 201) Amends the Internal Revenue Code to exclude from the definition of "qualified health plan" after December 31, 2014, for purposes of the refundable tax credit for premium assistance for such plans, any plan that includes coverage for abortion.

Excludes from the definition of "qualified health plan," for purposes of the tax credit for small employer health insurance expenses, any health plan that includes coverage for abortions.

Exempts from the application of such tax provisions: (1) abortions for pregnancies resulting from rape or incest or in cases where a woman suffers from a physical disorder, injury, or illness that would, as certified by a physician, endanger her life if an abortion were not performed; and (2) the treatment of any infection, injury, disease, or disorder that was caused by or exacerbated by the performance of an abortion.

Requires the Director of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), when entering into contracts for health insurance, to ensure that no multi-state qualified health plan offered in a state health care exchange provides health benefits coverage for which the expenditure of federal funds is prohibited under this Act.

(Sec. 202) Amends the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, with respect to notice provided to health plan enrollees, to require: