Stop "Concealed Carry Reciprocity"
“Concealed Carry Reciprocity” (CCR)—S.446 and H.R. 38—is a chaotic and dangerous policy that would gut every state’s gun laws and make our communities less safe. Right now, every state sets its own rules for who can carry a hidden, loaded handgun in public. There is no national standard for who can carry hidden, loaded handguns in public, and rather than create a uniform standard, CCR would effectively turn the weakest state’s laws into nationwide laws.



Use this interactive map to see each state’s standards for who may carry a concealed firearm in public.

Stand up to the gun lobby and fight back. Here are some ways you can take action.

Find out why CCR would have a profound impact on public safety through our fact sheet.

See how our Moms delivered thousands of postcards to their representatives

Stay on top of the latest with our press releases, editorials and media hits.

Under CCR, Washington politicians and the gun lobby would override state gun laws to force each state to recognize the concealed carry standards of every other state, including those states that have dramatically weaker standards, or no standards at all. For instance, 19 states allow a person to carry a concealed gun in public with no gun safety training, and 12 states do not even require a permit or background check for people to carry in public. So, CCR would legally force every state to allow people to carry hidden, loaded guns, even if they’ve never passed a background check or had gun safety training.

From America’s law enforcement to our mayors, attorneys general and prosecutors, those charged with protecting public safety say that CCR is dangerous and wrong. Not only is this policy unsafe, it is also unpopular. CCR would force states to allow people to carry hidden, loaded guns in public with no permit whatsoever, a policy opposed by at least 81 percent of Americans.

You can stop CCR. Send Congress a clear, resounding message: Don’t Gut Our Gun Laws. Protect Public Safety.

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

Read our fact sheets analyzing why “Concealed Carry Reciprocity” is a public safety issue:

Download our online resources: