FOX Network Picks Up ‘Roseanne,’ Saying It Has No Problem With Occasional Racism
Truth In Satire on Extra Newsfeed

FOX Network Picks Up ‘Roseanne,’ Saying It Has No Problem With Occasional Racism

After ABC cancels Roseanne Barr’s hit show in response to her stunning racist tweet, the network of bigots comes to the rescue

Allan Ishac Blocked Unblock Follow Following May 29, 2018

She was great, then she wasn’t, then she was again, and now she’s just a racist. (Credit: hellogiggles.com)

Just hours after ABC canceled its hit sitcom “Roseanne” due to an ugly racist tweet by its controversial star, Roseanne Barr, the Fox Network said it would be picking up the show.

“We’re excited to announce that ‘Roseanne’ will be coming to Fox this fall,” said Walter Fentel, a Fox vice-president of programming. “The controversy regarding Ms. Barr’s racially charged Twitter message, as well as her bigoted attitudes, are just some of the reasons we’re happy to welcome her to the Fox family. And we know our audience of narrow-minded, unsophisticated bumpkins will welcome her just as enthusiastically.”

Co-star John Goodman believes Roseanne’s tweet was misunderstood, adding that her racism “is much worse in real life.” (Credit: www.rollingstone.com)

In her vulgar post, Ms. Barr wrote that Valerie Jarrett, an African-American adviser to President Barack Obama, was the offspring of the “muslim brotherhood & planet of the apes.” The abhorrent tweet met with immediate condemnation on social media from all moderate voices, but cheers among Fox’s white supremacist fans.

President Donald Trump, who had called Ms. Barr earlier in the year to congratulate her on the success of her show, and who uses Fox programming to promote his administration’s policies, was thrilled to hear that “Roseanne” would be coming to his favorite network.

“Big news for ‘Roseanne’ fans and everyone who enjoys ‘black’ humor,” tweeted the president on Tuesday night. “I know that all Ms. Barr wants to do is make America great again and kudos to Fox for keeping that hope alive.”

“Roseanne” will air on Monday nights at 8:00pm on the Fox Network starting in September.

****

Thanks to all the many readers, fans, followers, and even my frenemies, for reading and commenting on my posts throughout the year as I continue my commitment to post every day, 7-days-a-week until the Orange Accident is no more.

I read every comment. And I try to answer.

Thank you.

–AI