Better Georgia Staff Directory – Better Georgia
Better Georgia Staff:

Bryan Long, Executive Director

Louis Elrod, Director of Operations



Bryan Long

Executive Director

Before founding Better Georgia in November 2011, Bryan started his career as a journalist, followed by more than five years with the Atlanta-based communications firm Jackson Spalding.

At Jackson Spalding, Bryan managed crisis communications, corporate communications and social media for some of Atlanta’s largest and most influential companies.

Previously, he worked as a reporter and editor with CNN.com, the Atlanta Journal-Constitution and the Atlanta Business Chronicle.

Bryan is well versed on social marketing, a skill which took him to the Democratic National Convention in Denver and the Republican National Convention in St. Paul in 2008.

Bryan’s two plus years at CNN.com honed his ability to work under pressure as he served as Writer/Editor for CNN.com’s breaking news team, where he covered such wide-ranging topics as the war in Iraq and its aftermath; the rebuilding of New York’s post-September 11 skyline; the safety of biotech labs after the nation’s anthrax scares; and the 2004 Presidential race and election. He was co-writer and co-editor for CNN.com’s first blog, a political and celebrity-filled report from the halls of Boston’s Fleet Center at the 2004 Democratic National Convention.

In October 2009, Bryan spent a week studying clean water projects in Haiti for Pure Water for the World and Midtown Atlanta Rotary Club. Bryan is a member of Leadership Atlanta’s class of 2012. He also serves on the Board of Directors for AID Atlanta, an organization that fights against the AIDS epidemic in metro Atlanta.

A native of Troy, Alabama, Bryan graduated with a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Alabama upon completion of a double-major curriculum in Journalism and American Studies.



Louis Elrod

Director of Operations

Georgia native Louis Elrod has been active in progressive causes and campaigns for nearly a decade. In 2004, Louis co-founded the Young Democrats of Habersham County, where he served as president for two years before moving to Athens in 2006. At the University of Georgia, Louis was the Communications Director for the UGA Young Democrats prior to being elected President of the chapter. He completed his two-year term as President of the Young Democrats of Georgia in April 2013, during which he initiated a groundbreaking training program and led the organization to its two best fundraising years since 2007.

Louis has also managed five races in Georgia, most recently managing the successful 2012 campaigns of state Representative Ronnie Mabra and Macon Circuit District Attorney David Cooke.

He graduated from the University of Georgia with a B.A. in Political Science.

Raven Covington

Intern – Summer 2013

Before joining Better Georgia as the organization’s first intern, Raven graduated from the University of Georgia with a major in Political Science and a minor in History. A native of Columbus, Ga., she got her start in politics by knocking on doors and registering voters every day after school for Barack Obama’s 2008 presidential campaign.

In 2011, Raven began using social media as an advocacy tool when she interned for the Spencer Frye for State House 118 campaign. As a member of the Frye team, she and others successfully unseated a 20-year incumbent. In the summer of 2012, Raven accepted a Fellowship with the Obama for America campaign. As a Fellow, she organized events and phone bank sessions in North Georgia. As the Communications Director of the Young Democrats of UGA, she used social media to inform and organize students. During the 2012 election season, the group registered more than 700 voters and made more than 21,000 phone calls on behalf of President Obama and other progressive candidates in the state.

In her spare time, she hangs out in coffee shops and plays trivia with friends.