Senator Joe Biden — Senator for Delaware: Press Room
BIDEN: 'The President's announcement today will not help families who are struggling with high prices at the pump. Opening up the rest of our coastlines to exploration will not give us more oil or gas for a decade.'

July 14, 2008

Lewes, DE – Standing on the shoreline at one of the nation's first public lands, Cape Henlopen State Park, Senator Joe Biden (D-DE) today laid out his vision for a cleaner, more efficient energy future. Sen. Biden discussed his opposition to further expanding off-shore drilling, laid out realistic and measurable steps we can take to reduce our dependence on oil, and discussed new investments we should be making in alternative energy.



Sen. Biden kicked off the event by responding to President Bush's announcement earlier today that he will lift the Executive Ban on new off-shore oil leases.



“The President's announcement today will not help families who are struggling with high prices at the pump” said Sen. Biden. “Opening up the rest of our coastlines to exploration will not give us more oil or gas for a decade.”



“The only way that we can achieve energy and climate security in this country is to reduce our dependence on oil. If we continue to rely only on more drilling, we will simply be drilling ourselves deeper into dependence on oil,” Sen. Biden added.



In the state of Delaware, drivers are paying $10 more a day for gas than we they were paying seven years ago, totaling $3600 a year. In the United States, we have just three percent of the world's proven oil reserves and four percent of the world's population – yet we consume twenty-five percent of the world's oil.



Sen. Biden was joined by several local community and environmental leaders at today's event, taking place on top of the Great Dune.



State Representative Pete Schartzkopf said: “It's nice to have a real national leader offering real solutions to our nation's energy problem. Delaware has taken several steps to be at the forefront and working together, we can ensure that renewable energy becomes a reality for all.”



Cape Henlopen Park Administrator Pat Cooper said: “Cape Henlopen State Park owes an immeasurable debt of gratitude to Sen. Biden for fighting tooth and nail early on in his career to ensure that all Delawareans have a protected place to visit with their families and enjoy all the beauties our state has to offer – from the ocean to nature trails. It is only fitting that he is here today to discuss how we can preserve and protect our nation's future.”



To read more about Sen. Biden's Energy Security for America, please click here.