Robert Mueller Net Worth (House Cars Salary Income 2018)
Robert Mueller Net Worth is $13 million dollars and earns an annual income of $430,000 dollars. The Net Worth of Robert Mueller has seen a hike of 64% over the past few years. Robert Mueller is an American attorney who was the sixth Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. While calculating the Net Worth of Robert Mueller we have included the data updated as of this Quarter. Check out the Exclusive information on Robert Mueller Net Worth details such as Yearly Income, House, Car Collection, Brand Endorsements, Investments etc. Also read Net Worth details of Donald Trump, Sean Spicer and Racheal Maddow.

Robert Mueller Net Worth

Estimated Net Worth $13.4 Million Annual Salary $235,000 Personal Investments $8.3 Million Luxury Cars – 4 $740,000

Robert Mueller Cars included in his Net Worth

The Car collection of Robert Mueller is medium. He owns few of the best luxury cars in the world. The Car brands owned by Robert Mueller include a Mercedes S-Class and Alfa Romeo.

Robert Mueller House included in his Net Worth

Robert Mueller Resides in Washington. He bought this Luxury Home in 2006. Estimated Value of this Real Estate Property around $1.4 Million.

Robert Mueller Biography

Robert Mueller went on to study at Princeton University (receiving an A.B. in 1966), where he continued to play lacrosse; he has cited his teammate David Spencer Hackett’s death in the Vietnam War as an influence on his decision to pursue military service. Hackett was a Marine Corps First Lieutenant in the infantry and was killed in 1967 by small arms fire.

Robert Mueller enlisted in the United States Marine Corps in 1968, attending officer candidate school, Army Ranger School and Army jump school.

Robert Mueller then served as an officer leading a rifle platoon of the 3rd Marine Division during the Vietnam War.

In 1993, Robert Mueller became a partner at Boston’s Hale and Dorr, specializing in white-collar crime litigation.

Robert Mueller was nominated for the position of FBI Director by President George W. Bush on July 5, 2001. Director Mueller, along with Deputy Attorney General James B. Comey, threatened to resign from office in March 2004 if the White House overruled a Department of Justice finding that domestic wiretapping without a court warrant was unconstitutional.

After leaving the FBI in 2013, Mueller served a one-year term as consulting professor and the Arthur and Frank Payne Distinguished Lecturer at Stanford University where he focused on issues related to cyber-security.

In addition to his teaching position, Mueller also joined the law firm WilmerHale as a partner in its Washington, D.C. office.

In September 2014, Mueller was hired to serve as independent investigator into the NFL’s conduct surrounding Ray Rice and issued a report in January 2015.

Robert Mueller Net Worth Growth Estimate

The Net Worth and Income of Robert Mueller is expected to continue to grow at a strong pace. Over the next few years, Robert Mueller’s Net worth is likely to grow by around 12%.

Share on: WhatsApp