Addressing Social Issues Facing African Americans
Jason Q. Purnell PhD, MPH | Principal Investigator and Project Director

Dr. Jason Purnell is an Assistant Professor at Washington University’s Brown School. He is trained in both applied psychology and public health and is a licensed psychologist. Dr. Purnell’s research focuses on how socioeconomic and sociocultural factors influence health behaviors and health outcomes and methods for mobilizing community response to health disparities.

In March 2013, alongside scholars from Washington University and Saint Louis University, Dr. Purnell embarked on a year-long exploration of health disparities in the St. Louis region called For the Sake of All. This multi-disciplinary project brought together stakeholders and community partners from across the St. Louis region and focused on the social determinants of health, including education, economics, neighborhoods, and community resources.

With the release of the For the Sake of All report in May 2014, Dr. Purnell and his team concluded Phase One of the project and took the next steps of taking the report to the St. Louis region. In Phase Two, the project team engaged business leaders, policy makers, and community members. Through community forums, discussion guides, outreach to the faith community, legislative briefs, articles, presentations, and more, Dr. Purnell and For the Sake of All have reached thousands of St. Louis citizens around implementation of the report’s recommendations. The work continues in Phase Three, as the project focuses on engaging all levels and sectors of the St. Louis region in strategic implementation of the recommendations.

Dr. Purnell graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, with a bachelor’s degree in Government and Philosophy. His doctoral degree in counseling psychology is from The Ohio State University, and his master’s in public health is from the University of Rochester School of Medicine & Dentistry. Dr. Purnell is also a licensed psychologist in the State of Missouri.

With primary research focuses on health equity and the social determinants of health, Dr. Purnell places a special emphasis on the social, cultural, and economic factors that influence health behaviors and health outcomes. He is also interested in how communities can be mobilized to respond to health inequity. His work has been published in leading scientific journals such as JAMA, American Journal of Public Health, Annual Review of Public Health, and Journal of Clinical Oncology. Significant interest in For the Sake of All has led to coverage by NPR, the Washington Post, Bloomberg Businessweek, Mclean’s (Canada), Korea Times (Korea), the “Joe Madison Show” on SiriusXM Radio, vox.com, and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch.

Dr. Purnell is very active in the St. Louis community, both personally and professionally, including service on the boards of Beyond Housing, Inc. and the American Youth Foundation. He is a member of the Leadership Council for the Ready by 21 St. Louis collective impact initiative and was appointed by Archbishop Robert J. Carlson to the Peace and Justice Commission of the Archdiocese of St. Louis. He has also been honored with the Young Leader Award from the St. Louis American Foundation and the Young Professionals Awards in Health and Quality of Life Empowerment from the Urban League Young Professionals of Metropolitan St. Louis. Dr. Purnell recently received the FOCUS St. Louis 2016 Leadership Award for his work on the For the Sake of All project.