Mark B. Harkins

Mark B. Harkins joined the Government Affairs Institute as a Senior Fellow in July 2013, having guest lectured numerous times for more than a decade and serving on Capitol Hill for 17 years. Mark worked for two Members of Congress before joining the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology as a Professional Staff Member and later as Legislative Director for the House Science Committee Democrats. He served as Senior Legislative Assistant to Representative David Price (D-NC), where his portfolio included appropriations, before serving as Chief of Staff for Rep. Brad Miller (D-NC), where he created and ran all aspects of a three office, twenty person Congressional operation.

Following his tenure on the Hill, Mark was a government relations professional for more than five years where he focused on the representation of corporate, nonprofit, and government clients before Congress and the Executive Branch.

Mark has extensive experience with the federal appropriations and budgeting process, as well as issues handled by the Financial Services, Science, Ways and Means, and Homeland Security Committees.

Early in his career, Mark was the Sports Information Director at Swarthmore College. And, he was once a co-owner of a fantasy sports statistics service.

Education: BA, Swarthmore College, (Economics)

Expertise:

Communicating with Congress

Congressional Structure and Operation

Committee Practices and Procedures

Legislative Politics

Budget and Appropriations

Media: For interviews, events, and news stories, e-mail gai@georgetown.edu or you can call our office at 202-333-4838

Recent Media In The Media Center

The Sequester Died on May 5 Mark Harkins | May 30, 2017 Sequestration put into place by the Budget Control Act in 2011 (BCA) is still on the books. But Congress, with the acquiescence of the President, has found a way to make that point moot. By invoking another section of budget law, section 251(b)(2)(A)(i) and (ii) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of Read More > Unusual Appropriations Mark Harkins | May 20, 2016 The budget process created in 1974 put into place a mechanism to limit the power of appropriators and try to slow down spending growth. By having either a Budget Resolution put a cap on discretionary spending or, when no Resolution is agreed to, having the Appropriations Committee put in place (or “deem”) a cap, the Read More >

Leading Expert On Congress