Ohio Student Suspended for Refusing to Leave Classroom During Gun Control Walkout
This is totalitarianism in 21st century America. It’s what fascism looks like. Decades after the left began its long march through the institutions” (academia, media, think tanks, entertainment etc) — subverting society by infiltrating institutions such as the academic and other professions — they have finally succeeded. It is coming down fast.

German-born American political philosopher and prominent member of the Frankfurt School of critical social analysis, Herbert Marcuse, whose Marxist and Freudian theories of 20th-century Western society were influential in the leftist student movements of the 1960s, wrote this back in his 1972 book, Counterrevolution and Revolt:

To extend the base of the student movement, Rudi Dutschke has proposed the strategy of the long march through the institutions: working against the established institutions while working within them, but not simply by ‘boring from within’, rather by ‘doing the job’, learning (how to program and read computers, how to teach at all levels of education, how to use the mass media, how to organize production, how to recognize and eschew planned obsolescence, how to design, et cetera), and at the same time preserving one’s own consciousness in working with others. The long march includes the concerted effort to build counter institutions. the ground to the building of a unified front shifting and sometimes dirty– – but it is there…

Close to fifty years later, did they imagine they would accomplish their goals with such stunning success?

The election of Donald J. Trump was either the opening round in what will be a knock-down-drag-out fight for our freedom, or the last gasp of a free America.

Ohio Student Suspended for Refusing to Leave Classroom During Gun Control Walkout JASON HOWERTON | MAR 16, 2018 | MAR 16, 2018 A high school student in Hilliard, Ohio, didn’t want to pick sides in the contentious gun debate surrounding Wednesday’s “National Walkout,” so he stayed in class instead of joining the largely anti-gun protest or an alternative “study hall.” Hilliard Davidson High School senior Jacob Shoemaker was then reportedly slapped with a suspension. The student argued that divisive politics have no place in America’s schools and he refused to take sides in the debate, according to the Associated Press. 10TV/Jacob Shoemaker Shoemaker’s suspension citation was posted online, possibly by a friend, and the story quickly went viral.

The Truth Must be Told Your contribution supports independent journalism Please take a moment to consider this. Now, more than ever, people are reading Geller Report for news they won't get anywhere else. But advertising revenues have all but disappeared. Google Adsense is the online advertising monopoly and they have banned us. Social media giants like Facebook and Twitter have blocked and shadow-banned our accounts. But we won't put up a paywall. Because never has the free world needed independent journalism more. Everyone who reads our reporting knows the Geller Report covers the news the media won't. We cannot do our ground-breaking report without your support. We must continue to report on the global jihad and the left's war on freedom. Our readers’ contributions make that possible. Geller Report's independent, investigative journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. But we do it because we believe our work is critical in the fight for freedom and because it is your fight, too. Please contribute to our ground-breaking work here.

Make a monthly commitment to support The Geller Report – choose the option that suits you best. Contribute Monthly - Choose One Subscriber : $18.00 USD - monthly Contributor : $36.00 USD - monthly Patron : $50.00 USD - monthly Silver member : $100.00 USD - monthly Gold member : $250.00 USD - monthly Platinum member : $500.00 USD - monthly