The Verdict Is In & Gorsuch Garners High Praise
Meet The Nominee That Has Been Described As "Impossible To Oppose"

TOP TAKEAWAYS

Republicans let the American People be heard and voters went to the polls in November knowing the next president of the United States would fill the vacancy.

Tonight, President Trump announced Judge Neil Gorsuch of the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals as his nominee for the vacant seat on the Supreme Court.

In 2006, Gorsuch's nomination was so "uncontroversial," that not a single Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee attended his confirmation hearing, and he passed both the committee and the Senate without opposition by voice vote.

During his confirmation process, Gorsuch was praised by Senators on both sides of the aisle as "very intelligent," called an "outstanding nominee," and said to have "a sense of fairness and impartiality."

Gorsuch has received near universal acclaim from those on both the left and the right, with liberal legal minds and Democrats calling him "a very talented, gifted judge," "very ethical," "very smart," and "thoughtful and fair-minded."

Gorsuch's credentials and resume have been described as "impeccable," "sterling," "impressive," and the type "common to high court justices."

In his 2006 nomination, Gorsuch was given a unanimous "well qualified" rating by the American Bar Association, the highest rating given.

IN 2006, GORSUCH WAS CONFIRMED WITHOUT OPPOSITION BY THE SENATE TO A SEAT ON THE TENTH CIRCUIT COURT OF APPEALS

Gorsuch Was Confirmed By The Senate And Passed The Judiciary Committee On Voice Votes, Without Opposition From Schumer, Durbin, Leahy, Clinton, Obama, Biden, Or Reid

On July 20, 2006, Neil Gorsuch Was Confirmed By The Senate On A Voice Vote As A Judge On The United States Court Of Appeals For The Tenth Circuit. (PN1565, Gorsuch Nomination , Approved By Voice Vote, 7/20/06)

There Are 12 Democrat Senators That Supported Gorsuch's Nomination In 2006 And Are Still In The Senate: Chuck Schumer (D-NY), Dianne Feinstein (D-CA), Patrick Leahy (D-VT), Maria Cantwell (D-WA), Tom Carper (D-DE), Dick Durbin (D-IL), Robert Menendez (D-NJ), Patty Murray (D-WA), Bill Nelson (D-FL), Jack Reed (D-RI), Debbie Stabenow (D-MI), And Ron Wyden (D-OR). ("Senators Of The 109 th Congress," U.S. Senate , Accessed 7/27/06)

("Senators Of The 109 Congress," U.S. Senate , Accessed 7/27/06) Other Democrat Senators That Supported Gorsuch In 2006 Included Harry Reid (D-NV), John Kerry (D-MA), Barack Obama (D-IL), Joe Biden (D-DE), And Hillary Clinton (D-NY). ("Senators Of The 109th Congress," U.S. Senate , Accessed 7/27/06)

No Senate Democrats Objected To Gorsuch's Confirmation Or Demanded A Recorded Vote. ( The Congressional Record , 7/20/06, S8036)

At The Time Of Gorsuch's Confirmation, There Were 44 Sitting Democrat Senators. ("Senators Of The 109th Congress," U.S. Senate , Accessed 7/27/06)

On July 13, 2006, The Senate Judiciary Committee Approved Neil Gorsuch's Nomination By Voice Vote. "He was reported out of the Committee on July 13, 2006 by a voice vote." ( The Congressional Record , 7/20/06, S8032)

In 2006, Sens. Patrick Leahy (D-VT), Joe Biden (D-DE), Dianne Feinstein (D-CA), Chuck Schumer (D-NY), And Dick Durbin (D-IL) All Were Members Of The Senate Judiciary Committee. (Committee On The Judiciary, U.S. Senate , Hearing, 6/21/06)

Gorsuch's Nomination Was Seen As Anything But Controversial

2006 Headline From The Denver Post: "Gorsuch Looks Like Shoo-In For Court" (Anne Mulkern, "Gorsuch Looks Like Shoo-In For Court, The Denver Post , 6/26/06)

Gorsuch Was So "Uncontroversial," That Not A Single Democrat On The Senate Judiciary Committee Attended His Confirmation Hearing. "The Senate confirmed Gorsuch by voice vote following uncontroversial Senate Judiciary Committee hearings that only Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) attended." (Andrew Hamm, "Judge Neil Gorsuch - Colorado Native And Washington, D.C., Veteran," SCOTUSBlog , 1/30/17)

In "A Signal" That Gorsuch's Nomination Was "Not Controversial," "Only One Senator On The 18-Member Judiciary Committee," Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC), Even Bothered To Attend His Confirmation Hearing. "Denver native Neil Gorsuch seemed headed toward what looks like easy confirmation to the Denver-based 10th Circuit Court of Appeals after gliding through a 20-minute U.S. Senate committee hearing on his qualifications Wednesday. Only one senator on the 18-member Judiciary Committee attended the hearing, a signal the nomination is not controversial." (Anne Mulkern, "Easy Confirmation Ahead For Gorsuch?," The Denver Post , 6/21/06)

Gorsuch's "Nomination Wasn't Deemed Controversial." "Gorsuch's nomination was approved on a voice vote. Individual votes weren't tallied because the nomination wasn't deemed controversial." (Anne Mulkern, "Gorsuch Confirmed For 10th Circuit," The Denver Post , 7/20/06)

Slate's Mark Joseph Stern: Gorsuch Was Appointed "Without Controversy." "Gorsuch sits on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit, based in his home state of Colorado, to which he was appointed, without controversy, by George W. Bush." (Mark Joseph Stern, "The One SCOTUS Nominee Democrats Should Stop At Any Cost," Slate , 1/25/17)

"Unlike Other Appointees Of President George W. Bush, Gorsuch Won An Easy Senate Confirmation On A Voice Vote In 2006." (David G. Savage, "Conservative Colorado Judge Emerges As A Top Contender To Fill Scalia's Supreme Court Seat," Los Angeles Times , 1/24/17)

Gorsuch Was Praised By Senators On Both Sides Of The Aisle During The Confirmation Process

Gorsuch "Sailed Through His Senate Confirmation In 2006," And Was Introduced By Both The Republican And Democrat Senator From His Home State Of Colorado. "He sailed through his Senate confirmation in 2006, and was even introduced by both the Republican (then-Sen. Wayne Allard) and Democratic (then-Sen. Ken Salazar) senators from his home state of Colorado." (Major Garrett, Jan Crawford, and Adam Aigner-Treworgy, "Trump Supreme Court Justice Pick Narrows To Two Names," CBS News , 1/24/17)

Sen. Ken Salazar (D-CO) Stated That He Found Gorsuch To Be "Very Intelligent" And "Thoughtful." SENATOR KEN SALAZAR (D-CO): "During our meeting, I found him to be very intelligent, thoughtful, and appreciative of the great honor it is to be nominated to the Federal bench." (Committee On The Judiciary, U.S. Senate, Hearing , 6/21/06)

Salazar Said That He Believed Gorsuch Possessed "A Demonstrated Dedication To Fairness, Impartiality, Precedent, And The Avoidance Of Judicial Activism." SENATOR KEN SALAZAR (D-CO): "In addition to professional excellence as a lawyer, a judicial nominee should have a demonstrated dedication to fairness, impartiality, precedent, and the avoidance of judicial activism-from both the left and the right. I believe that Mr. Gorsuch meets this very high test-and I believe he will make a fine addition to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals." (Senator Ken Salazar, The Congressional Record , 7/20/06, S8034)

SENATOR KEN SALAZAR (D-CO): "In addition to professional excellence as a lawyer, a judicial nominee should have a demonstrated dedication to fairness, impartiality, precedent, and the avoidance of judicial activism-from both the left and the right. I believe that Mr. Gorsuch meets this very high test-and I believe he will make a fine addition to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals." (Senator Ken Salazar, The Congressional Record , 7/20/06, S8034) Salazar: Gorsuch "Has A Sense Of Fairness And Impartiality That Is A Keystone Of Being A Judge." "The 10th Circuit covers 560,625 square miles, nearly 20 percent of the U.S. land mass, and raises some of the most important legal issues of the time, said U.S. Sen. Ken Salazar. 'Deciding cases involving life and death, the reach of government power, the scope of our freedoms and liberties is the daily task of a federal judge. It is a task that requires intellect, compassion, and a dedication to fairness and impartiality,' he said. 'He has a sense of fairness and impartiality that is a keystone of being a judge.'" (Elizabeth Aguilera, "10 th Circuit Judge's Oath A Family Affair," The Denver Post , 1/24/17)

Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-VT), While Gorsuch's Nomination Was Being Considered By The Senate, Had Nothing Negative To Say About Gorsuch Or His Nomination. SENATOR PATRICK LEAHY (D-VT): "Neil Gorsuch has been nominated to the Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit. I know that Senator Salazar is pleased that we were able to move his nomination quickly as well." (Senator Patrick Leahy, The Congressional Record , 7/20/06, S8033)

Leahy Said He Was "Pleased" That Senate Republican Leadership Had "Scheduled Debate And Consideration" Of A Set Of Nominations Including Gorsuch's. SENATOR PATRICK LEAHY (D-VT): "I am pleased that the Republican leadership has scheduled debate and consideration of these nominations and am glad that the Republican leadership is taking notice of the fact that we can cooperate on swift consideration and confirmation of nominations." (Senator Patrick Leahy, The Congressional Record , 7/20/06, S8033-S8034)

Senator John Cornyn (R-TX) In 2006: Gorsuch Is An "Outstanding Nominee" To The Tenth Circuit. "Last week, the Senate confirmed another outstanding nominee to the Tenth Circuit, Neil Gorsuch. And when the Senate votes to confirm Jerome Holmes, as I am confident it will, he will join Judge Gorsuch and four other fine Bush nominees on the Tenth Circuit." (Sen. John Cornyn, Congressional Record , 7/24/06, S. 8122)

Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC) In 2006: "I Have Nothing But Good Things To Say About Mr. Gorsuch." "I have nothing but good things to say about Mr. Gorsuch," said Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., the sole senator at the hearing." (Anne Mulkern, "Easy Confirmation Ahead For Gorsuch?," The Denver Post , 6/21/06)

Then-Judiciary Committee Chairman Sen. Arlen Specter (R-PA): Gorsuch Has "An Excellent Academic Background." SENATOR ARLEN SPECTER (R-PA): "Mr. Gorsuch has an excellent academic background with a bachelor's with honors from Columbia University, 1988, a law degree with honors from Harvard Law School in 1991, a Doctorate of Philosophy from Oxford University in 2004." (Senator Arlen Specter, The Congressional Record , 7/20/06, S8032)

Specter: Gorsuch Received "Unanimous Approval" During His Confirmation Process. SENATOR ARLEN SPECTER (R-PA): "Judge Shepherd, like Mr. Gorsuch, has come to this position with unanimous approval." (Senator Arlen Specter, The Congressional Record , 7/20/06, S8032)

Then-Senator Wayne Allard (R-CO) In 2006: "Gorsuch Is An Extraordinarily Well-Qualified Nominee" Who 'Would Capably Serve The Citizens Of Colorado, The Tenth Circuit, And Indeed The United States." "Well, Chairman Graham and members of the Committee, it is my pleasure to introduce to you Neil M. Gorsuch, President Bush's nominee to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit. Mr. Gorsuch is an extraordinarily well-qualified nominee and, if confirmed, would capably serve the citizens of Colorado, the Tenth Circuit, and indeed the United States." (Committee On The Judiciary, U.S. Senate, Hearing , 6/21/06)

GORSUCH HAS RECEIVED NEAR UNIVERSAL ACCLAIM FROM BOTH THOSE ON THE LEFT AND THE RIGHT

Gorsuch Has Been Praised By Both Conservatives And Independent Groups

Sen. Cory Gardner (R-CO): "People Felt So Confident In [Gorsuch] And His Qualifications That They Didn't Even Require A Recorded Vote" In 2006. "'I feel very good about his chances,' said U.S. Sen. Cory Gardner, who pointed out that the Senate approved by voice vote his 2006 nomination for his current judicial post. 'People felt so confident in him and his qualifications that they didn't even require a recorded vote.'" (Mark K. Matthews and Kirk Mitchell, "What You Need To Know About Colorado Judge Neil Gorsuch, Donald Trump's Rumored Top Pick For The Supreme Court," The Denver Post , 1/30/17)

Gorsuch's Former Legal Partner Mark Hansen: "He's An Affable, Collegial Unpretentious Man" In Whom "Liberals Will Find Very Little To Fault." "'I think the conservatives will love him and the liberals will find very little to fault,' said Mark Hansen, a former partner of Gorsuch at Kellogg Huber Hansen. 'He's an affable, collegial, unpretentious man with a good sense of humor.'" (Ariane de Vogue, "How Neil Gorsuch Could End Up As Donald Trump's Supreme Court Nominee," CNN , 1/25/17)

Hansen: Gorsuch Has Shown "Resilience," "Strength," And "Steadfastness." "'If adversity shows the true character of a person, then Neil showed his resilience, his strength and steadfastness,' Hansen said of how Gorsuch handled a difficult case." (Elizabeth Aguilera, "10 th Circuit Judge's Oath A Family Affair," The Denver Post , 1/24/17)

President Of The Federalist Society Eugene B. Meyer: "Judge Gorsuch Is Widely Viewed As One Of The Best Legal Minds Of His Generation." FEDERALIST SOCIETY PRESIDENT EUGENE MEYER: "And, I'd say beyond his paper resume, Judge Gorsuch is widely viewed as one of the best legal minds of his generation." (Eugene Meyer, Remarks At The 13th Annual Barbara K. Olson Memorial Lecture , Washington, DC, 11/22/13)

Vice President Of The Federalist Society Leonard Leo: Gorsuch Has A "Very, Very Distinguished Background," And His Opinions Are "Extremely Eloquently Written" And "Incisive." "Although Leo cautioned he would 'never assume a front-runner,' he spoke highly of Gorsuch, who sits on the bench of the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals in Denver. 'He has very, very distinguished background,' Leo said. 'He has probably 200 or so published opinions as an appeals clerk judge. They are extremely eloquently written, they're incisive, understandable, clear, opinionated.'" (Jennifer Hansler, "Trump Supreme Court Adviser Praises Judge Neil Gorsuch As Potential Heir To Scalia's Legacy," ABC News , 1/25/17)

The Heritage Foundation's John Malcom: Gorsuch Is "Very Bright" And "Well-Respected." " 'He is very bright, well-respected and quite personable,' John Malcolm, a lawyer at the Heritage Foundation, told the Los Angeles Times. 'And there's no question he would not be as contentious as some others.'" (Joseph P. Williams, "Judge Neil Gorsuch Tops Donald Trump's Supreme Court List," U.S. News & World Report , 1/27/17)

Judicial Crisis Network's Carrie Severino: Gorsuch Is "Eminently Qualified And Has A Great Record On The Bench." "'I'd be thrilled to see him,' said Carrie Severino, chief counsel of the conservative Judicial Crisis Network. 'He is so eminently qualified and has a great record on the bench.'" (Greg Stohr, "Trump Fulfills Conservative Wishes With High Court Shortlist," Bloomberg , 1/26/17)

Severino: Gorsuch Has A "Solid" And "Clear Record Of A Consistent Judicial Philosophy." "'He has a clear record of a consistent judicial philosophy and applying that in action,' said Carrie Severino, chief counsel and policy director for the Judicial Crisis Network, a conservative advocacy group. 'One of the real values here is he's someone with solid record and we're able to assess his experience.'" (Kevin Simpson, "Neil Gorsuch: Elite Credentials, Conservative Western Roots Land Denver Native On SCOTUS List," The Denver Post , 12/11/16)

Judicial Watch President Tom Fitton: Gorsuch Is "A Leader In Terms Of Conservative Jurisprudence." "Tom Fitton, president of Judicial Watch, tells Newsweek that Gorsuch fits the Scalia mold, which Trump has promised to adhere to in his replacement nominee. 'I think conservatives would consider him to be an exciting pick. I think it's fair to say he's a leader in terms of conservative jurisprudence and I think he quickly would become a strong voice on the court for his constitutional approach to decision making,' he says. He adds, 'Of the finalists that have been reported, I just don't see any running into any opposition that would be significant enough that would derail their nomination.'" (Michele Gorman, "A Look At Neil Gorsuch, Possible Trump SCOTUS Nominee," Newsweek , 1/27/17)

Former Colorado Supreme Court Justice Rebecca Love Kourlis: Gorsuch Is "Plugged In To The Realities Of Litigation And Focused On Trying To Make The System Work Better." "'He is plugged in to the realities of litigation and focused on trying to make the system work better,' Kourlis said. 'That is music to our ears.'" (Kevin Simpson, "Neil Gorsuch: Elite Credentials, Conservative Western Roots Land Denver Native On SCOTUS List," The Denver Post , 12/11/16)

Above The Law's David Lat: Gorsuch Is "Brilliant." "Article III groupies, Judge Neil Gorsuch is one to watch. He's brilliant, he's young, and he's incredibly well-connected." (David Lat, "The Eyes of the Law: Judge Neil Gorsuch's Investiture," Above The Law , 11/28/06)

Lat: Gorsuch Is "Impossible To Oppose." "'He has grabbed every brass ring,' said David Lat, managing editor of the legal website Above the Law. 'He's brilliant, conservative and impossible to oppose. That's a deadly combination for Democrats.'" (Mark K. Matthews, "Will Donald Trump Pick Colorado's Neil Gorsuch For Supreme Court?," The Denver Post , 1/30/17)

George Washington Law School Professor Orin Kerr: Judge Gorsuch's Opinions Are "Always Sharp, Learned, And Eminently Readable." "I always enjoy reading opinions from the Tenth Circuit by Judge Neil Gorsuch. They're always sharp, learned, and eminently readable." (Orin Kerr, "Judge Gorsuch On Arrest Warrants And Doppler Radar Devices," The Washington Post's The Volokh Conspiracy , 12/30/14)

The New York Times' Linda Greenhouse: Judge Gorsuch Is "A Rising Star Among Republican-Appointed Judges On The Federal Appellate Bench." "The 10th Circuit's decision, Teamsters Local Union No. 455 v. National Labor Relations Board, was written by Judge Neil Gorsuch, a rising star among Republican-appointed judges on the federal appellate bench." (Linda Greenhouse, "Tragedy Or Triumph," The New York Times , 9/3/14)

Denver Constitutional Lawyer Richard Westfall: Gorsuch Is "Incredibly Bright" And "Very Gracious." "Richard Westfall, a Denver lawyer who specializes in constitutional law, knows Gorsuch from the late 1980s, when both worked in a Washington law firm. Both were clerks for U.S. Supreme Court Justice Byron White and have kept in touch. Westfall said Gorsuch is 'incredibly bright' and characterized him as a 'principled conservative,' one who cares about people. 'He's conservative in views,' Westfall said, 'but very gracious and personable by disposition.'" (Alicia Caldwell, "Neil Gorsuch Is Pick For U.S. Appeals Court," The Denver Post , 5/9/06)

University Of Wisconsin-Madison Professor Ryan Owens: Gorsuch Is "Well-Qualified" And "Writes Clear Opinions With A Prose That Matches The Precision Of Justice Scalia." "Mr. Gorsuch is conservative and well-qualified. He is a sitting circuit court of appeals judge from the Tenth Circuit, graduated from Harvard Law and has a doctorate from Oxford. He writes clear opinions with a prose that matches the precision of Justice Scalia." (Ryan Owens, Opinion, "A Conservative Jurist For The Supreme Court," The Washington Times , 1/29/17)

Oklahoma City University Law School Dean Valerie Couch: Gorsuch Is "Supremely Well Qualified For The Supreme Court" And "He's A Really Authentic, Genuine Person." "'He's a really authentic, genuine person and cares a lot about the legal profession, so I think his visit here made a big impression,' she said. 'I think he's supremely well qualified for the Supreme Court.'" (Randy Ellis, "Federal Appellate Judge With Oklahoma Ties Among Top U.S. Supreme Court Candidates," The Oklahoman, 1/29/17)

Gorsuch Has Been Praised By Liberals And Democrat Appointed Judges

Clinton Appointee and Former Tenth Circuit Judge Robert H. Henry Praised Gorsuch As A "Brilliant Legal" Scholar. "Henry said Judge Carlos Lucero of Denver came to the court as an expert in water law and environmental law, while Michael McConnell of Salt Lake City and Neil Gorsuch of Denver were brilliant legal scholars who also brought experience from working at the Justice Department." (Robert Boczkiewicz, "Judge Captures Top Seat In Federal Court Of Appeals," The Oklahoman, 12/31/07)

Henry: Gorsuch Is "A Great Candidate" And "A Very Talented, Gifted Judge" Whose "Writing Is Elegant And Clear." "'I think he's a great candidate,' Henry said, adding that he thought Gorsuch had the judicial temperament to fit in well with other Supreme Court justices. 'Neil is a very talented, gifted judge,' Henry said. 'His writing is elegant and clear. ... His writing is really good and careful and measured.'" (Randy Ellis, "Federal Appellate Judge With Oklahoma Ties Among Top U.S. Supreme Court Candidates," The Oklahoman, 1/29/17)

President Jimmy Carter Appointee And United States District Court Judge John L. Kane: Gorsuch Is Admired By His Fellow Judges, And "He Writes Opinions In A Unique Style That Has More Verve And Vitality" Than Others. "Judge John L. Kane, who was appointed to the Federal District Court in Denver by President Jimmy Carter, said Judge Gorsuch was admired by his fellow judges. 'He writes opinions in a unique style that has more verve and vitality than any other judges I study on a regular basis,' Judge Kane said." (Michael D. Shear and Adam Liptak, "A Supreme Court Pick Is Promised. A Political Brawl Is Certain," The New York Times , 1/24/17)

University Of Colorado Law Professor, Former Clerk To Justice John Paul Stevens, And Democrat Melissa Hart: Gorsuch "Just Treats People Well In Every Context." "'He has very strong opinions, but he just treats people well in every context,' said Melissa Hart, a University of Colorado law professor. She is a Democrat who clerked for Justice John Paul Stevens, who retired in 2010." (Robert Barnes, "Neil Gorsuch Naturally Equipped For His Spot On Trump's Supreme Court Shortlist," The Washington Post ¸ 1/28/17)

Hart: Gorsuch Has "Smarts And Intellectual Seriousness." "If Gorsuch does join the bench, she expects she will disagree with many of his rulings, but predicts he has the 'smarts and intellectual seriousness' to become a 'shaper of the court.'" (Andrew Hamm, "Judge Neil Gorsuch - Colorado Native And Washington, D.C., Veteran," SCOTUSBlog , 1/30/17)

Boulder County, Colorado's Democrat District Attorney, Stan Garnett, Has Called Gorsuch "Very Ethical" And "Very Smart." "Boulder County District Attorney Stan Garnett, a Democrat, described Gorsuch as 'very ethical' and 'very smart.'" (Erica Meltzer, "Neil Gorsuch Is A Judge In The 'Scalia Mold,' And His Liberal Students Love Him," Denverite , 1/31/17)

Slate's Mark Joseph Stern: Gorsuch's "Writing Is Superb, Incisive, Witty, And Accessible," And "He Comes Across As Thoughtful And Fair-Minded." "His writing is superb, incisive, witty, and accessible in the style of Scalia and Justice Elena Kagan. In speeches and oral arguments, he comes across as thoughtful and fair-minded." (Mark Joseph Stern, "The One SCOTUS Nominee Democrats Should Stop At Any Cost," Slate , 1/25/17)

GORSUCH'S CREDENTIALS ARE "IMPECCABLE," "STERLING," AND "IMPRESSIVE"

Gorsuch "Has Sterling Credentials." "The son of Anne Gorsuch Burford, who was the first woman to lead the Environmental Protection Agency, Neil Gorsuch has sterling credentials, including degrees from Harvard Law School, Oxford University in England and a Supreme Court clerkship, and if confirmed would be the youngest member of the high court." (Joseph P. Williams, "Judge Neil Gorsuch Tops Donald Trump's Supreme Court List," U.S. News & World Report , 1/27/17)

Bloomberg View's Noah Feldman: Gorsuch "Has An Impressive Resume." "Gorsuch is only 49, and he has an impressive resume that includes a Marshall scholarship to Oxford, a Supreme Court clerkship, and a serious book on the ethics of assisted suicide and euthanasia." (Noah Feldman, "Expect The Expected From Trump's Supreme Court Pick," Bloomberg View , 11/16/16)

"Gorsuch's Credentials Are Impeccable." "A Harvard Law graduate, a Marshall Scholar, and a Supreme Court clerk (for both Justice Anthony Kennedy and the right-leaning Justice Byron White), Gorsuch's credentials are impeccable." (Mark Joseph Stern, "The One SCOTUS Nominee Democrats Should Stop At Any Cost," Slate , 1/25/17)

Gorsuch Graduated Phi Beta Kappa And Magna Cum Laude From Columbia University, Magna Cum Laude At Harvard Law School, Was A Marshall Scholar At Oxford University. "Marshall Scholarship to Oxford University; Harry Truman Scholar at and cum laude graduate of Harvard Law School; Phi Beta Kappa and cum laude graduate of Columbia University." (Committee On The Judiciary, U.S. Senate, Hearing , 6/21/06)

The American Bar Association Gave Gorsuch A Unanimous "Well Qualified" Rating

In His 2006 Nomination, Gorsuch Was Given A Unanimous "Well Qualified" Rating By The American Bar Association, The Highest Rating Given. (Ratings Of Article III Judicial Nominees -109th Congress, American Bar Association , 1/1/08)

Government Accountability

Nominations and Appointments