Convention HQ
The RNC plays a purely administrative role at Convention, ensuring that the rules and processes are carried out in a transparent manner.

The rules of the Convention are unique to each Convention and voted upon by the delegates.

A candidate must win the votes of a majority of delegates to secure the nomination. In 2016, the magic number is 1,237 (50% + 1 of the 2,472 Convention delegates). Most delegates will go to Convention “bound” to vote for a particular candidate, based on how their state or territory voted.

Delegates are selected and empowered at the grassroots level by their peers to represent their state or territory at the Convention. There are 2,472 delegates.

Every four years , the Republican Party has a Convention to determine the Party Platform, vote on the rules to govern the Party, and to nominate candidates for President and Vice President.

Who are the Delegates? EN ESPAÑOL



​Delegates are men and women empowered and selected at the grassroots level by their peers to represent their state or territory at the Convention.

In total, there are 2,472 delegates at Convention.





​

A presidential candidate must receive the vote of at least a majority of delegates (1,237 delegates) to become the Republican nominee.

How are Delegates Selected?



The selection process varies state-to-state, and depends on state party rule or state law. Most delegates are selected at state conventions, others are selected at state committee meetings, or are elected directly on the primary ballot. At the same time and in the same manner, alternate delegates are selected, should a delegate be unable to attend the Convention.

What is the Difference Between Bound and Unbound Delegates?



Delegates who are bound must vote on the Convention floor for the candidate to whom they are bound, according to the results of a state’s presidential preference vote (primary, caucus, or convention) for as many ballots as their state law or rule binds them.



Most delegates are bound. There are only six states or territories that are not having a presidential preference vote and whose delegates may be unbound (ND, WY, CO, Guam, American Samoa, and U.S. Virgin Islands.)

Unbound delegates are free to vote for whichever candidate on the ballot they would like.

When Do Delegates Become Unbound?



​On the first ballot, most delegates will be bound to vote for a particular candidate. State party rules or state laws determine how many ballots delegates are bound for. The majority of delegates become unbound on the second ballot, should the first ballot fail to produce a nominee (a candidate with 1,237 delegate votes).

Do I Have to be a Delegate to Attend the 2016 Republican National Convention?