Marlboro Marijuana Cigarettes are NOT For Sale In Four U.S. States
Marlboro Marijuana Cigarettes

These days you can get away with just about anything on the internet. Unfortunately, when it comes to making sh*t up, no one is hotter right now than ‘Now 8 News’ and their “Marlboro Marijuana Cigarettes.”

The Article Reads

“Washington, Oregon, Colorado and Alaska residents are celebrating the release of Phillip Morris Marlboro Marijuana Cigarettes available next month for recreational use. The world’s largest cigarette producer announced today that they would join the recreational marijuana bandwagon and begin the sale of marijuana cigarettes in these 4 U.S. states beginning November 1, 2015. “This product is marketed under the brand “Marlboro M” and will be available for sale through marijuana-licensed outlets. Serafin Norcik, Philip Morris’ Senior Vice President for marketing, said in an interview, “Our company has been high on the idea for marketing cannabis and has been monitoring the market for some time. We have finally made the decision to take the leap and support these states in their right to legalized recreational marijuana use. “Currently, the law limits the purchase to only one pack at a time. Prices start at $89 per pack. You must be 21 years or older to purchase and must provide a photo ID. Any resale of the Philip Morris Marlboro Marijuana cigarettes is subject to fines and jail time according to local laws.”

Is Phillip Morris Making Marlboro Marijuana Cigarettes?

When interviewing cannabis companies for Green Rush Daily, we typically ask where they see their company in 5 years. The overwhelming response is usually something like this “Well; we hope to get bought out in 3 to 5 years by big tobacco or big pharma; we all know they are coming, right?” Maybe it’s just a ploy or some cute candid response, but truthfully most cannabis companies don’t have a f*cking clue as to where they will be in one year, let alone five.

Do We Know “They” Are Coming?

Are big tobacco and big pharma hurting so badly right now they’re going to stop making billions per year on pills and cigarettes?

Last we checked, people still line up to buy cigarettes at $15 a pack, and pills seem to be all the rage these days, especially judging from this list of the top 10 most prescribed drugs of 2015. Keep in perspective these are monthly prescriptions, mind blown.

Everyone can now be perfect with the right pill these days, regardless of your gene pool. You just need to look out for the laundry list of side effects like diarrhea and vomiting.

Heroin is a major epidemic right now, mostly caused by opioids (Vicodin, Percocet, Oxycontin) being shoved down our throats after simple medical procedures like getting a tooth pulled.

This indirectly (or directly depending on how you look at it) translates to big dollars for big pharma. That, my friends, is why nothing is being done about it; good ‘ole capitalism at its finest. Big pharma and tobacco may eventually get into the cannabis game at some point, but when?

No one knows, but what we do know is they’re not going to hire cannabis growers overnight and start farming like a video game. Until then, let’s focus on the positives of cannabis and what it can do to advance our nation/humanity as a whole.

We know cannabis solves problems and issues we are facing in our country as a whole, from potential medical cures to possibly lowering addiction rates too hard drugs. By now everyone should also know the fact that cannabis is going to generate enormous tax revenue for states that do legalize, especially the early adopters as we’re already seeing. It could be the tip of the iceberg when it comes to what the cannabis plant can do for the world and human society.