Congresswoman Gwen Moore : Press Releases : Passage of Trumpcare Highlights House GOP's Indifference to Vulnerable Americans
Washington, D.C. — Following the passage of the American Health Care Act in the House, Congresswoman Gwen Moore (WI-04) released the following statement:

“Today, I emphatically voted against Trumpcare because it is quite simply a matter of life or death for my constituents. The passage of this legislative abomination underscores the depths of Republicans’ indifference to the 24 million Americans who will lose their coverage and the 14 million Americans who will be kicked off of Medicaid. Not only will this deeply flawed and misguided tax giveaway disguised as a health care bill have a crushing impact on people with pre-existing conditions who will face both higher premiums and deductibles, but it also threatens those with employer-based plans, as well as children and adults with disabilities. Put simply, no one is safe from the fallout of this catastrophe in the making.

“I am particularly appalled that President Trump and my Republican colleagues have proven all too willing to turn their backs on our country’s women by endangering their maternity and prenatal care and allowing insurers to deny preventive health care services like mammograms and gynecological exams. Under Trumpcare, conditions like postpartum depression and being a victim of domestic violence or sexual assault could be considered pre-existing conditions, and women in uniform will be at risk as millions of veterans and their families will face a multitude of barriers in seeking care.

“Now, I look to my colleagues in the Senate to be guided by the pleas of their constituents who have voiced their strident opposition to this disastrous bill. I sincerely hope they listen to the cancer survivors and the children living with chronic illnesses who now fear for their lives due to this unconscionable Republican effort. For their sake, I hope those in the upper chamber will use the commonsense and empathy that is severely lacking across the aisle in the House. The lives of all our constituents are on the line.”

###