Sheriff Blasts Rep. Trey Radel: He ‘Doesn’t Even Qualify To Drive A Lee County School Bus’
Republican Lee County Sheriff Mike Scott does not like Rep. Trey Radel (R-Fla.), and he’s not shy about his opinions.

Scott recently announced that he does not plan to run to replace Radel but he will support any other candidate that does. On Scott’s Facebook page, he wrote, “While Radel returned to his Congressional office following a microwave stint in rehab and a gaggle of rehearsed apologies, I have hundreds of inmates in our jail that are unable to return to their home due to similar or lesser drug offenses. The sad reality is that Trey Radel does not even qualify to drive a Lee County school bus at this point, yet he occupies a seat in Congress. I have fired Deputies for less and the brave military personnel potentially affected by a Radel vote would be dishonorably discharged had they done what he did. Surely nobody believes that Trey Radel is the very best that Southwest Florida has to represent us.”

Scott plans to remain sheriff but will do whatever he can to prevent Radel from being reelected.

Radel plead guilty to cocaine possession in November. As a result, he was sentenced to a year of probation and had to seek treatment for substance abuse.

Scott said, ”I wish Trey Radel all the best in his personal life; however, I will be a staunch advocate for his political replacement, and I plan to vigorously support viable candidates at every opportunity. Whatever political capital I have will be brought to bear ensuring that the decency we deserve is restored to the 19th congressional district.”

Scott is not alone in his views. Florida Gov. Rick Scott and Florida’s official Republican Party have both called for Radel to step down.

Despite all of this, only one challenger has entered the Republican primary at this time to take on Radel — former state lawmaker Paige Kreegel.

What are your thoughts on Radel? Like Scott, would you support any candidate who runs against Radel?