Mitchell B. Lerner
Prof. Mitchell Lerner received his B.A. from Brandeis University and his Ph.D. from the University of Texas-Austin. His research and teaching focus is on modern American diplomatic and political history during the Cold War, with an emphasis on US-Korean relations. He came to Ohio State in 2000, and is now the director of OSU's Institute for Korea Studies.

Dr. Lerner's first book, The Pueblo Incident: A Spy Ship and the Failure of American Foreign Policy, was published in 2002 by the University Press of Kansas. The book won the 2002 John Lyman Book Award for the best work of US Naval History, and was named by the American Library Association as one of fifty "historically significant works" that would not have been published after the passage of Executive Order 13233. It was also nominated for the Pulitzer and Bancroft Prizes. He is also the editor of Looking Back at LBJ (Kansas), a collection of essays about the Johnson Administration published in 2005, and A Companion to the Presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson (Blackwell). He has published articles about modern American politics and foreign policy (often with a Korean focus) in numerous anthologies and journals, including Diplomatic History, Diplomacy & Statecraft, Presidential Studies Quarterly, Southwestern Historical Quarterly, the Journal of Cold War Studies, and the Korean Society Quarterly. He is currently at work on a policy history of the Johnson Administration, as well as a broad study of US-Korean relations during the Cold War.

Professor Lerner was elected to the governing council of the Society for Historians of American Foreign Relations in 2008, and is on the advisory board of the North Korea International Documentation Project, directed by the Cold War International History Project at the Wilson Center for Scholars. He has also served as a Fellow at the University of Virgnia's Miller Center for Public Affairs, and in 2005-06, he held the Mary Ball Washington Distinguished Fulbright Chair at University College-Dublin. He has received fellowships and grants from the Korea Foundation, the Lyndon Johnson Presidential Library, the Dwight Eisenhower Presidential Library, and the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library, where he won the Kovler Fellowship in Foreign Intelligence in 2001. He has served as editor of Passport: The Society of Historians of American Foreign Relations Review and on the teaching committee for the Society for Historians of American Foreign Relations. In 2005, he won the OSU Alumni Award for Distinguished Teaching.