Reps. Hurd, Aguilar and Denham Drive Bipartisan DACA-Border Security Solution
WASHINGTON, DC – Today, Representatives Will Hurd (TX-23), Pete Aguilar (CA-31) and Jeff Denham (CA-10) introduced the Uniting and Securing America (USA) Act, a bipartisan bill that protects DACA recipients from deportation while implementing new commonsense border security measures through enhanced technology, manpower and physical barriers, where necessary. The bill also addresses the immigration backlog that keeps families in limbo while advancing reforms in Central America to address the factors driving migration to the United States. The bill was introduced to the floor with 50 original co-sponsors.

“After multiple attempts to find a solution, it’s time to narrow our strategy. Our plan offers a permanent legislative solution for children who came here of no fault of their own – while achieving operational control of the border by 2020,” said Rep. Hurd whose district includes over 800 miles of the U.S.-Mexico border, more than any other Member of Congress. “Americans are tired of partisan gridlock. They deserve solutions. This is about Congress doing our job and it proves that R’s and D’s are willing to work together to unite and secure America.”

“For too long, Congress has asked hundreds of thousands of young people to put their lives on hold while we play politics with their futures,” said Rep. Aguilar. “This bill represents a real bipartisan compromise that will provide a permanent legislative solution for Dreamers, and allow for a reasonable approach to securing our border. One of my top priorities is to ensure that these young people can continue the lives they’ve built here, and the USA Act will do just that.”

“The government asked Dreamers to come out of the shadows, and it’s time for Congress to pass legislation that will allow them to truly move forward with their lives. The only way to accomplish this is through compromise that includes border security measures,” said Rep. Denham. “DACA recipients are American in every way possible except on paper. They have paid their fees, passed background checks and are working, pursuing college degrees, or serving in our military to contribute to the greatness of America.”

“Democrats and Republicans stand united with the overwhelming majority of Americans who oppose deporting Dreamers. There is nothing political or partisan about protecting Dreamers, in fact there is agreement and bipartisanship because we all recognize the important contributions that these young people are making to our communities and our country. The USA Act is fair, bipartisan, targeted legislation that provides Dreamers with certainty, enacts common sense border security measures, and should be passed without delay,” said Rep. Michelle Lujan Grisham (NM-01), Chair of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus.

“With the March deadline quickly approaching, it is more critical than ever that Congress come together to provide a legal path forward for Dreamers. The USA Act is a reasonable, bipartisan solution to ensure these young people may remain in the only home they know, the United States,” said Rep. David G. Valadao (CA-21).

“I would like to thank Representatives Hurd and Aguilar for introducing the Uniting and Securing America (USA) Act. This is an important step in reinstating the DACA program and ensuring that our borders are made more secure,” said Congressman Henry Cuellar (TX-28). “As we face another government shutdown, it is clear that we are long overdue in providing a solution for hundreds of thousands of hardworking immigrants across the United States. As someone who lives on the border and understands the border, I am glad to see that the USA Act will also implement necessary commonsense border security measures that will keep our borders and citizens safe. I believe that this bipartisan bill is an important step in addressing concerns regarding immigration, border security, and DACA, and I look forward to continuing to work with my colleagues in congress on these key issues.”