America's News ? Historical and Current
It's second period at Broughton High School, and the students in Izzy Hernandez' physical education class are running at top speed on the basketball court, cutting into open spaces, looking for any edge in this heated game of Ultimate Frisbee.



His hands at his waist, Hernandez, 44, moves into the middle of the crowd for better position. He watches every wobbly pass and flows easily in and out of the action -- a mix of football, soccer and basketball -- in his track suit and sneakers.



"Get moving," he says during a lull, and blows his whistle.



Later, Hernandez is juking and faking, then running. He has joined the game.



"Fly back," he says, whipping a pass to a teammate.



Never intrusive but always in charge, he throws out pieces of advice like pennies into a fountain - just as he does at soccer practice.



Perhaps the ability to join in the fun is why Israel Abel Hernandez, known as Izzy, has become one of the best high school soccer coaches in the state. Broughton's boys' team won the N.C. High School Athletic Association 4-A state title -- the division that contains the largest schools -- on Nov. 18. That gave him his 10th championship, boys and girls combined, since he took over both programs in 1989.



Although he would be the last to trumpet it, Hernandez has compiled an impressive career record. His boys' teams have 248 wins, 127 losses and 32 ties. With the girls, he has the highest winning percentage among active coaches in the state -- 372-28-24.



His girls' teams have won nine state titles, including seven of the past nine. No other soccer team has won as many state titles.



When asked about his accomplishments, he claims little, if any, credit and prefers to praise his players and assistant coaches.



"I've had some great kids here," he says.



It is a quality that has endeared him to others in the soccer community. "He's a class act," says Jay Howell, director of coaching for the Capital Area Soccer League. "Does he have an ego? Yes. He's a coach. ... His ego doesn't get in the way of him being a good person, a gentleman."



He credits his players



It's no act. Hernandez genuinely believes the success of the program has come from the sweat of the players. He is the last to seek attention, the first to celebrate his athletes' success.



The players are the first to support their coach. They say he is hard to read and can be moody, but they know he respects them. They say he listens and never tries to embarrass them.



Rarely does he scream. A glare works much better. He relies on setting high expectations instead of issuing strict rules.



"He definitely knows how to talk to somebody," Broughton senior Tyler Duncan says. "He'll get on you, but there is a reason. ... Afterwards, he'll pull you to the side and tell you what you need to work on."



In the past, to build team camaraderie on his girls' squad, he has players award teammates bracelets at the end of every week for three categories: hard work, most valuable player and sportsmanship. Team members with bracelets stand on the practice field and explain why someone else deserves the award.



Hernandez is soft-spoken and has little tolerance for tomfoolery. He is also a lifelong student of soccer.



Hernandez attended Bishop Moore High School in Orlando, Fla., where he was an all-state midfielder. His team won a state championship.



He landed at Brevard College in Western North Carolina in 1981, where he spent two years before transferring to Elon College, now Elon University. At Elon he was a soccer team captain, an all-district player and the physical education major of the year in 1985.



When he graduated, he came to Raleigh and taught physical education at Daniels Middle School for four years, coaching soccer teams there and working as an assistant at Millbrook. He was also a club coach with the Capital Area Soccer League.



Skilled players



Hernandez says youth club systems such as CASL have become so strong that it would be foolish for high school coaches to take full credit for the success of their programs. Many players, he says, now enter high school with well-developed soccer skills.



When Hernandez took over the Broughton girls' and boys' programs, he knew he was in the right place.



"The experience I had as a player really helped me decide this is where I want to be," Hernandez said, even though he remembers thinking, "I'll do this until I find out what I really want to do."



Hernandez was born in Havana, Cuba, in 1962. His father, Ismael, brought the family legally to New Jersey a year and a half later. His mother, Ramona, and father now live in Orlando.



At the mere mention of family, Hernandez reminds you that he is a private person, although he is happy to show pictures of his parents on the walls in his office.



There are also pictures of his sons, Alexis, 22, and Anthony, 20. They have lived primarily with their mother, from whom Hernandez is divorced, but visit often with Hernandez and are often on the sidelines at games.



Throwing darts was a favorite family activity. Hernandez, a competitive dad, never wanted to lose.



"It's not that competitive 'I want to prove I'm better than you,' " Anthony says. "It's more like 'I want to win, but I want to have a good time doing it.' "



Hernandez can spend 60 nights a year at soccer games, not to mention practices, and runs a summer soccer camp at Broughton. But there is more to his life than coaching.



He goes to Carolina Hurricanes games and plays golf.



He has been known to play "Smoke on the Water" on his son's acoustic guitar, though that is the limit of his musical talents.



But if you want to see him comfortable, just visit him in his office on the second floor of the gymnasium. There, he is surrounded by photographs of every team he has coached.



###



###



ISRAEL ABEL HERNANDEZ



BORN: Havana, Cuba, Dec. 5, 1962



FAMILY: Two sons, Alexis and Anthony, who live in Charlotte and Greensboro, respectively. His parents, Ismael and Ramona, live in Orlando, Fla., as do his brother, Ismael Jr., and sister, Millie.



EDUCATION: Bachelor of Arts degree from Elon College, where he majored in physical education.



PROFESSION: Broughton High School physical education teacher and soccer coach since 1989.



AWARDS: Inducted into the Broughton High School hall of fame. Has coached both the N.C. Coaches Association boys' and girls' East-West all-star games. Coached Capital Area Soccer League 77 Spartans (18 and under) to the state's first club team national championship in 1995.