All Aboard Florida Selects Archer Western to Build Rail Infrastructure at Orlando International Airport

Corporate, Rail Matt Ball on July 8, 2015 - in Construction

MIAMI, July 8, 2015—All Aboard Florida has named Archer Western Construction Manager for the rail infrastructure at Orlando International Airport. Working closely with the Greater Orlando Aviation Authority (GOAA), Archer Western will build the railway, roadway and related structures for All Aboard Florida’s intercity passenger trains that begin service from the airport in late 2017. This work is expected to create 75 direct jobs and hundreds of additional opportunities for subcontractors and suppliers.

“Archer Western has a strong record of performance and is well known for its commitment to excellence and safety,” said Mike Reininger, president of All Aboard Florida. “The company’s expertise and qualifications will be invaluable to us as we partner with GOAA to bring passenger-rail service to Orlando.”

“All Aboard Florida is already reshaping the future of Florida transportation,” said Daniel P. Walsh, president of Archer Western, “We are pleased to be on this journey with them.”

Earlier this year, All Aboard Florida awarded Archer Western overall responsibility for construction management and general-contracting services for the Miami-to-West-Palm-Beach segment of its Miami-to-Orlando rail service. This contract consolidates the work that Archer Western has underway along the south corridor, which includes safety improvements and upgrades, track work, rail signalization and structural work. The company’s existing work with All Aboard Florida and the Orlando International Airport creates added efficiencies for the privately-funded passenger-rail project.

Respected news source Engineering News ranks Archer Western the 12th largest builder of rail and mass-transit projects in the country. The contractor has also led multiple transportation projects in Florida, including SunRail in Orlando. Archer Western is also a key contractor building the people mover from the North to South terminals at OIA for GOAA.

“Intercity rail is an important component of our regional and statewide connectivity,” said Greater Orlando Aviation Authority Executive Director Phil Brown. “Orlando International Airport has had plans for long distance rail for more than twenty years so we look forward to the addition of All Aboard Florida as we move toward achieving our Master Plan goal of providing multi-modal access for the community.”

About All Aboard Florida