Bartiromo Calls Out Ocasio-Cortez's Comments on Billionaires: 'Quite Naive'
After Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez appeared to agree with the idea that a world that allows for billionaires is not moral, Fox News Channel and Fox Business Network host Maria Bartiromo questioned how taxing the highest earners up to 70 percent would affect the economy.

Ocasio-Cortez (D-N.Y.) made the remark during a forum Monday in New York City after The Atlantic’s Ta-Nehisi Coates asked whether “a world that allows for billionaires” is “a moral outcome."

“No it’s not. It’s not," Ocasio-Cortez responded, adding that she does not believe all billionaires “like Bill Gates, for example, or Warren Buffett are immoral people."

“I’m not saying that, but I do think a system that allows billionaires to exist when there are parts of Alabama where people are still getting ringworm because they don’t have access to public health is wrong,” Ocasio-Cortez said.

The freshman Democratic congresswoman has faced criticism for suggesting the top marginal tax rate should be 70 percent for those making $10 million or more.

"What is that going to do to the economy if you make it so economically difficult for the highest earners?" Bartiromo said on "America's Newsroom" Tuesday, appearing via satellite from the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.

'Don't Lecture Me!': Rove, Harf Clash While Debating Politicization of MLK Day

Steyn Blasts Right and Left Wings for Jumping to Condemn MAGA Hat Student

She pointed out that according to the Tax Foundation, the top ten percent of earners already pay approximately three-quarters of all taxes.

"You have to wonder what those billionaires would do with their money if the first thing they have to is give 70 percent of it to the government," Bartiromo said.

She also wondered about the issue of productivity, questioning if people would be willing to work hard to get ahead if they know that at some point they will have to "give it all to the government."

"I don't think so," Bartiromo said. "So those comments to me seem quite naive."

Watch the "America's Newsroom" discussion above.

Adam Schiff: 'A Real President' Would End Shutdown Right Away

'Outnumbered' on Gillibrand's Shift on Immigration: She's 'Lurching to the Left' to Gain Support

'This Is Ridiculous': Dem Rep. Kildee Says Furloughed Gov't Workers Being Used as 'Pawns'