Photo Release -- Equifax Workforce Solutions Celebrates Growing St. Louis Presence
Apr 24, 2014

Congresswoman Ann Wagner Cuts the Ribbon at New State-of-the-Art Facility in Earth City

ST. LOUIS , April 24, 2014 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Equifax Workforce Solutions, a leader in human resource, analytics and verification services, today celebrated the opening of its new offices located on Rider Trail in Earth City . Dedicated to supporting and growing the St. Louis business community, Equifax has increased the company's area footprint by 18 percent with the addition of the 99,000 square foot building.

Congresswoman Ann Wagner and Equifax senior financial officer, Ken Marshall cut the ribbon at the new Equifax Earth City facility on April 24, 2014 .





A photo accompanying this release is available at http://www.globenewswire.com/newsroom/prs/?pkgid=24960

U.S. Congresswoman Ann Wagner led today's ribbon-cutting ceremony attended by Equifax leadership and local dignitaries, stating, "Equifax Workforce Solutions is not just a business, but a service to our nation."

The event also included an opening statement from Ken Marshall , senior financial officer at Equifax Workforce Solutions, and a town hall session with Congresswoman Wagner.

With the opening of the Rider Trail facility, St. Louis is the second-largest employee location in the Equifax portfolio with 1,250 full-time employees and contractors in the area, accounting for 20 percent of the Equifax U.S. workforce and nearly 60 percent of the Workforce Solutions division. The expansion is part of a larger global Equifax initiative, known as Score 850, designed to improve collaboration and drive performance through innovative and flexible workspaces that provide access to advanced technology.

"Equifax Workforce Solutions has a long history in the St. Louis area and continues to invest in the local community. Opening the Rider Trail facility will make a positive impact on the region and provide Equifax employees with a dynamic workplace that will enable increased communication and foster innovation for our clients," said Dann Adams , president of Equifax Workforce Solutions.

About Equifax

Equifax (NYSE:EFX) is a global leader in consumer, commercial and workforce information solutions that provide businesses of all sizes and consumers with insight and information they can trust. Equifax organizes and assimilates data on more than 600 million consumers and 81 million businesses worldwide. The company's significant investments in differentiated data, its expertise in advanced analytics to explore and develop new multi-source data solutions, and its leading-edge proprietary technology enable it to create and deliver unparalleled customized insights that enrich both the performance of businesses and the lives of consumers. Equifax Workforce Solutions (also known as TALX ), an Equifax business unit, is a leading provider of human resource, analytics and verification services.

Headquartered in Atlanta , Equifax operates or has investments in 19 countries and is a member of Standard & Poor's (S&P) 500® Index. Its common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) under the symbol EFX. In 2013, Equifax was named a Bloomberg BusinessWeek Top 50 company, was #3 in Fortune's Most Admired list in its category, and was named to InfoWeek 500 as well as the FinTech 100. For more information, please visit www.equifaxworkforce.com or www.equifax.com.

Note to editors: Trademarks and registered trademarks referenced herein remain the property of their respective owners.

The photo is also available via AP PhotoExpress.

CONTACT: MEDIA CONTACT Pam Stevens Equifax Workforce Solutions Phone: 314.214.7235 E-mail: pam.stevens@equifax.com

Equifax Inc.

Source:

News Provided by Acquire Media

Close window | Back to top