Institute for Policy Studies
Josh Hoxie joined the Institute for Policy Studies in August 2014 heading up the Project on Opportunity and Taxation. Josh’s main focus is on addressing wealth inequality through the estate tax, a levy on the intergenerational transfer of immense wealth. Josh grew up on Cape Cod, Massachusetts and attained a BA in Political Science and Economics from St. Michael’s College in Colchester, Vermont.

Josh worked previously as a Legislative Aide for U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, the longest serving independent in Congressional history, both in his office in Washington, DC and on his successful 2012 re-election campaign. Josh is excited to work in the IPS New England office and enjoys frequent trips to the ocean and the mountains.

Latest

How the Rich Exploit Charitable Giving Rules to Hoard Their Fortunes As taxpayers, we need to know whether a donation actually makes it to a charitable cause.

Report: Warehousing Wealth Donor-Advised Charity Funds Sequestering Billions in the Face of Growing Inequality

Our Missing $10 Trillion Tax cuts from the Bush, Obama, and Trump years have left a massive gap in the public coffers. This hurts everyone.

What Ocasio-Cortez’s Win Says About the Rise of the Left Small-dollar donations and serious on-the-ground and digital organizing are helping insurgents take back the reins of power from big money and proving voters are ready for an unapologetic leftist message.

Taking on Income Inequality in Massachusetts — Almost The movement for economic justice may have lost in court, but it’s winning in the streets.

Just How Rich are the Ultra Rich? Some rich people fly first class to fancy hotels. Others fly private jets to private islands.

Back When College Was Debt-Free America's largest state once offered residents a world-class, debt-free college education. It could again, and so could your state.

The Racial Wealth Gap is the Result of Systemic Racist Policies The lasting impact of slavery, red-lining, and mass incarceration, and how they contribute to today's massive racial wealth gap.

Report: Restoring Opportunity in California Taxing Wealth to Fund College for All in California

Five Tax Myths Debunked It’s easy to get lost in the noise from pundits and politicians who thrive on the tax code’s complexity.

Cable TV Ignores Inequality. Here's How to Get Around It. More than 1.7 million viewers tuned in to Bernie Sanders' inequality town hall streamed on Facebook Live, with tens of thousands more watching it later.

One-Time Bonuses, Full-Time Con: Trump's Tax Cuts Deliver Worker Layoffs Corporate public relations teams extol bonuses to pump up the Republican re-election effort, but many people will end up unemployed.

The Tax Scam Is Starting to Sink In While billionaires fund a PR push for the tax law, most ordinary workers report seeing no increase in their take-home pay.

No Love for Working Families This Valentine’s Day A Pennsylvania secretary gets an extra $1.50 a week from the GOP tax bill. The Koch brothers get an extra $27 million.

One Year of Trump: Boomtimes for Billionaires The Trump tenure has been boom times for those at the top. For the rest of the country, economic opportunity looks bleak.

Move Along, Baby Boomers In the face of countless crises, it’s time for the next generation to lead.