Meg Wiehe
Areas of Expertise State tax and budget policy current and historical state tax trends immigrants and taxes working family tax credits

Meg is ITEP’s deputy director. She joined ITEP as its state tax policy director in 2010 after spending several years working on tax policy in her home state of North Carolina. She is responsible for coordinating ITEP’s federal and state tax policy agenda. Meg works closely with policymakers, legislative staff and state and national organizations to advise and provide research on policy solutions that will achieve fair and sustainable federal, state and local tax systems.

Meg is an expert on state tax policy issues. She studies, writes and provides commentary and insight to a wide range of audiences on historical and current trends in state tax and budget policy. In particular, her analyses focus both on how tax and budget policies affect low- and moderate-income families as well as the intersection of tax and budget policies and state and local governments’ ability to fund basic public priorities, including education, infrastructure and health care. She is a lead or co-author of numerous publications on topics ranging from tax credits for workers and families, taxes paid by undocumented immigrants, closing tax loopholes, using state tax codes as an anti-poverty tool, promoting progressive revenue raising options, to comprehensive state and local tax reform. She also is a lead author of ITEP’s flagship report, Who Pays? A Distributional Analysis of the Tax Systems in All Fifty States.

Before ITEP, Meg worked at the North Carolina Budget and Tax Center where her research and advocacy focused on the effect of state fiscal policy on low- and moderate-income North Carolinians. Her work in North Carolina included leading a successful campaign to enact a state refundable Earned Income Tax Credit and coordinating a statewide revenue coalition, Together NC.

Meg holds a Bachelor of Arts in Anthropology from the University of Virginia and a Master of Public Administration from the Maxwell School at Syracuse University. She resides in Durham, N.C.

Follow Meg on Twitter: @MegWiehe

Recent Publications and Posts view more

State Rundown 3/27: Spring Bringing Smart State Tax Policy So Far Though a long winter and a rough start to spring weather have wreaked havoc in much of the country, lawmakers are off to a good start in the world of state fiscal policy so far. In the last week, a progressive revenue package was passed in the nick of time in NEW MEXICO, a service-sapping tax cut was vetoed in KANSAS, and a regressive and unsustainable tax shift was soundly defeated in NORTH DAKOTA. Meanwhile, gas tax updates are on the table in MAINE, MINNESOTA, and OHIO. And exemptions for feminine hygiene products and diapers were enacted in VIRGINIA and introduced in MISSOURI. State Rundown 3/14: Tax Fairness Proposed in Illinois More than three billion dollars could be raised under a major progressive tax plan proposed by Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker this week, the point being to simultaneously improve the state’s upside-down tax code and address its notorious budget gap issues. One state, Utah, may already be looking at a special session to revisit the sales tax reform debate that ended this week without resolution, in contrast to Alabama and Arkansas, where leaders finally resolved years-long debates over gas taxes and infrastructure funding. And lawmakers in four states – California, Florida, Minnesota, and North Carolina – introduced legislation to expand or enact Earned Income Tax Credits (EITC).

Media Mentions view more

Newsweek: We Shouldn't Wait for Washington to Tax the Rich: We Can Begin at the State Level Following is an excerpt from an op-ed by ITEP deputy director Meg Wiehe published in Newsweek Magazine: The historic role… Arizona Republic: Fact Check on Immigration "It sounds extraordinarily high to me," Meg Wiehe, deputy director at the nonpartisan Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy told…

meg at itep.org