Side-by-Side Comparison
Clarence Goins (R) Mark Harris (R) Robert Pittenger (R)

Panel Evaluation Panel Evaluation

Somewhat Conservative Very Conservative Somewhat Conservative

Vote Ratings Vote Ratings

From Conservative Organizations From Liberal Organizations

Legislative Vote Ratings Show Details Legislative Vote Ratings Show Details Legislative Vote Ratings Show Details

Donations FROM Candidate Show Details Donations FROM Candidate Show Details Donations FROM Candidate Show Details

Donations TO Candidate Show Details Donations TO Candidate Show Details Donations TO Candidate Show Details

Donations Donations

Clarence Goins (R) Mark Harris (R) Robert Pittenger (R)

Endorsements Endorsements

0 Conserv. 0 Liberal 0 Other 0 Conserv.0 Liberal0 Other Show Details Endorsements Reported to iVoterGuide by Candidate (None) 2 Conserv. 0 Liberal 0 Other 2 Conserv.0 Liberal0 Other Show Details Endorsements Reported to iVoterGuide by Candidate Gov. Mike Huckabee

Former Congresswoman Sue Myrick

Union County Clerk of Court JR Rowell

Former NC Court of Appeals Judge Sanford Steelman 2 Conserv. 0 Liberal 0 Other 2 Conserv.0 Liberal0 Other Show Details Endorsements Reported to iVoterGuide by Candidate (None)

Info from Other Sources Info from Other Sources



http://clerk.house.gov/evs/2015/roll705.xml

Signed Americans for Tax Reform's

One of the Republicans who voted for the 2018 Omnibus Spending package on March 22, 2018. The vehicle for the Voted for Obama's budget deal with Republicans in December 2015Signed Americans for Tax Reform's Taxpayers Protection Pledge One of the Republicans who voted for the 2018 Omnibus Spending package on March 22, 2018. The vehicle for the roll call vote was H.R. 1625. The package included continued funding for Planned Parenthood and sanctuary cities, no funding for new border wall construction, and no funding for Veterans Affairs reforms.

Stands on Issues Stands on Issues

Human life begins at conception and deserves legal protection at every stage until natural death.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

I am in favor of construction of a wall and other necessary infrastructure on our border that gives complete control over entering and exiting the United States.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Governments should not discriminate against individuals, organizations or small businesses because of their belief that marriage is only a union of one man and one woman.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Governments should define marriage as between one man and one woman; no other definition of marriage should be legalized or supported with taxpayer or public funds.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

It is the government’s responsibility to be sure everyone has a livable income.

Goins: Strongly Disagree Harris: Strongly Disagree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

It is the government’s responsibility to be sure everyone has health insurance.

Goins: Strongly Disagree Harris: Strongly Disagree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Judeo-Christian values established a framework of morality which permitted our system of limited government.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

More restrictive gun control is needed to protect public safety.

Goins: Strongly Disagree Harris: Strongly Disagree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Free enterprise and the right to private property are essential elements of a productive economic system.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Additional regulations are needed to prevent climate change.

Goins: Strongly Disagree Harris: Strongly Disagree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Religious liberty is at risk in the United States and deserves the highest level of protection in the law.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

The United States should help defend Israel from attack by its enemies.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Abortion providers, including Planned Parenthood, should not receive funds from federal, state, or local governments.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Islamic law (Sharia) should take precedence over national and state laws where there are Islamic majority communities in the U. S.

Goins: Strongly Disagree Harris: Strongly Disagree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Congress should pass a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

People should be allowed to use public restrooms, showers, and changing rooms based on "gender identity."

Goins: Strongly Disagree Harris: Strongly Disagree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

I support sanctuary cities.

Goins: Strongly Disagree Harris: Strongly Disagree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

It is OK for Congress to exempt itself from compliance with laws applicable to all citizens.

Goins: Strongly Disagree Harris: Strongly Disagree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

I support the death penalty.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Tuition-free public education should be guaranteed through college.

Goins: Strongly Disagree Harris: Strongly Disagree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

The United States should protect its sovereignty from the United Nations.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

The best way to maintain peace is through a strong military.

Goins: Strongly Agree Harris: Strongly Agree Pittenger: (Did not answer)

I voted in these primaries and general elections:

Goins: 2010 General Election, 2012 General Election, 2012 Republican Primary, 2014 General Election, 2016 General Election, 2016 Republican Primary Harris: 2010 General Election, 2010 Republican Primary, 2012 General Election, 2012 Republican Primary, 2014 General Election, 2014 Republican Primary, 2016 General Election, 2016 Republican Primary Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Under what circumstances should abortion be allowed?

Goins: I have understanding for rape victims and incest, however I do believe that God knew us before we were born in the womb. The cases stated should be taking into consideration as they are against the will of the victim. Final Analysis, I am against abortion. Harris: Under no circumstances should it be allowed. It takes the life of an innocent unborn child. Pittenger: (Did not answer)

What should the United States do to help eradicate the threat of radical Islamic terrorism?

Goins: Abolish the Visa Lottery is a start. I do believe that we should identify those countries that tend to have Radical Islamic activity and investigate those that come from that country to the US. The US should strengthen how we handle those that are convicted of these terrorist activities and not give light sentences. Any Radical Islamic activity in the US should be investigated to the fullest extent. We as Americans are promised Domestic Tranquility in our homeland. Harris: We must recognize the problem and identify the enemy. We have to call it what it is, Islamic Terrorism. Our intelligence agencies need to improve communications among each other and aggressively pursue all credible leads to seek out terrorist. The US needs to work collaboratively with our allies in Israel, Jordan, and Egypt who want to partner to end the threat of ISIS. As President Trump has previously stated, “We should aggressively pursue joint and coalition military operations to crush and destroy ISIS, international cooperation to cutoff their funding, expanded intelligence sharing, and cyberwarfare to disrupt and disable their propaganda and recruiting.” Pittenger: (Did not answer)

What in the nature of mankind caused America’s Founders to carefully define, separate, and limit powers in the Constitution?

Goins: In order to have a perfect UNION. We are a Republic for the people, by the people and of the people. Not of the government. The American Founders put the American citizen first. Not the American government. In order for us to have life, liberty and to pursue happiness, our founders limited the government and created a checks and balance. Harris: The founders limited power through checks and balances to prevent tyranny. They were well-versed in history and they feared the effect of mob democracy and oligarchy, and they wanted a government where power was restrained. They believed that absolute power corrupts even the best of intentioned people. Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Briefly describe your spiritual beliefs and values.

Goins: I am a Christian that believes Jesus Christ is the only begotten son of GOD. Jesus was sacrificed for my sins so that I may have everlasting life. I believe that Jesus ascended to Heaven and will come back for us to be joined in heaven. John 3:16 gives me this promised. I believe that we are comforted and guided by the Holy Spirit as Jesus said would be with us. I am a Christian Conservative that believes our constitution and laws are drawn from Christian values. I believe in traditional marriage, I believe abortion is wrong and I believe that every person is loved by God. I do believe we can turn away from God, but God grace is always there for us to be forgiven. Harris: I am a follower of Christ. I have devoted 30 years of my life to the ministry as a Pastor. I believe the Bible to be the inspired, infallible Word of God. I believe in a biblical worldview and the freewill of man. Pittenger: (Did not answer)

When you consider your views on a wide range of issues from economic and social matters to foreign policy and immigration, which of the following best describes you overall?

Goins: Very Conservative Harris: Very Conservative Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Please provide publicly available information validating your answer to the previous question.

Goins: In order for economic prosperity, the work ethics of the people in a free market is the key. Everyone has the opportunity to strive for success. If people have that drive, then the free market will be able to work for the good. Give a man a fish and he will always be hungry. Teach a man to fish and he will never hunger again. Social matters in this country has become out of hand. We no longer just disagree, but liberal activists become violent and influence the general public of such actions. We must adhere to the laws of the land and agree to be tolerant of all people and their choices. We must continue to fight for the rights that are endowed by our creator and our promise of Domestic Tranquility. Foreigners must come to our country legally. With the promise that they adhere to our laws and American values, they must be welcomed with open arms. However, illegal immigrants do not warrant such gratitude as they are not acknowledging our laws by coming here illegally. Harris: As a pastor, I have been a leader on issues facing our state and nation. I worked with groups like FRC, NC Values Coalition, and others to encourage evangelicals to elect conservatives in the 2016 election. We have worked together to fight against the transgender bathroom agenda. As the President of the Baptist State Convention, I lead the efforts in 2012 to define marriage between a man and a woman in the NC Constitution. Many of my positions are on my web site and throughout social media. I have been a target from the liberal left for years and will continue to fight to defend our traditional conservative values. Pittenger: (Did not answer)

How would you promote healthcare coverage that is adequate, affordable and accessible for all?

Goins: Health care should not be managed by the government. We already have seen the failings of the government in this area. While there should be some form of regulations, the government should not be an insurance company. The power of the people will make healthcare affordable. There should be choices in the free market that the people are able to make. More choices than a high deductible or low deductible. We should be able to shop for health plans that accommodate our needs. Also, Medicaid should be inspected and revamped. There are to many services being paid by our tax dollars to cover those that rely on medicaid for non emergency procedures. Harris: We need to look at reform that is market-based and patient driven. A market-based approach would foster competition and empower individuals to make personal healthcare decisions between them and their doctor. Opening the market up to buy insurance across state lines and encouraging HSA’s should be at the heart of any major healthcare reform. Pittenger: (Did not answer)

What role should government play in boosting the economy?

Goins: The government, on all levels, should have an open communication line with various corporations and businesses to discuss the state of the business. Discussions that affect the business such as taxes, employee regulations, etc.. I believe that the free market creates jobs and drives the economy. I also believe that the government can influence the economy and that is why it is crucial for the government to have a willingness to regulate in favor of the people. Harris: The government has the responsibility to create an environment conducive to promoting economic growth. This means that they should have as little involvement as possible, only intervening when necessary. They should have a low tax burden on both businesses and consumers, little regulation that stifles small businesses from foreign and growing and stay faithful to their responsibility to ensure that competition is allowed to drive economic growth, stimulating innovation in products that inevitably keeps prices for consumers low, perpetuating investment and encouraging the accumulation of wealth. Pittenger: (Did not answer)

What changes should be made to the tax code?

Goins: Permanent Individual cutbacks. This was a temporary item in the new tax code and I feel it should be permanent and the most important. Harris: The recent tax reform is a step in the right direction.. The reduction in corporate taxes and possibly even more significant, the change from a worldwide tax system to a territorial one is extremely important. We must continue to lower corporate tax rates to stay competitive among industrial nations and entice companies to bring jobs to America while simultaneously reducing the complexity of the system for individuals, shorten tax brackets, and continue to lower tax rates, putting more money back into the hands of citizens who lose a large percentage on the repatriation of their dollars by the government compared to being back under the stewardship of the individual. Pittenger: (Did not answer)

What is the best way to bring down unemployment?

Goins: Educating the people and equipping them with skills that will be necessary for when companies are prospecting an area. Bringing more vocational training to our students, so that they are more equipped to live as adults and lessen the amount that become dependent on the government. Harris: The best way to reduce unemployment is to encourage job creators and job creating small businesses. Many small businesses are discouraged from growing and expanding by various reasons from over regulation to an unqualified workforce. We need to reduce unnecessary regulations that are strangling our entrepreneurs and invest in workforce development to give workers the skills they need to participate in the job market. Simplifying the tax code and increasing access to start up capital are also ways to stimulate hiring. Pittenger: (Did not answer)

How would you guarantee Social Security benefits for future generations?

Goins: Social Security is suppose to be guaranteed and in a Trust for those that pay into the Social Security system. I believe that this is being abused and afraid that our benefits have been depleted or is being paid on credit. There should be an oversight committee or an audit of the Social Security Administration, to insure that our benefits are protected. This will be the only way to hold those accountable if those funds are used for other benefits. Also, there should be an inspection as to how those funds are invested. I am for taxpayers to choose to invest their own money instead of having the government to do it for them. Harris: As it stands now, Social Security is in a death spiral. The rate of returns are far from what they should be, and the burden is kicked down generation to generation. The current system is going to fail and needs to be completely over-hauled. However, we must honor our promises to existing retirees and those nearing retirement age keeping the current system in place for those folks. In order to sustain a system that resembles social security, the system will need to operate in a balanced manner meaning that individuals only receive what they pay in, supplemented if desired by a government budget that should be based not on the whims of political gain but economic sensibility. Pittenger: (Did not answer)

What education or experience qualifies you to hold the office for which you seek election?

Goins: I do have a college degree and certification in Trust Management. I have over 15yrs experience in the banking industry and own a business as well. However, this does not qualify me for running for office. What qualifies me is that I am an American Citizen, who pays taxes, owns property and I have a wife and 4 children. My experiences and associations with these is what qualifies me. Far to long we as Americans have forgotten that this government is of the people. Once we as a country embraces this, then we would have more qualified representation on all levels. Harris: As a pastor, I feel I am uniquely qualified for this position. I have been privileged to walk through all stages of life with people for the last thirty years. I've sat at the table with a family where the primary breadwinner just lost their job and they didn't know how they were going to make ends meet. I've seen the parents of the child who had just overdosed on opioids and had died. I've seen the devastating effect of Obamacare on small businesses and individuals. Having pastored folks from all races, social standings, ages, and income, I feel I have a perspective that is lacking in Congress. Pittenger: (Did not answer)

E-mail address and phone number for voters to reach you:

Goins: voteclarencegoins@gmail.com 910-850-6741 Harris: info@markharrisforcongress.com 704-619-1156 Pittenger: (Did not answer)

Is there anything else you would like voters to know about you?

Goins: Harris: Pittenger:

Background Background

Clarence Goins (R) Mark Harris (R) Robert Pittenger (R)

Education Campbell University, Buies Creek, BBA, 2001 Education Appalachian State University, Boone, BA, Poli Sci, 1987

Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary, Wake Forest, Doctor of Ministry, Master of Dvinity, 2009 Education University of Texas, Austin, BA, 1970

Vocational & Military Experience First Citizens Bank, Bank Manager, 4

Bank of America, Bank Manager, 8

Capital Bank, Bank Manager, 3 Vocational & Military Experience First Baptist Church Charlotte, Senior Pastor, 12.5 Vocational & Military Experience (None listed.)

Affiliations (Charitable, educational, religious, or political organizations affiliated with as a leader, member, contributor, or volunteer) Praise Fellowship Church of God, Member, Councilman, volunteer (heavily involved) Affiliations (Charitable, educational, religious, or political organizations affiliated with as a leader, member, contributor, or volunteer) NC Values Coalition, Former Board Member

Charlotte Pregnancy Resource Center

Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary, Former Chairman

With Open Eyes Foundation

Southern Baptist Convention, International Mission

Baptist State Convention, Former President

Brookstone School

NC Baptist Children's Homes Affiliations (Charitable, educational, religious, or political organizations affiliated with as a leader, member, contributor, or volunteer) Campus Crusade for Christ, Assistant to the President

Forest Hill Church

Jesse Helms Foundation, Board Member

University of Texas

Presbyterian Hospital Foundation, Board Member

Central Piedmont Community College, Board Member

Davidson College, Board Member

North Carolina Republican Party, Treasurer

Political Offices Held (None listed.) Political Offices Held (None listed.) Political Offices Held U.S. House, 4

NC Senate, 4