Duncan Statement on the Release of the FISA Memo
Washington, D.C. – Congressman Jeff Duncan (SC-03) released the following statement after the U.S. House of Representatives Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) released an extremely troubling Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) memo:

“Corruption thrives when people are left in the dark, which is why I have always championed for transparency in government and why I felt so strongly that the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence memo should be released to the public.

“In a broader context, the memo confirms what many of us in Congress from both parties have said for years — that the surveillance tools currently available to the government are susceptible to abuse and pose a risk to people’s constitutional rights.

“Specifically in this case, we see tools that were intended to keep our nation safe become weaponized by people with a political and ideological agenda. Ironically, supporters of Hillary Clinton working within the federal government engaged in a coordinated effort which was in many ways just as, if not more, subversive than what the Russian government is accused of doing.

“By intentionally withholding vital information from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) court about source credibility, background, and clear political bias, these activists within the government betrayed their oaths of office and helped launch an entire false narrative directed at delegitimizing the President of the United States, attempting to stall or undercut his policy agenda.

“The entire basis of the investigation into possible collusion with the Trump campaign and the Russians, along with the corresponding media coverage, was based on false information spread by political and ideological allies to Hillary Clinton and former President Barack Obama.

“Additionally, many of these same individuals had leading roles during the Clinton email investigation, which only further verifies the concerns that the FBI’s investigation into the Clintons was not conducted in a fair and proper way.

“These revelations require an extensive response by all three branches of government. The Department of Justice along with the FISA court must determine whether crimes were committed by government officials withholding necessary information from the court. There must be a review of past FISA warrants and unmasking orders to determine whether there are other instances of the government knowingly submitting faulty or biased evidence to the court in order to get secret warrants on American citizens. The revelations in the memo necessitate the public release of findings related to the Clinton email investigation, and whether a new investigation needs to be launched to determine whether crimes were committed. Finally, there needs to be a discussion as to whether the Mueller investigation is truly needed, seeing that the main premise that launched the investigation turned out to not be credible and was both directed and funded by political opponents.

“This memo rightly shakes Americans’ confidence in their government. The challenge will be conducting the proper amount of oversight, implementing the right reforms, bringing violators of the law to justice, and promoting a new era of transparency and openness in order to regain the public trust.”

Background:

Congressman Jeff Duncan spoke with President Trump about releasing the memo as he exited the 2018 State of the Union address.

Congressman Jeff Duncan voted “No” on the passage of the FISA Amendments Reauthorization Act of 2017 on January 11, 2018.

The FISA vote took place before the creation or knowledge of the HPSCI memo dated January 18, 2018.

###