JTIC -Excess Federal Property
State and local law enforcement agencies can obtain excess federal property at little or no cost through the 1033 Program, the 1122 Program and the Surplus Property Donation Program.

The 1033 Program

The 1033 Program (formerly the 1208 Program) permits the Secretary of Defense to transfer, without charge, excess U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) personal property (supplies and equipment) to state and local law enforcement agencies (LEAs).

The 1033 Program has allowed law enforcement agencies to acquire vehicles (land, air and sea), weapons, computer equipment, fingerprint equipment, night vision equipment, radios and televisions, first aid equipment, tents and sleeping bags, photographic equipment and more.

There are two methods of screening excess property. The first is physically visiting DRMOs and looking over the excess property displayed. The second method would be reviewing the inventory listings of the Defense Reutilization and Marketing Service (DRMS).

The 1122 Program

The National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 1994 contained Section 1122, which allows state and local governments to purchase new law enforcement equipment for counter-drug activities through the federal government. The discounts the federal government enjoys because of its large-volume purchases are passed on to state and local law enforcement agencies. These discounts may be particularly attractive when dealing with high-tech equipment and newer technologies.

The State Points-of-Contact (SPOCs) Offices administer the program. State and local government personnel interested in applying for entry into the program should contact the executive agent at (703) 695-7964 or via email at 1122Program@conus.army.mil. The sources of supply through the SPOCs can be found at the following links: Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) and Federal Supply Schedules. If you have questions regarding the 1122 program, please contact your State Point-of-Contact .

Surplus Property Donation Program

Each state and territory has a State Agency for Surplus Property (SASP). These agencies were established to receive federal surplus personal property and to donate it to public agencies and certain nonprofit, tax-exempt agencies.

The General Services Administration (GSA) has the responsibility of administering this program and has issued regulations for its implementation. Law enforcement agencies enrolled in the 1033 Program are among the governmental agencies eligible to obtain property from their SASP. The rules of property utilization include:

Property requested must be needed and useable by the requesting agency and must not be for personal use.

Property is offered as is (although it may have been repaired or refurbished by the SASP) and is transferred without warranty.

Property must be placed in use within 12 months of its acquisition and used for at least 12 months.

Property with an original acquisition cost of $5,000 or more will have additional periods of restricted use, as will vehicles, aircraft and vessels.

For more information about the Surplus Property Donation Program, go to the National Association of State Agencies for Surplus Property (NASASP).