U.S. House of Representatives
Kevin Brady is a pro-family, pro-small business conservative representing the 8th District of Texas in the U.S. House of Representatives.



Kevin is Ranking Member of the House Ways and Means Committee - - considered by many to be the most powerful committee in Congress with jurisdiction over taxes, health care, Social Security, Medicare, international trade and welfare.



While serving as Chairman, Kevin authored and helped pass the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which reformed the U.S. Tax Code for the first time in more than 30 years, leading to millions of jobs being created, record revenue to the U.S. Treasury, the lowest unemployment rate in almost 50 years and the highest wage growth in a decade.



A champion of free enterprise and American-made energy, Kevin’s focus is creating jobs, reducing Washington spending and sunsetting obsolete federal agencies.



Kevin previously served as chairman of the influential Health Subcommittee for the House Ways and Means Committee. As chairman, he focused on ensuring a strong, free market in the nation's health care industry and look for ways to increase the quality of health care, while keeping costs low.



And as the former Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Joint Economic Committee, Kevin is a GOP leader.



Until 2013, Kevin was the leader of the Trade Subcommittee and led the successful effort to pass new sales agreements with Panama, South Korea and Colombia – and he served as the White House point man on the successful passage of the Central American Free Trade Agreement. On the Social Security Subcommittee, Kevin fought to preserve this important program for future generations once and for all.



Prior to his election to Congress, Kevin worked as a chamber of commerce executive for 18 years and served six years in the Texas House of Representatives where he was named one of the Ten Best Legislators for Families & Children. In 1994 he was named one of Five Outstanding Young Texans.



In order to stay close to the people he represents, Kevin never moved to Washington. He lives in Montgomery County with his wife Cathy and his two sons Will (18) and Sean (15) – and has logged nearly two million miles commuting to Congress each week.



Kevin is an original Hometown Hero of The Woodlands, a Paul Harris Fellow in Rotary and a Distinguished Alumni of the University of South Dakota. He and his family attend Saints Simon and Jude Catholic Church.



ACHIEVEMENTS



Congressman Brady's major legislative accomplishments include:

Authoring the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the first major reform of the U.S. Tax Code in more than 30 years.

Working with Texas Democrats and the Florida congressional delegation to deliver disaster relief to communities impacted by Hurricanes Harvey, Maria and Irma.

Restoring the federal sales tax deduction which saves Texas taxpayers over $1 billion a year.

Passing new trade agreements that have created new sales and thousands of new jobs for Texas workers in manufacturing, agriculture and technology.

Passing the Teacher Liability Protection Act to protect teachers against frivolous lawsuits when they maintain order and discipline in the classroom.

In the wake of 9-11, establishing a national network of university homeland security research centers to prevent and respond to future terrorist attacks, including the center at Texas A & M.

Championing the Federal Sunset Act which forces agencies and programs to regularly prove their value to taxpayers or face elimination.

Authoring the MAP Act which President Reagan's former budget director lauded for its "smart spending caps and innovative guardrails."

Helping create the Texas Institute of Genomic Research, a cutting-edge research center that will accelerate new medical discoveries and create 5,000 new Texas jobs.

Spearheading House efforts on Hurricane recovery in the wake of Rita and Ike.

AWARDS



In Congress, Kevin has been repeatedly named Hero-of-the-Taxpayers, Small Business Champion and Super-Friend of the Seniors. He has received the Golden Bulldog Award by Watchdogs of the Treasury, special recognition by Citizens Against Government Waste, and is a perennial winner of the Guardian of Small Business, Taxpayer Hero and Spirit of Enterprise awards.



Kevin has been honored as Outstanding Texas Political Leader-of-the-Year and Deep East Texas Legislator-of-the-Year and was recently named as having one of the Top Five Spending Cut Agendas on Capitol Hill. Kevin is Ranking Member of the House Ways and Means Committee - - considered by many to be the most powerful committee in Congress with jurisdiction over taxes, health care, Social Security, Medicare, international trade and welfare.While serving as Chairman, Kevin authored and helped pass the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which reformed the U.S. Tax Code for the first time in more than 30 years, leading to millions of jobs being created, record revenue to the U.S. Treasury, the lowest unemployment rate in almost 50 years and the highest wage growth in a decade.A champion of free enterprise and American-made energy, Kevin’s focus is creating jobs, reducing Washington spending and sunsetting obsolete federal agencies.Kevin previously served as chairman of the influential Health Subcommittee for the House Ways and Means Committee. As chairman, he focused on ensuring a strong, free market in the nation's health care industry and look for ways to increase the quality of health care, while keeping costs low.And as the former Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Joint Economic Committee, Kevin is a GOP leader.Until 2013, Kevin was the leader of the Trade Subcommittee and led the successful effort to pass new sales agreements with Panama, South Korea and Colombia – and he served as the White House point man on the successful passage of the Central American Free Trade Agreement. On the Social Security Subcommittee, Kevin fought to preserve this important program for future generations once and for all.Prior to his election to Congress, Kevin worked as a chamber of commerce executive for 18 years and served six years in the Texas House of Representatives where he was named one of the Ten Best Legislators for Families & Children. In 1994 he was named one of Five Outstanding Young Texans.In order to stay close to the people he represents, Kevin never moved to Washington. He lives in Montgomery County with his wife Cathy and his two sons Will (18) and Sean (15) – and has logged nearly two million miles commuting to Congress each week.Kevin is an original Hometown Hero of The Woodlands, a Paul Harris Fellow in Rotary and a Distinguished Alumni of the University of South Dakota. He and his family attend Saints Simon and Jude Catholic Church.In Congress, Kevin has been repeatedly named Hero-of-the-Taxpayers, Small Business Champion and Super-Friend of the Seniors. He has received the Golden Bulldog Award by Watchdogs of the Treasury, special recognition by Citizens Against Government Waste, and is a perennial winner of the Guardian of Small Business, Taxpayer Hero and Spirit of Enterprise awards.Kevin has been honored as Outstanding Texas Political Leader-of-the-Year and Deep East Texas Legislator-of-the-Year and was recently named as having one of the Top Five Spending Cut Agendas on Capitol Hill.