Dennis Kucinich statement on Cordray’s smear attack – Dennis Kucinich for Governor
Dennis Kucinich statement on Cordray’s smear attack

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

April 17, 2018

CLEVELAND – Today, the Cordray campaign unleashed a series of attacks attempting to tie me to the Kremlin’s payroll, to 911 deniers, and to the murder of innocents in the Middle East. These cowardly, hysterical and outrageously untrue statements reflect Cordray’s panic that he and the State Capitol power-brokers might lose control of the Ohio Democratic Party and the statehouse.

Cordray will do anything to change the subject from his NRA “A” rating and his support for assault weapons on the streets of America.

The facts: Last year, I attended a peace conference in the UK, at the invitation of EuroCSE (The European Centre for the Study of Extremism, Cambridge http://www.eurocse.org/ ). It was paid for by a civil rights advocacy group in California.

Those in attendance included the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Rt. Rev. and Honorable Lord Dr. Eames, a member of the House of Lords and a leading international peace activist; Baroness Caroline Cox, of the House of Lords, an international humanitarian leader. Here is a YouTube video of other conference speakers:

The purpose of the conference was to bring peace and reconciliation to Syria, not to support the current regime. Here is my opening statement, which was abstracted for a panel discussion:

The war in Syria is not a civil war and never was. Hundreds of thousands of troops, soldiers of fortune, mercenaries, intelligence agents, war profiteers, and religious fanatics, from over 90 countries, have descended on Syria, under the cover of the revolutionary Arab Spring.

The result was a war which has fragmented the country, produced millions of refugees, destroyed the infrastructure, wrecked houses of worship and killed nearly a half million people.

The war is the working out of the game of nations, with Syria as the board in a multidimensional chess match played by Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey and the United States on one side, and Hezbollah, Russia and Iran on the other side.

Syria, has long been run by an authoritarian regime which saw dissent as the product of foreign agents. Indeed, prior to the country exploding into war, legitimate protests were met with resistance by the government. But the escalation of the conflict came when arms and fighters moved into Syria, capitalizing on dissent, but advancing a cause inimical to most Syrians, the establishment of a caliphate, by violence.

Syria had long held a tradition of pluralism, wherein Christians, Jews and Muslims of all sects, as well as various ethnicities could live, work and worship freely without fear of persecution, under the protection of the government.

The introduction of armed religious extremists to Syria, supported by foreign powers, shattered religious harmony and set the stage for rampant intolerance and murderous attacks.

Syria today stands at the crossroads of war and peace in the world The west cannot impose its will on Syria, no matter how many bombs it drops. The Syrian people, who are not unanimous on the question of President Assad, are resolute in protecting their way of life, which includes free education and free health care, while supporting the Assad government from a military overthrow which would destroy Syria.

Saudi Arabia and Turkey have unleashed forces of destruction within their countries by their support for the invasion of Syria and the attempted overthrow of that government.

All aggressor countries cannot continue to attempt to overthrow the government of Syria without destabilizing their own lands, because when the fighters they sent into Syria come back, they will look to apply the lessons of terrorism to their homelands.

As anyone can plainly see, my speech was about peace and an end to wars, as have been hundreds of other speeches I have given in the US House of Representatives and in forums around the world.

Richard Cordray wants to have assault weapons, which are weapons of war, on the streets of America. I want such weapons taken off the streets of America – and the world.

I am, have been and will continue to be resolute in the cause of peace. The pursuit of political office will never cause me to cower in that work.

There are three weeks left to the Democratic Primary for Governor of Ohio. I ask that you join me in standing up for peace and standing up against the cowards who would allow more violence in our society.