Marquette University Law School
Professor Secunda teaches employee benefits law, labor law, employment discrimination law, employment law, education law, civil procedure, and trusts and estates. He is also the founder and former faculty advisor of the Marquette Benefits and Social Welfare Law Review, which began publication in 2015. Professor Secunda is the faculty advisor for the student-run Marquette University Labor and Employment Law Society (LELS).

Former U.S. Secretary of Labor Hilda Solis appointed Professor Secunda to a three-year term on the U.S. Department of Labor's ERISA (employee benefits law) Advisory Council, effective January 2013. Former Secretary of Labor Thomas Perez appointed him to serve as the Chairman of the Council for calendar year 2015. He was recently elected in 2018 as a fellow of the American College of Employee Benefits Counsel.

Professor Secunda received the Senior Fulbright Scholar Award for 2015-2016 to study Australian workplace retirement law (superannuation) at Melboure University Law School. He was a Senior Fellow at Melbourne Law School, teaching in their Masters of Law program both international employment law and comparative superannuation (workplace retirement plan) law. He was again a Senior Fellow at Melbourne Law in March 2017. Professor Secunda's previous international research and teaching experiences have included: visiting professor at the Universite de Paris Ouest Nanterre La Defense during June 2011, visiting professor of law at the University of Wisconsin-Madison Law School during the summer and fall 2011 semesters, the 2012 Hicks Morley Visiting Professor of International Labour Law at The Western Ontario Faculty of Law, and visiting professor of law for the part-time LLM Comparative Law Program and visiting scholar at the Osgoode Hall Law School at York University in Toronto. He was a visiting scholar at Hong Kong Polytechnic University in May of 2016. He just returned from being a visiting summer school professor, teaching international employment law in 2018 at Justus-Leibig Universitat Giessen, Germany.

Professor Secunda writes extensively on employee benefits (with emphasis on study of the international and comparative aspects of workplace retirement plans), labor law, employment law (with emphasis on the constitutional rights of public employees and workplace safety & health issue), employment discrimination law, and education law (with emphasis on special education law). His research takes an international and comparative law focus on the retirement and health benefit rights of U.S. employees in comparison to other countries, the constitutional rights of public employees, the organizational and collective bargaining rights of public and private sector employees, workplace health and privacy rights, and the rights of special education children. His recent law review articles on these topics have appeared, among other publications, in the UCLA, University of Chicago Legal Forum, Washington University, Notre Dame, Indiana, Illinois, Florida State, Fordham, San Diego, Colorado, Hastings, and Wisconsin Law Reviews; his essays have been published in the online journals at Yale, Penn, Northwestern, and UCLA. His articles have been cited and discussed in many top law reviews, including the Harvard Law Review, Yale Law Journal, Columbia Law Review, and NYU Law Review, among others.

Professor Secunda is also the author of a number of current books, including: Employment Law: Case Materials (8th ed. 2018 Supp.) (with Mark Rothstein, Lance Liebman, Kim Yuracko, and Charlotte Garden); Understanding Employment Law 3rd ed. (with Rick Bales and Jeff Hirsch); Mastering Employment Discrimination Law 2nd ed. (with Jeff Hirsch and Joe Seiner); Labor Law: A Problem-Based Approach 2nd ed. (with Jeff Hirsch and Michael Duff); Mastering Labor Law (with Jeff Hirsch, Joseph Slater and Anne Lofaso), and Global Issues in Employee Benefits Law (with Samuel Estreicher and Rosalind Connor).

Professor Secunda is the past national Chair of three Sections of the Association of American Law Schools (AALS): Employee Benefits and Executive Compensation, Labor Relations and Employment Law, and Employment Discrimination Law. Along with Joseph Slater and Scott, he founded the Colloquium on Scholarship in Employment and Labor Law (COSELL), now in its 13th year and was also a co-founder, with Peter Wiedenbeck and Dana Muir, of the ERISA and Social Insurance Law Annual Conference, now in its 7th year. He is an elected member of the American Law Institute (ALI). He is also a former editor of the Workplace Prof Blog, an advisory board member of the Tax and Employee Benefit Law Center at John Marshall Law School, and an Ambassador and Team Leader of the International Best Practices Team of the United Kingdom Transparency Taskforce. Professor Secunda has co-authored numerous amicus briefs in employee benefit, labor, and employment law cases, including the Tibble, Lane and Dudenhoeffer U.S. Supreme Court cases, and is a frequent presenter and commentator internationally and domestically on labor, employment, benefits, pension, and education law issues. You can find him also on Twitter @psecundawrkprof, where he discusses, and links to, current developments in workplace legal and political issues, employee benefits law, and education law.

Special Recognitions: 2018 Inducted Fellow into American College of Employee Benefits Counsel; 2015-2016 Senior Fulbright Scholar Research Award for Australia; 2014 Paul Stephen Miller Memorial Award for academic and public contributions to the field of labor and employment law; Order of the Coif; Chairman (2015) of DOL's ERISA Advisory Council; Elected Member of the National Academy of Social Insurance (NASI); Elected Member of the American Law Institute (ALI); Distinguished Service Award for Southeastern Association of Law Schools (SEALS); and Honorary Lifetime Member of SEALS.

Extra Curricular: Procuring the best possible employment outcomes for my Marquette law students; running, Philly Sports (Fly Eagles Fly!), Tweeting, and Golden Retrievers.