SLDS for Teachers



The Statewide Longitudinal Data Systems (SLDS) Grant Program is designed to help teachers make informed decisions to improve student learning. SLDS Saves Time!

SLDS is FREE!

SLDS is Easy to Use!

SLDS Helps You Improve Instruction! Permanent Records at Your Fingertips

SLDS is your access to an electronic permanent record for each of your students. No more going to the office to search for student records. No more using the file in the office or signing out the file and traipsing back to the office to return the file. Will that save you time ?



No more endless waiting for records from another Georgia district for transfer students. Transfer student data is available the morning after the student is claimed and added to your schedule. You'll know if your new student is a SWD, an ESL, or has been retained. Will that improve instruction ?



No more wondering how "little Johnny" did on last year's statewide tests. With just a few clicks, you can see Johnny's scores for the past six years. (And, benchmark test results are coming!) Will this improve instruction ?



No more wondering if Johnny has had an attendance problem in the past. You can see Johnny's attendance for the past six years, and see the trend. How about this for a time saver and instruction enhancer ?



Just 3 Clicks to Student Data

All this information, and more, is at your fingertips and accessible from your Student Information System (SIS). No new login is required. No new password to remember. Simply click on the SLDS link in your SIS and you will see your schedule, your students' overall attendance record, and your students' overall assessment scores. Click on a class within your schedule to see your class roster. Then link to individual student profiles, individual enrollment history, individual attendance history, individual assessment scores, and much, much more.



Teacher Resource Links

In the near future, SLDS will include digital Teacher Resource Links (TRL) that are suggested based on a student's performance on statewide assessments. These resources are approved by state curriculum experts. You will save time by no longer scouring the internet for appropriate resources.



Already Have SLDS?

Online training is available now. Training modules are posted below -- see Teacher Resources. And, more will follow within the month. Online training is FREE .



Face-to-face training is also available. If the online module didn't get you started successfully, let your administration know that you need face-to-face training -- it's FREE .



Don't Have SLDS?

Talk to your administration to find out why and let them know you need SLDS. They, in turn, can speak with your Central Office to find out the status of SLDS in your district. Like all things SLDS ... it's FREE .