The representative concentration pathways: an overview
Socio-economic and emission scenarios are used in climate research to provide plausible descriptions of how the future may evolve with respect to a range of variables including socio-economic change, technological change, energy and land use, and emissions of greenhouse gases and air pollutants. They are used as input for climate model runs and as a basis for assessment of possible climate impacts and mitigation options and associated costs. For better comparisons between various studies as well as easier communication of model results, it is preferable to use a common set of scenarios across the scientific community. In the past, several sets of scenarios have performed such a role, including the IS92 scenarios (Leggett et al. 1992) and, more recently, the scenarios from the Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES) (Nakicenovic et al. 2000).

As pointed out by Moss et al. (2010), the research community currently needs new scenarios. First, more detailed information is needed for running the current generation of climate models than that provided by any previous scenario sets. Second, there is an increasing interest in scenarios that explicitly explore the impact of different climate policies in addition to the no-climate-policy scenarios explored so far (e.g. SRES). Such scenarios would allow evaluating the “costs” and “benefits” of long-term climate goals. Finally, there is also an increasing interest in exploring the role of adaptation in more detail. This requires further integration of information for scenario development across the different disciplines involved in climate research. The need for new scenarios prompted the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to request the scientific communities to develop a new set of scenarios to facilitate future assessment of climate change (IPCC 2007). The IPCC also decided such scenarios would not be developed as part of the IPCC process, leaving new scenario development to the research community.

2010 1) Development of a scenario set containing emission, concentration and land-use trajectories—referred to as “representative concentration pathways” (RCPs). 2) A parallel development phase with climate model runs and development of new socio-economic scenarios. 3) A final integration and dissemination phase. The community subsequently designed a process of three phases (Moss et al.):

The main purpose of the first phase (development of the RCPs) is to provide information on possible development trajectories for the main forcing agents of climate change, consistent with current scenario literature allowing subsequent analysis by both Climate models (CMs) and Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs).1 Climate modelers will use the time series of future concentrations and emissions of greenhouse gases and air pollutants and land-use change from the four RCPs in order to conduct new climate model experiments and produce new climate scenarios as part of the parallel phase. At the same time, IAMs will explore a range of different technological, socio-economic and policy futures that could lead to a particular concentration pathway and magnitude of climate change. The development of the RCPs in the first phase thus allows climate modelers to proceed with experiments in parallel to the development of emission and socio-economic scenarios, expediting the overall scenario development process (Moss et al. 2010).

A careful selection process was used to identify the RCPs, using criteria that reflected the needs of both climate scenario developers and users (see Section 2). Two important characteristics of RCPs are reflected in their names. The word “representative” signifies that each of the RCPs represents a larger set of scenarios in the literature. In fact, as a set, the RCPs should be compatible with the full range of emissions scenarios available in the current scientific literature, with and without climate policy. The words “concentration pathway” are meant to emphasize that these RCPs are not the final new, fully integrated scenarios (i.e. they are not a complete package of socio-economic, emission and climate projections), but instead are internally consistent sets of projections of the components of radiative forcing that are used in subsequent phases. The use of the word “concentration” instead of “emissions” also emphasizes that concentrations are used as the primary product of the RCPs, designed as input to climate models. Coupled carbon-cycle climate models can then as well calculate associated emission levels (which can be compared to the original emissions of the IAMs) (see Hibbard et al. 2007). In total, a set of four pathways were produced that lead to radiative forcing levels of 8.5, 6, 4.5 and 2.6 W/m2, by the end of the century (see Section 2). Each of the RCPs covers the 1850–2100 period, and extensions have been formulated for the period thereafter (up to 2300).

The papers in this Special Issue of Climatic Change describe the RCPs, and their development process. The current paper provides an overview of this process, and focuses on the set as a whole and on how models have been linked in a new, innovative process of scenario development. More specific information can be found in the related papers in this special issue, such as those by the four IAM teams describing the scenarios underlying each of the RCPs (Masui et al. 2011; Riahi et al. 2011; Thomson et al. 2011; Van Vuuren et al. 2011a). This special issue also includes several papers that describe how the information from the IAM models was subsequently processed. The paper by Granier et al. (2011) provides an assessment of a range of historical emissions data as context for the harmonized emissions used as a common starting point for the future trajectories of the RCPs. The paper by Lamarque et al. (2011) describes how information on air pollutant emissions was used for deriving future concentration and forcing scenarios for aerosols and ozone. The paper by Hurtt et al. (2011) is the first to harmonize land-use history data with future scenario data from multiple IAMs to form a single consistent, spatially gridded, set of scenarios on land-use change, to study human impacts on the past, present, and future Earth system. The paper by Meinshausen et al. (2011b) describes how the IAM’s emission projections of long-lived greenhouse gases were harmonized and used for calculating concentration trajectories for these gases. Moreover, Meinshausen et al. (2011b) describes the Extended Concentration Pathways (ECPs) from 2100 to 2300. All together, the papers aim at documenting the complete development process, from initial IAM model results to the unique data set provided to support IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report (AR5).

The paper is structured as follows. First, we provide a more detailed description of the RCP development process. Subsequently, we describe the main characteristics of the RCPs. As the RCPs are intended to represent the concentration and emissions pathways in the broader scenario literature, this paper specifically compares them to them to those in the literature, including the underlying trends of key driving forces (population, income, energy and land use), emissions and concentrations. In the final section, we draw conclusions and provide guidance on the appropriate uses of the RCPs.