RCP2.6: exploring the possibility to keep global mean temperature increase below 2°C
Over the last few years, the interest in climate-policy related questions has strongly increased. In response, many mitigation scenarios have been published in the scientific literature exploring the effectiveness of climate policy. However, in order to explore future climate change, climate models currently still use the SRES scenarios (Nakicenovic and Swart 2000) that only include possible future emission scenarios in the absence of climate policy. Consequently, these scenarios are not representative of the full range of possible emission developments anymore. The increasing relevance of mitigation scenarios has been an important reason for the IPCC to request the climate research community to develop a new set of scenarios (IPCC 2007). In response, the scientific community designed a multi-phase process to develop new scenarios, involving researchers working on integrated assessment, climate system modeling and assessment of climate impacts and adaptation. An overview of the whole process is provided by Moss et al. (2008, 2010). As a first step in the process, four scenarios were selected from the scientific literature as a representative set of the current literature (see also Van Vuuren et al., 2011). An important purpose of this selection was to allow new climate model runs exploring a very wide range of radiative forcing levels, in parallel with new work on socio-economic scenarios. The scenarios, or, more precisely, the information contained in these scenarios on emissions and concentration and land use, were named the “representative concentration pathways” (RCPs).

At the time of IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report, the majority of mitigation scenarios focused on stabilizing the radiative forcing of greenhouse gases around 4.5 W/m2 in 2100 (see Fisher et al. 2007a).1 Only six scenarios from three independent studies were identified that explored the possibility of reaching forcing levels below 3 W/m2 (Azar et al. 2006; Riahi et al. 2007; Van Vuuren et al. 2007a). Since then, however, a whole range of new literature has emerged that explore such ambitious targets (e.g. Calvin et al. 2009; Clarke et al. 2009; Edenhofer et al. 2010; Rao et al. 2008). This new scenario literature has emerged partly as a responses to work by Meinshausen et al. (2006), who indicated that stabilization of radiative forcing at such low levels would be needed to maintain a relatively high probability to limit global mean temperature increase to 2°C.

Van Vuuren et al. (2006, 2007a) explored for the first time in detail the required changes in the energy and land-use system to achieve such low forcing levels (2.6 and 2.9 W/m2) using the IMAGE model. To represent the category of low forcing scenarios within the RCP set, the IMAGE scenario was selected. In fact, as during the Noordwijkerhout conference no decision could be made between the IMAGE scenario leading to 2.6 and 2.9 W/m2 (Moss et al. 2008) both were temporally selected and the scenario named RCP3-PD, indicating that emissions in this scenario lead to a radiative forcing of around 3 W/m2 mid-century and decline afterwards (PD stands for peak-and-decline). After confirmation of reproducibility of the 2.6 W/m2 scenario by other models, a final choice was made to include this scenario in the RCP set and since then, also the name RCP2.6 has been used (e.g. Moss et al. 2010). Both the name RCP3-PD and RCP2.6 thus refer to the same emission scenario (we use the latter in this paper). As described in the overview paper on the RCP process (Van Vuuren et al., 2011), all original RCPs have been updated, especially with respect to 1) the consistency with historical emissions and newly available emissions data and 2) spatial data on emissions and land use as input to the climate models. For the RCP2.6, specifically, also attention was paid to the possible implications of emissions associated with bioenergy use (which was not yet accounted for). This updated scenario has been described elsewhere (Van Vuuren et al. 2010c), in particular with respect to emissions trends and bioenergy use. In this article, we briefly repeat the general methodology used for the RCP2.6 (Section 2) and the main results (Section 3.1), but focus additionally on the downscaling methods that have been used to generate spatially explicit information as input to the climate models (Section 2 and 3.3). To put the results into context, Section 3.4 discusses some of the main uncertainties of the RCP2.6 and, finally, in Section 3.5 we compare the RCP2.6 to IMAGE scenarios for higher radiative forcing levels (4.5 and 6 W/m2 in 2100) and the other RCPs. These two sections together explore the uncertainty related to the RCP2.6, and to indicate the differences in policy action associated with different mitigation levels. The other RCPs (leading to 8.5 W/m2 in 2100, stabilization at 6.0 W/m2 and stabilization at 4.5 W/m2) have been descried in detail eslewhere in this Special Issue (Masui et al. 2011; Riahi et al. 2011; Thomson et al. 2011).