Health Effects Related to Wind Turbine Sound, Including Low-Frequency Sound and Infrasound
Annoyance and sleep disturbance are the most frequently studied health effects of wind turbine sound as is also the case for sound from other sources. After a short explanation of the health effects addressed in the literature, the overall conclusions from key reviews are summarized. Then the main findings for annoyance, sleep disturbance and other health effects are described in more detail, sometimes referring to the underlying publications. The influence of personal, situational and contextual factors on these effects is also included. Then in Sect. 3.2 the most recent original studies (2015–2017) are described separately in more detail while following the same structure.

Effects that are mentioned as specific effects of infrasound and/or low-frequency sound are treated in Sect. 4.

Pedersen et al. [ 52 ] found that people who perceive the wind turbines as intruding and a threat to their privacy (motion, sound, visual) reported more annoyance. When people feel attached to their environment (‘place attachment’), the wind farm can form a threat to that location and can create resistance [ 59 ]. Also, a feeling of helplessness and procedural injustice can develop when people feel they have no real say in the planning process. Potentially, this plays a role especially in rural areas where people choose to live because of tranquillity; for them the wind park can form an important threat (visual and auditory). Based on renewable energy projects in the UK, Walker and Devine-Wright [ 60 ] concluded that the more people participated in project development, the higher was the public support for renewable energy in general.

When planning and participation are experienced as unjust or inadequate, public support will soon deteriorate, also among people who were originally neutral or in favour of the wind farm [ 55 ]. When residents feel they have been insufficiently heard, they feel powerless and experience a lack of control over their own environmental quality and quality of life. Worry or concern can be reduced by an open and honest procedure in which residents can contribute to the decisions in a positive way [ 56 ]. Already in the early phase of wind energy, research from Wolsink [ 57 ] and later from Breukers [ 58 ] showed that collaboration with emphasis on local topics was more successful than a policy aimed at as much wind energy as possible and a non-participatory approach.

For the social acceptance of wind turbine projects by a local community, the Belgian Superior Health Council [ 20 ] stated it is crucial how the community evaluates the consequences for their future quality of life. The communication and relation between the key parties (residents, municipality and project developer) are very important. Disturbance by wind turbines is a complex problem, in which the objective (physical) exposure and personal factors play a role, but also policy, psychology, communication and a feeling of justice.

Being noise sensitive refers to an internal state determined by physiological, psychological, attitudinal aspect, lifestyle and activities of a person that increases the reactivity to sound in general. Noise sensitivity has a strong genetic component (i.e. hereditary), but can also be a consequence of a disease (e.g. migraine) or trauma. Also, serious anxiety disorders can go together with an increased sensitivity to sound and possibly lead to a feeling of panic [ 53 ]. Only a few studies have addressed this issue in relation to wind turbine sound. An early example is the study of Shepherd et al. [ 47 ] in New Zealand, in which two groups were compared (a ‘turbine group’ versus a control group). Noise sensitivity was measured with a single question informing whether people considered themselves as noise sensitive. In the turbine group a strong association was found between noise sensitivity and annoyance and a weak association in the control group. This is indicative of an interaction effect of exposure and sensitivity on annoyance. This has also been documented for other sound sources [ 54 ]. According to a case report from Thorne [ 50 ], a relatively high proportion of residents near two wind farms in Australia were noise sensitive. Self-selection into a ‘quiet area’ by noise sensitive people can be a plausible explanation.

Economic aspects can also affect annoyance from wind turbines. In a study of Pedersen et al. [ 52 ] in the Netherlands, some 14% of the respondents benefited from one or more wind turbines, in particular enterprising farmers who lived in general closer to the turbines and were exposed to higher sound levels than the remaining respondents. The percentage of annoyed persons in this group was low to very low, despite the higher exposure and the use of the same terms to describe the typical characteristics of wind turbine sound. In the study this group was described as ‘healthy farmers’: on average they were younger, more often male and had a higher level of education when compared to those not having economic benefits and reported less problems with health and sleep. However, it might not only be the benefit, but differences in attitude and perception as well as having more control over the placement of the turbines that might play a role [ 37 ].

Modern wind turbines are visible from a considerable distance because they rise high and change the landscape. Due to the movement of their rotor blades, wind turbines are more salient in the landscape than objects that do not move. The rotating blades draw our attention and can cause variations in light intensity when the blades block or reflect sunlight. The visual and auditory aspects have been shown to be highly interrelated [ 19 , 36 , 52 ] and are therefore hard to unravel with respect to their effects. Annoyance from visual aspects may add to or even reinforce annoyance from noise (and vice versa). Noise and visual annoyance are strongly related as was also described above. It has been suggested [ 20 ] that people who see the wind turbines from their homes are more worried about the health effect of continuous exposure and as a consequence also report more annoyance [ 20 ].

Research in the past decade has shed some light on the question why some people are more disturbed by wind turbines than others. Next to physical aspects, personal and contextual aspects influence the level of annoyance. Often these aspects are referred to as non-acoustic factors, complementary to the acoustic factors (the ‘decibels’). Because the term non-acoustic refers to a broad range of aspects, and as a result is very unspecific, we prefer the term personal and contextual factors []. They can be subdivided in the following categories (with some exemplary aspects in brackets):There is a lot of variation in the aspects studied and also the strength of the evidence varies strongly. Without pretending to be exhaustive, those aspects documented in the reviews on wind turbine sound up to 2015 are discussed in more detail below.

In an Australian report [ 50 ] the number of people living in the vicinity of wind turbines with serious health complaints was estimated to be 10–15%. However, according to literature reviews on the health effects of wind turbines [ 1 , 19 , 20 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 28 ] there is no evidence for health effects caused by wind turbines in people living in the vicinity of wind turbines, other than annoyance and self-reported sleep disturbance and the latter is inconclusive. There was, however, a clear correlation between annoyance and self-reported sleep disturbance in one study [ 41 ]. Based on existing field studies, there is insufficient evidence that living near a wind turbine is the direct cause of health effects such as mental health problems, headaches, pain, stiffness or diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, tinnitus and hearing damage.

Several more recent studies show an association between quality of life and sleep disturbance and the distance of a dwelling to a wind turbine [ 47 , 48 ]. Differences in perceived quality of life were associated with annoyance and self-reported sleep disturbance in residents. These results are highly comparable with those found for air and road traffic, e.g. see [ 49 ].

A direct association between wind turbine sound and sleep disturbance can only be determined when there is a measurable reaction to the sound. Such an immediate influence is only plausible when the sound level is sufficiently high and as yet has not been convincingly shown for wind turbine sound [ 23 , 45 ]. An indirect effect has been shown between self-reported sleep disturbance and annoyance from wind turbine sound, but not between sleep disturbance and the sound levels per se [ 41 ]. Research has shown that also for other sound sources there is a high correlation between self-reported sleep disturbance and annoyance from noise [ 46 ].

Good sleep is essential for physical and mental health. Sound is one of the factors that can disturb sleep or affect the quality of sleep. Several biological reactions to night time sound from different sources have been described in the literature: increased heart rate, waking up, difficulty in falling asleep and more body movements (motility) during sleep [ 4 ]. The night noise guidelines of the WHO are not specifically aimed at noise from wind turbines, but cover a range of (other) noise sources. It is conceivable that the relatively small but frequently occurring sound peaks just above the threshold for sleep disturbance due to the rhythmic character of wind turbine sound cause sleep disturbance [ 44 ]. A Dutch study found that wind turbine sound did not affect self-reported sleep onset latency but did negatively influence the ability to keep sleeping [ 37 , 41 ]. An increase in sound level above 45 dBA increased the probability of awakening. This was not the case for people who obtained economic benefit from the wind turbines, but this might also have been an age effect (co-owners of the turbines were younger). These findings of the study in the Netherlands are in line with the conclusions which the WHO drew from the review of scientific literature the relation between transport sound and sleep [ 4 ]. According to the WHO, sleep disturbance can occur at an average sound level at the facade at night (Lnight) of 40 dB and higher [ 4 ].

Whether the type of environment affects the levels of annoyance is not yet clear. It can be assumed that people in rural areas are more likely to hear and see wind turbines than in more built-up urban areas with more buildings and a less open view. However, Dutch research showed that the percentage of highly annoyed people was equally high in rural and urban areas [ 37 ] although the correlation with the wind turbine sound level was less strong in the built-up area [ 41 ]. An important moderator was the existence of a busy road nearby, reducing the percentage annoyed by wind turbine sound annoyance in rural areas only. In a Swedish study it was found that residents in rural areas reported more annoyance in rural areas than in urban environments, possibly due to their expectation that the rural area would be quiet [ 42 ]. In a recent study Qu et al. [ 43 ] found that the level of annoyance from wind turbine sound in urban and suburban areas was less than reported in the Swedish, Dutch, Polish and Canadian studies in rural areas.

In a Dutch survey [ 37 ] 75% of the respondents indicated that the terms ‘swishing/lashing’ gave the best description of wind turbine sound, irrespective of their being annoyed or not [ 37 ]. Laboratory studies have consistently shown that the periodic variation in the sound of wind turbines adds to the annoyance. In the study of Persson Waye and Öhrström [ 38 ] it was found that wind turbine sounds described as ‘swishing’, ‘lapping’ or ‘whistling’ were more annoying while the least annoying sounds were described as ‘grinding’ and ‘low frequency’ [ 38 ]. In the UK research was performed near three dwellings where people complained about wind turbine sound. Rather than the low-frequency component of the sound amplitude modulation or the rhythmic character was the most conspicuous aspect of the sound [ 39 ]. In a later UK study Large and Stigwood [ 40 ] concluded that amplitude modulation is an important aspect of the intrusiveness of wind turbine sound. More recently Yoon et al. [ 12 ] stated that there is a strong possibility that amplitude modulation is the main reason why wind turbine sound is easily detectable and relatively annoying.

Some think that it is too early to define exposure–effect relations for wind turbines [ 20 , 35 ]. According to them, the influence of context (like residential factors, trust in authorities and the planning process, situational factors) and personal factors (such as noise sensitivity and attitude) is so strong that the exposure–effect relation can only (or at best) give an indication of the percentage of highly annoyed at the local level [ 22 , 23 ].This is not unique to wind turbines, but is to some degree—also true for other sound sources and in part explains why in specific places or situations the actual percentage of annoyed persons can differ from the relations in Fig. 2 . Michaud et al. [ 36 ] compared the results from five studies and found there was a 7.5 dB variation in wind turbine sound levels that led to the same percentage of annoyed persons.

In many countries the assessment of the sound of wind turbines is based on average, A-weighted sound levels (see Sect. 1.2 ). It is generally accepted that annoyance from wind turbines occurs at lower levels than is the case for traffic or industrial sound. Based on Dutch and Swedish data, an exposure–effect relation was derived between calculated sound exposure levels expressed in Lden (day–evening–night level) and the percentage highly annoyed, for indoor as well as outdoor exposures. Later research in Japan and Poland have confirmed these results and obtained similar results [ 30 , 31 ]. The relation between wind turbine sound and annoyance can be compared with those for road, rail and aircraft sound. This comparison is presented in Fig. 2 where the ‘aircraft Europe’ data are from the European HYENA study [ 32 ], the wind turbine data are from Janssen et al. [ 29 ], and the other data are from Miedema and Vos [ 33 ] for industrial sound and from Miedema and Oudshoorn [ 34 ] for air, road and rail transportation sound. The more recent HYENA study has shown that at a number of big European airports noise annoyance has increased when compared to the older data from Miedema and Oudshoorn [ 34 ]. Figure 2 shows that sound from wind turbines leads to a higher percentage of highly annoyed people when compared to other sound sources. The relation resembles that of air traffic sound, but near airports there are higher sound levels and a correspondingly higher percentage of highly annoyed. The relations for transport sound in Fig. 2 have been derived for large numbers of persons from many countries, but the actual percentage for a specific place or situation can be very different, for wind turbines as well as other sources.

The next sections will describe the state of the art in more detail per health effect. Note that the description is limited to the effects of wind turbine sound in the ‘normal’ frequency range. Findings from studies, addressing suggested specific impacts of the low-frequency component and infrasound distinct from ‘normal’ sound are summarized separately in Sect.

Personal and contextual factors can influence annoyance. There is consensus in the literature that visual aspects, attitudes towards wind turbines in the landscape and towards the people responsible for wind farms, the process around planning and construction and economic interest can all in their own way affect levels of annoyance. However, actual evidence for this is still limited.

Most recently, Onakpoya et al. [ 1 ] reanalysed the data from eight cross sectional studies, selected on strict quality requirements and including a total of 2433 participants. Effects considered were annoyance, sleep disturbance and quality of life. Evidence supports the earlier conclusion that there is an association between exposure to wind turbine sound and an increased frequency of annoyance and sleep problems, after adjustment for key variables as visual aspects, attitudes and background sound levels. The strength of evidence was the most convincing for annoyance, followed by sleep disturbance, when comparing participants at exposure levels below and above 40 dB. The findings are in line with Schmidt and Klokker [ 24 ] and Janssen et al. [ 29 ]. In contrast to these authors, Merlin et al. [ 19 ] consider annoyance a response to wind turbines and not a (health) effect as such.

Next to sound, vibration, shadow flicker, warning lights and other visual aspects have been examined in the reviews. There are no studies available yet about the long-term health effects. Such longitudinal studies (studies comparing the situation at different moments in time) might be useful to gain more insight in the causal pathways of the different factors. However, they can still only examine the strength of temporal associations across a range of relevant variables and to establish causal relations will remain problematic in this area.

A remarkable number of nineteen reviews were published in the period between 2009 and 2017. These include systematic reviews as well as policy preparing reviews. Some reviews were dismissed after reading the full text, since they were highly anecdotal, no health impact was estimated, incomplete or only concerned occupational exposure, etc. The remaining ten recent and leading reviews and policy documents (described in 11 manuscripts: [ 1 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 ] draw comparable conclusions about the health effects of wind turbine sound: in general, an association is found between annoyance and the level of wind turbine sound. Also, an association between sound level and sleep disturbance is considered plausible, even though a direct relation is uncertain because of the limited number of studies with sometimes contradictory results. Perceived stress is related to chronic annoyance or to the feeling that environmental quality and quality of life has diminished due to the placement of wind turbines, and there is sufficient evidence that stress can negatively affect people’s health and well-being in people living in the vicinity of wind turbines [ 20 ].

The number of publications on wind turbine sound and its health effects has increased considerably in the past 10 years, including peer-reviewed articles, conference papers and policy documents (Table).

People can experience annoyance or irritation, anger or disturbance from wind turbine sound, or when they feel that their environmental quality and quality of life deteriorates due to the siting of wind turbines near their homes.

Evidence Since 2015 Based on New Studies

In the period between January 2015 and 2017, 22 relevant publications were identified in peer-reviewed literature. These are 10 on field studies [36, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69], 7 on experiments [12, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75], 3 on a prospective cohort study [76, 77, 78], 1 panel study [79] and 1 qualitative analysis of interviews and discourse [80]. After the systematic literature search, two relevant papers from the most recent International Wind Turbine Noise Conference (Rotterdam 2017) were included [43, 81].

16 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 36 61 62 63 64 65 82 83 66 67 3 First author, year and reference Studies included Country Number of participants Design Quality Exposure Outcomes Effect Michaud, (2016a) [61] Canada 1238 Survey objective and subjective measures A waited SPL outdoors estimated \(+\) C-weighted Annoyance, sleep disturbance, stress or psychological The prevalence of self-reporting to be either ‘very’ or ‘extremely’ (i.e. highly) annoyed with several wind turbine, features increased significantly with increasing A-weighted levels Michaud, (2016b) [62] Canada 1238 Mixed Objective and subjective measures SPL 31–48 dB estimated \(+\) measurements on location Sleep (actimeter), subjective sleep indicators No effect on any of the sleep indicators Michaud, (2016c) [63] Canada 1238 Survey Objective and subjective measures A waited SPL outdoors estimated \(+\) C-weighted Perceived stress scale (PSS) scores, hair cortisol concentrations, resting blood pressure and heart rate The findings do not support an association between exposure to WTN up to 46 dBA and elevated self-reported and objectively defined measures of stress Michaud, (2016d) [36] Canada 1238 Survey Objective and subjective measures A waited SPL outdoors estimated \(+\) C-weighted Noise annoyance, wind turbine perceptions, (including concern for physical safety) and a whole range of personal and situational aspects Annoyance determined by other wind turbine-related, annoyances, personal benefit, noise sensitivity, physical safety concerns, property ownership and province: the community tolerance level (CTL) to WTN is 11 and 26 dB less than to other sources Jalali, (2016a) [76] Canada T1-43, T2-31 Prospective cohort Before after Objective and subjective measures Annoyance, Qol subjective health, mental health Significant effect on mental health and annoyance and symptoms. Interaction with negative attitude, worry about housing prize and visual complaints Jalali, (2016b) [77] Canada 16/2 nights Prospective cohort Before after Objective and subjective measures Distance only Sleep indicators with polysomnographic No major change in sleep after placement of WT’s Jalali, (2016c) [78] Canada Prospective cohort Before after Objective and subjective measures Distance only Pittsburg sleep quality, Epworth Sleepiness Scale and the Insomnia Severity Index WT placement was associated with increased poor sleep quality, daytime sleepiness and rates of insomnia (expressed in th score on the PSQI and the ESS and the ISI. There was a strong association with negative attitude, worry about property values and WT visibility Schäffer, (2016) [70] Germany and Switzerland 60 Laboratory study Test in j 12 pp of noise stimuli WT \(<55\) versus traffic outdoor levels \(>40\) normal fluctuations due to weather conditions Annoyance (short term) modifying effect of noise characteristics Difference found but (much) smaller than Janssen and Michaud), AM next to noise level Feder, (2015) [64] Canada 1238 Field study Objective and subjective measures 22–11 km and estimates based on ISO9613-1 and ISO9613-for each dwelling, dBA and dBC WHO Qol annoyance, symptoms, sleep quality, perceived stress, life, style behaviours and prevalent chronic disease No effects on Qol subscales below 46 dB Chrichton, (2015) [71] New Zealand 60 Laboratory study Students/no control group Up to 43 dB NZ standard for WT infra sound Annoyance Effect only in negative expectation group, interaction with NS Blanes-Vidal, (2016) [69] Denmark/USA 454 Cross sectional Na Distance to WT and number of turbines Ideopathic symptoms Effects on fatigue, difficulty concentrating, headache all disappeared after adjustment for noise exposure and odour from other sources Ionannnidou, (2016) [72] Denmark 19 Laboratory study Na Amplitude modulation elements 60 dBA 30 s M (approach van den Berg) Annoyance Check Abassi, (2015) [68] Iran 53 Field study Na 8-h equivalent sound level (LAeq, 8 h) based on ISO 9612:2009 Annoyance, sleep psychological distress, health complaints Annoyance associated with measured levels but lower than found in residential studies possibly due to economic benefits Tonin, (2016) [74] Australia 72 Laboratory study More men Infrasound exposure double blind (sham noise) Annoyance, symptoms Effects mediated by high/low expectancy Hafke-Dys, (2016) [73] Poland 21 Laboratory study Control condition without modulation Broadband and narrowband noise. With modulations typical, for WT (3, 6 and 9 dB) based on Renteghem Annoyance Interaction between noise type (broadband) and AM on annoyance. WT noise is perceived as less annoying when AM freq. is \(<4\) Hz Yoon, (2016) [12] Korea 24 Laboratory study Control group Amplitude modulation Perceived loudness Combined effect of noise levels and AM on noise perception Botterill, (2016) [80] Australia Na Interviews and discourse analysis Na Na Topics mentioned most often in the discourse Health and property values came forward as main topics Kageyama, (2016) [66, 67] Japan 1079 Face-to-face structured interviews Control sites! (16) versus 34 exp. sites LAeq estimated based on some measurement sites, median 36–40 and 35 at control sites Insomnia, physical and mental health, sensitivity to noise and visual annoyance Odds ratio (OR) of insomnia was significantly higher when the noise exposure level exceeded 40 dB, self-reported sensitivity and visual annoyance independently associated with insomnia. OR of poor health only significant for, noise sensitivity and visual annoyance Maffei, (2015) [75] Italy 40 Listening, experiments Exp versus control Sound recordings of about 5 min were made at five distances Noise recognition Recognition is congruent with the increase of the distance and the decrease of the values of sound, equivalent levels and loudness Krekel, (2016) [79] France/Germany 30 Panel data Na (i) The exact geographical coordinates, (ii) the exact construction, dates and (iii) information on the size of the installation Satisfaction with life Geographical distribution of well-being merged with WT locations. Well-being data merged with Voicescu, (2016) [65] Canada 1238 Survey Objective and subjective measures Shadow flicker (SF) combined with noise estimates expressed in maximum minutes per day (SFm), modelled and based on distance Annoyance, health complaints including dizziness Annoyance associated with SF annoyance to other wind turbine-related features, concern for physical safety and noise sensitivity. Reported dizziness was also retained in the final model (all significant) Yano, (2015) [30] Japan 1079 Face-to-face interview Control group (332) in areas with no wind turbines Extra/interpolated from measured night time noise level \(({L}_{\mathrm{Aeq},n})\); distance for visual exposure Noise annoyance, visual disturbance, perception of shadow flicker (SF) \({L}_{\mathrm{Aeq,}n}\) and distance significantly related to noise annoyance; distance more strongly associated with noise annoyance than level. Most annoyance reported at night-time. Visual annoyance not significantly related to distance, SF indoor and SF outdoor significantly related to distance. SF outdoor more prominent in mountainous area (compared to flat). Interaction between noise annoyance and visual annoyance/SF outdoor, not with visibility and SF indoors Qu, (2017) [43] England \(+\) Scotland 357 Survey in (sub)urban areas No attribution to wind turbines in control group (96) Calculated (maximum?) A-weighted wind turbine sound pressure level (SPL) on most exposed facade Awareness of and annoyance with wind turbine noise, self-reported sleep disturbance, prevalence of specific health problems, general health, subjective well-being SPL positively associated with noise annoyance. SPL not associated with sleep, but degree of noise annoyance significantly increased possibility of sleep disturbance. Visibility of wind turbine from both window and garden significantly increased odds of less deep sleep. In case group, annoyance with wind turbine noise significantly influenced prevalence of health problems: psychological problems significantly and positively associated with being annoyed by wind turbine noise, but not with SPL itself. Positive associations were found between SPL and adverse health problems, including nausea and dizziness. Dizziness and ear discomfort related to SPL in control group Two major studies were (partly) reported in this period and not included in the reviews, one in Canada [] and one in Japan []. The study from Health Canada [] was performed with 1238 adult residents living at varying distances from wind turbines. A-weighted sound levels outdoors were calculated as well as C-weighted levels, and additional measurements were made at a number of locations. A strong point of the study is the high response rate of 79%. The results were presented in six publications, addressing effects on sleep, stress, quality of life, noise annoyance and health effects and a separate paper on the effect of shadow flicker on annoyance. Also, two papers were published describing the assessment of sound levels near wind turbines and near receivers []. The Japanese study by Kakeyama et al. [] pertains a field study with structured face-to-face interviews at 34 study sites and 16 control sites. Wind turbine sound levels were estimated based on previous measurements at some sites and expressed in LAeq. Outcomes studied were sleep deprivation, sleep disturbance and physical and mental health symptoms (Table).

The next sections describe the state of the art in more detail per health effect as in 3.1. Note again that the description is limited to the effects of wind turbine sound in the ‘normal’ frequency range. Findings from studies addressing suggested specific impacts of the low-frequency component and infrasound distinct from ‘normal’ sound are summarized separately in Sect. 4.

Noise Annoyance In one of his papers about the Health Canada study, Michaud et al. [61] describe the findings on annoyance, self-reported health and medication use. In line with earlier findings the study confirms that the percentage of highly annoyed increased significantly with increasing wind turbine sound levels. The effect was highest for annoyance with visual aspects of wind turbines, followed by blinking lights, shadow flicker, sound and vibrations. An Iranian study of Abasssi et al. [68] included 53 workers divided in three job groups with repairing, security and administration tasks. The exposure level to wind turbine sound of employees at each job group was measured as an 8-h equivalent sound level as is usual in working conditions. Outcome measures included annoyance, sleep, psychological distress and health complaints. Noise sensitivity, age, job stress and shift work were accounted for. Annoyance was associated with measured sound levels but lower than found in residential studies. The other health outcomes did not show a significant association. It is not clear how this relates to residential conditions as the situations are quite different and different factors are involved. In the period 2015–2017 several laboratory studies have addressed the effects of wind turbine sound and annoyance. In a listening test among 60 people, after a pilot in 12 people, an association was found by Schäffer et al. [70] between road traffic and wind turbine sound level or variations in sound level due to amplitude modulation and annoyance. Attitude towards wind turbines and noise sensitivity were important confounders, and the frequency of the amplitude modulation (higher for the wind turbine sound) seemed to play an important role. The relative contribution of the typical characteristics of wind turbine sound, and particularly the rhythmic character or amplitude modulation (AM) was studied in several experiments. Ionannidou et al. [72] report on a study among 19 volunteers in which the effect of changes over time in the amplitude modulation of wind turbine sound on annoyance was investigated. The changes could either be the frequency of the modulation, the depth (or strength) of the modulation or a change in depth over time. The study confirms earlier results that AM leads to a higher annoyance rating. A higher modulation frequency (from 0.5 to 2 Hz) also resulted in a higher rating, but the effect was not significant. There was also a higher annoyance rating when the modulation depth increased intermittently, but again this was not significant. Because of the limited statistical power of these tests (because of the low number of participants and the limited time), it was recommended to investigate the variations in AM for a longer period and in a field setting. A study from Hafke-Dys et al. [73] among 21 volunteers again concerned the effect of amplitude modulation on annoyance. In this study sounds with several modulation conditions were compared to a non-modulation condition. The test sounds used were (1) sound from moving cars, passing at a rate of 1–4 per second; (2) broadband sound with the same spectrum as wind turbines and (3) narrowband sound that could be modulated at 1, 2 and 4 Hz. All three types of sound had modulation depths typical for wind turbines at 3, 6 and 9 dB similar to Van Renterghem et al. [84], or zero (no modulation). Results showed that AM did increase annoyance in the case of broadband sound and passing cars, but not for the narrow band sound. The modulated sound was more annoying with increasing modulation frequency, in agreement with an expected highest sensitivity for modulated sounds at 4 Hz. Large, modern wind turbines modulate their sound at a frequency close to 1 Hz. The effect of AM on annoyance was less for the broadband sound than for passing cars. The main difference between these two sounds was the spectral content, with the broadband sound having more low-frequency sound than the passing cars. The authors conclude that this result supports the Japanese study [13] in which it was demonstrated ‘that low frequency components are not the most significant problem when it comes to the annoyance perception of wind turbine noise’. Yoon et al. [12] studied the reaction to modulation of wind turbine sound in 12 people. Findings show again that there is an association between AM and level of annoyance. The authors conclude that there is a strong possibility that amplitude modulation is the main cause of two typical properties of wind turbine sound: that it is easily detectable and highly annoying at relatively lower sound levels than other noise sources. They add that this does not mean that these properties can be fully explained by the amplitude modulation. Crichton and Petrie [71] studied 60 volunteers at exposure levels up to 43 dBA (the New Zealand standard limit) in combination with infrasound (9 Hz, 50 dB). In one group, the participants were shown a video about the health risk of wind turbine infrasound, and in the second group a video on health benefits was shown. An effect on annoyance was found only in the group expecting to be negatively affected, and in this group noise sensitivity increased the likelihood of being annoyed. In the group expecting a positive effect, there was far less annoyance and almost no influence from noise sensitivity. In a later publication from the Japanese study, it was found that within 860 m from a wind farm 10% of the residents were annoyed by shadow flicker while within 780 m 10% of the residents were highly annoyed by wind turbine sound [81]. The authors concluded that a minimum distance (or ‘setback’) between residences and wind farms should be considered from an aural and visual point of view.

Sleep Disturbance Michaud et al. [62] reported on sleep disturbance from a field study involving 742 of the 1238 respondents (as described under 3.2) wearing an actimeter, to measure relevant sleep indicators during 3–7 consecutive nights after the interviews. Outdoor wind turbine sound levels were calculated following international standards. Neither self-reported sleep quality, diagnosed sleep disorders nor objective measures such as sleep onset latency, awakenings and sleep efficiency showed an immediate association with exposure levels up to 46 dB after adjustment for relevant confounders such as age, caffeine use, body mass index (BMI) and health condition. This partly contrasts with earlier findings on subjective sleep measures [47]. No study addressed objective sleep measures in relation to wind turbines before. However, it should be mentioned that the method of actigraphy is limited as compared to more elaborate polysomnographic measures as were employed by Jalali et al. [76] and described below. In the Health Canada study having to close the window in order to guarantee an undisturbed sleep had by far the strongest influence on annoyance [61]. This could be a reason that no relation between wind turbine sound level and sleep disturbance was found: if persons disturbed at night by wind turbine sound would close their bedroom window, the result could be that they are less disturbed at night by the sound as such, although they could be annoyed because they had to close the window. The results do not directly support or negate this explanation. However, those closing their bedroom windows was eight times more likely to be annoyed. At higher wind turbine sound levels, people more often gave wind turbines as a reason for closing the bedroom window [61]. Kakeyama et al. [66, 67] showed a significant association between sound levels above 40 dB and sleeping problems (insomnia). These findings are in contrast with those reported by Michaud et al. [62] who did not observe an immediate association between sound exposure levels up to 46 dBA and subjective and objective indicators for sleep. The earlier findings of Bakker [41] regarding subjective sleep indicators showed that sleep disturbance seemed to be related to sound level only when no others factors were included. When annoyance with wind turbine sound was included, then sleep disturbance was related to that annoyance and not anymore to sound level. Earlier, Pedersen and Persson [42] also concluded on an association between annoyance and sleep disturbance rather than a direct effect of sound level. Jalali et al. [77] measured sleep disturbance in a group of 16 people for 2 consecutive nights using a polysomnographic method including a range of sleep and physiological parameters such as sleep onset, duration, movement during sleep, awakening, EEG activity. Sound measurements over the whole frequency range (0.5–20,000 Hz) were performed in the bedroom as well as outdoor, while accounting for weather conditions, wind speed and temperature. Factors that were taken into account were attitude, sensitivity, visibility, distance within 1000 m and windows open versus closed. Results showed no major changes in the sleep of participants who had new wind turbines in their community. There were no significant changes in the average indoor (31 dBA) and outdoor sound levels (40–45 dBA before, 38–42 dBA after) before and after the wind turbines became operational. None of the participants reported waking up to close their windows because of the outside noise. The lack of an effect might be explained by the limited measurements (two nights) or the low indoor sound levels that almost equalled the threshold value for sleep disturbance of 30 dBA. In another paper Jalali et al. [78] report on the association between measured wind turbine sound levels and subjective sleep quality as measured with the Pittsburgh sleep quality index. Results show only an indirect association with attitude towards the wind turbines and concern about reduced housing values and the visibility of the turbine from the properties. The results confirm the strong psychological component and individual differences in sleep disturbance from wind turbine sound.

Other Health Effects Due to Sound From the Canadian study Michaud et al. [61] concluded that, except for annoyance, the results do not support an association between exposure to wind turbine sound up to 46 dBA and the evaluated health-related end points, such as mental health problems, headaches, pain, stiffness, or diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, tinnitus and hearing damage. Michaud et al. [63] also studied the association between wind turbine sound level and objective stress indicators (cortisol, heart rate) and perceived stress (PPS index). These stress indicators were weakly associated with each other, but analysis showed no significant association between exposure to wind turbine sound (up to 46 dBA) and self-reported or objective measures of stress. The authors remarked that there was also no association between stress indicators and noise annoyance, which does not support the hypothesis that stress can be a consequence of chronic annoyance. The only wind turbine-related variable that had an influence on stress was high annoyance with the blinking lights on top of the wind turbines [63]. McCunney et al. [25] found an explanation for a lack of significant associations in the fact that sound levels from wind turbines do not reach levels which could cause such direct effects. Results for quality of life (Qol) [64], measured using the WHO Qol index and including physical, environmental, social quality and satisfaction with health, showed no relation with sound levels (at levels up to 46 dB). This is in contrast with findings reported earlier by Shepherd et al. [47] and Nissenbaum et al. [48]. However, the results of these studies are hard to compare because the exposure levels are not the same and because different instruments were used to measure perceived quality of life Tonin et al. [74] studied 72 volunteers in a laboratory setting for a double-blind test similar to that of Crichton et al. [71] but used infrasound at a higher level (91 dB). Before the listening test, participants were influenced to a high expectancy of negative effects from infrasound with a video of a wind farm affected couple, or a low expectancy of negative effects with a video of an academic explaining why infrasound is not a problem. Then normal wind turbine sound was presented via a headset to all participants with the inclusion of the infrasound or no infrasound for a period of 23 min. The infrasound had no statistically significant effect on the symptoms reported by participants, but the concern they had about the effect of infrasound had a statistically significant influence on the symptoms reported. A survey in Denmark [69] among 454 citizens living in rural areas at different distances to wind turbine farms with a varying numbers of wind turbines studied the effect on non-specific symptoms. The study included idiopathic symptoms (i.e. not related to a specific disease) as effects and distance to the wind farm and the number of turbines as a measure of exposure. The originally positive association of distance with fatigue, headaches and concentration problems all disappeared after adjustment for exposure to sound and odour from other sources. Jalali et al. [76] report on a prospective cohort (i.e. before–after) study with 43 participants who completed a questionnaire in spring 2014 and again a year later. Exposure to a wind farm was only measured in terms of distance. Residents who were annoyed by the sound or sight of turbines, or who had a negative attitude towards them or were concerned about property devaluation, after 1 year experienced lower mental health and life quality and reported more symptoms than residents who were not annoyed and had positive attitudes towards turbines. The response rate for this study was low (only 22%), and 12 people (of 43 that is approximately 25%) were not in the second round. Another weak point is the lack of a control group. Against the background of the increasing number of wind farms in Germany, Krekel et al. [79] investigated the effect of the presence of wind turbines on residential well-being by combining household data from the German Socio-Economic Panel with a dataset on more than 20,000 wind turbines for the time period between 2000 and 2012. The key effect studied was life satisfaction. Results showed that the construction of one or more wind turbines in the neighbourhood of households had a significant negative effect on life satisfaction. This effect was limited in both distance and time. More recent the first results were published of a new British study that was held near wind turbines in densely populated, suburban areas [43]. In this study part of the participants received a questionnaire that included explicit questions on the impacts of the local wind turbines on well-being, and the remaining part received a variant with no such questions. When including all participants, there was less annoyance from wind turbine sound in this study compared to what was found in earlier (Swedish, Dutch, Polish and Canadian) studies in rural areas. For the first group (with questions concerning local wind turbines), the sound levels were not significantly related to health problems and this group reported less health problems and better general health; this was opposite to the relationship found in the other, variant group.