Exhibition Review : Discover Gold at the Bank of England Museum from 19th January 2015
If the old legend that the streets of London were paved with gold was a bit fanciful, the fact that there are vast treasures of gold under the streets is confirmed by the new permanent exhibition, Discover Gold at the Bank of England Museum.

The Bank holds a vast amount of gold for the UK government and other governments in its vaults underneath Threadneedle Street. The giant new photographic backdrop and video presentation in the exhibition explains some of interesting facts to visitors. It is estimated that there are around 4,600 tons of gold worth £156billion stored in the concrete lined vaults. Each of the 28lb 24-carat gold bars is stamped with different shapes and marks to distinguish its owner.

Eagle eyed viewers may spot a number of old posters for luxury cruises on the walls of the vault, this is because the vaults used to be the old canteen. It also was used in the Second World War as a bomb shelter for Bank of England staff.

The exhibition seeks to explain why gold has been treasured for thousands of years and reveal the scientific properties that make it a vital ingredient in modern technology. The display includes a rare gold bar from the 4th-century AD, a bar given as a symbolic gift to the church by The Queen at her coronation in 1953. It also explores the intriguing connection between Carob seeds and gold.

If you would like to get your hands on a real gold bar, the museum has one for you to lift up but be warned it is very heavy !

Although the Gold exhibition is relatively small, it makes a welcome addition to the many other interesting exhibitions in the museum.

The Bank of England plays an important role in promoting financial stability and has an intriguing history. Surrounded by the massive windowless curtain wall, the Bank of England is one of the landmarks of the City of London and yet one of its most mysterious institutions. The museum attempts to explain some of the workings of the institution by allowing visitors to go behind the wall to discover some of the secrets of ‘ The Old Lady of Threadneedle Street’.

Opening Hours

Monday to Friday:​ 10.00am – 5.00pm (last entry 4.45pm).

24 & 31 December 2014: 10.00am – 1.00pm.

Closed at weekends and Public Bank Holidays.

Admission is free.

There will be a series of events throughout the year, if you would like to find out more, visit the Bank of England Museum website here

Visiting London Guide Rating – Highly Recommended

London Visitors is the official blog for the Visiting London Guide .com website. The website was developed to bring practical advice and latest up to date news and reviews of events in London.

Since our launch in January, we attract thousands of readers each month, the site is constantly updated.

We have sections on Museums and Art Galleries, Transport, Food and Drink, Places to Stay, Security, Music, Sport, Books and many more.

There are also hundreds of links to interesting articles on our blog.

To find out more visit the website here