The Real Story Behind the Loss of Steelworker Jobs

Daniel Griswold Blocked Unblock Follow Following Jul 5, 2017

In the Rust Belt city of Youngstown, Ohio, people still remember “Black Monday.” Four decades ago, on September 19, 1977, Youngstown Sheet and Tube Company laid off 5,000 well paid, unionized steelworkers. As locals will tell you, the city has never been the same.

Black Monday is worth recalling today as the Trump administration looks poised to impose restrictions on imported steel in the name of national security, through Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. Behind the move is an effort to restore lost steelworker jobs to Youngstown and other communities where the protectionist message of candidate Trump resonated.

The chronology of Black Monday is important. The Trump administration blames the woes of the steel industry and U.S. manufacturing in general on imports, especially from China, and on trade deals such as the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico. But Black Monday shows that the painful transition of the steel industry came years before the rise of China or the signing of any “bad” trade deals.

The decline of jobs in the U.S. steel industry has nothing to do with the rise of imports. The primary driver of declining employment is dramatic productivity gains in the industry, fueled by automation and changing steel production methods. A secondary cause is the long-term decline in the relative importance of steel to a modern, information driven economy.

Since the 1970s, total consumption of steel in the United States has been trending downward even as our population and economy have grown larger. According to the World Steel Institute (based in Belgium), the annual per capita consumption of steel in the United States has fallen almost in half since the 1970s, from 637 kilograms to 336. In a modern economy, commodities such as steel are relatively less important than technology and services.

The long-run decline in demand for steel has translated, quite predictably, into a decline in output. As the graph nearby shows, since the heyday of Youngstown Sheet and Tube, both steel consumption and output in the United States have been trending downward. And the two are closely linked. Steel demand and output fell in the steep recession of 1981–82. Both recovered in the booming 1990s, only to plunge again in the Great Recession of 2008–09, followed by the plodding recovery since then. Despite the fluctuations, both steel demand and output have settled well below the levels of 40 years ago.

Producing steel today is a U.S. industry and workforce that is far more productive than four decades ago. According to the American Iron and Steel Institute,

Labor productivity [in the steel industry] has seen a five-fold increase since the early 1980s, going from an average of 10.1 man-hours per finished ton to an average of 1.9 man-hours per finished ton of steel in 2015. Many North American plants are producing a ton of finished steel in less than one man-hour.

If you want to know why the steel industry employs so fewer workers than in decades past, there is the answer. It is not rising imports. Domestic production supplied 79 percent of demand in 2011–2015, compared to an almost identical share of 80 percent in the early 1980s. Even if steel output were restored to what it was in the days before Black Monday, total employment in the industry would still be a fraction of what it was then.

Without a sharp increase in domestic demand for steel (unlikely) and even more crucially a dramatic reversal of productivity in the industry (unthinkable), those jobs are never coming back, no matter how high the duties our government may foolishly impose on imported steel.