This week on the campaign trail …
View this email in your browser This week on the campaign trail …



House Ag Committee approves 2018 Farm Bill

Several provisions from Cramer included



This past week, the U.S. House Committee on Agriculture approved a five-year Farm Bill that includes Kevin’s fix to the Agriculture Risk Coverage (ARC) commodity support program. Also included in the bill was Kevin’s introduction of minimal effects standards in Swampbuster, requiring USDA to define, within six months, what is a wetland and what is not, in order to protect our producers from illegal conversions. The draft bill also maintains the existing structure of crop insurance and rejects proposals to means test or limit crop insurance payments. Kevin Cramer Farm Bill vimeo.com This is "Kevin Cramer Farm Bill" by Cramer for Senate on Vimeo, the home for high quality videos and the people who love them. Tariff talk exposes Heitkamp to scrutiny on international affairs

Misguided understanding of market impacts displays significant weakness



Statewide newspapers have been promoting Senator Heitkamp’s misguided understanding on market impacts of tariffs in North Dakota. Unfortunately, all this has accomplished has been turmoil and anxiety in the agricultural community which ultimately harms North Dakota producers. A news report from



The picture that is becoming clear is that Senator Heitkamp doesn’t have the backbone to stand up to China and their incredibly unfair trade practices and double dealings. She has been silent when it comes to Chinese currency manipulation and their incessant theft of American intellectual property.



To date, we haven’t had a President with the fortitude to stand up to these unfair practices and now we do. He needs our support. Senator Heitkamp has been critical of Trump’s position while Rep. Kevin Cramer has supported it. One vote matters in November; we need Kevin in the U.S. Senate to support a renewal of our trade positions with China. It’s about time.

Misguided understanding of market impacts displays significant weaknessStatewide newspapers have been promoting Senator Heitkamp’s misguided understanding on market impacts of tariffs in North Dakota. Unfortunately, all this has accomplished has been turmoil and anxiety in the agricultural community which ultimately harms North Dakota producers. A news report from KFYR-TV this past week says it nicely as does the opinion editorial from commodity trader Eugene Graner The picture that is becoming clear is that Senator Heitkamp doesn’t have the backbone to stand up to China and their incredibly unfair trade practices and double dealings. She has been silent when it comes to Chinese currency manipulation and their incessant theft of American intellectual property.To date, we haven’t had a President with the fortitude to stand up to these unfair practices and now we do. He needs our support. Senator Heitkamp has been critical of Trump’s position while Rep. Kevin Cramer has supported it. One vote matters in November; we need Kevin in the U.S. Senate to support a renewal of our trade positions with China. It’s about time. Burgum officially endorses Cramer

Midterm elections are just around the corner! Midterm elections are just around the corner! North Dakota Gov. Doug Burgum has put his official stamp of approval on Kevin Cramer’s Senate run officially announcing his endorsement this past week. In a Facebook post, Kevin said, “I’m grateful for Governor Burgum’s endorsement and I look forward to working with him for years to come.” In the campaign office we have a countdown to election day posted on our board. At the end of this week, there’s 200 days to Nov. 6. That may seem like a long time, but it’s not. It’s right around the corner! Tax Day 2018

Most of us are paying less this year



President Trump’s Tax Cuts and Jobs Act reduced the tax rates for most North Dakotans and the results have been astounding. We are realizing benefits right now and there’s plenty of evidence.



In North Dakota, a married couple filing a joint return with four dependents will see their federal tax liability decrease by $3,624.



But, this is not the story you get if you listen to Democrats. They are doing all they can to discredit the tax cuts and President Trump. Their claims are nothing more than fear-mongering. Claims of cuts to Social Security are ludicrous. There is nothing in the bill that mentions Social Security. And the hypocrisy of their new-found concern over the deficit is laughable. The Democrats didn’t raise a peep of protest about deficit creation during the Obama years when deficits topped $1 trillion four years in a row. But, that aside, creating a deficit either for the federal government, or your family household, comes down to spending more than you take in. Out-of-control government spending is most certainly a major factor in the deficit and is a point the Democrats conveniently like to forget.



The truth is Kevin continues to fight hard to reign in government spending. In addition, he actively supports a balanced budget amendment that would force government to live within its means. The North Dakota Constitution mandates such a condition; it’s time the federal government does the same. Such a measure was introduced by House Republicans last month only to be blocked by democrats who are crying about the deficit.



And let’s remember that all the talk of revenues and deficits is speculation and none of it takes into account the potential for economic growth that the Trump pro-growth agenda can and will deliver. Our new, more aggressive approach to trade, regulations and taxation will unleash our economy to create more good jobs and prosperity for all Americans. This new reality is a completely foreign concept to big-spending liberal democrats. Most of us are paying less this yearPresident Trump’s Tax Cuts and Jobs Act reduced the tax rates for most North Dakotans and the results have been astounding. We are realizing benefits right now and there’s plenty of evidence.In North Dakota, a married couple filing a joint return with four dependents will see their federal tax liability decrease by $3,624. (State of North Dakota, Office of State Tax Commissioner) And the good news continues. North Dakotan’s will see the largest average tax reduction in the nation. The analysis, conducted by the Tax Policy Center – a group backed by the Urban Institute and the Brookings Institution – says our state taxpayers will see an average 10.8 percent cut. South Dakota comes in second at a 10.5 percent cut. (Tax Policy Center) But, this is not the story you get if you listen to Democrats. They are doing all they can to discredit the tax cuts and President Trump. Their claims are nothing more than fear-mongering. Claims of cuts to Social Security are ludicrous. There is nothing in the bill that mentions Social Security. And the hypocrisy of their new-found concern over the deficit is laughable. The Democrats didn’t raise a peep of protest about deficit creation during the Obama years when deficits topped $1 trillion four years in a row. But, that aside, creating a deficit either for the federal government, or your family household, comes down to spending more than you take in. Out-of-control government spending is most certainly a major factor in the deficit and is a point the Democrats conveniently like to forget.The truth is Kevin continues to fight hard to reign in government spending. In addition, he actively supports a balanced budget amendment that would force government to live within its means. The North Dakota Constitution mandates such a condition; it’s time the federal government does the same. Such a measure was introduced by House Republicans last month only to be blocked by democrats who are crying about the deficit.And let’s remember that all the talk of revenues and deficits is speculation and none of it takes into account the potential for economic growth that the Trump pro-growth agenda can and will deliver. Our new, more aggressive approach to trade, regulations and taxation will unleash our economy to create more good jobs and prosperity for all Americans. This new reality is a completely foreign concept to big-spending liberal democrats.



* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *





You can help! Please forward this email to your friends and family.

Let’s spread the word. Only 200 days to election day.









PAID FOR BY CRAMER FOR SENATE



PO BOX 396



BISMARCK, ND 58502-0396