Diplomacy Works Digest

Friday September 14, 2018

The Lead: If you read just one thing this week about the Iran Nuclear Agreement… read this: Trump Administration forced to scale back UNGA Iran focus

“Mr. Trump had planned to use a session of the Security Council, which he is presiding over, to dramatize Iran’s malign behavior throughout the Middle East. But with aides and European allies warning that Iran could exploit the meeting to spotlight Western division over the nuclear deal, the White House has broadened the agenda to nonproliferation, a less loaded theme…“They haven’t done a good job of articulating what their strategy is,” said Karim Sadjadpour, an expert on Iran at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace….The administration, he said, still appeared split between hard-liners who want to bring the regime to its knees and others who are open to some kind of grand bargain. At times, that group seems to include Mr. Trump himself. He has more than once expressed a willingness to meet with Mr. Rouhani, an invitation the Iranian leader has yet to accept…But as Robert Malley, who helped negotiate the Iran deal in the Obama administration, put it: “If the Trump administration is declaring economic war on them, they will react in some way. One of the ways is to radicalize their foreign policy, particularly in Iraq.”



Read this story in its entirety here.

The Fact Check: President Trump is up to his usual late night and early morning tweeting, this time alleging that former Secretary of State John Kerry has had “illegal meetings” and “secret meetings” since leaving office with Iran’s Foreign Minister Javad Zarif.



Were the meetings secret?



Well, if by secret it means that Kerry talked about them in public interviews and briefed the State Department about them, then I guess those conversations are secret.



As Kerry told Fox’s Dana Perino, "Let me be crystal clear: When I met with the Iranians, the policies of the United States was still to be in the Iran deal because the president had not decided and not pulled out. Secondly, every former secretary of state continues to meet with foreign leaders, goes to security conferences, goes around the world. We all do that, and we have conversations with people about the state of affairs in the world in order to understand them. We don't negotiate. We are not involved in interfering with policy, but we certainly have reasonable discussions about nuclear weapons, the world, China, different policies."



And just read this exchange earlier this week with conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt:



Hewitt: It's been reported you've met with (Zarif) a couple of times at least since leaving office as well. So you still...

Kerry: Yes, I have. That's accurate.

Hewitt: And is it a half dozen times, a dozen times?

Kerry: No. No, no, no. I met with him at a conference in Norway. I think I saw him in a conference in Munich at the World Economic Forum. So I've probably seen him three or four times.

Hewitt: Are you trying to coach him through the Trump administration's rejection of the JCPOA?

Kerry: No, that's not my job, and my coaching him would not, you know, that's not how it works…I've been very blunt to Foreign Minister Zarif, and told him look, you guys need to recognize that the world does not appreciate what's happening with missiles, what's happening with Hezbollah, what's happening with Yemen. You're supporting you know, an ongoing struggle there. They say they're prepared to negotiate and to resolve these issues. But the administration's taken a very different tack. I don't know as I talk to you today if there's been any dialogue or sit down. I don't think there has, which would open up any kind of diplomatic channel. And it appears right now as if the administration is hell bent for leather determined to pursue a regime change strategy…

Hewitt: Oh, that makes sense.

Hewitt: Now when you get done talking to Zarif in Norway or Munich, do you call up Pompeo and talk with him about this sort of stuff and how...

Kerry: Well, those conversations took place before Pompeo became Secretary of State. And I haven't seen him since then. But I did have a fairly long conversation with Secretary Pompeo before the Iran decision was made. And I made the argument that I just made to you. I made it very clearly, and it was clear that he disagreed with that approach, or President Trump disagreed. I don't know which. But the bottom line is that is not the approach they took.



Secretary Kerry publicly and privately supported the JCPOA – which was US policy. His position was the American position. Jennifer Rubin (no Kerry fan) had a smart tweet about this:



Read the thread here to see how Rubin debated the point vigorously and effectively.



What are the facts?



Publicly as well as privately, Kerry urged Iran and Europe to find a way to keep the JCPOA alive because it's working. He hopes Iran stays in compliance no matter what happens in our politics at home. That's also the view of the US State Department and pretty much everyone. His position is the American position.



Like past diplomats, he keeps in touch with his former counterparts. We should all want diplomats keeping in touch with their former counterparts around the world. It's valuable. It's also normal, and traditional. Just ask Henry Kissinger about his decades-long conversations with the Chinese and Russians which have aided American policymakers for decades. Here at Diplomacy Works, where we defend diplomacy, we think it'd be a mistake to let Trump tweets have a chilling effect on anyone and make it impossible for these normal interactions to happen. Frankly, today more than ever, it's useful to hear what other countries are saying and thinking, and it's something think tanks, former officials, and others have done for decades.



Is there any truth to Trump’s assertion that the meetings ere “illegal?” No. The New York Times had a good piece on this as did Media Matters.



Bottomline: Trump’s wrong and, in keeping with tradition, he’s using ‘alternative facts.’ But more than that, is this really a fight this president wants to have? As a candidate, he publicly invited Vladimir Putin to hack emails and break American law. In the winter of 2016, he , intervened against US policy and meddled in the last Administration's conversations with Egypt over a UN vote on Middle East settlements. Oh, and today his campaign manager plead guilty to conspiracy against the United States.



Kerry’s meetings: perfectly legal, not remotely secret.



The Megaphone:



Trump’s withdrawal from the Iran nuclear deal ‘EMPOWERS HARDLINERS’, warns John Kerry



Iran Nuclear Chief Hopes Deal Will Survive



Reuters: US Sanctions impact hurt energy markets. “The U.S. decision to re-impose sanctions on Iran’s exports from early November contributed to a forecast tightening of the market, pushing the Nov-Dec spread to a premium of more than 50 cents in early May.”



An interesting look into Iran’s economy



Germany looking at payment system with Iran to save nuclear deal



New book offers vital background on the Iran nuclear deal