Marco Rubio's Energy Plan
America is blessed with abundant energy resources. Thanks to new technology and innovation, our country is poised to become the world’s energy superpower even as our emissions have been declining. If we harness our energy potential in the right way, and let innovation flourish, we will ensure that energy is affordable for consumers and families, help businesses grow and create jobs, protect our environment, strengthen our national security, and increase America’s influence around the world.

Affordable, reliable American energy has sparked a manufacturing renaissance, enabling America’s small businesses to compete in the global economy. To make the 21st century a New American Century, we must take full advantage of our energy potential. Marco has long opposed big-government efforts to take over our energy economy, like a cap-and-trade program that would amount to a massive energy tax.

On Day One in office, Marco will begin to undo the damage done by President Obama’s Environmental Protection Agency, and begin implementing his comprehensive energy plan.

His energy plan will:

Optimize America’s Resources

Empower States and Tribes to Control Onshore Energy Development Within Their Borders

Rewrite the Obama Administration’s Flawed Five-Year Offshore Drilling Plan

Immediately Approve the Keystone XL Pipeline

Expedite Approval of American Natural Gas Exports

Defend U.S. Interests in International Climate Negotiations

Bolster the Energy Security of U.S. Allies

Conclude TTIP Negotiations Without Restrictions on Access to U.S. Energy Exports

Minimize Government Bureaucracy

Create a National Regulatory Budget to Limit the Power of Unelected Regulators

Stop President Obama’s Carbon Mandates

Expose the True Costs of Environmental Litigation to Taxpayers

Simplify and Improve the Environmental Review Process

Maximize Private Innovation

Reform Our Outdated Higher Education System to Support Energy Jobs of the Future

Facilitate Private-Sector-Led Development of New Technologies

Overhaul the Tax Code and Cut Taxes for Business of All Sizes

Read the detailed version of the plan by clicking here (PDF).

Here’s what some of Marco’s supporters are saying about it.

Oklahoma State Senator David Holt, Oklahoma State Chairman:

There is no question that Marco’s energy policies would prove enormously beneficial to the economies of energy-producing states like Oklahoma. By encouraging energy independence and innovation, Marco’s proposals would significantly benefit our nation’s security and economic future. There is no other candidate for president who is presenting the same level of thoughtfulness and specificity when it comes to energy policy.

West Virginia Delegate Danny Hamrick, West Virginia State Chairman:

West Virginians bear the burden of President Obama’s war on coal, and the broader war on energy, firsthand. Marco’s plan to promote American energy exploration and production will support hard working men, women, and their families in our state and the nation by reining in harmful overregulation by the EPA.

* * *

Nowhere is the disconnect between the potential of our people and the priorities of politicians as large as in energy. Plans pushed by many Democrats including Hillary Clinton are premised on the outdated and unrealistic notion that our energy potential can only be seized by the federal government handing out subsidies to favored companies and imposing new mandates and taxes on others. No matter which party is in power, Washington picking winners and losers is a recipe for failure.

Rather than distort the market, the government should instead promote competition. Policies that expand access to oil, gas, and coal development can also expand access to the development of wind, solar, nuclear, and hydropower energy. Modernizing regulations and permitting processes will help develop both traditional and alternative energy sources and encourage energy diversity.

Hillary Clinton’s energy vision is stuck in the past. Her plans would restrict consumer choice, grow the federal bureaucracy, and make energy more expensive for Americans — a burden that will fall heavily on seniors, minority communities, and the working poor.

The Clinton-Obama approach has never worked, and never will. Government must focus on the kind of basic research it does well, and let innovators take care of the rest.

To achieve our full energy potential in the 21st century, Marco will follow three guiding principles: optimizing America’s resources, minimizing government bureaucracy, and maximizing private innovation.

On Video

x

x

x

x

Op-Eds & Speeches

Marco speaks to energy leaders in Oklahoma City. (September 2, 2015)

Marco on America’s energy future. (National Review, September 1, 2015)