Mission Statement
Not one more. We cannot allow one more person to be killed by senseless gun violence. We cannot allow one more person to experience the pain of losing a loved one. We cannot allow one more family to wait for a call or text that never comes. We cannot allow the normalization of gun violence to continue. We must create a safe and compassionate nation for our youth to grow up in.

In the days after the tragedy in Parkland, Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School students strived to ensure that what happened at their school never happens again. As a nation, we continue to witness tragedy after tragedy, yet our politicians remain complacent. The Parkland students, along with young leaders of all backgrounds from across the country, refuse to accept this passivity and demand direct action to combat this epidemic.

Gun violence does not always look the same; this issue includes mass shootings, suicides, domestic abuse, violence on our streets, and more. It is vital to remember that our youth and communities of color are disproportionately affected by this violence, and we must focus more on preventing trauma than comparing it. Bullets do not discriminate and our response to violence cannot either.

No one should not have to be exposed to such trauma, as all lives are equally precious. Just because a bullet has not touched your life does not mean you or any of our American communities are safe. Our country must make the safety of its citizens a number one priority, and we must hold those in power accountable for perpetuating the root causes of this violence.

Millions came together for the largest global protest in history to remind the world that young people have the power to drive real change. Every day since March 24th, 2018, we have been expanding our coalitions and working with new advocates in order to create a movement that ends the violence and elects morally just leaders into office. We will not stop our advocacy until we see the change we demand.

March For Our Lives was founded by Marjory Stoneman Douglas students and alumni, coming together to make this moment different.