Marco Rubio & Obamacare Bailout: How He Saved $2.5 Billion
ObamaCare is failing.

One of the nation’s largest insurers, UnitedHealthcare, says it’s losing so much on its ObamaCare customers (despite skyrocketing prices and taxpayer subsidies) that it’s considering leaving the market.

So, naturally, insurance companies want a taxpayer bailout, and the Obama administration wants to give it to them.

But Marco has led the fight to stop this outrageous bailout for two years.

In fact, insurers would already be receiving a gigantic bailout this year — if Marco hadn’t stopped them in Congress, saving taxpayers $2.5 billion.

x

There is a provision in the gargantuan health care law for an insurer bailout, called “risk corridors,” that essentially allows the federal government to transfer money to health insurers if they’re losing too much on ObamaCare.

It was supposed to be paid for with a tax on insurers that were making money off of ObamaCare, but not enough were, so the White House resorted to trying to transfer other taxpayer money to pay for the bailout.

Marco exposed the plan, and the liberal left and insurance companies went wild attacking him for it.

Then, when the White House tried to get funding for the bailout into last year’s budget, Marco led the fight to keep it out for at least one year. That saved taxpayers $2.5 billion.

Now Marco is leading the fight to stop the bailout again — only this time the stakes for taxpayers, and the potential savings, will be even bigger.

Here’s what Marco had to say when he successfully got his idea into law:

For over a year, I’ve fought to protect Americans from having to fund massive bailouts to protect the profits of the insurance companies that helped write Obamacare. While there is much in this massive spending measure that is simply bad for America, at least the provisions protecting against a taxpayer-funded bailout of insurance companies are a step in the right direction. While the Obama administration can still administer the risk-corridor program, for one year at least, they won’t be able to use taxpayer funds to bail out insurance companies.

The program will be around for another two years. With ObamaCare failing, insurers will be back next year, too, so Marco is working to end the possibility of a taxpayer-funded bailout permanently.

Of course, ObamaCare needs to be repealed entirely and replaced with reforms that will allow Americans to get affordable health care coverage without resorting to bailouts of insurance companies.

Marco has laid out his plan for repealing and replacing ObamaCare here.