Universal Background Checks
Though more than 90% of the American public supports background checks for all gun sales, a dangerous and deadly loophole in federal gun laws still exempts unlicensed sellers from having to perform any background check whatsoever before selling a firearm. With this loophole, guns easily find their way into the hands of illegal buyers and gun traffickers, dramatically increasing the likelihood of gun murders and suicides.

Background

By far the most dangerous gap in federal firearms laws today is the background check loophole. Although federal law requires licensed firearms dealers to perform background checks on prospective purchasers, it does not require unlicensed sellers to do so. An estimated 40% of all firearms transferred in the US are acquired from unlicensed sellers without a background check.

According the US Department of Justice, because federal law fails to require background checks by every person who sells or transfers a gun—known as universal background checks—“individuals prohibited by law from possessing guns can easily obtain them from private sellers and do so without any federal records of the transactions.” “The private-party gun market,” one study observed, “has long been recognized as a leading source of guns used in crimes.” Although this loophole is frequently referred to as the “gun show” loophole, because of the particular problems associated with gun shows, it applies to all private firearm sales, regardless of where they occur.

The internet has significantly increased illegal buyers’ ability to find sellers willing to transfer firearms to them without background checks.

As of September 2013, about 67,000 firearms were listed for sale online from private, unlicensed sellers.

29% of ads by private sellers on armslist.com (a popular website for firearm sales) were posted by high-volume private sellers who posted five or more ads over an eight-week period.

According to an undercover investigation by the City of New York, 62% of private online firearm sellers agreed to sell a firearm to a buyer even after the buyer had told the seller that he or she probably could not pass a background check.

When private sellers don’t run background checks, people known to be dangerous can easily obtain guns, often with deadly consequences. For example, in 2012, a gunman killed three people, including his wife, and injured four others at a spa in Wisconsin, after buying a gun through a private seller he found online. The shooter was prohibited from purchasing guns due to an active domestic violence restraining order against him, but was able to buy the gun anyway because the seller was not required to run a background check.

In a 2007 report, the International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) stated that, because individuals who fail a background check can easily access firearms from unlicensed sellers, “Guns are far too easily acquired by prohibited possessors, and too often end up being used in gun crime and gun violence.” The IACP concluded that “Congress, as well as state, local, and tribal governments, should enact laws requiring that all gun sales and transfers proceed through” a federally licensed dealer.

Gun offenders overwhelmingly obtain their guns through private sales. A survey of state prison inmates in 13 states who were convicted of gun offenses found that only 13% obtained the gun from a gun store or pawnshop where background checks are required. Nearly all (96%) of those inmates who were already prohibited from possessing a gun at the time of their crime obtained the firearm through an unlicensed private seller.

When background checks are required, they are extremely effective at keeping guns out of the hands of dangerous, prohibited persons. Since the federal background check requirement was adopted in 1994, over 3 million people legally prohibited from possessing a gun—mainly convicted felons, domestic abusers, and the dangerously mentally ill—have been denied a firearm transfer or permit. In 2014 alone, 147,000 prohibited people were blocked from acquiring guns by NICS, the federal background check system.

The Data Confirms that Universal Background Check Laws are Effective and Save Lives

From 2009 to 2012, states that required background checks on all handgun sales or permits had 35% fewer gun deaths per capita than states without that background check requirement.

Researchers have also found that, after adjusting for population, states that require background checks on all handgun sales experience less than half as many mass shooting incidents (52% fewer) as states without that background check requirement. States with background checks have 63% fewer mass shootings by individuals who are prohibited from possessing guns and 64% fewer mass shootings involving domestic violence. States with comprehensive background check laws also experience 48% less gun trafficking, 38% fewer deaths of women shot by intimate partners, and 17% fewer firearms involved in aggravated assaults, per capita.

States with universal background check requirements also have 53% fewer firearm suicides and 31% fewer overall suicides per capita than states without these laws.

One state has also provided a tragic case study in the importance of background checks in preventing gun violence and saving lives. In 2007, Missouri repealed its permit-to-purchase handgun licensing law, which had, since 1921, required all handgun purchasers to undergo a background check and obtain a license in order to lawfully purchase a handgun from any seller. This change eliminated mandatory background checks for handguns sold by private sellers in Missouri.

Johns Hopkins researchers determined that repeal of Missouri’s background check law was linked to a 14% increase in Missouri’s murder rate through 2012 and a 25% increase in firearm homicide rates. These researchers estimated that in tragic human terms, the law’s repeal translated into an additional 49 to 68 murders every year. This spike in murders in Missouri only occurred for murders committed with a firearm and was widespread across the state’s counties. In contrast, none of the states bordering Missouri experienced significant increases in their murder rates, and the national murder rate declined during this period by over 5%. Additionally, immediately following the repeal of Missouri’s background check law, there was a twofold increase in the percentage of guns recovered at Missouri crime scenes within two years of their retail sale. After the law was repealed, there was also a sharp increase in the percentage of crime guns recovered by police in Missouri that were originally purchased in that state. Other researchers confirmed that repeal of Missouri’s background check requirement was associated with a 16% increase in the state’s rate of firearm suicide.

Another state offers a sharp contrast with Missouri. In 1995, Connecticut implemented a permit-to-purchase handgun licensing law that required applicants to pass a background check in order to purchase a handgun from any seller. Johns Hopkins Researchers found that Connecticut’s background check law was associated with a 40% reduction in the state’s firearm-related homicide rate. The large drop in homicides was found only in firearm-related killings, not in homicides by other means, confirming that this law drove the reduction in the state’s overall homicide rates. Other researchers also found that Connecticut’s background check laws was associated with a 15% reduction in firearm suicides.

Polls have repeatedly shown that the vast majority of the American public supports laws requiring background checks on all gun purchasers. A survey conducted for the New England Journal of Medicine in January 2013 found that 84% of gun owners and 74% of NRA members also support requiring a universal background check system for all gun sales.

Summary of Federal Law

Federal law imposes various duties on federally licensed firearms dealers. Firearms dealers must, among other things:

Perform background checks on prospective firearm purchasers.

Maintain records of all gun sales.

Make those records available to law enforcement for inspection.

Report certain multiple sales.

Report the theft or loss of a firearm from the licensee’s inventory. Federal law imposes none of these requirements on unlicensed sellers, however.

The Gun Control Act of 1968 provides that persons “engaged in the business” of dealing in firearms must be licensed. Although Congress did not originally define the term “engaged in the business,” it did so in 1986 as part of the McClure-Volkmer Act (also known as the Firearms Owners’ Protection Act). That act defined the term “engaged in the business,” as applied to a firearms dealer, as “a person who devotes time, attention, and labor to dealing in firearms as a regular course of trade or business with the principal objective of livelihood and profit through the repetitive purchase and resale of firearms.”

Significantly, however, the term was defined to exclude a person who “makes occasional sales, exchanges, or purchases of firearms for the enhancement of a personal collection or for a hobby, or who sells all or part of his personal collection of firearms.” According to a 1999 report issued by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the current definition of “engaged in the business” often frustrates the prosecution of “unlicensed dealers masquerading as collectors or hobbyists but who are really trafficking firearms to felons or other prohibited persons.”

Summary of State Law

Nineteen states and Washington DC have extended the background check requirement beyond federal law to at least some private sales.

Nine states (California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Nevada, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island, Washington) and DC require universal background checks at the point of sale for all transfers of all classes of firearms, including purchases from unlicensed sellers; Maryland and Pennsylvania do the same for handgun purchases only.

Four states (Hawaii, Illinois, Massachusetts, and New Jersey) require any firearm purchaser, including a purchaser from an unlicensed seller, to obtain a permit issued after a background check, and four more states (Iowa, Michigan, Nebraska, and North Carolina) do the same only for handgun purchasers. Illinois also requires a background check whenever a firearm is sold at a gun show.

Voters in Washington and Nevada adopted universal background checks laws by ballot initiative in 2014 and 2016 respectively. However, after the 2016 election, the Nevada Attorney General opined that the process set forth in the Nevada ballot initiative was unenforceable, so the state currently does not prosecute individuals for failing to conduct background checks on private sales of firearms.

State Laws Closing the Private Sale Loophole

Background Checks at the Point of Transfer

The most comprehensive approach to ensuring that guns are not sold to prohibited persons is through a requirement for a background check at the point of transfer of any firearm. Processing transfers by private sellers through licensed dealers or a law enforcement agency helps to ensure that a background check will be conducted prior to any transfer.

States that Require a Background Check at the Point of Transfer

California

Colorado

Connecticut

Delaware

District of Columbia

Maryland (handguns and assault weapons only)

Nevada (law not currently enforced)

New York

Oregon

Pennsylvania (handguns only)

Rhode Island

Washington

California, Colorado, Delaware, Nevada, New York, Oregon, and Washington generally require all firearm transfers to be conducted by or processed through licensed dealers, who conduct background checks on prospective firearm purchasers or recipients. In the District of Columbia, firearms may be sold and transferred only by or to a licensed dealer.

Rhode Island requires all sellers to obtain a completed application form from the prospective purchaser and to submit the form to law enforcement for purposes of conducting a background check. Connecticut requires any person transferring a firearm to either submit a form to law enforcement or conduct the transfer through a licensed dealer, so that a background check is conducted for every sale or transfer.

Maryland and Pennsylvania require a background check for every prospective handgun sale or transfer, and provide that the background check may be conducted either by a licensed dealer or a designated law enforcement agency.

State Permit Requirements for Private Purchasers

Eight states implement firearm background check requirements on private sales primarily by prohibiting private sellers from transferring firearms to purchasers who do not have a requisite state license or permit, and by requiring a background check before issuing the license or permit.

States that Require Permits for Private Purchasers after Background Checks

Hawaii

Illinois

Iowa (handguns only)

Massachusetts

Michigan (handguns only)

Nebraska (handguns only)

New Jersey

North Carolina (handguns only)

Hawaii, Illinois, Massachusetts, and New Jersey require a person to obtain a license or permit before purchasing any firearm from any seller, and require applicants to pass a background check in order to obtain that license or permit. Iowa, Michigan, Nebraska, and North Carolina require a person to pass a background check in order to obtain a license or permit for the purchase of a handgun but not long guns like rifles or shotguns. State licensing requirements are discussed in detail in our policy page on Licensing. While these requirements ensure that a background check has been conducted at some point, a person may fall within a prohibited category after the license or permit is issued but before the time the person attempts to purchase a firearm. As a result, licensing laws do not necessarily prevent prohibited people from accessing firearms as effectively as point-of-transfer background checks.

Gun Show Background Checks

Illinois requires a background check before the sale or transfer of a firearm at a gun show. Additionally, though Oregon generally requires background checks to be conducted by a licensed dealer at the point of transfer for all firearms, Oregon law allows a transferor at a gun show who is not a licensed dealer to contact the Department of State Police directly to conduct the background check. For more information about the regulation of gun shows, see our summary on Gun Shows.

In 2016, Virginia enacted a law requiring the state police to be available at gun shows in order to facilitate voluntary background checks requested by either party to a transaction if the seller is unlicensed.

Key Legislative Elements

The features listed below are intended to provide a framework from which policy options may be considered. Any jurisdiction considering new legislation should consult with counsel.