About Jack Martins For Congress
As the father of four daughters, Jack and his wife understand the challenges facing hard-working families. He’s made life better for us by focusing on the right priorities; cutting taxes, creating jobs, and keeping us safe. Now he wants to make sure Washington does the same as our next Congressman from New York’s Third Congressional District, which includes Nassau, Suffolk, and Queens.

Jack has served as a New York State Senator since 2011 representing the Seventh Senate District, which runs from the Nassau-Queens border to Hicksville and includes the entire Town of North Hempstead and portions of the Towns of Hempstead and Oyster Bay. Over the last five years, Jack cut income taxes for residents and businesses to their lowest rates in decades, helped create New York State’s property tax cap, repealed the MTA payroll tax for small businesses and schools, and voted for five consecutive on-time, fiscally responsible state budgets which controlled spending and made smart investments in economic development, infrastructure, and education without raising taxes.

Jack has been working to find new ways to improve job training programs and connect people with in-demand jobs as Chairman of the Senate’s Labor Committee and Co-Chairman of its Workforce Development Task Force. He has secured state funding to help local police departments better protect our communities and authored laws to enhance safety for first responders and combat the growing heroin epidemic which is affecting all of our communities. And he has been a leader in fighting to safeguard the environment and our ground water supply.

As a concerned parent of school aged children, Jack has been outspoken and highly critical of the state’s failed implementation of Common Core because of its damaging impact to our children.

Prior to serving in the Senate, Jack was Mayor of the Village of Mineola for eight years. Elected at a time when the Village’s finances were in shambles, he developed balanced, fiscally responsible budgets and debt management plans which substantially reduced the Village’s debt and put the Village back on solid financial footing. He also helped develop its award-winning comprehensive master plan which helped grow the Village’s economic base utilizing smart growth principles.

The son of Portuguese immigrants, Jack was born in Queens, raised in Nassau County, and graduated from Chaminade High School. He received his bachelor’s degree from American University and his Juris Doctor from St. John’s University.

Click here for a downloadable copy of Jack’s biography.