McSally Votes to Fund DHS, Border Security Assets
WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Representative Martha McSally today voted to pass legislation to fund the Department of Homeland Security through fiscal year 2015. The bill provides additional funding for Customs and Border Protection agents to do their jobs while improving security along our border.

“I’m glad to see the House pass legislation to fund our homeland security assets and ensure those who protect our border have the resources they need,” said McSally. “Improving border security is something on which Southern Arizonans can agree, and today’s vote gets us closer to that goal, but it is only step one. We need to continue working to address our broken border strategy. That’s why I’m working with the Chairman of the Homeland Security Committee to craft legislation that places more of our resources at the border and stops cartels, traffickers, and criminal organizations before they enter our communities.”

“By refusing to work with Congress and acting alone on immigration, the President has set a dangerous precedent that threatens the very Constitutional principles and separation of powers on which our country is founded. It’s critical that Congress, as the direct representation of the people, stand up for those principles. Going forward, our focus needs to be on securing our border and revamping the legal immigration system so it is consistent with our economic needs and provides a way for people who want to come here to work hard and contribute a simple, fast, and legal way to do so.”

On December 11, 2014, Congress passed a short-term funding bill for the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) by extending its current funding level until February 27, 2015. H.R. 240, which passed the House today 236 to 191, provides $39.7 billion in discretionary funding for DHS and prioritizes frontline security, which includes operational, counterterrorism, threat-targeting activities, and essential tactical equipment.

The bill increases funding for Customs and Border Protection (CBP) by $118.7 million, supporting the largest operational force levels in history – 21,370 Border Patrol agents and 23,775 CBP officers. The bill also includes over $750 million for cybersecurity operations administered by DHS to prevent cyber-attacks and foreign espionage.