U.S. Rep. McSally Applauds House Passage of Security Appropriations Package, Fully Funding S. AZ Assets
WASHINGTON, DC – U.S. Representative Martha McSally today released the following statement on the Make America Secure Appropriations Act which the House passed today by a vote of 235—192. This national security appropriations package includes the appropriations bills for defense, military construction and veterans, energy and water, and the legislative branch.

“As a 26-year veteran of the Air Force, I am committed to ensuring that our military has the resources it needs to be prepared at all times and that our veterans receive proper care. This bill restores readiness shortfalls, gives our troops a pay raise, and invests in equipment and training for our troops to counter ISIS and other threats. It also provides funding for better and increased access to care for our veterans.

This bill supports Southern Arizona’s defense assets by fully funding the A-10 fleet, the Tomahawk missile line at Raytheon, crucial intelligence missions at Ft Huachuca. It also increases army end strength by 10,000 personnel. There are many dangerous threats facing our nation today. This bill ensures we have the tools, resources, equipment, training, and morale to address these challenges.”

The bill appropriates the full funding for the NDAA, passed last month, which includes provisions for Southern Arizona, advocated by Congresswoman McSally. To see that full list, click HERE.

The measure also includes McSally’s amendment to appropriate an additional $2 million to the Therapeutic service dog training program, which awards competitive grants to nonprofit organizations that provide service dogs to wounded warriors.

Highlights of the legislation include:

Defense:

A total of $658.1 billion for the Department of Defense, including $584.1 billion for base budget and $73.9 billion to support our troops, restore readiness, and provide the resources necessary to defeat ISIS and counter challenges around the world.

Fully funds a 2.4% pay raise for the troops

Funds critical support for our troops to combat terrorists and continue the train and equip programs to defeat ISIS, supports the Afghan Security Forces, and provides necessary funding for the Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Fund

$150 million for the Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative and additional support for our allies to deter against Russian aggression

Includes $705 million for Israeli missile defense and continues security assistance for Jordan

Military Construction / Veterans Affairs:

$88.8 billion in total discretionary funding, including $638 million to house, train, and equip our troops and provide care for 21.4 million veterans

Provides $69 billion for VA Medical Care, including: $8.4 billion for mental health care; $7.3 billion in homeless veteran treatment, $186 million in suicide prevention; $316 million for traumatic brain injury; $50 million for opioid abuse prevention

Energy & Water: