The prosecution (or persecution) of Stephen Nodine: How a suicide became murder (video)
"I think that you don't go to the courthouse looking for justice anymore. I think that you go to the social media, or the media." -- Stephen Nodine.

G ULF SHORES, Alabama – Just before 8 p.m. on Mother’s Day 2010, a 911 caller reported a shooting in a quiet subdivision off of West Fort Morgan Road.

Police arrived to find a blonde woman at the end of her driveway, a gun resting near her right foot and a stream of blood trickling down her left side. Residents from the neighborhood reported seeing a red Ford F-150 pickup truck speeding out of The Ridge Condominiums, and eventually police received information that then-Mobile County Commissioner Stephen Nodine was the driver.

Police put out a statewide be-on-the-lookout order, or BOLO, for the Mobile County-issued vehicle.

Following standard procedure, Gulf Shores police investigated as if it were a homicide. But early clues pointed to the possibility that the victim, Angel Downs, might have shot herself.

An AL.com investigation, drawing from law enforcement sources, court records and crime scene footage indicates that Baldwin County’s district attorney overruled an emerging consensus that the fatal gunshot was self-inflicted, and instead pursued a murder charge.

At one point on the night of Downs' death, a dispatcher responded to a question about whether the real estate agent had had any previous contact with police.

“I’m surprised I didn’t look at this before,” she said. “Showing back in 2006, she attempted suicide.”

To Officer Paul Maliska, who was wearing a body camera that captured the conversation, it was a revelation. “Uh-oh,” he said.

Added another officer, “You hear that?”

The dispatcher came back over the radio with more details: Downs had swallowed two bottles of sleeping pills in her previous home a couple of miles down Fort Morgan Road. Subsequent investigation would reveal that she had left a suicide note that evening.

After visiting Downs’ home on the night of the shooting, Baldwin County Coroner Stan Vinson wrote “suicide?” on an internal form. He said he listed the death that way because the gun remained at Downs’ side, making it less likely that someone else pulled the trigger. Normally in a shooting, he said, the killer takes the gun with him.

But Vinson stressed that it was in no way a definitive determination. That did not come until later, when he listed the manner of death as “undetermined” after reviewing the autopsy report and other evidence collected by police.

“All the information was not available,” he said in an interview. “At that time, I didn’t know one way or the other.”

The suicide theory began to take firm hold the next day when a state medical examiner performed an autopsy and determined that the wound was consistent with a self-inflicted gunshot. Gulf Shores Cpl. Justin Clopton, the lead investigator, concurred.

“Well, of course, our thought was, you know, everything looked consistent with suicide, but there was circumstances surrounding the case that we just did not have pieces of the puzzle to match with it,” he would later testify.

In some of her first public comments two days after the shooting, then-Baldwin County District Attorney Judy Newcomb seemed to be leaning toward the same conclusion. She told reporters about the previous suicide attempt.

But by May 14 – five days after the shooting – Newcomb had labeled the case a murder investigation and named Nodine as the only suspect. What followed was one of the most sensational murder cases ever in southwest Alabama and the political end of Nodine, a brash, tough-talking politician who had built a reputation as a political brawler and someone viewed as a rising star in Republican circles.

DA-driven investigation

A review of hundreds of pages of court transcripts, investigative reports and interviews with law enforcement officers suggests that a consensus had emerged among investigators that Downs shot herself. Sources involved in the probe said Newcomb, herself, made the decision to pursue a murder charge.

According to multiple law enforcement officials, who asked not be identified because they are not authorized to speak to the media, Newcomb was far more involved in the investigation than would be typical for a prosecutor at that stage of a case.

“It was Judy Newcomb’s show,” said one person involved in the investigation who requested anonymity.

Although the trial in December 2010 ended in a hung jury on charges of murder and stalking, the investigation that preceded it led to a conviction of Nodine on a federal charge of being an unlawful drug user in possession of firearms. Nodine served a year of a 15-month sentence and is ineligible to hold public office or even vote.

Nodine, who spends his days working at the Bay Minette law office of his lawyer, Pascal Bruijn, and his nights and weekends serving a two-year sentence on a perjury and harassment conviction, has gone on a public relations offensive in recent weeks to bolster his insistence that he had nothing to do with his ex-girlfriend’s death. That has included local television and radio appearances and a forthcoming episode of the national crime news show “48 Hours” set to air after the NCAA basketball tournament.

On Monday, Nodine said, he will tape an episode of the “Dr. Phil” show that will air at a later date. [UPDATED: Nodine has canceled today's taping of the program].

In an interview with AL.com, he said he would not rest until he has exposed a “rogue prosecutor” who twisted the truth for political gain. He also expressed frustration that his legal problems have played out in news coverage – including in-courtroom tweets during his trial.

“I think that you don’t go to the courthouse looking for justice anymore,” he said. “I think that you go to the social media, or the media.”

Newcomb could not be reached for comment despite multiple attempts.

Baldwin County Sheriff Huey “Hoss” Mack acknowledged that it is atypical to have a split opinion among law enforcement officers investigating a shooting.

“It is rare, but yes, I have had cases of that nature,” he said. “I’ve been involved in cases like that.”

Mack also noted that the Gulf Shores Police Department, which took the lead on the case, has little experience with death investigations. “The broader your experience base, the more cases you have to reference,” he said.

David Whetstone, whom Alabama Attorney General Luther Strange appointed to take over the case after the first trial ended in a hung jury on the most serious charges in December 2010, agreed that Newcomb seemed to be leaning toward suicide in the first couple of days. But he said that was before she had uncovered important evidence, such as cell tower records that he said were “crucial and critical to showing what was going on.”

Those records showed that Nodine, after leaving Downs’ home following a day spent together at Pensacola Beach, abruptly turned around on Baldwin County 10 and started heading back toward her home. A series of cell calls to Downs in rapid succession suggested that Nodine was in the midst of an angry confrontation with the woman with whom he had been having an on-and-off affair during the past six years, Whetstone said.

Emails between the two and statements by some of her friends also painted the picture of a rocky relationship that may have turned violent at times.

Investigators also learned that Downs called her sister in Georgia asking the best place to shoot an intruder. And then there was a text message she sent to her: “Stepehen nodine is here.” It was their last communication.

“A jury thinks that’s powerful evidence,” Whetstone said. “I think it’s powerful.”

Many of Downs’ friends and relatives found it powerful, as well, and maintain that nothing that has happened since has changed their minds. Her sister, Susan Bloodworth, did not respond to a request for an interview.

Her ex-husband, Chris Downs, noted in a recent interview that the jury voted 9-3 in favor of conviction. He said he believes the trial may well have ended in a conviction if it had not been held close to Christmas, when jurors tend to be more compassionate.

“I still think that he got away with murder,” he said.

For his part, Nodine said he now believes that Downs was upset that he would not leave his wife and that the call and text to her sister were designed to set him up.

GOP primary loomed large

O nce Newcomb made the decision to pursue a murder charge, the case moved at record speed. She pushed law enforcement officials to file reports in time to present the case to a grand jury that she was keeping in session later that month; officers said they worked overtime to finish reports that ordinarily would have taken weeks to complete.

“Yeah, we were rushed,” Clopton would later testify. “We worked long hours getting all that together.”

Law enforcement officials recall expressing shock that the case was put on such a rapid time table. It took just 15 days from the day of the shooting until a grand jury issued a murder indictment. In the vast majority of murders, police make an arrest as soon as they have probable cause and then investigate – often for months – before the evidence goes to a grand jury.

One investigator said the reason that was not done in this case was because the responding officers did not feel comfortable swearing that they had probable cause against Nodine.



BlackBerry photos



One of the big issues surrounding the Stephen Nodine-Angel Downs case was whether investigators could examine the contents of Downs’ BlackBerry phone. Former District Attorney Judy Newcomb maintained it could not be opened without risking the loss of data. Her successor managed to find an expert who did retrieve the data. The phone contained numerous photos of Downs with Nodine and Nodine’s son. See the pictures here.

May 24, 2010, was significant for another reason. It was a week and a day before the Republican primary for Baldwin County district attorney, which featured a heated competition between Newcomb and three challengers. Attorneys for Nodine later argued that the primary race was the No. 1 factor in Newcomb’s decision to pursue a murder charge – an allegation she has denied.

A source close to Newcomb during the campaign dismissed the notion that Newcomb went after a person she thought might be innocent for political gain.

“But I do think she saw that and thought all eyes of Baldwin County were upon her,” said the source, who asked not to be identified because of not being authorized to speak for her. “I think she saw it as an opportunity to prove herself as a tough prosecutor.”

From that point forward, the source said, Newcomb was “completely disengaged from the campaign.”

Dennis Knizley, a Mobile lawyer who represented Nodine at his trial, said in an interview that he cannot recall a single murder case in Mobile or Baldwin counties during his 33-year career that went to a grand jury so quickly.

The seven-month interval between the May 9 shooting and the trial – just weeks before Newcomb left office – also was unusually short.

Why the need to present the case so quickly to a grand jury? Knizley said the looming primary was the only logical explanation. He estimated that by at least a 10-1 margin, murder cases start with an arrest, followed by an arraignment and a preliminary hearing in district court before going to a grand jury.

The only legitimate reason for bypassing the arrest stage and going to a grand jury, Knizley said, is to allow investigators to conduct a thorough probe, gathering facts before making a snap judgment in a case that is a close call.

That is not what happened in the Nodine case, Knizley said. Instead, he argued, Newcomb moved as quickly as she possibly could, going to the grand jury months before hiring an independent forensic examiner to challenge the state medical examiner’s opinion that Downs’ death was consistent with suicide.

“It doesn’t pass the sight, smell and sound test,” he said.

Knizley said Newcomb’s political position coupled with the “disastrous outcome” of a capital murder trial the prior year meant that Newcomb “needed a high-profile criminal that she could prosecute. She may have concluded that her political future didn’t seem very bright.”

Newcomb ended up finishing third in that four-way race.

“The timing creates a great deal of concern that the case was presented other than consistent with a totally objective prosecution,” Knizley said.

Whetstone agreed that Newcomb’s approach was unusual. He could not recall ever taking a murder case straight to a grand jury in his years as a prosecutor. Were he in charge, he said, he would have told police to arrest Nodine when they were ready.

But Whetstone also expressed doubt that Newcomb’s motivation was politics.

“It would have been unlikely for Judy,” he said. “She was not the most politically in-tune person I’ve ever met.”

At the time, Newcomb told reporters that she chose to go to the grand jury first because it would give her more flexibility to issue subpoenas without having to go to a judge. But the Alabama Rules of Criminal Procedure contradicts that: “At any time the grand jury is not in session, the district attorney shall issue subpoenas for any witnesses the district attorney may require to come before the district attorney for examination under oath administered by the district attorney as to any violations of the laws of the State of Alabama.”

‘We can live it’

A s the date of the grand jury session approached, Newcomb and her team faced a potentially devastating problem. Dr. Eugene Hart, who performed the autopsy, had told law enforcement authorities that the death of Downs was consistent with a suicide.

Such a ruling likely would have severely compromised Newcomb’s ability to get a grand jury to issue an indictment.

Newcomb directed that the victim’s body be sent back to Hart so that he could re-examine some injuries that investigators believe they had found on the fingernails and back of her scalp. The second look, Hart later would testify, did nothing to change his mind.

See the notes Click here to see the handwritten notes of a meeting between District Attorney Judy Newcomb and Dr. Eugene Hart on the day of his grand jury testimony.

Newcomb then arranged a face-to-face meeting with Hart and his boss – then-Chief Medical Examiner Kenneth Snell – on the day Hart was to testify before the grand jury. In the conference room were the two forensic examiners, Newcomb, assistant district attorneys and investigators from her office and the Baldwin County Sheriff’s Office.

Three pages of handwritten notes that current District Attorney Hallie Dixon gave to the defense after she took office suggest that Newcomb pressed Hart for a favorable death ruling. According to testimony at a prosecutorial misconduct hearing held a year and a half after the trial, the meeting grew heated at times. One of Newcomb’s investigators, by some accounts, raised his voice.

Nodine’s new lawyers, appointed after the defendant no longer could afford to pay Knizley, introduced the handwritten notes at last May’s misconduct hearing. Circuit Judge Charles Partin ultimately denied their request to dismiss the charges.

Dixon, who served as an assistant district attorney under Newcomb, testified that she recognized the handwriting of her former boss.

Newcomb denied that she was the author.

At the very least, though, someone on her team produced the notes, and they offer a glimpse into the topics discussed on the eve of Hart’s grand jury appearance. Hart, who testified that he never had been called to such a meeting with his boss before, explained the rationale for his findings. He found no other injuries and there was no evidence of a struggle.

The notes indicated that Hart told Newcomb and the investigators that the bullet went straight through Downs’ head, indicating that she was waiting to be shot. That is not a common way to kill someone but a “very common way to kill self,” the notes indicate.

In the end, Hart agreed to list the manner of death as “undetermined” because he could not prove that someone else did not pull the trigger. The notes from the meeting appeared to express relief: “CoD ‘undetermined’ we can live (with) it.”

The experts stack up

M onths after securing the indictment, Newcomb paid $4,000 to Dr. James Downs, a state medical examiner in Georgia. At the time, she explained that Downs – no relation to the victim – would “supplement” Hart’s report.

Knizley said he also had never seen that happen.

Whetstone also agreed it was highly unusual.

“I would not have done that,” he said. “I was happy with undecided.”

Knizley said he did not receive Downs’ report until the Thursday before the trial, after he sought to have the doctor disqualified from testifying.

Knizley hired his own pathologist, Dr. Dr. James Lauridson, who testified that the forensic evidence pointed to suicide.

At the misconduct hearing, Dixon testified that she ordered a top-down re-examination of the case after law enforcement officers complained about the way the case had been handled. She hired another independent forensic investigator. That expert, Stuart James, concluded that “it is not probable that anyone but Angel Downs fired the weapon.”

Jan Johnson, an expert hired by Nodine’s new lawyers, reached a similar conclusion.

Nodine’s lawyers accused Newcomb of withholding pictures – from the original defense team and Dr. Downs – showing pre-existing cuts to the victim’s hands that the pathologist had characterized as defensive wounds.

Downs said in a recent interview that he could not discuss the case but added that “absolutely nothing about my opinion has changed at any time, absolutely not.”

As Whetstone took over the case at the attorney general’s order, Dixon said she warned him, “Do you realize that if you go forward with this (murder) prosecution, the star witnesses for the defense are going to be your own investigators?”

Whetstone had said he would move forward under Newcomb’s indictment – as opposed to charges Dixon brought alleging a misdemeanor criminally negligent homicide charge. He spoke of new evidence, including a prisoner Nodine was jailed with in Florida’s Santa Rosa County, where Nodine was waiting to be transferred to a federal prison to serve a sentence for being an unlawful drug user in possession of firearms.

But a Baldwin County investigator interviewed the inmate, Carter Hassman, and reported that his account was inconsistent with evidence in the case. The inmate reported to the investigator that Nodine told him that Downs had been using the gun’s sight to pick corn out of her teeth when it went off. Nodine then bragged that he got away with it.

That account does not match the forensic examination of Downs, and investigators dismissed it.

Whetstone said trying the case with the sitting DA disputing the state’s case would have been “disastrous.”

The Friday before the retrial was to begin, Nodine accepted a plea bargain, admitted to the misdemeanor harassment offense and a perjury charge stemming from inaccurate information about his finances. He said he refused to admit to anything involving Downs’ death.