Man accused of threatening Mobile bank president, requesting $50,000 for protection of victim, his family
MOBILE, Alabama -- A 24-year-old foreign national serving in the U.S. Navy is behind bars Friday after a judge deemed he may be planning to leave Mobile County while facing allegations of extortion.

Edwin Kigathi Gitau, who was born in Kenya, is facing one count of first-degree extortion, a felony with a maximum sentence of 20 years. He was initially arrested by Mobile police on Dec. 27 and released on bail.

He was rearrested on Wednesday after the victim told authorities he was still in fear for his life and records from the Navy showed Gitau had orders to leave Mobile County in the coming weeks, according to court records.

He is scheduled to appear before Mobile County Circuit Court Bob Sherling for a hearing in the matter on Jan. 9.

Prosecutors contend Gitau approached the president of a local bank at his home on Dec. 27 and told him that a "hit" had been taken out on him, his wife and his children. Gitau told the man he was a Navy Seal and used his Navy identification card as proof of his position.

He told the victim he needed $50,000 to protect the man and his family and get himself out of the country, according to a motion filed by prosecutors to review the conditions of Gitau's release. He gave the victim his cell phone number and told the victim to make contact when the $50,000 was ready.

Investigators with the Mobile branch of the FBI confirmed that Gitau is a foreign national servicing in the Navy with orders to leave the county in an unspecified number of weeks, according to court records.

On Jan. 2, Sherling granted the motion to review the conditions of Gitau's release. Gitau was booked into Mobile County Metro Jail around 6:20 p.m. on Thursday.

In the motion, Mobile County Assistant District Attorney Chris McDonough said at the Jan. 9 hearing, prosecutors will ask that Gitau surrender his passport, be ordered to stay in Mobile County and have no contact with the victim and his family.

"The victim and his family have moved into a local motel out of fear for their safety," according to the motion to review the conditions of Gitau's release. "The victim and his wife returned to their home (on Jan. 1) to check on it. While they were present the power went out at only their house, heightening their fear for their safety."

Booking records show Gitau has no known prior arrests in Mobile County.