More context needed for Ben Rhodes’ comments on the Iran deal

By Louis Jacobson, PolitiFact senior correspondent

Ben Rhodes recently turned to Medium to pen a response to a lengthy profile of himself in the New York Times Magazine — one in which he was quoted dismissing the foreign policy establishment as “the Blob” and seemingly taking credit for manipulating the media into supporting the Obama administration’s nuclear agreement with Iran.

We won’t address the sparring between Rhodes, foreign policy professionals and journalists. But one passage in Rhodes’ Medium essay about the substance of the Iran deal did catch our eye.

“The proof of that accomplishment can be seen today in Iran, where the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is being implemented, averting a nuclear-armed Iran or a military conflict with Iran over its nuclear program,” Rhodes wrote. “Despite our critics’ warnings, Iran has lived up to their commitments — shipping out its stockpile, disconnecting centrifuges, and converting its heavy water reactor. International monitors have had the access necessary to confirm these facts. Today, Iran verifiably cannot obtain a nuclear weapon. That, more than anything I or anyone else can say, makes the case for the Iran deal.”

Whether Iran can or cannot obtain a nuclear weapon is one of the key points of the deal. Rhodes’ description isn’t wrong, but it does need more context. Without rating it on our Truth-O-Meter — since much of this argument revolves around what will or could happen in the future — we decided to take a closer look.

What’s in the Iran deal

First, we’ll recap what’s in the nuclear agreement with Iran.

Broadly speaking, under the agreement, Iran has agreed to accept strict curbs on nuclear technologies and intrusive access by nuclear-weapons inspectors for 10 to 25 years, with a pledge to abide by existing international treaties limiting its nuclear ambitions in perpetuity. In exchange, international economic sanctions against Iran are lifted, as long as Iran doesn’t cheat. If Iran does cheat, sanctions can be reimposed.

Specifically, the deal requires Iran to give up 97 percent of its stockpile of enriched uranium, as well as most of the centrifuges it can use to enrich uranium. In addition, Iran agrees to only enrich uranium to a level unsuitable for weapons for 15 years, and to cease production of plutonium, the other element that can be used to build a bomb. Known nuclear sites would be monitored for 15 years to confirm compliance, and inspectors would have the ability to enter undeclared sites suspected of nuclear use, though with possible delays of up to 24 days.

If Iran were to abide by these rules for 10 years, scientists say it would take them at least 12 months to build a weapon. This 12-month period is known as the “breakout” time. As long as the breakout time is long enough, supporters of the agreement say, the United States and its allies will be able to act to prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon.

The agreement, which was struck in July 2015, reached a major milestone in January 2016 when the International Atomic Energy Agency affirmed that Iran has made enough progress curbing its nuclear program to begin the lifting of longstanding economic sanctions.

Opponents of the deal, however, have argued that it simply delays by a decade or so Iran’s eventual acquisition of a bomb. Some have said that the United States and its allies should have negotiated stronger protections, or that by agreeing to the deal, the United States is giving its tacit approval to Iran moving toward a bomb after the deal’s strongest provisions expire.

Rhodes’ statement

We found a few areas in which experts say Rhodes glossed over some complexities.

First, several experts told PolitiFact that Rhodes’ statement is oversimplified.

While it will be very hard for Iran to get a bomb under the agreement, the word “cannot” may be a bit strong, they said. The important thing is that if Iran does try to cheat on the agreement, the United States and its allies will be able to stop the creation of nuclear weapons, due to the 12-month breakout time.

“A more detailed answer may have been, ‘Today, experts believe Iran does not have the material or the enrichment capability to create enough enriched fissile material to create a single nuclear weapon for at least one year, let alone build a fully functioning, reliable nuclear weapon,’ ” said Greg Terryn, a policy analyst at the Center for Arms Control and Non-Proliferation and Council for a Livable World, which supports the deal.

Indeed, when we contacted the White House, a spokeswoman expanded upon Rhodes’ original words.

“We have confirmed that all of Iran’s pathways to acquiring enough fissile material for a nuclear weapon have been cut off, and the most comprehensive inspections and verification regime for any nuclear program is in place,” the White House told PolitiFact. The agreement “verifiably prevents Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon, and if Iran tried to covertly build a bomb, we would know and we would catch them.”

Second, by hanging its meaning heavily on the word “today,” Rhodes’ statement sidesteps longer-term challenges under the deal.

Today, it is accurate to say that Iran won’t be able able to acquire a nuclear weapon, said Daryl Kimball, executive director of the Arms Control Association. But what happens after key provisions of the agreement expire is more up for grabs, he said.

“The limits are scheduled to expire at different intervals,” Kimball said. “So the question is, what will happen 15 years from now? A lot will happen between now then that will answer that question.”

Michaela Dodge, a nuclear-policy specialist at the conservative Heritage Foundation, went further.

“The merits of the deal cannot be judged by what is or is not possible today, but in what position it leaves us and allies in the long-run,” said Dodge, who is skeptical the deal will be effective.

This leads to the third issue with Rhodes’ statement. The verification mechanisms, while tough on paper, are only now being implemented. Concerns have emerged, from inspectors’ access to Iranian sites to how much transparency the rest of the world will have to what they find.

“There’s a huge debate over whether the deal is verifiable,” said Omri Ceren, a senior adviser to the Israel Project, which is skeptical of the deal.

The bottom line

In taking a close look at Rhodes’ statement — “Today, Iran verifiably cannot obtain a nuclear weapon” — we found general consensus that the agreement offers strong tools for keeping nuclear weapons out of Iranian hands, at least on paper, and as long as the agreement in force.

However, Rhodes’ statement glosses over the agreement’s shortcomings. His statement emphasizes the degree of certainty that a bomb could be stopped today, while sidestepping questions of what could happen after the agreement expires and other potential problems with real-world implementation.

SOURCES

Ben Rhodes, “How We Advocated for the Iran Deal,” (Medium post), May 9, 2016

New York Times Magazine, “The Aspiring Novelist Who Became Obama’s Foreign-Policy Guru,” May 5, 2016

NPR, “Implementation Day Arrives: Sanctions On Iran Are Lifted,” Jan. 16, 2016

Institute for Science and International Security, “Parchin after Implementation Day: When Will the IAEA Go?” Feb. 17, 2016

Foundation for Defense of Democracies, “The IAEA’s Latest Report Falls Short,” March 4, 2016

PolitiFact, “Ted Cruz says deal will ‘facilitate and accelerate’ Iran getting a nuclear bomb,” Sept. 10, 2015

PolitiFact, “PolitiFact Sheet: 6 things to know about the Iran nuclear deal,” Sept. 8, 2015

Email interview with Greg Terryn, policy analyst at the Center for Arms Control and Non-Proliferation and Council for a Livable World, May 9, 2016

Interview with Daryl Kimball, executive director of the Arms Control Association, May 9, 2016

Email interview with Michaela Dodge, nuclear-policy specialist at the Heritage Foundation, May 9, 2016

Email interview with Omri Ceren, senior adviser to the Israel Project, May 9, 2016

Email interview with Richard Nephew, adjunct professor at Columbia University’s School of International and Public Affairs, May 9, 2016

Email interview with Dew D. Tiantawach, White House spokeswoman, May 9, 2016