Analysis of weapons in Sandy Hook report shows Lanza was deliberate, could have been much more deadly
DANBURY, Conneticut -- A list of the guns involved in the December 2012 massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., shows that it took time and deliberation for the shooter to kill his mother and that things could have been much worse at the school.





The information on the weapons used was gleaned from a 40-page report and analysis of the mass shooting released Monday by State's Attorney Stephen J. Sedensky III.





According to the report, Adam Lanza killed his mother with a Savage Mark II rifle before he left for the elementary school with four other guns to continue his shooting rampage there.





The Mark II is a bolt-action rifle chambered for .22 Long Rifle cartridges, an inexpensive, small-caliber bullet normally used for target practice or hunting squirrels, rabbits and other small game.





An autopsy of Nancy Lanza, the shooter's mother, recovered four bullets of that caliber from her body. Three shell casings found in her bedroom and another left in the rifle indicate the four shots that hit her were the only ones Adam Lanza shot in her bedroom that morning.





Unlike the semi-automatic carbine used later at the elementary school, the Mark II could not be fired very quickly, and would have required the manual ejection of a spent shell between each shot, meaning Lanza deliberately shot his mother four times, and had to throw the bolt of the rifle three times in between.





The weapons found at the scene of the elementary school also show that the massacre could have been much worse had Lanza not stopped and taken his own life when he did.





According to the report, Lanza used exclusively used a Bushmaster Model XM15-E2S semiautomatic rifle during the massacre at the school, which was over less than 11 minutes after it began. In that short time period, Lanza killed 20 first-grade students and six adults.

Lanza was also found to be carrying two handguns on his person, though, and a semiautomatic Saiga shotgun was found in the trunk of the car he drove to the school.





According to the report, the only time any of those three firearms was fired was when Lanza turned a Glock 20 pistol chambered for 10mm cartridges on himself and took his own life.





While the Bushmaster took more than two dozen lives in around 10 minutes, police analysis showed all three of the other weapons Lanza took were fully operational on the day of the shooting. Had Lanza chosen to continue the massacre using the two handguns or the particularly deadly 12-gauge semiautomatic Saiga, he could have done so with ease.