Q&A: Michelle Obama, Raising Her Voice to ‘Let Girls Learn’ Girls the world over face huge hurdles getting an education, but this U.S. initiative is working to show how everyone benefits when girls go to school.

I n March 2015, President Barack Obama and first lady Michelle Obama launched the Let Girls Learn initiative, which brings together USAID, the Department of State, the Peace Corps, the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) and others to address the range of challenges preventing adolescent girls from attending and completing school.

Around the world, girls face complex physical, cultural and financial barriers in accessing education. As a girl grows older, the fight to get an education becomes even harder.

FrontLines: Why should adolescent girls’ education matter to everyone?

First Lady Michelle Obama: Right now, 62 million girls worldwide — many of whom are adolescent girls — are not in school. They’re not getting any formal education at all — no reading, writing or math — none of the basic skills they need to provide for themselves and their families and contribute fully to their countries.

Sending these girls to school isn’t just the right thing to do, it’s also the smart thing to do — for them and their families, and for their economies and our economy too.

Studies from the World Bank show that one extra year of secondary school can increase a girls’ future income by 15 to 25 percent. And we know that when girls are educated, they are less likely to contract HIV, more likely to delay childbearing and vaccinate their children, and have lower maternal and infant mortality rates. Research even shows that sending more girls to school can boost an entire country’s GDP.

School girls in Sana’a gather for their lesson. Since many girls in Yemen do not attend primary school, USAID-backed measures have ensured all girls a right to attend school and increase literacy. / Clinton Doggett, USAID

And when incomes and standards of living rise abroad, that’s good for companies here at home. So when girls are raising healthier families and contributing more to their country’s workforce, that’s just not good for their economy, it’s good for our economy too.

But ultimately, for me, this isn’t just an economic issue, it’s a moral issue. I know that I am where I am today because of my education. But if I had been born into different circumstances, who knows what opportunities I would have had. I feel so incredibly blessed to have had a chance to fulfill my potential, and I believe I have an obligation to help girls around the world fulfill theirs.

FrontLines: How is Let Girls Learn different from other girls’ education efforts out there?

Obama: International girls’ education is not a new issue. There are many organizations doing incredible work to help girls worldwide attend school, and Let Girls Learn is a U.S. Government-wide initiative that aims to support and complement these efforts by marshalling development expertise, diplomacy, community-driven efforts and support from individuals and the private sector.

“We need to get these girls into school, because we know that education is the single-most important stepping stone to power, to freedom, and to equality.” — Michelle Obama

For example, the Department of State is engaging with governments, partners and adolescent girls to ensure this issue is a priority; USAID is working in countries affected by armed conflict and crisis to provide safe access to schools, create alternative learning programs, and help rebuild education systems; and the Peace Corps is training their volunteers to work with their communities to develop girls’ education projects.