Clarence Thomas’s Wife is Sharing Fake News About the “Caravan”

Ginni Thomas is her own woman. The fact that her husband is an Associate Justice on the Supreme court has never prevented her from sharing her point of view. At times, her activism has included advocating and organizing on issues certain to appear on the Supreme Court docket.

She has also been known to share conspiracy theories — including the fevered fantasy that George Soros is preparing to engineer a coup against the republic.

There is no doubt she is a loving and devoted wife. So devoted, that she once sent Anita Hill, a former colleague of Justice Thomas who accused him of sexual harassment, a voicemail asking for an apology.

Factchecking is clearly not part of her process. So when a meme began moving around the internet — a photo of a Mexican law officer supposedly bloodied by the “caravan” — in her mind, a hoard of savage beasts hell bent on invading via our southern border — she was among the first to post it on Facebook.

Yet this photo is fake — or at least the story Mrs. Thomas is telling about it is false. It was taken in 2012 and has nothing to do with the caravan. Snopes made the ID yesterday.

Ginni Thomas isn’t alone. Thousands of posts featuring this photo and the false story ascribing this to Honduran immigrants are currently flying around the internet, being shared literally millions of times.

Facebook and Reddit Posts with Misattributed Photo

Facebook Posts with Misattributed Photo

FacebookPosts with Misattributed Photo

Ginni Thomas is not alone. This story implies that we are facing invasion by people so dangerous that many right wingers are advocating we meet the migrants not with the normal process for processing claims of refugee status — but with bullets.

Why is Facebook allowing this to continue to be shared? It is false. It’s a DMCA violation — the photo is an editorial image owned by Getty Images being used out of context without license.

Still photographs have a under-appreciated power. They don’t merely represent the facts of a situation, but they underly the emotional memory of an event.

Consider the famous photo of the naked child running from a napalm attack in Vietnam.

(Nick Ut — AP)

It has difficult to think of the Vietnam war without recalling this photo. That recollection changes everything — including how we interpret other information about the event.

Consider this photo from Iraq — showing a soldier, face blackened from battle, bleeding from a cut on his nose, smoking a cigarette.

(AP Photo/Los Angeles Times, Luis Sinco)

I recall wondering at the time whether that photo would be the symbol of the invasion of Iraq. Or would it be this one, taken by the late Chris Hondros at Tal Afar when a car came a little too close to a checkpoint. (That car was not full of terrorists. It contained a husband and wife and their two children. When the Marines opened fire — which they did exactly as they were trained to do when someone doesn’t stop for a checkpoint-the parents were killed, almost liquified by the high powered projectiles that peppered their sedan.) .

This is from the aftermath.

Chris Hondros

In my younger years, I yearned to be a photojournalist. I was okay, but I never had the skills of greats like Chris Hondros or Robert Capa.

But I did learn the power of the photograph that the written word rarely has — the power to make a moral demand on the viewer — a demand to act.

The photo that Ginni Thomas shared, and Facebook, Twitter, Reddit and others are allowing to be misrepresented at a massive scale — is dangerous.

If the networks are sincere in their claims that they are responsible corporate citizens, they must act. Not tomorrow, not in a few hours. Right now.

Thanks to Jiore Craig for providing feedback.