What I Said at the Vatican About the World’s Efforts to Fight Cancer
Your Eminence, Your Eminences. And, Elana, thank you for that very gracious introduction. I’ve have an opportunity in my 200-year career, as you’ve just heard. His Eminence and I were talking about age. I am 25 years older than His Eminence, but I’ve spoken in a number of magnificent fora, but none more magnificent than this. And it’s a great, great honor to be back in the Vatican. And, Elana, I want to thank you for the introduction. But more than that, I want to thank you for your courage, and your family’s courage, and the inspiration you give to so many young people around the world. It matters. Your Eminences, I’m honored to be with you in this magnificent hall. And, Robin, thank you. It’s good to be here. It’s a pleasure to be with all of you scientists, physicians, faith leaders, philanthropists, patients, and their families. There is no cancer patient whose circumstances are not shared with everyone that loves them. I know, as millions of people around the world know. And I want to stand by thanking all of you who are here for your knowledge, your dedication, your tenacity, and for your pastoral care. Like tens of millions of people around the world, my family and I have been the beneficiaries of your wisdom, your commitment, your compassion when we were still clinging to hope that — my son Hunter is with me, and my son-in-law Howard — we were clinging to hope that Hunter’s brother, my son would somehow be the beneficiary of a last-minute breakthrough before God called him. If you permit me what they call in my country, in my Senate where I worked, whenever you wanted to make a personal statement, the protocol was to stand on the floor of the Senate and say, I’d like to ask forgiveness for a point of personal privilege. I know he’s not here at the moment. But I want to thank His Holiness for the personal time and the private time, the generosity with his time. As he was leaving the United States, I had the great privilege of escorting him to the aircraft in the city of Philadelphia. And he asked if he could meet with my family. We had just lost my son. And he met with my extended family in the hangar behind where the aircraft was. And I wish every grieving parent, brother, sister, mother, father would have had the benefit of his words, his prayers, his presence. He provided us with more comfort than even he I think will ever understand. We experienced in my family what binds so many in this room together and all across the world, how faith can turn loss into hope — and hope into action.

Vice President Joe Biden greets His Holiness Pope Francis after delivering remarks on cancer at the Vatican’s International Conference on Regenerative Medicine. Vatican City, April 29, 2016. (Official White House photo by David Lienemann)

The Holy Father has given hope to so many people of all faiths in every part of the world with his strong words and humble ways. I arrived from Iraq, from Erbil just this morning, at 5:30 in the morning. And when I told the Shia leader of Iraq in Baghdad, the Kurd and Sunni leader of Iraq in Erbil where I was going, they each wanted to talk about the Holy Father. I think that’s a pretty incredible thing. It reminds us that as we stand on the cusp of unprecedented, scientific and technological change — of amazing discoveries that were once unimaginable breakthroughs, we cannot forget that real lives and real people are at the heart and the reason for all that we do. There is always a child, a son, a daughter, a husband, a wife, a loved one in pain summoning all the courage they can, sustained by hope that a cure will be there for them. And everyone else who is and may be in their shoes thinks the same way. And the truth is that today — more than any point in human history — we have a genuine opportunity to help more people across the world than ever before. And that’s our obligation. And when we think about the promise measured against the need, every minute of every day matters. And I know every one of you understand that. From my perspective that’s why we’re here. In a sense I may be the most — least qualified person to speak here today. I am not a researcher. I’m not an oncologist. I’m not a geneticist. I’m a Vice President of the United States. But I’ve been on the other end of the need. But that’s what I want to talk to you about today. For hundreds of years humankind has tried to deal with and fight and cure cancer. In the United States nearly 50 years ago, President Richard M. Nixon announced for the first time in America history, “a war on cancer.” Since then we’ve spent billions of dollars. And thousands of researchers and scientists and doctors and medical centers and government agencies, philanthropists have all worked with the singular focus of trying to defeat or at least slow cancer. We’ve made progress worldwide in prevention with campaigns to end smoking, increasing cancer screenings, and the emergence of vaccines, the final epiphany of understanding that our personal habits and our physical environment — cleaner air and cleaner water — probably hold a greater promise than any single thing we could do to prevent cancer. We’ve made progress in treating some cancers — some better than others like lymphoma. Cancer-related death rates are down 23 percent over 20 years. But they haven’t declined enough. And we have to ask ourselves, why haven’t we made more progress? It’s expected that the world will see almost 20 million new cases of cancer, and 11.4 additional million cancer deaths by 2025. So the question — among others — that brings us here today is: How can we prevent that from happening? My regret is that I was in Iraq the last couple days and not sitting here absorbing, listening to, taking in the presentations made by some of the most brilliant minds in the world who are assembled here today and over the last several days and who are finding the answer. The answer is clear that in science for the first time we are more ready, and technology is here. And our capacity to connect with each of them around the world holds greater hope than ever existed. So when I called for a Cancer Moonshot — and the President almost wished we hadn’t used the word moonshot. It generates comments about the phrase moonshot. But when I walked into the Rose Garden off the White House with the President back in October to announce I wasn’t running for President of the United States, I said the one regret I have I wish I could have been the President of the United States that presided over a fundamental change in the effort to cure and/or turn some cancers into chronic diseases. I knew this time is different from previous efforts. Many of the parents who are here — or families that are here — you learn to become an expert very quickly when someone you adore is in serious difficulty. Or as my mother, Jean Finnegan Biden, would say, Joey, a little bit of knowledge is a dangerous thing. But you try to absorb as much as you can about the disease that that person who shares your soul is fighting. And because I had access to one of the great cancer research hospitals in the world — MD Anderson — and others, I had a chance to talk to the world’s top cancer researchers, scientists, philanthropists. And I learned it’s really within the last four to five years that science and the medicine of cancer have reached an inflection point that is almost brand new. We hadn’t been here before. Just five years ago, oncologists weren’t working with immunologists, virologists, geneticists, chemical, and biological engineers and so many other disciplines. I didn’t realize that immunology was thought of as sort of a voodoo science 15 years ago. I’m being a bit facetious. But this is the first time in history all these disciplines are now beginning to work closer and closer together and holding enormous promise. And today coalitions of cancer organizations are aggregating genomics, patients’ records, families history, lifestyles using super computers to find answers that we don’t have right now. Date technology firms with whom I’ve met, the largest in the world, are converting data into machine-readable formats, making it more accessible to researchers and discovering new patterns that could deliver real results for patients — not unlike mapping the stars. And the world is taking note of all of you assembled here in this hall and your collaboration, because it’s relatively new. I’ve had the great privilege, because of my job, to meet with world leaders who want to work together on the process. I’m told a member of the royal family of the UAE is here. When I met with Mohammed bin Zayed recently, I went to talk about how we deal with Daesh and ISIL. As you’ll recall, the discussion was, let’s talk about cancer. How can we generate a memorandum of understanding between our countries? The same thing is going on when I go to Israel. I’m meeting with President Abe, of Japan; President Park, of South Korea. The number of world leaders that have contacted me that want to collaborate and work together. They sense exactly what we sense — the enormous possibilities. Philanthropists from around the world are investing billions of their money in this fight, and you see it here. Ten years ago regenerative medicine was a dream. Today it’s a reality. Look at this conference. The Pontifical Council for Culture is bringing the world together to deliver breakthrough therapies and improve care for people all around the world. And I’m grateful. But the point is that so much has changed, there is so much more hope, and I might add such higher expectation, the community at large. But while governments can do a great deal, this is not the work of one government, or government itself. There’s an overwhelming need for a public-private partnership to bring together all of the human and financial and knowledge resources at our disposal to make a quantum leap. Our goal in the United States is to do within the next five years what would otherwise take a decade. But that’s the work of all of us. And today I’m calling on — I’m calling for an international commitment grounded on a few basic principles.

Vice President Joe Biden delivers remarks at the Vatican’s International Conference on Regenerative Medicine, Vatican City, April 29, 2016. (Official White House Photo by David Lienemann)

I’ve traveled the United States over the last six months visiting with over 290 oncologists, going to 10 of our greatest cancer research centers, meeting with drug companies, meeting with big data firms. Certain things have emerged, and I am not a medical expert. But I have spent my life trying to solve complicated problems and entities that do not talk to one another. The first principle I think we could adopt is to focus on prevention, access, and affordability around the world. Nearly 50 percent of all cancers are preventable. Take cervical cancer — 530,000 new cases are diagnosed each year; 270,000 people die each year; 87 percent in developing countries. In Africa, it’s the second most common cancer after breast cancer. It’s a travesty. But it’s fully preventable with basic education, screening, and vaccines. We have a greater global combination — to coordinate — we need greater global coordination to promote healthier lifestyles that prevent cancers like it. We need gender — we need greater coordination to reduce environmental causes of other forms of deadly but preventable cancers. We also have to increase access to treatment. Even in the United States of America, a developed country, access to care is not what it should be. Less than 5 percent of all cancer patients wind up in a clinical trial. Seventy-percent of cancer patients are treated by community oncologists — good, qualified men and women, but who don’t have access to the treatment trials and expertise available to America’s great cancer institutes. And treatments have to be affordable. The best medicine and treatment can’t belong only to the privileged and the powerful. It has to belong to everyone. The second principle is the international response to cancer should reflect the same urgency we bring to infectious disease threats. Cancer is the constant emergency. In the United States alone we lose more than 1,600* people a day to cancer. We should be doing everything possible to accelerate cancer treatments and cures with urgency. We should be sharing data the moment it’s published — immediately. Not hiding it behind pay walls that prevent information from being shared for a year or more. We just dealt with the Hubble Telescope, with a new technology that was found to how to better — have more accuracy in the pictures; stuff of which could have national security implications. It was made available to world immediately. Immediately. Why do you wait? What is your rationale? Creating faster grant and review cycles so the best minds in the world can work on the hardest problems in cancer as soon as possible. We should build up the capacity of the civil societies to fill gaps of care, and screening, preventing, treatment in cervical and breast cancers, and oral cancers — especially in hard-to-reach places around the world. It’s within our power.

Vice President Joe Biden meets with Cardinal Pietro Parolin, Secretary of State, at the Apostolic Palace, in Vatican City, April 29, 2016. Also pictured is U.S. Ambassador Kenneth Hackett. (Official White House Photo by David Lienemann)