MSFAA FAQS
Q1. Who should complete the Maryland State Financial Aid Application (MSFAA)?

The Maryland State Financial Aid Application (MSFAA) is available to applicants who are ineligible to receive federal aid using the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). The MSFAA allows qualified children of undocumented immigrants, who qualify for in-state tuition under §15–106.8 of the MD Education Article , to apply and be considered for certain types of State need-based financial aid, such as the: Howard P. Rawlings Educational Excellence Awards Program, the Part Time Grant, the Maryland Community College Promise Scholarship, and the Richard W. Collins III Leadership with Honor Scholarship.





Q2. What are the requirements for qualified children of undocumented immigrants to be exempt from paying the out-of-state tuition rate at an in State institution?





You should consult your institution with questions.





Q3. Will any of my information on the application be shared?



​

The personally identifiable information provided on the Maryland State Financial Aid Application is confidential and used solely to determine eligibility for state financial aid. The personally identifiable information will be disclosed only as required by law.





Q4. What is the difference between the FAFSA and the Maryland State Financial Aid Application (MSFAA)?

Students should only complete one of the applications (not both), according to the requirements below:

You are eligible to complete the FAFSA at 1.You are eligible to complete the FAFSA at https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/fafsa if you are a:

U.S. Citizen



Permanent Resident



Eligible non-citizen



T Visa holder





2. You are eligible to complete the MSFAA if you are:

Undocumented

Meet the non-resident exemption as described under §15–106.8. of the MD Education Article​





Q5. As an undocumented student, am I eligible for State student aid?



If you attend an eligible Maryland public or private institution, you may be eligible for various Maryland State financial aid programs.

Those programs are the: Howard P. Rawlings Educational Excellence Awards Program, Part Time Grant, Maryland Community College Promise Scholarship, and the Richard W. Collins III Leadership with Honor Scholarship. For more information concerning the eligibility requirements of these programs visit http://www.mhec.state.md.us/preparing/Pages/FinancialAid/descriptions.aspx





Q6. What should I do if I’ve already submitted a FAFSA before learning that I should have submitted a MSFAA?



You must complete the MSFAA through the Maryland College Aid Processing (MDCAPS) portal, as MHEC will not be able to use the FAFSA to determine your eligibility for State financial aid. The MDCAPS portal is found on the MHEC website at www.mhec.maryland.gov





Q7. Can I fill out the MSFFA if I don’t have a Social Security Number?





Yes. Students are not required to have a Social Security Number to submit the MSFAA. However, students will need to meet the non-resident exemption requirements as described under §15–106.8. of the MD Education Article​ to qualify for aid.

Application Process

Q8. As an undocumented student, how do I apply for financial aid through the State of Maryland?



The MSFAA allows qualified children of undocumented immigrants to be considered for various State financial aid programs. Eligible applicants will complete the application online through the Maryland College Aid Processing Portal (MDCAPS).





Note: U.S. citizens and eligible non-citizens such as permanent residents should complete the FAFSA at U.S. citizens and eligible non-citizens such as permanent residents should complete the FAFSA at https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/fafsa . They may be eligible for federal student aid as well financial aid through the State of Maryland.





Q9. When will the MSFAA be available?



For the 2019-2020 academic year, the application will be available through the MDCAPS portal late January 2019 for the qualified children of undocumented immigrants to complete.





In the subsequent years the online application will be available October 1.





Q10. Am I required to register for Selective Service?



If you are a male between the ages of 18 and 25, in most cases you are required to register with the Selective Service System (SSS) and show proof of registration to MHEC before receiving state financial aid.





You do not need to have a Social Security Number (SSN) to register for Selective Service. If you do not have a SSN, or have been issued a SSN through the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program, you can register for Selective Service by completing a paper “Selective Service Registration” form, which can be picked up at any U.S. Post Office or can be downloaded for print here: https://www.sss.gov/Portals/0/PDFs/regform_copyINT_1.pdf​





Q11. Do I have to wait until my parents or I file taxes to complete my MSFAA?



Yes. Under §15–106.8. of the MD Education Article​ , the qualified children of undocumented immigrants must file taxes. MSFAA uses the prior-prior-year tax information as noted below:

Example of Prior-Prior Tax year:





IF YOU PLAN TO ATTEND COLLEGE FROM YOU WILL SUBMIT THIS MSFAA​ YOU CAN SUBMIT THE MSFAA FORM ​USING INCOME AND TAX FORM July 1, 2019 - June 30, 2020 2019-2020 October 1, 2018 - June 30, 2020 2017​ ​June 1, 2020 - June 30, 2021 ​2020 - 2021 October 1, 2019 - June 30, 2021​ ​2018 ​July 1, 2021 - June 30, 2022 ​2021 - 2022 ​​October 1, 2020 - June 30, 2022 ​2019

​​