ICYMI: Hawley Tries to Cover Up the Fact that He Did Not Create a Public Corruption Unit
COLUMBIA, Mo. — Today, the Kansas City Star highlighted that there is no evidence that Attorney General Josh Hawley created a public corruption team before the Missouri Democratic Party (MDP) submitted a sunshine request asking for emails related to a public corruption unit.

TIMELINE OF EVENTS



Nov 8: Josh Hawley is elected Attorney General on a promise to create a Public Corruption Unit to clean up the pay-to-play culture in Jefferson City.

April 19: Hawley’s biggest campaign donor and the State Senate President are accused of pay-to-play.

April 25: Hawley says his office “doesn’t have criminal jurisdiction over pay-to-play allegations.”

July 12: The Attorney General’s office confirms receipt of a sunshine request from the Missouri Democratic Party (MDP) requesting any emails regarding a public corruption unit.

July 13: Internal documents show that Attorney General Josh Hawley personally requests that his office add a “Public Corruption Team” page to the Attorney General’s website.

July 24: The Attorney General’s office puts out a press release touting a third “corruption prosecution case” by his “Public Corruption Team” — the first mention of such a team in a public press release during his tenure.

August 10: The Attorney General’s office responds to a DSCC sunshine request for any records regarding a public corruption unit. The responsive documents show that there were no written communications within the AG’s office about a public corruption team until the day after they confirmed receipt of the MDP sunshine request.

“Attorney General Josh Hawley is clearly the worst type of politician — saying one thing to get elected, doing another once in office, and trying to cover his tracks when found out,” said Missouri Democratic Party Communications Director Meira Bernstein.

From the Kansas City Star:

Among the major planks of Josh Hawley’s successful campaign for attorney general last year was his promise to create a public corruption unit to investigate and prosecute misconduct by elected officials.

Hawley says he’s living up to that promise…

Missouri Democrats aren’t so sure…They contend there’s no evidence Hawley took any steps to create a public corruption unit until after Democrats began asking questions about the unit’s existence in July. And when allegations of corruption began percolating in Jefferson City earlier this year involving Hawley’s biggest campaign donor, Democrats say the attorney general remained steadfastly on the sidelines.

“Attorney General Josh Hawley is clearly the worst type of politician — saying one thing to get elected, doing another once in office, and trying to cover his tracks when found out,” said Meira Bernstein, communications director for the Missouri Democratic Party.

…On July 12, the Missouri Democratic Party filed an open records request for any emails or internal communications regarding a public corruption unit in the attorney general’s office. A few days later the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee filed a similar request.

The documents turned over to Democrats by Hawley’s office didn’t include any emails or correspondence pertaining to the public corruption unit by the attorney general’s staff before the open records request was filed. In a July 13 email, members of Hawley’s staff were informed that the attorney general wanted to add a page to his website for the public corruption unit. Staff then discussed what the page should say and look like.

A week later, Hawley’s office put out a press release touting a third prosecution by the “Public Corruption Team.” This was the first mention of such a team’s existence in a press release.

“There is no evidence that Hawley, or his office, made any effort to create a public corruption unit prior to their receipt of the Missouri Democratic Party’s sunshine request on July 12,” Bernstein said.

…Bernstein questions why Hawley’s office made no public announcement about the formation of the corruption team, or why there was never any public mention of the team whatsoever until after the Democrats began asking questions. By contrast, on other initiatives, such as efforts to combat human trafficking, Hawley has made big public roll-outs.

“It does not add up,” she said.

Democrats also panned Hawley’s response to pay-to-play allegations against David Humphreys, a Joplin businessman who donated $3 million to Hawley’s campaign last year.

…Bernstein says there’s no way for Hawley to know if any wrongdoing occurred between Humphreys and Richard “since he ignored bipartisan calls to investigate the situation.”

[…]

###