Dewhurst gets home of consultant accused of theft
Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst reached a settlement agreement in early November with former political consultant Kenneth “Buddy” Barfield in which Barfield signed over his elegant West Austin home to repay a portion of the campaign funds that Dewhurst claims Barfield stole from his failed 2012 campaign for the U.S. Senate.

Travis County records show an Agreed Final Judgment was entered on Nov. 4 that gives “an equitable lien to Plaintiffs David Dewhurst committee and Dewhurst for Texas” over Barfield’s home at 1606 Watchhill Dr. in the tony Old Enfield section of Austin.

The white-columned, 6,000-square foot-home is listed for sale at an asking price of $2.8 million. According to a real estate website, it last sold in 2005 for $2.2 million.

The final order further awarded the Dewhurst campaign $3.7 million from Barfield, his consulting company and a group of other real-estate related companies he controls. It was not clear whether that figure includes the value of the house, and no attorneys could be reached for futher explanation. Previous estimates in news accounts have placed the alleged theft at between $2 million and $4 million.

Meanwhile, the Dewhurst campaign committees apparently still owes approximately $1 million to various consultants and vendors who worked on his 2012 campaign. According to an August story in the Texas Tribune, Dewhurst owed well-known political consultant Dave Carney $36,388, pollster Mike Baselice $50,452 and Jim Bognet $112,885.

At the time of that story, Dewhurst spokesman Travis Considine said the lieutenant governor was pursuing legal avenues to recoup money from Barfield before settling the campaign’s debts.

This week, Considine said, “The state and federal committees have acquired title to Barfield’s house as part of efforts to recover monies he stole from the committees. Efforts will continue to sell the house to obtain funds to repay monies stolen by Barfield from the committees.”

Court records show the agreement was reached in November. Furthermore, Travis County real estate records name Houston attorney George Shannon as owner of the property. Shannon declined comment, but acknowledged that “Dewhurst entities” were among his clients.

The theft scheme first became public in late 2012 when Dewhurst amended his federal campaign disclosure forms by declaring that Barfield had defrauded him, leading him to file erroneous documents.

In those filings, Dewhurst said that Barfield, who served as Dewhurst’s campaign manager for five years, “knowingly supplied false information to the Dewhurst campaign — which then caused Dewhurst’s campaign to report a number of inaccurate transactions.” Barfield allegedly filled out inflated bank deposit slips and used campaign funds for personal investments and expenses, including his mortgage payments, according to the lawsuit.