Connecting Missourians
You can also view statewide and regional service and speed maps based on data from over 100 participating Internet Service Providers on our Maps & Data page.

The National Broadband Map (NBM) is a searchable and interactive website that allows users to view broadband availability across every neighborhood in the United States.

View photos from broadband events around the state and in your communities. Read more...

Where broadband access remains unavailable or inadequate, electric co-ops are stepping up to fill the void. Read more...

Broadband can help health care providers take better care of patients. Read more...

MoBroadbandNow tracks the progress of broadband infrastructure projects on a quarterly basis and publishes relevant information. View the report.

Take the MoBroadbandNow speed test to find out what your actual connection speeds are. Test your speed now!

Broadband Buzz

On May 22, US Department of Agriculture (USDA) Secretary Tom Vilsack announced that USDA is now accepting applications for the Community Connect Grant Program, the Distance Learning and Telemedicine Program and the Public Television Station Digital Transition Grant Program. The funding will advance communications technology in rural communities.

Up to $13 million will be available through the Community Connect Grant Program, which funds broadband in underserved areas with the goal of supporting economic growth and delivering enhanced educational, health care and public safety services. Up to $19.3 million will be available through the Distance Learning and Telemedicine Program, which funds access to health care resources, training and rural education by financing advanced telecommunications equipment in rural areas. Up to $2 million will be available through the Public Television Station Digital Transition Grant Program to help rural stations complete the transition to digital broadcasting.

The deadline for applications is July 7.

For more information on funding availability and links to Federal Register postings, see the USDA News Release.

The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) has released the Infrastructure Loan Application Guide for applicants interested in the Telecommunications Infrastructure Loan Program. The guide, which provides information on eligibility, types of financial assistance available, engineering requirements, and the loan review process, among other information, is intended to help applicants and borrowers with the development of loan applications.

The Telecommunications Infrastructure Loan Program makes long-term direct and guaranteed loans to expand and improve telecommunications facilities in rural areas. All funded telecommunications facilities must be broadband capable. More information is available here.

Later this month — on March 12 — the World Wide Web will be 25 years old. To commemorate this event, the Pew Research Center Internet Project has released a report — “The Web at 25 in the US” — that examines the adoption and impact of the web. The report looks at changes and trends through Pew’s research history on the Internet and presents 2014 data. Key findings include:

87 percent of American adults use the Internet, with 68 percent using the Internet both at home and on a mobile device (smartphone or tablet).

71 percent of Americans report using the Internet on a regular day, with 90 percent of Internet users reporting they access the Internet at home and 44 percent saying they access the Internet at work.

90 percent believe that the Internet has been a good thing for them personally, while 76 percent believe that it hase been good for society. Six percent say it has been bad for them personally, while 15 percent believe it has been bad for society.

53 percent say that the Internet would be very hard to give up.

Two-thirds of Internet users report that online communication has strengthened their relationships with family and friends.

The summary of findings can be found here. The full report is in two parts: How the Internet has woven itself into American life and Americans’ views about the role of Internet in their lives.