President-obsessed Texan Ron Wade has an Oval Office in his own home
Although Rick Perry is out of the running for president and Ron Paul is trailing in delegates, one Texas man has already made it to the Oval Office. Well, sort of.

Ron Wade of Longview has been obsessed with presidents since he was a boy and now, to the tune of $250,000, he has a replica of the Oval Office in his home. Last night, Wade and his family were featured on TLC’s My Crazy Obsession.

The presidential addition took two and a half years to design and eight months to build. With custom ceilings, carpeting and furnishings, the replica is nearly exact – just at 80 percent of the size. But his homage to the presidency doesn’t stop there.

Wade’s enormous collection of presidential memorabilia is worth nearly half of a million dollars and includes thousands of buttons, bobble heads and even furniture used in the White House. One of his most prized possessions is a chair bought by Jackie Kennedy – an expensive seat he allows no one to use.

The Texas presidential-fanatic also drives a classic presidential limousine, which was used by John F. Kennedy in the final months of his life. Often on the weekends, his family will dress up like the Kennedys and drive around town, which Wade says turns many heads.

On a state employee salary, Wade stretches his budget to the limit, spending, on average, one thousand dollars each week on memorabilia. If he sees something president-related, he can’t say no. “I might not be able to afford it, but I’m going to buy it,” he said.

While showing off his collection to TLC, Wade explained that it has grown too big for his home. With memorabilia tucked in every nook and cranny, he said it’s time to move – perhaps to a replica of the White House.

The only thing standing in his way is money. During the show, a realtor assesses the value of his home, estimating it to be worth about $240,000. Unfortunately, she explained, the addition added more sentimental value than retail value.

Despite the disappointing evaluation, Wade doesn’t plan on stopping.

“I think it’s a healthy obsession,” he said.