Ohio could spend $1 million on signs marking stimulus-funded roadwork
Your tax dollars are sending you a message.

Ohio could spend $1 million on signs identifying road projects paid for with federal stimulus money. The state ordered that markers be placed at both ends of construction zones for the duration of projects to show taxpayers "where their stimulus dollars went," said Scott Varner, a spokesman with the Ohio Department of Transportation. Several can be seen in construction zones around Northeast Ohio.

Officials estimated the cost at $2,000 to $3,000 to supply, install and remove signs for each of Ohio's 365 projects. Stimulus money pays for the signs. Overall, the cash covering the markers amounts to just a small percentage -- about one-tenth of 1 percent -- of the $935 million headed to Ohio for roadwork.

But some say that's too much to spend for what amounts to government self-promotion.



State Sen. Tim Grendell, a Republican from Geauga County, can see four of the stimulus markers planted at two adjoining projects along a five-mile stretch of Wilson Mills Road near his home. He called the markers a waste and said he complained to ODOT about the expenditure.

"It's not like we don't have better places to put the money," Grendell said.

The Federal Highway Administration encouraged use of the markers but did not make it a requirement, said Doug Hecox, a spokesman for the agency. He said some state departments of transportation -- including those in Arizona, Nebraska, Texas and Vermont -- are not posting the signs.

Vermont nixed the notices after deciding it would rather spend highway dollars "on roads than signs," according to an online blog by the state's stimulus czar, Tom Evslin. He included a link to state stimulus projects and a note that "the Web is cheaper than signs."

Ohio chose to require the signs so people could see the investments made by the stimulus, Varner said. Contractors include the cost of the markers in their bids for projects. Signs must go up on the first day of work, according to the state's guidelines.

Most of the stimulus sign is colored green with white text. It says "Project Funded by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act" and includes logos for Recovery.gov and ODOT. That is topped with a pair of orange signs -- one with the shadow image of a shovel-ready worker and the other with the message "Putting America to work."

ODOT regulations mirror federal suggestions and allow two sizes. The larger announcement, for freeways, is 10 feet wide and just over 9 feet tall. A smaller version for local roadways is 7 feet wide and roughly 6½ feet tall, or about the size of two basketball backboards.

County engineers and other local officials contacted last week offered mixed reviews on the signs. Some complained about the added expense and "billboard appearance" along two-lane roads. (Shadows from the sign could "cause mildew" on nearby homes during a project on Lake County's Fairgrounds Road, said James Gills, that county's engineer.)

But others said that they saw value in the notices and the message of recovery being delivered. "In these times," said Jamal Husani, chief transportation and traffic engineer for the Cuyahoga County engineer's office, "people may feel a little better seeing any sign that something is being done."