Fourth National Climate Assessment
Rural communities are integral to the Southeast’s cultural heritage and to the strong agricultural and forest products industries across the region. More frequent extreme heat episodes and changing seasonal climates are projected to increase exposure-linked health impacts and economic vulnerabilities in the agricultural, timber, and manufacturing sectors. By the end of the century, over one-half billion labor hours could be lost from extreme heat-related impacts. Such changes would negatively impact the region’s labor-intensive agricultural industry and compound existing social stresses in rural areas related to limited local community capabilities and associated with rural demography, occupations, earnings, literacy, and poverty incidence. Reduction of existing stresses can increase resilience.

The Southeast’s diverse natural systems, which provide many benefits to society, will be transformed by climate change. Changing winter temperature extremes, wildfire patterns, sea levels, hurricanes, floods, droughts, and warming ocean temperatures are expected to redistribute species and greatly modify ecosystems. As a result, the ecological resources that people depend on for livelihood, protection, and well-being are increasingly at risk, and future generations can expect to experience and interact with natural systems that are much different than those that we see today.

The Southeast’s coastal plain and inland low-lying regions support a rapidly growing population, a tourism economy, critical industries, and important cultural resources that are highly vulnerable to climate change impacts. The combined effects of changing extreme rainfall events and sea level rise are already increasing flood frequencies, which impacts property values and infrastructure viability, particularly in coastal cities. Without significant adaptation measures, these regions are projected to experience daily high tide flooding by the end of the century.

Many southeastern cities are particularly vulnerable to climate change compared to cities in other regions, with expected impacts to infrastructure and human health. The vibrancy and viability of these metropolitan areas, including the people and critical regional resources located in them, are increasingly at risk due to heat, flooding, and vector-borne disease brought about by a changing climate. Many of these urban areas are rapidly growing and offer opportunities to adopt effective adaptation efforts to prevent future negative impacts of climate change.

Rural communities are integral to the Southeast’s cultural heritage and to the strong agricultural and forest products industries across the region. More frequent extreme heat episodes and changing seasonal climates are projected to increase exposure-linked health impacts and economic vulnerabilities in the agricultural, timber, and manufacturing sectors. By the end of the century, over one-half billion labor hours could be lost from extreme heat-related impacts. Such changes would negatively impact the region’s labor-intensive agricultural industry and compound existing social stresses in rural areas related to limited local community capabilities and associated with rural demography, occupations, earnings, literacy, and poverty incidence. Reduction of existing stresses can increase resilience.

The Southeast’s diverse natural systems, which provide many benefits to society, will be transformed by climate change. Changing winter temperature extremes, wildfire patterns, sea levels, hurricanes, floods, droughts, and warming ocean temperatures are expected to redistribute species and greatly modify ecosystems. As a result, the ecological resources that people depend on for livelihood, protection, and well-being are increasingly at risk, and future generations can expect to experience and interact with natural systems that are much different than those that we see today.

The Southeast’s coastal plain and inland low-lying regions support a rapidly growing population, a tourism economy, critical industries, and important cultural resources that are highly vulnerable to climate change impacts. The combined effects of changing extreme rainfall events and sea level rise are already increasing flood frequencies, which impacts property values and infrastructure viability, particularly in coastal cities. Without significant adaptation measures, these regions are projected to experience daily high tide flooding by the end of the century.

Many southeastern cities are particularly vulnerable to climate change compared to cities in other regions, with expected impacts to infrastructure and human health. The vibrancy and viability of these metropolitan areas, including the people and critical regional resources located in them, are increasingly at risk due to heat, flooding, and vector-borne disease brought about by a changing climate. Many of these urban areas are rapidly growing and offer opportunities to adopt effective adaptation efforts to prevent future negative impacts of climate change.

Many in rural communities are maintaining connections to traditional livelihoods and relying on natural resources that are inherently vulnerable to climate changes. Climate trends and possible climate futures show patterns that are already impacting—and are projected to further impact—rural sectors, from agriculture and forestry to human health and labor productivity. Future temperature increases are projected to pose challenges to human health. Increases in temperatures, water stress, freeze-free days, drought, and wildfire risks, together with changing conditions for invasive species and the movement of diseases, create a number of potential risks for existing agricultural systems. 7 Rural communities tend to be more vulnerable to these changes due to factors such as demography, occupations, earnings, literacy, and poverty incidence. 8 , 9 , 10 In fact, a recent economic study using a higher scenario (RCP8.5) 11 suggests that the southern and midwestern populations are likely to suffer the largest losses from future climate changes in the United States. Climate change tends to compound existing vulnerabilities and exacerbate existing inequities. Already poor regions, including those found in the Southeast, are expected to continue incurring greater losses than elsewhere in the United States.

The ecological resources that people depend on for livelihoods, protection, and well-being are increasingly at risk from the impacts of climate change. Sea level rise will result in the rapid conversion of coastal, terrestrial, and freshwater ecosystems to tidal saline habitats. Reductions in the frequency and intensity of cold winter temperature extremes are already allowing tropical and subtropical species to move northward and replace more temperate species. Warmer winter temperatures are also expected to facilitate the northward movement of problematic invasive species, which could transform natural systems north of their current distribution. In the future, rising temperatures and increases in the duration and intensity of drought are expected to increase wildfire occurrence and also reduce the effectiveness of prescribed fire practices. 3 , 4 , 5 , 6

Trends towards a more urbanized and denser Southeast are expected to continue, creating new climate vulnerabilities. Cities across the Southeast are experiencing more and longer summer heat waves. Vector-borne diseases pose a greater risk in cities than in rural areas because of higher population densities and other human factors, and the major urban centers in the Southeast are already impacted by poor air quality during warmer months. Increasing precipitation and extreme weather events will likely impact roads, freight rail, and passenger rail, which will likely have cascading effects across the region. Infrastructure related to drinking water and wastewater treatment also has the potential to be compromised by climate-related events. Increases in extreme rainfall events and high tide coastal floods due to future climate change will impact the quality of life of permanent residents as well as tourists visiting the low-lying and coastal regions of the Southeast. Sea level rise is contributing to increased coastal flooding in the Southeast, and high tide flooding already poses daily risks to businesses, neighborhoods, infrastructure, transportation, and ecosystems in the region. 1 , 2 There have been numerous instances of intense rainfall events that have had devastating impacts on inland communities in recent years.

The Southeast includes vast expanses of coastal and inland low-lying areas, the southern portion of the Appalachian Mountains, numerous high-growth metropolitan areas, and large rural expanses. These beaches and bayous, fields and forests, and cities and small towns are all at risk from a changing climate. While some climate change impacts, such as sea level rise and extreme downpours, are being acutely felt now, others, like increasing exposure to dangerous high temperatures, humidity, and new local diseases, are expected to become more significant in the coming decades. While all regional residents and communities are potentially at risk for some impacts, some communities or populations are at greater risk due to their locations, services available to them, and economic situations.

Climate model simulations of future conditions project increases in temperature and extreme precipitation for both lower and higher scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP8.5; see Figure 19.5). 13 , 19 After the middle of the 21st century, however, the projected increases are lower for the lower scenario (RCP4.5). Much larger changes are simulated by the late 21st century under the higher scenario (RCP8.5), which most closely tracks with our current consumption of fossil fuels. Under the higher scenario, nighttime minimum temperatures above 75°F and daytime maximum temperatures above 95°F become the summer norm and nights above 80°F and days above 100°F, now relatively rare occurrences, become commonplace. Cooling degree days (a measure of the need for air conditioning [cooling] based on daily average temperatures rising above a standard temperature—often 65°F) nearly double, while heating degree days (a measure of the need for heating) decrease by over a third (Figure 19.22). The freeze-free season lengthens by more than a month, and the frequency of freezing temperatures decreases substantially. 20 , 21

The number of extreme rainfall events is increasing. For example, the number of days with 3 or more inches of precipitation has been historically high over the past 25 years, with the 1990s, 2000s, and 2010s ranking as the decades with the 1st, 3rd, and 2nd highest number of events, respectively (Figure 19.3). More than 70% of precipitation recording locations show upward trends since 1950, although there are downward trends at many stations along and southeast of the Appalachian Mountains and in Florida (Figure 19.3).

The Southeast region experienced high annual average temperatures in the 1920s and 1930s, followed by cooler temperatures until the 1970s. Since then, annual average temperatures have warmed to levels above the 1930s; the decade of the 2010s through 2017 has been warmer than any previous decade ( App. 5: FAQs, Figure A5.14 ), both for average daily maximum and average daily minimum temperature. Seasonal warming has varied. The decade of the 2010s through 2017 is the warmest in all seasons for average daily minimum temperature and in winter and spring for average daily maximum temperature. However, for average daily maximum temperature, the summers of the 1930s and 1950s and the falls of the 1930s were warmer on average. The southeastern United States is one of the few regions in the world that has experienced little overall warming of daily maximum temperatures since 1900. The reasons for this have been the subject of much research, and hypothesized causes include both human and natural influences. 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 However, since the early 1960s, the Southeast has been warming at a similar rate as the rest of the United States ( Ch. 2: Climate, Figure 2.4 ). During the 2010s, the number of nights with minimum temperatures greater than 75°F was nearly double the long-term average for 1901–1960 (Figure 19.1), while the length of the freeze-free season was nearly 1.5 weeks greater than any other period in the historical record (Figure 19.2). These increases were widespread across the region and can have important effects on both humans and the natural environment. 18 By contrast, the number of days above 95°F has been lower since 1960 compared to the pre-1960 period, with the highest numbers occurring in the 1930s and 1950s, both periods of severe drought (Figure 19.1). The differing trends in hot days and warm nights reflect the seasonal differences in average daily maximum and average daily minimum temperature trends.

The Southeast includes vast expanses of coastal and inland low-lying areas, the southern (and highest) portion of the Appalachian Mountains, numerous high-growth metropolitan areas, and large rural expanses. Embedded in these land- and seascapes is a rich cultural history developed over generations by the many communities that call this region home. However, these beaches and bayous, fields and forests, and cities and small towns are all at risk from a changing climate. These risks vary in type and magnitude from place to place, and while some climate change impacts, such as sea level rise and extreme downpours, are being acutely felt now, others, like increasing exposure to dangerously high temperatures—often accompanied by high humidity—and new local diseases, are expected to become more significant in the coming decades. While all regional residents and communities are potentially at risk for some impacts, some communities or populations are at greater risk due to their locations, services available, and economic situations. In fact, a recent economic study using a higher scenario (RCP8.5) 11 suggests that the southern and midwestern populations are likely to suffer the largest losses from projected climate changes in the United States. According to the article, “[b]ecause losses are largest in regions that are already poorer on average, climate change tends to increase preexisting inequality in the United States.” 11 Understanding the demographic and socioeconomic composition of racial and ethnic groups in the region is important, because these characteristics are associated with health risk factors, disease prevalence, and access to care, which in turn may influence the degree of impact from climate-related threats.

Throughout the southeastern United States, the impacts of sea level rise, increasing temperatures, extreme heat events, heavy precipitation, and decreased water availability continue to have numerous consequences for human health, the built environment, and the natural world. This assessment builds on the above concerns described in the Third National Climate Assessment (NCA3) and includes impacts to urban and rural landscapes as well as natural systems. The impacts from these changes are becoming visible as 1) flooding increases stress on infrastructure, ecosystems, and populations; 2) warming temperatures affect human health and bring about temporal and geographic shifts in the natural environment and landscapes; and 3) wildfires and growing wildfire risk create challenges for natural resource managers and impacted communities.

There are still gaps in knowledge regarding the potential effects of climate change on cities across the Southeast. Cross-disciplinary groups such as the Georgia Climate Project ( http://www.georgiaclimateproject.org ) are developing research roadmaps that can help to prioritize research and action with relevance to policymakers, practitioners, and scientists.

Infrastructure related to drinking water treatment and wastewater treatment may be compromised by climate-related events ( Ch. 3: Water, KM 2 ).. Water utilities across the Southeast are preparing for these impacts. Tampa Bay Water, the largest wholesale water utility in the Southeast, is coordinating with groups including the Florida Water and Climate Alliance to study the impact of climate change on its ability to provide clean water in the future. 46 , 47 Spartanburg Water, in South Carolina, is reinforcing the ability of the utility to “cope with, and recover from disruption, trends and variability in order to maintain services.” 48 Similarly, the Seminole Tribe of Florida, which provides drinking and wastewater services, assessed flooding and sea level rise threats to their water infrastructure and developed potential adaptation measures. 49 The development of “green” water infrastructure (using natural hydrologic features to manage water and provide environmental and community benefits), such as the strategies promoted in the City of Atlanta Climate Action Plan, is one way to adapt to future water management needs. Implementation of these strategies has already resulted in a reduction in water consumption in the city of Atlanta, relieving strain on the water utility and increasing resilience. 50

Many cities across the Southeast are planning for the impacts sea level rise is likely to have on their infrastructure (see Case Study “Charleston, South Carolina, Begins Planning and Reinvesting” and Key Message 2). Flood events in Charleston, South Carolina, have been increasing, and by 2045 the city is projected to face nearly 180 tidal floods (flooding in coastal areas at high tide) per year, as compared to 11 floods per year in 2014. 45 These floods affect tourism, transportation, and the economy as a whole. The city has responded by making physical modifications, developing a more robust disaster response plan, and improving planning and monitoring prior to flood events.

Infrastructure, particularly roads, bridges, coastal properties, and urban drainage, is vulnerable to climate change and climate-related events (see Key Message 2) (see also Ch. 3: Water, KM 2 ; Ch. 11: Urban, KM 2 ; Ch. 12: Transportation, KM 1 ). 41 By 2050, the Southeast is the region expected to have the most vulnerable bridges. 35 An extreme weather vulnerability assessment conducted by the Tennessee Department of Transportation found that the urban areas of Memphis and Nashville had the most at-risk transportation infrastructure in the state. 42 Increasing precipitation and extreme weather events will likely impact roads, freight rail, and passenger rail, especially in Memphis, which will likely have cascading effects across the region. 43 Transit infrastructure, such as the rail lines of the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA), are also at risk. As a result, MARTA has begun to identify vulnerable assets and prioritize improvements to develop a more resilient system. 44

The fast growth rate of urban areas in the Southeast contributes to aeroallergens, which are known to cause and exacerbate respiratory diseases such as asthma. Urban areas have higher concentrations of CO 2 , which causes allergenic plants, such as ragweed, to grow faster and produce more pollen than in rural areas. 40 Continued rising temperatures and atmospheric CO 2 levels are projected to further contribute to aeroallergens in cities ( Ch. 13: Air Quality, KM 3 ).

Poor air quality directly impacts human health, resulting in respiratory disease and other ailments. In the Southeast, poor air quality can result from emissions (mostly from vehicles and power plants), wildfires, and allergens such as pollen. The major urban centers in the Southeast are already impacted by poor air quality during warmer months. The Southeast has more days with stagnant air masses than other regions of the country (40% of summer days) and higher levels of fine (small) particulate matter (PM 2.5 ), which cause heart and lung disease. 37 There is mixed evidence on the future health impacts of these pollutants. Ozone concentrations would be expected to increase under higher temperatures; however, a variety of factors complicate projections ( Ch. 13: Air Quality, KM 1 ). There are many possible future wind and cloud cover conditions for the Southeast as well as the potential for continued shifts in land-use patterns, demographics and population geography, and vehicle and power plant emissions standards. Increases in precipitation and shifts in wind trajectories may reduce future health impacts of ground level ozone in the Southeast, 35 but warmer and drier autumns are expected to result in a lengthening of the period of ozone exposure. 38 Warmer August temperatures in the Southeast from 1988 to 2011 were associated with increased human sensitivity to ground-level ozone. 39

The transmission of vector-borne diseases, which are spread by the bite of an animal such as a mosquito or tick, is complex and depends on a number of factors, including weather and climate, vegetation, animal host populations, and human activities ( Ch. 14: Human Health, KM 1). Climate change is likely to modify the seasonality, distribution, and prevalence of vector-borne diseases in the Southeast. 29 Vector-borne diseases pose a greater risk in cities than in rural areas because of higher population densities and other human factors (for example, pools of standing water in man-made structures, such as tires or buckets, are breeding grounds for some species of mosquitoes). Climatic conditions are currently suitable for adult mosquitoes of the species Aedes aegypti, which can spread dengue, chikungunya, and Zika viruses, across most of the Southeast from July through September (Figure 19.6), and cities in South Florida already have suitable conditions for year-round mosquito activity. The Southeast is the region of the country with the most favorable conditions for this mosquito and thus faces the greatest threat from diseases the mosquito carries. 30 Climate change is expected to make conditions more suitable for transmission of certain vector-borne diseases, including year-round transmission in southern Florida. Summer increases in dengue cases are expected across every state in the Southeast. Despite warming, low winter temperatures may prevent permanent year-round establishment of the virus across the region. 31 Strategies such as management of urban wetlands have resulted in lower dengue fever risk in Puerto Rico. 32 Similar adaptation strategies have the potential to limit vector-borne disease in southeastern cities, particularly those cities with characteristics similar to Caribbean cities that have already implemented vector control strategies ( Ch. 20: U.S. Caribbean ). 33 , 34 The Southeast is also the region with the greatest projected increase in cases of West Nile neuroinvasive disease under both a lower and higher scenario (RCP4.5 and RCP8.5). 35 , 36

The number of days with high minimum temperatures (nighttime temperatures that stay above 75ºF) has been increasing across the Southeast (Figure 19.1), and this trend is projected to intensify, with some areas experiencing more than 100 additional warm nights per year by the end of the century (Figures 19.4 and 19.5). Exposure to high nighttime minimum temperatures reduces the ability of some people to recover from high daytime temperatures, resulting in heat-related illness and death. 26 This effect is particularly pronounced in cities, many of which have urban heat islands that already cause elevated nighttime temperatures. 27 Cities are taking steps to prevent negative health impacts from heat. For example, the Louisville, Kentucky, metro government conducted an urban heat management study and installed 145,000 square feet of cool roofs as part of their goal to lessen the risk of climate change impacts. 28

Cities across the Southeast are experiencing more and longer summer heat waves. Nationally, there are only five large cities that have increasing trends exceeding the national average for all aspects of heat waves (timing, frequency, intensity, and duration), and three of these cities are in the Southeast region—Birmingham, New Orleans, and Raleigh. Sixty-one percent of major Southeast cities are exhibiting some aspects of worsening heat waves, which is a higher percentage than any other region of the country. 12 The urban heat island effect (cities that are warmer than surrounding rural areas, especially at night) adds to the impact of heat waves in cities ( Ch. 5: Land Changes, KM 1 ). Southeastern cities including Memphis and Raleigh have a particularly high future heat risk. 25

While the Southeast is historically known for having a rural nature, a drastic shift toward a more urbanized region is underway. The Southeast contains many of the fastest-growing urban areas in the country, including a dozen of the top 20 fastest-growing metropolitan areas (by percentage) in 2016. 22 Metropolitan Atlanta has been swiftly growing, adding 69,200 residents in just one year. 23 At the same time, many rural counties in the South are losing population. 24 These trends towards a more urbanized and dense Southeast are expected to continue, creating new climate vulnerabilities but also opportunities to adapt as capacity and resources increase in cities ( Ch. 17: Complex Systems ). In particular, coastal cities in the Southeast face multiple climate risks, and many planning efforts are underway in these cities. Adaptation, mitigation, and planning efforts are emphasizing “co-benefits” (positive benefits related to the reduction of greenhouse gases or implementation of adaptation efforts) to help boost the economy while protecting people and infrastructure.

Many southeastern cities are particularly vulnerable to climate change compared to cities in other regions, with expected impacts to infrastructure and human health. The vibrancy and viability of these metropolitan areas, including the people and critical regional resources located in them, are increasingly at risk due to heat, flooding, and vector-borne disease brought about by a changing climate. Many of these urban areas are rapidly growing and offer opportunities to adopt effective adaptation efforts to prevent future negative impacts of climate change.

Increasing Flood Risks in Coastal and Low-Lying Regions The Southeast’s coastal plain and inland low-lying regions support a rapidly growing population, a tourism economy, critical industries, and important cultural resources that are highly vulnerable to climate change impacts. The combined effects of changing extreme rainfall events and sea level rise are already increasing flood frequencies, which impacts property values and infrastructure viability, particularly in coastal cities. Without significant adaptation measures, these regions are projected to experience daily high tide flooding by the end of the century.

Sea Level Rise Is Contributing to Increased Coastal Flooding in the Southeast Average global sea level (or global mean sea level; GMSL) has risen about 8–9 inches since 1880, with about 3 inches of that rise occurring since 1990.51,52 This recent increase in the rate of rise is projected to accelerate in the future due to continuing temperature increases and additional melting of land ice.51 This recent global rate increase, combined with the local effects of vertical land motion (sinking) and oceanographic effects such as changing ocean currents, has caused some areas in the Southeast to experience even higher local rates of sea level rise than the global average.53,54,55,56,57,58,59 Analyses at National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) tide gauges show as much as 1 to 3 feet of local relative sea level rise in the past 100 years in low-lying areas of the Southeast.54,59 This recent rise in local relative sea level has caused normal high tides to reach critical levels that result in flooding in many coastal areas in the region. Monthly and seasonal fluctuations in high tide levels are caused by a combination of astronomical factors (sun and moon gravitational attraction) and non-astronomical factors such as geomorphology (landscape of the area), as well as meteorological (weather) conditions. The highest tides of the year are generally the perigean, or spring, tides, which occur when the moon is full or new and is closest to the Earth. These perigean tides, also known as “king tides,” occur twice a year and in many cities are causing what has been called “nuisance” or “recurrent” flooding (referred to herein as high tide flooding). These floods can cause problems ranging from inconvenient to life changing. While the challenges brought on by rising perigean tides are diverse, important examples include increasingly frequent road closures, excessive water in storm water management systems, and deterioration of infrastructure such as roads and rail from saltwater. NOAA’s National Weather Service (NWS) issues coastal flood advisories and warnings when water levels at tide gauges are expected to exceed flood thresholds. These thresholds correspond to discrete water levels relative to NOAA tide gauges. Recent analyses of historical water levels at many NOAA tide gauges has shown an increase in the number of times that these warning thresholds were exceeded compared to the past. Annual occurrences of high tide coastal flooding have increased 5- to 10-fold since the 1960s in several low-lying coastal cities in the Southeast (Figure 19.7).51,60 In 2015, several Southeast coastal cities experienced all-time records of coastal flooding occurrences, including Wilmington, NC (90 days), Charleston, SC (38 days), Mayport, FL (19 days), Miami, FL (18 days), Key West, FL (14 days), and Fernandina Beach, FL (7 days). These flooding occurrences increased more than 50% in 2015 compared to 2014.58 In 2016, three all-time records were either tied (14 days at Key West, FL) or broken (50 days at Charleston, SC, and 38 days at Savannah, GA). The Miami area nearly matched the 2015 record of 18 days.61 This increase in high tide flooding frequency is directly tied to sea level rise. For example, in Norfolk, Virginia, local relative sea level rise has led to a fourfold increase in the probability of exceeding NWS thresholds compared to the 1960s (Figure 19.8). High tide flooding is now posing daily risks to businesses, neighborhoods, infrastructure, transportation, and ecosystems in the Southeast.1,2

Figure 19.7: Annual Number of High Tide Flooding Days SHRINK

Global sea level is very likely to rise by 0.3–0.6 feet by 2030, 0.5–1.2 feet by 2050, and 1.0–4.3 feet by 2100 under a range of scenarios from very low (RCP2.6) to high (RCP8.5),51,52,62 which would result in increases in both the depth and frequency of coastal flooding (Figure 19.7).51 Under higher emissions scenarios (RCP8.5), global sea level rise exceeding 8 feet (and even higher in the Southeast) by 2100 cannot be ruled out.51 By 2050, many Southeast cities are projected to experience more than 30 days of high tide flooding regardless of scenario.63 In addition, more extreme coastal flood events are also projected to increase in frequency and duration.60 For example, water levels that currently have a 1% chance of occurring each year (known as a 100-year event) will be more frequent with sea level rise. This increase in flood frequency suggests the need to consider revising flood study techniques and standards that are currently used to design and build coastal infrastructure.

Figure 19.8: Range of Daily Highest Water Levels in Norfolk, Virginia EXPAND

Download CSV

Download JSON

View in GCIS Table 19.1: Billion-Dollar Flood Events in the Southeast (2014–2016) Event Date Damages Casualties Southeast Tornadoes and flooding (FL, AL, AR) April 27–28, 2014 $1.8 Billion 33 South Carolina record flooding October 1–5, 2015 $2.1 Billion 25 Hurricane Matthew October 7–9, 2016 $10.1 Billion 49 Louisiana flooding (Baton Rouge) August 11–15, 2016 $10.1 Billion 13

A closer look at the August 2016 event in Louisiana provides an example of how vulnerable inland communities in the Southeast region are to these extreme rainfall events. Between August 11–15 2016, nearly half of southern Louisiana received at least 12–14 inches of rainfall. While urban areas such as Baton Rouge and Lafayette were hit the hardest, receiving upwards of 30 inches in a few days, coastal locations were also inundated with up to 20 inches of rain. Rainfall totals across the region exceeded amounts that would be expected to occur once every 1,000 years (or a less than 0.1% annual probability of occurrence), causing the Amite and Comite Rivers to surge past their banks and resulting in some 50,000 homes across the region filling with more than 18 inches of water.85 Nearly 10 times the number of homes received major flooding (18 inches or more) during this event compared to a historic 1983 flood in Baton Rouge, and the damage resulted in more than 2 million cubic yards of curbside debris from cleaning up homes (enough to fill over 600 Olympic-sized pools).86 A preceding event in northern Louisiana on March 8–12, 2016, caused $2.4 billion in damages (in 2017 dollars; $2.3 billion in 2015 dollars) and five casualties,84 illustrating that inland low-lying areas in the Southeast region are also vulnerable to flooding impacts. Events of such magnitudes are projected to become more likely in the future due to a changing climate,19,87 putting more people in peril from future floods. Existing flood map boundaries do not account for future flood risk due to the increasing frequency of more intense precipitation events, as well as new development that would reduce the floodplain's ability to manage storm water. As building and rebuilding in flood-prone areas continue, the risks of the kinds of major losses seen in these events will continue to grow. The growing number of extreme rainfall events is stressing the deteriorating infrastructure in the Southeast. Many transportation and storm water systems have not been designed to withstand these events. The combined effects of rising numbers of high tide flooding and extreme rainfall events, along with deteriorating storm water infrastructure, are increasing the frequency and magnitude of coastal and lowland flood events.45,88,89,90 The recent increases in flood risk have led many cities and counties to take adaptive actions to reduce these effects. Four counties in Southeast Florida formed a climate compact in 2010 to address climate change impacts, including sea level rise and high tide flooding.91 Recently updated in 2017, their climate action plan was one of the first intergovernmental collaborations to address climate change, adaptation, and mitigation in the country. Since then, cities like Charleston, South Carolina, have started to invest in flood management activities (see Case Study “Charleston, South Carolina, Begins Planning and Reinvesting”). Other examples include Miami Beach, Florida, which has a multiyear, $500-million program to raise public roads and seawalls and improve storm water drainage.92 Norfolk, Virginia, has begun comprehensive planning to fix its high tide flooding issues.93 Biloxi, Mississippi, has put in place several adaptation strategies to lessen the future impacts, including enacting a new building code that requires elevating structures an additional one foot above the base flood elevation.94 Tybee Island, Georgia, has developed a sea level rise adaptation plan with recommendations to flood-proof a 5.5-mile stretch of their sole access causeway, replace two vulnerable bridges, and retrofit their existing storm water infrastructure to improve drainage.95 In response to the 2016 flooding, eight parishes in the Acadiana region of Louisiana came together to collaborate at a watershed level, pooling their federal hazard mitigation grant funding to support projects across the Teche-Vermilion watershed. This is the only watershed-level hazard mitigation collaboration of this kind happening in the state and has the support of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the Governor's Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness, and the Louisiana Office of Community Development.96 Many communities in the Southeast also participate in FEMA’s Community Rating System (CRS) program, which provides reduced flood insurance premiums to communities that go above and beyond the minimum National Flood Insurance Program regulation standards.97 Many communities require a safety factor, also known as freeboard, expressed as feet above the base flood elevation, for construction in special flood hazard areas. Several Southeast communities—such as Hillsborough and Pinellas Counties, Florida; Biloxi, Mississippi; Chatham County, Georgia; and Myrtle Beach, South Carolina—have earned low CRS classes (5 on a scale of 1–10, with 1 being the best or most insurance premium discount) by implementing freeboard and other regulations that exceed the minimum standards.97 Case Study: Coastal and Inland Impacts of Extreme Rainfall In October 2015, an extreme rainfall event impacted both inland and coastal South Carolina, leading to the largest flood-related disaster in the state since Hurricane Hugo struck in 1989. The October 2015 event is among a series of devastating precipitation events that have occurred across the Southeast in recent years. From October 1–5, 2015, deep tropical moisture combined with a slow-moving (stalled) upper-level low pressure system to pump moisture into South Carolina’s coastal and interior regions. Much of the affected region received between 10 and 26 inches of rain over the 4-day event, breaking many all-time precipitation records (Figure 19.12). Mount Pleasant, located on South Carolina’s coast, received 26.88 inches of rain, which is an extremely rare event. The rainfall sparked inland flooding that led to three dam breaches and the destruction of countless roads and homes (see Figure 19.13 showing flash flooding impacts to inland roads). Roughly 52,000 residents applied for disaster relief, and 160,000 homes sustained some type of damage. At the coast, a combination of high tide and heavy rain caused significant flooding in downtown Charleston. A high tide of 2.38 feet above Mean Higher High Water (MHHW) occurred in the afternoon of October 3. This was the seventh highest tide ever recorded in Charleston Harbor and the highest since Hurricane Hugo in 1989. Under future climate scenarios, the combination of extreme precipitation and higher tides due to local sea level rise will likely cause more frequent events of this intensity and magnitude.98 Figure 19.12: October 2015 Extreme Rainfall Event Increases in extreme rainfall events and high tide coastal floods due to future climate change could impact the quality of life of permanent residents as well as tourists visiting the low-lying and coastal regions of the Southeast. Recent social science studies have indicated that people may migrate from many coastal communities that are vulnerable to the impacts of sea level rise, high tide flooding, saltwater intrusion, and storm surge.71 Even though many communities are starting to develop adaptation strategies to address current flooding issues, many adaptation strategies are not being designed for longer time horizons and more extreme worst-case climate scenarios.1,67 The 2017 Hurricane Season For the United States, 2017 was a historic year for weather and climate disasters, with widespread impacts and lingering costs. While 2017 tied the previous record year of 2011 for the total number of billion-dollar weather and climate disasters—16—the year broke the all-time previous record high costs by reaching $306.2 billion in damages (in 2017 dollars; $297 billion in 2015 dollars). The previous record year was 2005 with a total of $214.8 billion (in 2017 dollars; $208.4 billion in 2015 dollars), which included the impacts of Hurricanes Dennis, Katrina, Rita, and Wilma.99 In 2017, Hurricane Irma was one of three major hurricanes to make landfall in the United States and territories, with the most significant impacts occurring in the Southeast region. Irma was a Category 4 storm with 130 mph wind speeds when it made landfall at Cudjoe Key, Florida (20 miles north of Key West). Storm surge inundations at Cudjoe and the surrounding Keys were between 5 and 8 feet.100 Prior to landfall in Florida, Irma caused significant damage in the U.S. Virgin Islands and parts of Puerto Rico as a Category 5 hurricane with 185 mph wind speeds (see Ch. 20: U.S. Caribbean, Box 20.1 and KM 5).84 Irma’s intensity was impressive by any measure. According to the National Weather Service, Hurricane Irma was only the fifth hurricane with winds of 185 mph or higher in the whole of the Atlantic Basin since reliable record keeping began, and it was the strongest observed hurricane in the open Atlantic Ocean.101 For three days, the storm maintained maximum sustained winds of 185 miles per hour, the longest observed duration in the satellite era.101,102 Not only was Irma extremely strong, it was also very large with tropical storm force winds reaching as far away as 400 miles from the hurricane’s center and driving hurricane force winds up to 80 miles away.101 Two factors supported Irma’s strength: the very warm waters it passed over, which exceeded 86°F,102 and the light winds Irma encountered in the upper atmosphere (Figure 19.14).101 High-intensity hurricanes such as Irma are expected to become more common in the future due to climate change.103 Rapid intensification of storms is also more likely as the climate warms,104 even though there is also some historical evidence that the same conditions that lead to this intensification also act to weaken hurricane intensity near the U.S. coast, but it is unclear whether this relationship will continue as the climate warms further (see Kossin et al. 2017,103 Box 9.1).

Figure 19.14: Warm Waters Contribute to the Formation of Hurricane Irma EXPAND