Cleveland police chief says all new rape kits will be tested; count of older, untested kits continues
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Cleveland Police have tallied more than 6,000 rape kits and pieces of evidence from sexual assault cases going back 17 years.

And they continue to review that evidence case-by-case in an effort to determine what was and wasn't tested for DNA profiles of suspects that could solve cold cases or link attacks by serial sexual predators. The task is time consuming, said Chief Michael McGrath. "If we're going to do this, we're going to do this right."

Perhaps more significantly, he said that starting this year, Cleveland is submitting every rape kit the department receives for testing -- so there should be no backlog of untested kits going forward.

Since December,

were tested by Cleveland's forensic lab or the state crime lab. McGrath said he expects that number to rise as they continue to identify kits already tested and send older ones to the lab.

While more recent rape kits -- packaged in standard personal pizza-sized cardboard boxes -- are logged and tracked, officers have to hand sort through boxes of older evidence that can contain bed sheets or clothing in paper or plastic bags.

The State Bureau of Identification & Investigation will test every kit Cleveland sends in 2010, though their preference is for departments to

By the numbers Since December, the Cleveland Police Department has been reviewing sexual assault evidence it has stored going back to 1993. 6,125 The number of rape evidence kits officers have counted 2,382 The number of those kits that have been tested for DNA 10,624 The number of rapes reported to Cleveland police from 1993 to 2009 For Cleveland's full report, including year-by-year data of rapes reported and kits collected and tested, go to cleveland.com/metro

that detectives, prosecutors and forensic scientists think will be most likely to provide leads.

"BCI is continuing to work diligently with Cleveland Police to help them in determining the most effective way to address the older, stored kits," said a spokeswoman for the attorney general's office, which oversees the lab.

In the past, Cleveland supervisors decided whether to submit rape evidence for DNA testing on a case-by-case basis.

McGrath said evidence was often not tested in cases where a sexual assault victim chose not to cooperate with prosecutors, a person recanted a sexual assault report, where there was a lack of firm leads or no biological or trace evidence was found.

The importance of testing as many rape kits as possible has been magnified in the past decade as national databases packed with DNA profiles, have helped solve cold sexual assault cases by linking rape evidence with that from the databases.

Investigators have also solved strings of sex crimes after DNA belonging to unknown assailants was found in rape kits that linked together cases they didn't even know were related.

"What we are doing here is trying to catch-up with technology a little bit," McGrath said.

The department decided to take their inventory count back to 1993 because cases going back that far would likely fall within the state's statute of limitations for prosecution, which is 20 years.

Recently some states have passed laws that have made "DNA exceptions" to their statute of limitations laws and begin running the clock once the identity of the suspect is conclusively linked to DNA evidence collected when the crime occurred.

McGrath said after the final count of untested kits is completed -- a task that could take between six months and two years -- the department will turn its attention to deciding what, if anything, should be done with rape evidence the city has that stretches back to at least the 1950s.

Though those cases are beyond the current statute of limitations, the evidence could answer questions for victims.

There is also the possibility that new leads will be generated as the old batches of previous untested evidence is processed.

"If a lead comes up," McGrath said. "We will investigate it."

The sex crimes unit already has one detective dedicated to cases where assailants are identified through DNA database hits. That detective works in conjunction with a Cleveland Rape Crisis Center advocate to find and inform victims that a new lead has been found in their cases.

Deputy Chief Ed Tomba said that if a suspect identified through DNA is already in jail, the police have more time to investigate and make a new case. But if the suspect is free, then a warrant is issued quickly.

Ultimately it is up to the victim to decide whether to pursue prosecution or not. Some victims may be thrilled at the news of their attacker being arrested. Others may have moved on with their lives and decide they don't want to reopen old wounds.

"You want to give the victim respect and grant their wishes," Sgt. Antoinette

McMahan, a supervisor in the sex crimes unit said.

McGrath dismissed worries of manpower issues if a slew of new DNA hits should generate leads. "We'll handle it," he said.