FOURTH NATIONAL CLIMATE ASSESSMENT
Summary Findings

The twelve Summary Findings represent a very high-level synthesis of the material in the underlying report. They consolidate Key Messages and supporting evidence from 16 underlying national-level topic chapters, 10 regional chapters, and 2 response chapters.

Overview

The Overview presents the major findings alongside selected highlights from NCA4 Volume II, providing a synthesis of material from the underlying report chapters.

Chapter Text

Key Messages and Traceable Accounts

Chapters are centered around Key Messages, which are based on the authors’ expert judgment of the synthesis of the assessed literature. With a view to presenting technical information in a manner more accessible to a broad audience, this report aims to present findings in the context of risks to natural and/or human systems. Assessing the risks to the Nation posed by climate change and the measures that can be taken to minimize those risks helps users weigh the consequences of complex decisions.

Since risk can most meaningfully be defined in relation to objectives or societal values, Key Messages in each chapter of this report aim to provide answers to specific questions about what is at risk in a particular region or sector and in what way. The text supporting each Key Message provides evidence, discusses implications, identifies intersections between systems or cascading hazards, and points out paths to greater resilience. Where a Key Message focuses on managing risk, authors considered the following questions:

What do we value? What is at risk?

What outcomes do we wish to avoid with respect to these valued things?

What do we expect to happen in the absence of adaptive action and/or mitigation?

How bad could things plausibly get? Are there important thresholds or tipping points in the unique context of a given region, sector, and so on?

These considerations are encapsulated in a single question: What keeps you up at night? Importantly, climate is only one of many drivers of change and risk. Where possible, chapters provide information about the dominant sources of uncertainty (such as scientific uncertainty or socioeconomic factors), as well as information regarding other relevant non-climate stressors.

Each Key Message is accompanied by a Traceable Account that restates the Key Message found in the chapter text with calibrated confidence and likelihood language (see Table 1). These Traceable Accounts also document the supporting evidence and rationale the authors used in reaching their conclusions, while also providing information on sources of uncertainty. More information on Traceable Accounts is provided below.

Our Changing Climate

USGCRP oversaw the production of the Climate Science Special Report (CSSR): NCA4 Volume I,2 which assesses the current state of science relating to climate change and its physical impacts. The CSSR is a detailed analysis of how climate change affects the physical earth system across the United States. It presents foundational information and projections for climate change that improve consistency across analyses in NCA4 Volume II. The CSSR is the basis for the physical climate science summary presented in Chapter 2 (Our Changing Climate) of this report.

National Topic Chapters

The national topic chapters summarize current and future climate change related risks and what can be done to reduce those risks. These national chapters also synthesize relevant content from the regional chapters. New national topic chapters for NCA4 include Chapter 13: Air Quality; Chapter 16: Climate Effects on U.S. International Interests; and Chapter 17: Sector Interactions, Multiple Stressors, and Complex Systems.

Regional Chapters

Responding to public demand for more localized information—and because impacts and adaptation tend to be realized at a more local level—NCA4 provides greater detail in the regional chapters compared to the national topic chapters. The regional chapters assess current and future risks posed by climate change to each of NCA4’s 10 regions (see Figure 1) and what can be done to minimize risk. Challenges, opportunities, and success stories for managing risk are illustrated through case studies.

National Climate Assessment Regions

The regions defined in NCA4 are similar to those used in the Third National Climate Assessment (NCA3),8 with these exceptions: the Great Plains region, formerly stretching from the border of Canada to the border of Mexico, is now divided into the Northern Great Plains and Southern Great Plains along the Nebraska–Kansas border; and content related to the U.S. Caribbean islands is now found in its own chapter, distinct from the Southeast region.