Kasich, Strickland tug-of-war over passenger-rail service continues
The nation's transportation secretary says he's ready to end Ohio's $400 million passenger-rail program and not waste tax dollars, if that's what the state's incoming governor wants.

But U.S. Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood told Gov.-elect John Kasich in a letter Tuesday that the federal-stimulus dollars can't be used for anything but the nation's high-speed rail program.

And LaHood made a hard pitch for Kasich to support the Cleveland-to-Cincinnati train, saying it will create thousands of jobs and provide a "shot in the arm that Ohio could well use."

That pitch won't go far. Kasich has criticized Ohio's rail plan as a costly boondoggle that he'll end once he becomes governor in January.

In response to LaHood's letter, Kasich spokesman Rob Nichols said the governor-elect will pursue "additional flexibilities" for uses of the $400 million in federal-stimulus money.

Kasich asked President Barack Obama on Monday to allow the money to be used for other infrastructure projects in Ohio. If it can't, Kasich wants the money used to reduce the federal deficit.

"As the former chairman of the House Budget Committee, Governor-elect Kasich is fully aware of the rules surrounding the use of federal funds," Nichols said in an e-mail.

In a shot at Gov. Ted Strickland, Nichols said it was "refreshing to see that Secretary LaHood understands the importance of preventing any more wasteful spending on the passenger rail project."

Strickland has said Ohio will continue a $25 million phase of engineering and design studies as long as he's governor. Ohio has signed contracts of up to $15 million for those studies and other work. Consultants have supplied more than $1 million in services so far.

LaHood, like Strickland, said the rail project would generate thousands of jobs. And it could attract rail-manufacturing companies to Ohio, LaHood said in his letter to Kasich.

But his offer to "wind down" the $400 million project if Kasich doesn't want it, in order to save tax dollars, seemed to undermine Strickland's stance that the program should continue.

Strickland doesn't think he's been undercut, spokeswoman Amanda Wurst said.

"Studies going on now are not a waste of tax dollars," Wurst said. "It will be good information available to ... future governors and legislators who have a vision for Ohio."

To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: tbreckenridge@plaind.com, 216-999-4695