North Carolina Community Health Center Association
North Carolina Still Has a Coverage Gap

What is the Coverage Gap?

Estimates indicate 244,000 uninsured North Carolinians fall in the Medicaid Coverage Gap and as many as 400,000 would benefit from extending Medicaid coverage. Additionally, there are more than 100,000 uninsured children in North Carolina, and closing the Coverage Gap could greatly reduce that number since children are more likely to get covered and stay covered if their parents gain access to insurance coverage. In 2015, 41% of all FQHC patients in North Carolina were uninsured, and more than 70% of patients lived at or below 100% FPL. Community health centers served 177,088 uninsured adults in 2015, and the majority of those fell in the Medicaid Coverage Gap. Our providers see firsthand the significant health challenges and barriers to needed services that these patients face. In North Carolina, nearly 40,000 women are not receiving recommended preventive screenings, 27,044 diabetics cannot get much needed medications, and 45,500 individuals with depression are not getting the treatment they need. In fact, community health center providers often have to modify treatment plans for uninsured patients because of the patients’ inability to afford a specialist visit or pay for needed medications.Under Medicaid expansion, outpatient providers could address many of the currently untreated issues that often result in patients seeking inefficient, costly, and inappropriate care in the emergency department. Within the first year of closing Michigan’s Coverage Gap, more than half of expansion enrollees saw a primary care doctor and 17 percent received preventive services. In Kentucky, 46,000 people were screened for diabetes and 13,000 people were treated for substance use disorders within the first year of expansion.

In partnership with the Health Access Project, we have collected stories from CHC patients and assembled a Close the Gap Storybook.



Click here or on the image above to download and view the storybook.



Here’s how you can help

Show Your Support for Closing the Coverage Gap!

North Carolina could help as many as 400,000 North Carolinians who lack access to affordable health insurance. Federal funding is set aside to provide insurance to this population.

Write a Letter to the Editor



Talk to Policymakers and the Media

Learn More: NCCHCA Coverage Gap resources

Research and Analysis