Ohio lawmakers secure earmarks, draw criticism
Washington - Black raspberries that may fight cancer. A missile defense surveillance blimp. A factory to convert coal into diesel fuel.

Ohio lawmakers put $305 million into 2008 spending bills for these and other pet projects that they say are vital to their constituents but that budget watchdog groups deride as "pork barrel" spending.

Newly adopted disclosure rules make it possible for the first time to determine exactly who put what into the federal budget. The new information reveals four legislators are Ohio's top congressional spenders: Springfield Republican Rep. David Hobson, Toledo Democrat Marcy Kaptur, Niles Democrat Tim Ryan and Navarre Republican Ralph Regula

All are members of the House committee that decides how to allocate federal dollars. Their Appropriations Committee posts give them power to earmark money for pet projects and make them magnets for campaign contributions from lobbyists and companies that seek tax money.

Hobson got the most money for special projects of any Ohioan in the U.S. House of Representatives: nearly $88 million by himself and in collaboration with other lawmakers, according to a federal spending database compiled by the Taxpayers for Common Sense. He ranked 22nd among its 435 members.



Here are some examples of projects that Ohios senators and local U.S. representatives obtained earmarks for in 2008 spending bills: • Sen. Sherrod Brown, Avon Democrat: $368,500 for renovations at the Akron-Canton Regional foodbank. • Sen. George Voinovich, Cleveland Republican: $294,000 for a new daycare/family services center at the Goodrich-Gannett Neighborhood Center in Cleveland. • Marcy Kaptur, Toledo Democrat: $2.8 million for the Combat Mental Health Initiative at University Hospitals of Cleveland, to study soldiers' risk factors for deployment-related post-traumatic stress disorder. • Dennis Kucinich, Cleveland Democrat: $517,000 to expand the Cleveland Botanical Garden's Green Corps work/study program for disadvantaged urban teenagers. • Steven LaTourette, Bainbridge Township Republican: $2.5 million for Hunter Manufacturing in Solon, which is developing a chemical filtration system to protect troops, equipment and facilities from chemical warfare agents. • Ralph Regula, Navarre Republican: $390,000 for construction, renovations and equipment at Wadsworth Rittman Hospital. • Tim Ryan, Niles Democrat: $1 million for Alpha Micron Inc. of Kent to develop a visor that Air Force pilots can re-tint rapidly in response to glare. • Betty Sutton, Copley Township Democrat: $490,000 to help the Lorain Port Authority establish a ferry boat between the Black River Landing and Lake Erie. • Stephanie Tubbs Jones, Cleveland Democrat: $1,082,000 for a Cleveland State University program that will construct four rooftop wind spire towers in Northeast Ohio to provide alternative electricity sources.

Kaptur ranked second in Ohio, and 25th in Congress, with a tally of nearly $77 million.

The next-highest Ohioans were Ryan and Regula, who each got more than $28 million and ranked 143rd and 146th, respectively. Hobson and Regula will retire from Congress early next year.

In the Senate, Cleveland Republican George Voinovich secured around $162 million for Ohio projects, while Avon Democrat Sherrod Brown got close to $111 million. Voinovich's tally ranked him 48th among the Senate's 100 members, while Brown was 72nd. Neither is on the Senate's budget-writing committee.

The debate over earmarks

Most members of Congress love earmarks and view them as a way to funnel federal dollars to worthwhile local projects. Regula is particularly proud of directing money to health care programs throughout Northeast Ohio and says federal earmarks often help recipients raise money from other sources. For example, he said an earmark he secured to help a Lodi hospital build an emergency room induced private donors to contribute several hundred thousand dollars.

"We know our communities better than these bureaucrats in the executive branch, who don't even know where our districts are most of the time," adds Kaptur, who allotted $922,497 for research that Ohio State University is conducting with a Wilmington berry farm on chemicals in black raspberries that might be used to fight esophageal, oral and colon cancer. Hobson, Voinovich, Brown and GOP Reps. Deborah Pryce of Upper Arlington and Mike Turner of Centerville were also behind the berry earmark.

Critics say earmarks contribute to runaway spending, and they contend legislators can improperly use earmarks to enrich themselves. The only Ohio member of Congress who never seeks earmarks - House GOP Leader John Boehner of West Chester - has launched a thus-far unsuccessful crusade to eliminate them.



"You have the earmark tail wagging the federal budget dog," says Leslie Paige, media director of the nonpartisan budget watchdog group Citizens Against Government Waste.

"They are secretive, they are unaccountable, they are out of control."

A Plain Dealer examination of Hobson's earmarks published last week found he secured federal money for two projects near real estate he owns. He says he didn't personally profit from the expenditures and obtained Ethics Committee permission for the most recent one. His actions don't violate any laws or House rules, though budget watchdog groups called it a conflict of interest.

Paige's group criticized Regula for a $126,000 earmark he secured with Voinovich that would be used to catalog White House library books so the National First Ladies Library in Canton could purchase duplicate books for its collection.

The First Ladies Library was founded by Regula's wife, Mary, and its director is Regula's daughter, Martha. A Plain Dealer review of Regula's earmarks found he also got $882,000 for a new overnight parking apron for airplanes at the Akron-Canton Airport, where his son, David, is customer service manager.

Regula says his family ties have nothing to do with the earmarks. He said the library money will go to a separate entity from the First Ladies Library, the New York-based Bibliographic Society of America, which will do the cataloging.

Regula said he secured money for airport projects like a sewage treatment facility and de-icing equipment for many years before his son, who also serves as vice-chairman of the Ohio Turnpike Commission and a Bethlehem Township trustee, joined its staff.

"That airport is extremely important to our area for economic development," Regula said.

Citizens Against Government Waste's Paige said she was "outraged" that a member of Congress would steer money to entities that employ family members.

"It is starting to look like a banana republic out there," Paige said of Regula's earmarks.

Lobbyists give generously

Paige and other critics say earmarks also contribute to a pay-to-play culture on Capitol Hill, where companies and lobbyists that benefit from earmarks give donations to legislators' re-election campaigns.

An Arlington, Va.-based defense lobbying firm called The PMA Group has given more money to both Hobson and Ryan than anyone else in their congressional careers, according to statistics compiled by the Center for Responsive Politics. PMA and its employees have given $88,500 to Hobson over his career, and $42,250 to Ryan, the group calculated. Its statistics say PMA is Kaptur's top contributor in the 2007-2008 election cycle, with $15,500 in donations.

All three legislators allotted earmarks to clients represented by PMA in the 2008 budget year, but insist that their spending decisions are solely based on project merits, and that campaign donations aren't a factor. A PMA spokesman would not comment on the firm's political contributions.

PMA's lobbying clients include Lockeed Martin, whose Akron division is working on an unmanned High Altitude Airship blimp prototype that the military would use for surveillance and missile defense. Ryan and Brown obtained $2.5 million for the project. Ryan said he backs the program because it has the potential to create 500 new UAW jobs in Akron, not because of campaign donations. Lockheed Martin and its employees gave $24,100 to Ryan over his career, and $4,350 to Brown. PMA's contributions to Brown over his career total $500.

"The only criteria I use are creating jobs, or improving the health, safety and welfare of the district," said Ryan, who added that most entities that benefited from his earmarks didn't give to his campaign.

Another earmark that Ryan believes will help create jobs is the $2.25 million that he and St. Clairsville Democrat Charlie Wilson obtained to study technologies that could be used by a proposed coal-to-liquid fuel plant in Columbiana County. The plant would create 4,000 construction jobs if it's built, and hundreds of permanent jobs thereafter.

The Washington state-based company that wants to build the plant, Baard Energy, hasn't given any campaign money to Ryan or Wilson. Its lobbying firm, Locke Lord Strategies, gave $3,000 to Ryan and nothing to Wilson.

Hobson says he likes to use earmarks for projects that create jobs in his district, as well as good ideas the federal bureaucracy has ignored. He touts a device that 3M developed a few years ago that allows more current to pass through electrical lines without restringing the line.

"They couldn't get into the Department of Energy," Hobson recalls. "We funded the earmark and told them to look at it. After three years, DOE put out a big notice saying 'Look what we found. Isn't it wonderful.' The only reason they looked at it was because we did the earmark. That was a good deal."