Network Health Adds Talent to Executive Team
MENASHA, WI (April 14, 2016) – Network Health has brought on Josh Weisbrod and Brian Brenner as new additions to its executive team. The Wisconsin-based health insurance company has offered commercial and Medicare health insurance products in the Fox Valley for more than 30 years. Network Health recently expanded coverage into southeastern Wisconsin and has grown to become the largest provider-owned Medicare Advantage operator in Wisconsin.

Josh Weisbrod joins Network Health as the Director of Risk Adjustment. Josh has 20 years of health care, health insurance, health care analytic and human service experience working with local and national companies, and state and federal agencies.

“Josh Weisbrod has an extensive health care insurance background, which will serve Network Health well as we broaden our footprint in the marketplace,” said Mary Davis, MD, Chief Medical Officer.

Before coming to Network Health, Josh served as Director of Government Programs for Security Health Plan in Marshfield, Wisconsin. Josh previously served as Director of Operations for the Health Insurance Risk-Sharing Plan (HIRSP) in Madison, Wisconsin and as a manager in the Health Informatics division of APS Healthcare, Inc.

Brian Brenner joins Network Health as the Director of Operations Support. Brian leads Network Health’s quality and training, grievance and appeals, benefit and material configuration, and payment integrity areas. Brian has nearly 30 years of insurance industry expertise. Prior to joining Network Health, Brian held a number of leadership roles at Guardian Life Insurance including Director of Medical Claims and Director of New Business. Brian received his bachelor’s degree from the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

“Brian brings to Network Health a wealth of knowledge across the full spectrum of insurance administration. His experience and expertise will guide Network Health’s operational performance as we continue to grow throughout our service area,” LJ Tanner, Vice President of Operations, said.