6 Employee Engagement Strategies for Millennials in the Workplace
Millennials are the most talked about demographic in the workplace right now. That is because, according to Deloitte, in just 10 years they will make up 75% of the U.S. Workforce. Managing millennials in the workplace is a little different than managing other generations, but the gulf that is discussed in circles and in executive boardrooms is not as large or different as it might appear or feel.

Although employee engagement and Millennials in the workplace sometimes are talked about in dire context, there are some things that Millennials have told us that organizations are doing quite well. Dale Carnegie Training and MSW/ARS Research have conducted a study which specifically looked at what drives employee engagement with Millennials in the workplace. Here are 6 specific employee engagement strategies that organizations are using to please Millennials in the workplace.

Giving support when needed – Gen Y Millennials live in an on demand culture. TV, music, and other technology make things on demand. The same goes for the workplace. Generally Millennials in the workforce want to be empowered to do the work their way, but when they run into trouble or need extra help they want the support of management to help them.

Flex hours – See On demand culture and understand that technology has completely blurred work and personal life. What Millennials want in the workplace is flex hours and many companies are accommodating.

Trusting Immediate Manager – This element transcends generation. Everyone wants to trust their immediate manager. It allows you to do your job with confidence and support.

Immediate Manager Cares About my Personal Life and Its Impact on My Job – with the personal and professional line blurred an employee’s personal life is no longer of limits. It is perfectly fine to ask if you believe your relationship is at a level. Don’t pry but rather “be genuinely interested” as Dale Carnegie said.

Confidence in the leadership ability of senior leadership – Millennials need to know “why” and “where” the company is going. Most times it is the task of senior leadership to communicate that strategic vision and most of them seem to be delivering on that requirement in today’s workplace.

Support of health and well-being are encouraged – Again, this goes back to how Millennials do not view personal and professional life as separate. They also feel like organizations are doing a good job of watching out for this important event of employee engagement.

Despite articles and belief, to the contrary, organizations are successfully delivering on important strategies to improve employee engagement. These are 6 areas where organizations in general are winning. However, it is important to look specifically at your organization to see if you are delivering on the important engagement drivers for Millennials in the workplace.

Do you have some employee engagement strategies for Millennials in the workplace? Let us know in the comments below.

Download our FREE White Paper on Engaging Millennials in the Workplace to get valuable insight on what drives Millennials and how you can better engage them.