The First Look at Starbucks Red Holiday Cups for 2015
Update 11/8 6:00 PM The Story Behind the Design of Starbucks 2015 Red Holiday Cups

When red Starbucks cups return, it’s a signal that the holiday season is drawing near.

Starbucks customers are getting an early taste of Starbucks holiday beverages starting today (October 22) along with a glimpse of this year’s red holiday cups in some of Europe’s most recognizable shopping destinations: Selfridges in London and Birmingham, England; Galleries Lafayette in Paris; and in Austria at Donau Zentrum in Vienna and Europark in Salzburg. Starbucks® stores around the world will follow with holiday beverages starting in early November.

This year’s iconic red Starbucks cup features a two-toned ombré design, with a bright poppy color on top that shades into a darker cranberry below. “We have anchored the design with the classic Starbucks holiday red that is bright and exciting,” said Jeffrey Fields, Starbucks vice president of Design & Content. “The ombré creates a distinctive dimension, fluidity and weightedness.”

Since 1997 Starbucks has served its holiday beverages in a unique cup, starting with a jazz-themed design in jewel tones of deeper reds, greens and blues. Every year since, the cup has told a story of the holidays by featuring symbols of the season from vintage ornaments and hand-drawn reindeer to modern vector-illustrated characters.

“In the past, we have told stories with our holiday cups designs,” said Fields. “This year we wanted to usher in the holidays with a purity of design that welcomes all of our stories.”

In the nearly two decades since the first red Starbucks cup, the company has grown from 1,400 stores in a handful of countries to more than 22,000 stores in 68 markets around the world.

“Starbucks has become a place of sanctuary during the holidays,” he said. “We’re embracing the simplicity and the quietness of it. It’s more open way to usher in the holiday.”

Spanish-Language Translation of this Story (Traducción Idioma español de esta historia)

For more information on this story, contact the Starbucks Newsroom