DeSantis Voted In Favor Of Food Stamps For Illegal Immigrants
Ron DeSantis Questionable 2014 Vote

President Trump-endorsed Florida gubernatorial candidate Ron DeSantis might have some explaining to do to American families and Florida’s conservative primary voters.

Earlier this week, the Central Florida Post reported that in a 2014 vote on H.R. 2642, DeSantis voted against a farm bill that included provisions to ban food stamps (also know as Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program or SNAP) to illegal immigrants, college students, lottery winners, convicted murderers, and violent sex offenders.

His dangerous decision ultimately puts illegal aliens and criminals ahead of law-abiding American citizens in line for food stamps – a judgment President Trump would surely question.

Roger Stone Questions DeSantis’ Trump ‘Endorsement’

During an interview on the Infowars War Room, conservative fighter Roger Stone questions President Trump’s Ron DeSantis endorsement tweet as it might have not been an endorsement after all. See what Stone had to say:

This begs the question: did President Trump really endorse DeSantis for governor or was the president just being kind?

DeSantis 2014 Food Stamp Vote: Illegal Immigrant Families First

Currently, illegal and legal immigrant families are cashing in on American taxpayer-funded benefits. The Washington Examiner reported that American families receive $1,261 less in welfare than immigrant families.

Ron DeSantis’ 2014 vote speaks volumes to those American families – he isn’t willing to stand up for them, put them first, and prohibit food stamps for illegal immigrants.

The forgotten man and woman is the hard working American taxpayer who wakes up every day without asking government for anything in return. We are finally putting these Americans first again, and I promise to fight every day for them as Governor. #DeSantisforGovernor — Ron DeSantis (@RonDeSantisFL) January 29, 2018

If DeSantis understood that there are well-deserving Americans being pushed to the back of the food stamp line, he would have included them in this tweet.

Despite illegal immigrants being ineligible for welfare benefits, the Washington Examiner estimated that they are receiving between $1.4 billion and $2.1 billion in food stamp benefits.

The American taxpayers DeSantis is promising to fight for every day would most likely care about saving billions of dollars in taxpayer funds. Little do they know, one vote from DeSantis could have prevented this welfare disaster.

America First?

Ron DeSantis doesn’t have a problem talking tough about putting America First. But talk is just that, talk. In reality, DeSantis is forgetting hard working American families who deserve to be at the front of the line for benefits and welfare like food stamps.

America First means putting ALL Americans first, and if Ron DeSantis were a friend of President Trump, he would also be fighting for these American families who have been forgotten by Congress.

Is There A Pattern? 2016 Ron DeSantis: Trump ‘Reluctant Endorser’

Even beyond his questionable 2014 vote, Ron DeSantis’ embrace of President Donald Trump and his message of conservative, America First solutions is a relatively new phenomenon.

As late as July 2016, DeSantis was ranked by Nate Silver’s FiveThirtyEight political blog as a ‘Reluctant Endorser’ of President Trump. He was never on board with him until he conveniently began supporting the then-GOP Presidential Nominee Trump.

While DeSantis is trying to be a Trump copycat, vowing to clean up Tallahassee Swamp in 2018, the Florida 6th District Congressman continues to dodge reporters while refusing to defend Trump’s ability to do his job.

Is there a pattern of questionable decisions and weak Trump support? You be the judge.

Comments

comments