2018 Governor’s Race: Democratic Candidates Face High School Students
To call the last four years in Illinois politics tumultuous might be an understatement.

For more than two years, the state didn’t have a budget. Unpaid bills piled up, social service agencies closed their doors, and state universities made painful cuts. If Gov. Bruce Rauner survives his Republican primary challenge, he’ll face a re-election battle against one of six Democrats.

Thanks to our sponsors: View all sponsors

Related: Democratic Candidates for Governor Want Madigan to Resign

During a special episode of Chicago Tonight, we’re joined by 50 high school students who are part of the Mikva Challenge, a program that helps young people get involved in politics and community leadership. They’ll participate in a forum with all six Democratic candidates for governor, asking questions about combating violence, improving schools and why the candidates each think they should be the next governor of Illinois.

Behind the scenes

Students, teachers and Mikva Challenge coordinators arrived at WTTW Monday afternoon for warm-up activities, lunch and discussion. Below, photos from the day.

































Below, meet some of the Mikva Challenge students. Find out which issues are most important to them, what they thought of candidates’ responses to their questions and who they’re inclined to support after Monday’s forum.

Zainie Qureshi

Senior at Metea Valley High School

Which issue is most important to you?

I think in light of what happened in Florida and how that affected people like me and could’ve easily affected me, gun control.

How did you feel candidates responded to questions regarding gun control?

I thought it was kind of textbook, which is to be expected but I did appreciate some of the examples and the empathies given, but what I want to see is policy. Hopefully, I’ll see that later.

After this forum, is there any candidate you’re more inclined to support?

I was pretty set on [J.B.] Pritzker but I really appreciated [Daniel] Biss’s passion. I thought it was very evident in the way he spoke.

Kimberly Esquivel

Junior at George Washington High School

Which issue is most important to you?

The environment in schools because I feel like if we have a bad environment in the school building and outside the school building we’re not going to be able to learn efficiently like we’re supposed to. And that would affect our progress to get into colleges and future careers.

What motivated your question about inequities in schools?

It was [the environment] in my classrooms, and how last year we painted over the mold and put art on the walls to make it seem like we didn’t have mold or any pressing issues.

How did you feel candidates responded to your question about inequity in schools?

I felt like they were too vague. I felt like [J.B.] Pritzker gave the textbook answer. I was kind of upset and disappointed.

After this forum, is there any candidate you’re more inclined to support?

[Daniel] Biss.

Cecilia Ruiz

Junior at Benito Juarez High School

Which issue is most important to you?

The issue I was most concerned about was definitely gun violence given the recent event in the Florida shooting – also we’re in Chicago. There’s been so many shootings and police brutality and racial profiling. It’s something we as youth as a city and a state as a whole are very concerned about.

What motivated your question about lowering the voting age to 16?

If we’re allowed to drive around the roads of Chicago, why not be allowed to vote for somebody who we think can help us, especially the youth. Why not? Why can’t we be a voice for our state?

After this forum, is there any candidate you’re more inclined to support?

I’m really in between [Daniel] Biss and [Tio] Hardiman.

Marcus Ward

Senior at Daniel Hale Williams Prep

Which issue is most important to you?

Education because it’s the key to everybody succeeding in life.

What motivated your question about providing on-the-job training for students?

Seeing in my community that many people can’t afford to go to college or they don’t have the education to succeed in college, technical training is a very important investment that we should make.

How did you feel about the Chris Kennedy’s response to your question?

The response was very thorough and made me understand more how the candidate is as a person. I believe he answered the question truthfully as to what he believed in. I don’t think he tried to side step it.

Rhandi Matthews

Senior at Daniel Hale Williams Prep

Which issue is most important to you?

Mental illness and how people with mental illness are going to be able to function in society.

How did you feel about Chris Kennedy’s response to your question about reopening mental health clinics?

I felt like his response was understandable but didn’t give me enough insight for what his actual plan was going to be.

After this forum, is there any candidate you’re more inclined to support?

I find myself more inclined to support [Daniel] Biss with the responses that he gave. He was more direct with his responses and his ideas.

Victor Shi

Sophomore at Stevenson High School

Which issue is most important to you?

Education because the school that I go to is a wealthier school, I feel like other schools should have the equal access opportunity for education and school quality.

Was there anything about the forum that surprised you?

I would definitely say how relaxed it was.

After this forum, is there any candidate you’re more inclined to support?

Daniel Biss.

Related stories:

2018 Voters’ Guide to the Cook County Primary

WTTW’s 2018 Voters’ Guide to the Cook County Primary is an online resource designed to inform voters about the candidates running for office in the March 20 election. Learn more.

2018 Governor’s Race: Political Battles Turn Bitter

Feb. 7: J.B. Pritzker apologizes for remarks he made on FBI wiretaps about black politicians. But will the apology undo the damage? We discuss the March 20 primary with political reporters Greg Hinz, Natasha Korecki and Laura Washington.

2018 Governor’s Race: Decade-Old Phone Call a Headache for Pritzker

Feb. 6: A recording of a nearly decade-old phone call between disgraced former Gov. Rod Blagojevich and J.B. Pritzker is causing a headache for the Democratic front-runner for governor.

Jeanne Ives Asks ‘What’s Offensive?’ About ‘Provocative’ Campaign Ad

Feb. 5: Gov. Bruce Rauner’s challenger, state Rep. Jeanne Ives, R-Wheaton, says she’s been surprised by the “hysteria” surrounding a new ad her campaign released Friday.

Thanks to our sponsors: View all sponsors