Liar pol’s polls get Viet-conked
Embattled Connecticut US Senate candidate Richard Blumenthal’s double-digit lead in the polls plummeted yesterday — as another instance of him falsely claiming he had served in Vietnam surfaced.

Democrat Blumenthal — who had easily been the front-runner to replace retiring Sen. Chris Dodd — has dropped to a 3-percentage-point lead over Republican challenger Linda McMahon, according to a Rasmussen Reports poll taken on Tuesday.

Blumenthal had 48 percent of the vote, compared to McMahon’s 45.

Two weeks ago, McMahon — the co-founder of World Wrestling Entertainment — trailed Blumenthal by 13 points.

It’s the closest McMahon or any other candidate has come to Blumenthal, the state’s longtime attorney general and early favorite for the seat.

Blumenthal also lost ground in his lead over Republican Rob Simmons, a Vietnam vet. He now bests Simmons by 50 to 39 percent, down from a 23-point lead over the former congressman, according to Rasmussen.

The survey was taken hours after Blumenthal held a press conference about his false claims of serving in Vietnam. He insisted he didn’t mean to lie and that he misspoke when he said he served “in Vietnam.”

“On a few occasions, I have misspoken about my service and I regret that. I take full responsibility,” Blumenthal said.

In another sign that Blumenthal’s campaign was in trouble, the nonpartisan Cook Political Report — which rates the competitiveness of political races — moved the race into a the toss-up category. Previously, they’d given the Dems the advantage.

Merrick Alpert — a Democrat vying in the primary for the Senate seat — said he has received at least 50 calls from Democratic delegates who are now thinking of backing him at the state convention tomorrow.

“They were in the process of having the coronation for the prince, but just as they were about to put the crown on his head, the Earth shook,” said Alpert.

Last week, he said, he could barely get any delegate on the phone. “Now, literally, they are calling me,” he said.

Meanwhile, the Stamford Advocate uncovered another example in which Blumenthal — who did a six-year stint in the US Marine Corps Reserves but never left America for his duties — talked of being in Vietnam.

“I wore the uniform in Vietnam and many came back to all kinds of disrespect,” he told the crowd at the Stamford Veterans Day parade in 2008, according to the paper.

There are at least two other occasions when he also had said he served in Vietnam.

In another development, the McMahon campaign posted on its Web site a longer version of what had been a particularly damaging video of Blumenthal boasting about serving in Vietnam.

That video — widely shown on Tuesday when the scandal broke — featured Blumenthal telling veterans, “We have learned something very important since that days that I served in Vietnam.”

In the longer version, Blumenthal is seen at first correctly stating that he served in the armed services “during the Vietnam era.”

His camp said this showed that he wasn’t trying to boost his military cred, but had simply misspoke.

jennifer.fermino@nypost.com