New York State Senator Jose Peralta’s cause of death revealed
Queens state Sen. Jose Peralta suffered sudden septic shock, his despondent widow told The Post Friday of the lawmaker’s tragic, Thanksgiving eve death.

“All they said is that he was septic,” Evelyn Peralta said Friday afternoon, after meeting with officials with the city Medical Examiner’s office.

“And that led to organ failure,” she said of her 47-year-old husband, the state Senate’s first Dominican-American member.

“They need to do additional tests,” she said. “There is no final conclusion yet. They don’t know” what caused the fatal blood infection, she said.

“His body was poisoning itself.”

She added, tearfully, “I just came back from viewing the body. The doctor said it’s rare, [given] his age and that it happened so quick … he was healthy. He was a healthy guy.”

The senator, who represented a Queens district that included Corona, Elmhurst, Jackson Heights and Woodside, had complained of pressure in his head and shortness of breath before developing a fever on Tuesday, the widow had said.

A doctor “didn’t find anything” at the time. But by Wednesday, he was having trouble breathing and when he became incoherent, she rushed him to Elmhurst Hospital.

Now, she said, she is making funeral arrangements.

see also New York State Senator Jose Peralta dead at age 47 New York State Senator Jose Peralta died of an apparent...

“Just please write something nice,” she said, her voice breaking. “He was a nice person.”

The Peraltas have a 13-year-old son, Myles; he also had a son Matthew, 21.

The Democrat served for eight years in the state Assembly, then took his seat in the Senate in 2010. He had been defeated in this year’s primaries.

Tributes have been pouring in on social media, with colleagues describing him as a tireless advocate for the people of Queens.

Sepsis is often caused by the immune system overreacting to an infection; releasing chemicals into the blood that trigger widespread inflammation.

In extreme circumstances, the inflammation can lead to organ damage and failure, a dangerous condition called “septic shock.”