Andrew J. Cherlin | Sociology
I received my undergraduate degree from Yale University in 1970 and a Ph.D. degree in Sociology from the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1976. I came to Johns Hopkins as an assistant professor in 1976 and have been here ever since. I served as President of the Population Association of America in 1999. In 2003 I received the Distinguished Career Award from the Family Section of the American Sociological Association. In 2005 I was a Guggenheim Fellow. In 2009 I received the Irene B. Taeuber Award from the PAA, in recognition of outstanding accomplishments in demographic Research. I am a member of the American Academy of Arts and Science, the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences, and the National Academy of Sciences.

My research is in the sociology of families and public policy. I have published books and articles on topics such as working-class families, marriage and divorce, children's well-being, intergenerational relations, family policy, and welfare policy. My most recent book is Labor’s Love Lost: The Rise and Fall of the Working-Class Family in America (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2014). My previous book is The Marriage-Go-Round: The State of Marriage and the Family Today (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2009). I was also the principal investigator of the "Three-City Study," an interdisciplinary study of low-income children and their caregivers in the post-welfare-reform era. The study’s web site includes downloadable documents that describe the study and a searchable list of publications. The data from all three survey waves of our study are publicly available through the Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research. I am also the author of a textbook in the sociology of the family, Public and Private Families: An Introduction (Eighth edition, McGraw-Hill, 2017).

230.101 Introduction to Sociology

230.388 Sociology of the Family

230.614 Seminar on the Family

360.400 Social Policy Senior Seminar