Christie's bogus spin on property taxes: Editorial
When you hear Gov. Chris Christie and his crew boast about their success in controlling property taxes, you may wonder why it doesn’t feel better.

The reason is that they are peddling another myth. The real burden on the average New Jersey family has been increasing sharply — and is rising faster under Christie than it did under Gov. Jon Corzine.

How’s that possible? Christie has cut billions of dollars from property tax rebate programs. It is true, as the governor says, that tax rates are rising more slowly. But the rebate reductions more than offset that progress.

When you put it together, the burden during Christie’s first three years in office has jumped by 18.6 percent for the average New Jersey family, according to a compelling analysis on the website NJ Spotlight by Mark Magyar, a deputy policy chief in the Whitman administration. That compares with a 6 percent hike during Corzine’s final three years.

The point here is not that Christie is the monster who deserves blame for the property tax crisis. He inherited the problem during an economic meltdown. Scaling back the rebates was a reasonable move, even if it did break a campaign promise. Sen. Richard Codey (D-Essex) cut rebates when he faced a shortfall as acting governor in 2005.

The problem with the Christie crew is that they try to sweet-talk voters into believing the problem is solved, as if they can spin away this rock-hard reality. The latest happy talk came Thursday when Commissioner Richard Constable of the Department of Community Affairs tried — and failed — to persuade legislators to ignore these facts.

“By any measure, the property tax reforms have been a resounding success,” he said.

It is enough to give a middle-class home­owner despair. They are spiking the ball and doing a touchdown dance when they are still stuck at midfield.

If you are keeping score, though, don’t let Democrats off the hook. Most Democratic legislators voted against the pension reform that is saving local taxpayers $540 million this year. They are still blocking Christie’s tough sick-pay reform, and Senate President Stephen Sweeney’s plan to promote shared services. They want to repair their frayed romance with public worker unions, and that leaves them reluctant to embrace any more spending cuts.

The governor’s problem is the opposite. He is determined to limit state spending, and that means he will never give local governments and schools the help they need to contain property taxes, nor will he give home­owners the relief they need to cope.

He compounds the problem by favoring the wealthy over the middle class and poor. Note that when he was faced with a shortfall, he went after the rebate programs, which target relief to the elderly and middle class. But he did not touch the income-tax deduction, which skews more toward the wealthy. The man’s priorities are bent.

In the 2009 campaign, independent candidate Chris Daggett told voters that a real fix would require both higher state taxes and lower local spending. He got 6 percent of the vote, which tells you how well the truth plays in politics.

The best hope now, given the political landscape, is to continue squeezing local spending. And with cops being laid off, libraries closing down and class sizes swelling, it is hard to believe enough fat still exists to make a huge difference.

It would be a relief if Christie and his crew would at least give the spin a rest. If this is what they call a resounding success, you wonder what bubble they are living in.