What Gov. Chris Christie's budget means for New Jersey
403 Forbidden

403 Forbidden

By Mark J. Magyar

For 15 years, Democratic and Republican governors alike piled up debt and failed to make billions of dollars of contributions to the pension system. Just as the bills for those past failures are coming due, Gov. Chris Christie has proposed a 10 percent income tax cut and business tax cuts that will reduce state revenue by $2 billion by 2016.

Democratic legislative leaders and the GOP governor have been sparring over whether it is more important to cut property taxes or income taxes. Clearly, approval of a major income tax cut would preclude any meaningful property tax relief package for the next four years.

But the real issue is just how big a tax cut New Jersey can afford over the next four years — or, indeed, whether the state can afford a major tax cut at all. Without a booming economy producing record revenues, Christie’s 10 percent income tax cut could be an anchor dragging down the budget, creating a structural deficit that could be covered only by deep budget cuts, an analysis of New Jersey’s built-in budget problems shows.

During his budget address Tuesday, Christie insisted New Jersey will be able to meet its pension obligations, increase school aid, put more money into higher education and other policy priorities, and continue to make major cuts in income taxes and business taxes every year.

However, implementation of Christie’s proposed income tax cut, combined with a series of business tax cuts approved last year, would take more than $550 million in revenue out of the state budget this year and cost the state more than $2 billion in lost revenue four years from now, when the tax cuts are fully implemented in fiscal year 2016.

New Jersey’s pension contribution costs would jump from $484 million to almost $2.9 billion over that same four-year period, while debt service would rise almost $350 million.

Covering the cost of the tax cuts, pensions and debt service alone would require the equivalent of $4.7 billion in revenue growth over the next four years — a 16 percent jump from the $29.7 billion in fiscal year 2012 revenue that the Christie administration still expects to collect by June 30, despite seven months of subpar tax collections so far.

Since 2000, the only four-year periods in which state revenue growth exceeded 16 percent were those in which Democratic governors passed major increases in corporate, income or sales taxes.

“For Christie to achieve what he would like to achieve would require annual revenue growth in the area of 5 percent, and while everyone would love for the governor to be right on this, we have to be prudent and plan for the likelihood that the economic rebound does not allow for that level of growth,” said Raphael Caprio, professor of public policy at Rutgers University.

Caprio served with former state Office of Management and Budget Director Richard Keevey, former state treasurers Sam Crane and Feather O’Connor Houstoun and other budget experts on a bipartisan, blue-ribbon task force that concluded New Jersey is facing a major structural deficit through fiscal year 2016 — and that was before Christie proposed either his business or income tax cuts.

CHRISTIE'S TICKING TIME BOMBS The state faces a series of built-in cost increases that could explode the budget, judging from the numbers for fiscal years 2012 through 2016: • Pensions: Contributions will jump from $484 million to $2.8 billion. • Income tax cuts: Will reduce revenues by $1.33 billion. • Business tax cuts: Will reduce revenues by $774 million.

In “Facing Our Future,” a report issued in January 2011 by the Council of New Jersey Grantmakers, Caprio and the other budget experts laid out two revenue scenarios. The “more aggressive” scenario projected average annual revenue growth of 5.15 percent, while the “slow to moderate” scenario forecast average revenue growth of 3.74 percent — a growth rate that would be insufficient to cover the costs of Christie’s income and business tax cuts and the state’s pension and debt service obligations.

Fiscal house isn’t ‘in order’

Based on studies by the Rockefeller Foundation, the National Association of State Budget Officers and New Jersey’s own OMB and Office of Legislative Services, the “Facing Our Future” fiscal team concluded that long-term growth “will be moderate at best” — in which case Christie would have to slash government services or state aid to pay for his tax cuts.

However, the fiscal year 2013 budget Christie unveiled Tuesday went far beyond the “more aggressive” scenario by “Facing Our Future” in its assumptions, projecting 7.5 percent overall growth despite $550 million in tax cuts — the equivalent of an 8.4 percent revenue increase in a single year if there were no tax cuts.

The projected revenue surge would fund $1.1 billion in new spending over the current year, including a huge increase in pension funding and more money for schools, colleges, tuition aid, the developmentally disabled and drug rehabilitation programs — all providing the political buildup for Christie’s clarion call to the Legislature: “Why not cut income taxes for all New Jersey now that our fiscal house is in order?”

The answer, of course, is that New Jersey’s fiscal house, while sturdier than it was when Christie took office in the wake of the Great Recession of 2007 to 2009, is not “in order.”

If revenues come in as Christie and Treasurer Andrew Sidamon-Eristoff project next year, it would mean New Jersey’s economy has fully bounced back in a single year to pre-recession fiscal year 2007 levels; in fact, Christie’s total budget of $49.5 billion, including federal and dedicated funds, would be the largest in New Jersey history.

Problems down the road

The problem would come in the three years that follow.

Just paying for pensions, debt service and Christie’s business and income tax cuts would eat up a total of $3.5 billion through fiscal year 2016.

With Christie vowing to veto any tax increase, that $3.5 billion would represent most of New Jersey’s potential revenue growth over that three-year period, and any remaining revenue will be needed just to cover basic increases in Medicaid, health insurance for retirees and normal inflationary costs — not to mention Christie’s promise to increase pay-as-you-go funding for transportation capital projects from general revenues.

That would leave no money to restore the remaining $350 million in school aid cut during Christie’s first year, no money to invest in creating world-class universities or caring for an aging population, and no money to restore property tax credits to the $1,000-plus levels provided during the final year of the Democratic Corzine administration.

It would freeze in place the 20 percent increase in net property taxes since 2009 that resulted primarily from Christie’s rebate cuts, guaranteeing that New Jersey will continue to have the highest property taxes in the nation.

New Jerseyans consistently tell pollsters that they would prefer a property tax cut over an income tax cut.

Clearly, any serious analysis of the state’s upcoming budget issues shows that New Jerseyans can’t have both.

Mark J. Magyar is editor-at-large for New Jersey Spotlight. A veteran Statehouse reporter, he specialized in budget issues as deputy policy chief for Gov. Christie Whitman and served as policy director for the independent Daggett for Governor campaign in 2009. He teaches labor studies at Rutgers University.