Yet another mainstream mandate promoter now claims to oppose Obamacare
It is a sad fact - one that I like to rub in when I'm around RINOs - that the Republican Party did a lot more than the Democrats to originate the individual mandate that is the keystone of Obamacare.





There was Mitt Romney, of course, who made the mandate part of Romneycare; Newt Gingrich, who was for it before he was against it; and now Ed Gillespie, the former Jersey guy' who's trying to run for U.S. Senate from Virginia.





I've been unimpressed by Gillespie ever since I saw him get clobbered in a debate with Phyllis Schlafly on immigration amnesty. Schlafly was against it. Gillespie was for it, but he was for it in that weasely way Beltway Republicans have of supporting the amnesty while pretending it wasn't an amnesty,





He's up to the same tricks with the individual mandate, if this article in the Washington Examiner is any indication:











Gillespie was working as a lobbyist for the Coalition to Advance Healthcare Reform, which promoted "market-based reforms" of the nation's health care system. Those reforms, the group said in a 2007 statement, were designed to create a “Market-Based Healthcare System; Universal Coverage with Individual Responsibility; Financial Assistance for Low-Income Individuals; Healthier Behavior and Incentives; Equal Tax Treatment.” Gillespie said his work on behalf of the coalition didn't include direct lobby in support of an individual mandate, which requires everyone to buy health insurance and is now a central element of Obamacare. “Throughout the debate on Obamacare I strongly criticized the mandate, and in my own book I talk about market-based reforms as [the] best approach,” Gillespie said. In Gillespie’s 2006 book, “Winning Right,” he enumerates five tenets to “ensure that efficiency, affordability, and availability would prevail in the health care sector.” The fifth principle was “all adults participate.” Gillespie proposed ensuring "that every emancipated adult capable of providing for his or her health care do so. One way to accomplish this is to use the tax code to gain compliance.”



That's the Obama mandate in a nutshell, boys and girls. And Gillespie was for it before he was against it. In fact, he and Romney, for whom he served as an advisor in the failed 2012 campaign, both spoke in favor of the mandate back before Obama emerged on the national scene.

Mainstream Republicans reveal themselves to be total hypocrites on Obamacare, calling it "socialized medicine" while pandering to seniors on Medicare, which really is socialized medicine.

And to get back to that immigration issue, we wouldn't be debating an amnesty today if the Republicans had simply enforced the law when George W. Bush was president and Gillespie was heading the Republican National Committee.

As Schlafly noted in this 2005 piece, the Bush position was a complete sellout of conservative interests:

The politicians and business executives, who are determined to continue bringing in foreigners to work for lower wages than Americans expect, have gotten smart. The plan to import "willing workers" from other countries is now being packaged in the language of concern about border security. This strategy is obvious in the new White House-backed coalition called Americans for Border and Economic Security, organized by Republican lobbyist (and former Republican National Committee Chairman) Ed Gillespie. Admission to this coalition costs $50,000 to $250,000, fees that will finance a political-style campaign to sell the U.S. people on a guest-worker program wrapped in a few border-security measures.

As with the individual mandate, the RINOs engaged in good old-fashioned crony capitalism. The business interests wanted cheap labor and the RINOs wanted to give it to them - never mind that massive immigration gives huge political advantage to the Democrats.

In case you're wondering why the Ron/Rand Paul wing of the party is finding so much support, wonder no more. Just go to Gillespie's Wikipedia page and look at all the influence-peddling jobs this guy has held over the years.

That might be excused if Gillespie were some sort of political genius who helped steer the party to victory. But his works has driven the party in the opposite direction.

The Beltway's a dreadful place and those who've been successful there should stay there. I suspect Virginia voters will come to that conclusion.