Drivers riding high across lake on new I-10 twin span
Motorists headed east on the new Interstate 10 bridge over Lake Pontchartrain can look forward to a safer and faster drive, as well as a panoramic view from 30 feet above the water, thanks to Thursday's partial opening of the new twin spans between Slidell and New Orleans.

The most expensive single public works project ever undertaken in Louisiana, the new 5 1/2-mile bridge will replace the old I-10 spans that were badly damaged by Hurricane Katrina almost four years ago.

The construction project has provided a daily spectacle for St. Tammany Parish commuters for the past 3 1/2 years. Finally, workers opened the new bridge Thursday at 11 a.m. to eastbound traffic for the first time.

For many Slidell residents, the opening brought some relief from the safety and traffic problems of the old twin spans.

Kevin Barre, a communications manager at the Lockheed Martin complex in eastern New Orleans, has been commuting from Slidell for 17 years. After one trip across the new bridge to get home Thursday afternoon, he said he already feels safer.

"It's hard to get a really good fix on what it will all be like when it's all finished because of the construction, " Barre said. "But I feel more comfortable on this bridge than I ever have on the twin spans."

When Katrina knocked the twin spans out of commission, he felt as if his lifeline had been cut, he said. After watching the bridge being built from the ground up in the ensuing years, he is confident that lifeline will never be cut again.

Donna Hutson, a 20-year commuter from Slidell into New Orleans, said the damaged twin spans put her out of work for months and forced her to commute by bus across the U.S. 11 bridge.

"This bridge is higher, so there is less chance of debris from the lakes and the camps, " Hutson said. "It would have to be a really big hurricane to damage this one."

The state Department of Transportation and Development has called the bridge "hurricane proof" because of its height and the high-grade building materials used during construction.

Motorists driving across the bridge for the first time Thursday noticed a slight slant to the road surface. The bridge was designed that way, to help the roadway shed water from storms.

Hutson said she expects commuters to go through a "breaking-in period" while they get used to the lane changes and construction.

The opening had none of the fanfare of Wednesday's ribbon-cutting ceremony and was preceded by seven hours of work on both sides of the lake by DOTD construction crews.

By Thursday at 4 a.m., the crews were removing concrete barriers on both sides of the bridge to facilitate the cross-over.

Once the barriers were removed, police blocked interstate traffic and directed motorists into the right-hand lane. At this point, traffic was restricted to one lane until about 2 p.m., when the bridge was fully opened.

Slidell-bound vehicles moved onto the bridge through the incomplete eastbound side of the bridge before using the emergency cross-over to move onto the finished westbound side and continue east.

DOTD officials expect motorists will continue to use the future westbound bridge as they cross the lake toward Slidell for at least two years.

. . . . . . .

Adam Duvernay can be reached at aduvernay@timespicayune.com.