LD-1 Disclosure Form
Clerk of the House of Representatives

Legislative Resource Center

B-106 Cannon Building

Washington, DC 20515

http://lobbyingdisclosure.house.gov Secretary of the Senate

Office of Public Records

232 Hart Building

Washington, DC 20510

http://www.senate.gov/lobby

LOBBYING REGISTRATION

Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 (Section 4)

Check One: New Registrant New Client for Existing Registrant Amendment

1. Effective Date of Registration 01/01/2011 2. House Identification 41530 Senate Identification 400689049

REGISTRANT Organization/Lobbying Firm Self Employed Individual

3. Registrant Organization Three Bridges Advisors, Inc.

Address 915 E Street NW Address2 Suite 413

City Washington State DC Zip 20004 Country USA

City State Zip Country

5. Contact name and telephone number International Number

Contact Mr. David W. Jolly Telephone 2025064000 E-mail djolly@threebridgesadvisors.com

Federal markets consulting and advocacy.T

CLIENT A Lobbying Firm is required to file a separate registration for each client. Organizations employing in-house lobbyists should check the box labeled “Self” and proceed to line 10. Self

7. Client name The Free Enterprise Nation Address 1511 North West Shore Boulevard, Suite 700

City Tampa State FL Zip 33607 Country USA

City State Zip Country

Free enterprise think tank and advocacy organization.

LOBBYISTS

10. Name of each individual who has acted or is expected to act as a lobbyist for the client identified on line 7. If any person listed in this section has served as a “covered executive branch official” or “covered legislative branch official” within twenty years of first acting as a lobbyist for the client, state the executive and/or legislative position(s) in which the person served.

Name Covered Official Position (if applicable) First Last Suffix David W. Jolly General Counsel, Rep. Bill Young David W. Jolly (COP cont'd) Associate Staff, House Committee on Appropriations David W. Jolly (COP cont'd) District Director, Rep. Bill Young David W. Jolly (COP cont'd) Leg. Asst., Rep. Bill Young

LOBBYING ISSUES

11. General lobbying issue areas (Select all applicable codes).

TAX ACC FIN SMB LBR BUD RET HCR

12. Specific lobbying issues (current and anticipated)

Free enterprise related issues, to include tax reform, financial services, labor issues, and private and public sector workforce issues.

AFFILIATED ORGANIZATIONS

13. Is there an entity other than the client that contributes more than $5,000 to the lobbying activities of the registrant in a quarterly period and either actively participates in and/or in whole or in major part supervises, plans, or controls the registrant’s lobbying activities?

No --> Go to line 14. Yes --> Complete the rest of this section for each entity matching the criteria above, then proceed to line 14.

Internet Address:

Name Address Principal Place of Business Street City State/Province Zip Code Country

FOREIGN ENTITIES

14. Is there any foreign entity

a) holds at least 20% equitable ownership in the client or any organization identified on line 13; or

b) directly or indirectly, in whole or in major part, plans, supervises, controls, directs, finances or subsidizes activities of the client or any organization identified on line 13; or

c) is an affiliate of the client or any organization identified on line 13 and has a direct interest in the outcome of the lobbying activity?

No --> Sign and date the registration. Yes --> Complete the rest of this section for each entity matching the criteria above, then sign the registration.

Address Ownership Name Street Principal place of business Amount of contribution City State/Province Country (city and state or country) for lobbying activities