Vitter had five calls with D.C. Madam
Calls began soon after he was sworn in, ended on Mardi Gras 2001.

By Bill Walsh

Washington bureau

A phone number for Sen. David Vitter, R-La., appears at least five times in the billing records of what federal authorities say was a Washington call-girl operation, the first just four months after he was sworn in to the U.S. House in 1999 and the last on Mardi Gras of 2001.

Under pressure earlier this week, Vitter acknowledged committing a "very serious sin" and that his number showed up in the records of Deborah Jeane Palfrey, who has come to be known as the "Washington, D.C. Madam." An attorney for Palfrey earlier said that Vitter's number was found once in the records, but a search of the documents by The Times-Picayune turned up four more calls to a number once registered to Vitter. The attorney said that clients also used phones in hotel rooms, so that not all the numbers can be traced to individual callers.

The records show that Vitter number was called by Palfrey's service beginning Oct. 12, 1999 and ending Feb. 27, 2001, which was Mardi Gras. Palfrey has said she was running an escort service that her employees were instructed not to engage in sex acts. But federal prosecutors say she was running a prostitution ring that netted more than $2 million in assets.

Records show that the return calls to Vitter's number generally lasted a minute or two and were placed in the evening. The phone number had a Washington, D.C., exchange. Vitter keeps an apartment in Washington where he stays while Congress is in session.

Vitter has limited his public statements to a contrite press release Monday night in which he said, "Several years ago, I asked for and received forgiveness from God and my wife in confession and marriage counseling."

Vitter's statement came a few hours after Hustler Magazine called his congressional office to confront him with the news that they had found his phone number appeared once in Palfrey's billing records.

"We called him for comment and he left through the back door," Hustler publisher Larry Flynt said in a phone interview Wednesday from his office in Beverly Hills.

Flynt said that Vitter isn't the only lawmaker whose number appears in the phone records that Palfrey placed on the Internet on Monday. He said 30 members of Congress are on the list and he plans to make them public, although he didn't say when.

"It should be a very interesting political year," Flynt said.

The self-promoting pornography publisher, who has described his techniques as "bottom feeding," has been known to exaggerate before. In 1998, he promised to expose illicit sexual affairs carried on by numerous Republican members of Congress who were prosecuting President Clinton for lying about his liaisons with White House intern Monica Lewinsky. Flynt's efforts claimed only one victim: then Rep. Bob Livingston, R-Metairie.

His threat to expose the adulterous affairs by Livingston prompted the veteran congressman to bow out of the race for House speaker and resign from Congress. Those revelations came after Flynt took out an ad in the Washington Post offering up to $1 million to anyone who can prove a sexual relationship with a member of Congress.

"We're trying to get rid of some of the hypocrisy that is the biggest threat to our democracy," Flynt said, noting that his prime targets are politicians who support socially conservative policies. "I can't see letting someone like Livingston live a double life."

Flynt recently took out a similar ad offering up to $1 million for information about the illicit affairs of Congress. But he said it wasn't the ad that exposed Vitter.

Flynt credited Washington, D.C., investigative journalist Dan Moldea for unearthing the Livingston story as well as ferreting out Vitter's phone number from the 59,120 calls listed in the pages of Palfrey's billing statements. He said Moldea spotted the number Friday after "multiple reverse searches." It was Moldea and Hustler assistant managing editor Mark Johnson who placed calls to Vitter's office Monday about 5 p.m. Eastern Time, he said.

The Times-Picayune's search of Palfrey's phone records found a phone number that an Internet search showed was assigned to Vitter several years ago. The number showed up in the call lists on Oct. 12, 1999, Sept. 18, 2000, Oct. 26, 2000,

Feb. 11, 2001 and Feb. 27, 2001.

The first call appears a little more than four months after Vitter was sworn in June 8, 1999, to replace Livingston and just days before Vitter held his first Town Hall meeting in his district. The October 2000 call came a week and a half before he would coast to his first election for the full House term.

The last came on the day newly elected President Bush unveiled his proposed tax cuts to Congress and days after Vitter filed legislation restricting who could prescribe the abortion drug RU-486. All of the calls were placed late afternoon Pacific Time. Palfrey ran her call girl operation from California.

Despite his record of exposing Louisiana politicians, Flynt said at an afternoon press conference that he wasn't targeting the state. But he noted the coincidence that Livingston was succeeded in the House by Vitter.

"We have nothing against Louisiana," he said. "It just seems to be your day in the barrel."

Richard Russell contributed to this story. Bill Walsh can be reached at bill.walsh@newhouse.com or (202) 383-7817.