Representative Steve Southerland, II
Health Care

While there may be differing opinions on how best to improve access to quality, affordable health care, most North and Northwest Floridians agree that reforms to the current system are necessary.

By opening up competition across state lines, insurance companies will be compelled to innovate and reduce premium costs. By implementing tort reform, we can clear the backlog of frivolous lawsuits that artificially inflate costs for responsible consumers. By expanding access to health savings accounts, families will find it easier to pay for the services they need. And by covering patients with preexisting conditions, we can ensure that no illness or injury will prevent you from accessing quality, affordable care.

As a father of four daughters, the son of a senior-aged mother and father, and a third generation small business owner, I believe we can and must do better than the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), reform legislation that was signed into law in 2010.

As our nation struggles to emerge from the deepest recession in a generation, independent analysis has indicated that the health care law will cause significant job losses for the U.S. economy while stifling future employment growth. In fact, according to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, the health care law could destroy up to 650,000 American jobs.

Since coming to congress I have voted to repeal, replace, and defund Obamacare over forty times. With millions of Americans now losing the health insurance they were promised they would be allowed to keep by the President, I joined my fellow House colleagues in supporting H.R. 3350, the Keep Your Health Plan Act. This common sense legislation allows health insurance plans currently available on the individual market to remain in place next year, while ensuring that Americans will not be penalized under the law if they choose to keep their existing plan.

Repealing the health care law is just the first step towards putting the American people, as opposed to the government, back in control of their personal health care choices. We must continue working together to find health care solutions that improve quality, access, and affordability. That said, it is not enough to simply defund or repeal Obamacare; we must replace it with patient-centered reforms.

That is why I cosponsored H.R. 3121, the American Health Care Reform Act, which provides a pragmatic and practical free-market alternative to Obamacare. This legislation would reduce premium costs by allowing insurance to compete across state lines, protect individuals with pre-existing conditions and give purchasers a Standard Health Insurance Deduction – resulting in a tax cut for the vast majority of Americans.