Palcohol is powdered alcohol
1. Who created it and what exactly is it? A guy named Mark Phillips in Scottsdale, AZ.







Imagine a Margarita on a counter. And then imagine if you could snap your fingers and it would turn into powder. That's Palcohol....without the magic. Palcohol is just a powder version of vodka, rum and three cocktails....with the same alcoholic content.







2. Why create Palcohol? Mark is an active guy...hiking, biking, camping, kayaking, etc. After hours of an activity, he sometimes wanted to relax and enjoy a refreshing adult beverage. But those activities, and many others, don't lend themselves to lugging heavy bottles of wine, beer or spirits. The only liquid he wanted to carry was water.

So he thought? Wouldn't it be great to have alcohol in powder form so all one had to do is add water? Since powder is light and compact, it wouldn't be a burden to carry. Mark searched for powdered alcohol and it wasn't available. So he began his quest to create it. Over a few years, with the help of scientists around the world, Mark was able to create powdered alcohol and called it Palcohol.



Now Palcohol is here. One package weighs about an ounce.







3. What is the alcoholic content when consuming it? Palcohol, when used as directed, by adding six ounces of liquid to it, is equal to a standard mixed drink.







4. What's in it? It varies per version but basically, alcohol....and in the cocktail versions, natural flavorings and Sucralose as a sweetener. The ingredients of each version are listed on the front of the package. Palcohol is gluten free.





5. How is it made? If we told you, we'd have to shoot you.





6. What flavors are there? We plan on releasing five versions sold in a pouch that is the equivalent to one shot of alcohol:



V which is powder made from premium vodka distilled four times.

R which is powder made from premium Puerto Rican rum

V and R can be used two ways. One way is by adding six ounces of your favorite mixer to make a Rum and Coke, Vodka and Orange Juice, etc. Another option is adding six ounces of water to the powder and then adding a flavored drink powder to make it any flavor you want. The result is equivalent to one average mixed drink.



The three cocktail versions are:



Cosmopolitan

Powderita - tastes just like a Margarita



Lemon Drop

Just add water to these three flavors for an instant cocktail.







7. Who owns Palcohol? Palcohol is owned by a privately held company called Lipsmark.





We would entertain a buyer. In the interim, we are looking for manufacturer / distributor licensees in countries.





8. Where will it be sold? Think of Palcohol as liquor....just in powder form. It will be sold anywhere where liquor can be sold and a buyer must be of legal drinking age to buy it. It will be available both in the United States and abroad and it can also be bought online.





9. When will it be available? As soon as we can but probably not until late 2020 at the earliest. No samples will be released ahead of time.