After Democrats Caught Funding Caravan, Trump Supporters Send A Swift Response

Even Donald didn’t expect his supporters would take matters into their own hands.

The caravan is swiftly approaching the American border, and news broke last week that Democrats have been actively supporting it.

Beto O’Rourke’s campaign staffers were caught on camera extensively discussing how to divert campaign dollars to help the caravan.

While Democrats are more than happy to let them in, Trump has mobilized border patrol and thousands of military troops to support them.

Unfortunately, the military cannot use force for the time being.

Their hands are tied, so a group of Trump supporters are taking matters into their own hands.

From MSN:

Gun-carrying civilian groups and border vigilantes have heard a call to arms in President Trump’s warnings about threats to American security posed by caravans of Central American migrants moving through Mexico. They’re packing coolers and tents, oiling rifles and tuning up aerial drones, with plans to form caravans of their own and trail American troops to the border. The Texas Minutemen, according to McGauley, have 100 volunteers en route to the Rio Grande who want to help stop the migrants, with more likely on the way. “I can’t put a number on it,” McGauley said. “My phone’s been ringing nonstop for the last seven days. You got other militias, and husbands and wives, people coming from Oregon, Indiana. We’ve even got two from Canada.”

If America’s own troops can’t stop the invading mob, the only people left to protect us is the American people themselves.

SHARE if you support the men and women protecting America from the caravan!

Warnings are going out to military commanders that these men and women are coming. We agree that the military should know they’re coming.

But as far as we’re concerned, they should be welcomed with open arms.

Democrats want to welcome the caravan, with all the criminals hiding in it. They’re willing to send money and supplies to help them.

But Americans are seeing this and they are running to the polls. The red wave is building into a tsunami.

SHARE if you are part of the red TSUNAMI to stop the caravan in its tracks!

Source: MSN