Political Punch
As President Obama prepares to commemorate the legacy of Martin Luther King, Jr., with a speech at a new King monument on the National Mall, fewer Americans than two years ago say they believe race relations have improved under the country’s first black president, according to a new Gallup survey.



Continue reading "Fewer See Improved Race Relations Under Obama"



If you’re an unemployed Democrat with a knack for Facebook and Twitter, President Obama’s reelection campaign may have a job for you.



Continue reading "Obama Campaign Hiring: Seeking ‘Head for Politics, A Sense of Humor, and Buckets of Common Sense’ "



ABC News' David Kerley reports: Libya, earthquakes, and now a hurricane all during the President’s Martha’s Vineyard vacation. Conference calls on the golf course, reignited criticism from several quarters about the 10-day holiday on this island off of Massachusetts. So,...



Continue reading "What Does the President Think About the Criticism of His Vacation?"



ABC News' Stephanie Smith reports: The White House is touting the time it took to overthrow Libyan tyrant Muammar Gadhafi – a subtle bit of horn-tooting for the administration at a time when there’s not much else to brag about....



Continue reading "What's Next For Libya and Where Is Gadhafi?"



On a day that the Congressional Budget Office predicted slow economic growth, and an unemployment rate still over 8% by the end of next year, the White House says the President continues to work on his new jobs plan during his Martha’s Vineyard vacation. And the President is taking some advice.



Continue reading "Vacationing Obama Calls CEOs for Ideas on New Jobs Plan"



With the powerful Hurricane Irene heading toward the Carolinas, the White House says preparations are well underway, but that the President has no plans to return to Washington D.C. early.



Continue reading "Obama Monitors Hurricane Irene, But No Plans to Cut Vacation Short"



A United Nations Security Council diplomat tells ABC News that the United States plans to introduce a resolution at this afternoon that would authorize the transfer of roughly $1.5 billion of Moammar Gadhafi’s frozen assets to the rebels.



Continue reading "US Seeks UN resolution to Release $1.5 Billion to Libyan Rebels"



President Obama was playing golf today at the Farm Neck Golf Course on Martha’s Vineyard when the 5.8 earthquake hit the east coast, but he didn't feel the tremor, a White House spokesman said.



Continue reading "Quake Tremors Reach Obama on Vineyard, But He Didn't Feel Them"



ABC's Kirit Radia (@kiritradia_abc) reports: Does today’s east coast tremor put a hole in the “Secretary of Quake” theory? Maybe not, as it seems the shaking earth has followed Secretary of State Hillary Clinton home. Since she became America’s top...



Continue reading "Hillary Clinton: Secretary of Quake?"



ABC News' Stephanie Smith reports: This morning at the Blue Heron Farm, National Security Adviser John Brennan gave the President his daily national security briefing which included the lastest developments in Libya, according to White House Deputy Press Secretary Josh...



Continue reading "President Bikes, Keeps Tabs on Libya"



Vice President Joe Biden is under fire for appearing to condone China’s one-child policy during a speech Sunday at Sichuan University in Chengdu.



Continue reading "Biden Under Fire for 'Not Second-Guessing' China's One-Child Policy"



The Obama administration today announced final plans to overhaul government-wide regulations in a move they say will save businesses at least $10 billion over five years, and help spur the creation of new jobs.



Continue reading "White House to Curb Federal Regulations, Save Businesses $10 Billion"



Vice President Joe Biden traveled to earthquake and tsunami ravaged northeastern Japan today, where he offered condolences for the lives lost and destroyed in the March tragedy and praise for the resiliency of the Japanese people.



Continue reading "Biden: Don’t Bet Against US and Japan"



The cost of U.S. military intervention in Libya has cost American taxpayers an estimated $896 million through July 31, the Pentagon said today.



Continue reading "US Military Intervention in Libya Cost At Least $896 Million "



President Obama is in a statistical dead heat when matched with each of four GOP presidential contenders in a hypothetical 2012 election match-up, according to a new Gallup survey of registered voters.



Continue reading "Obama in Dead Heat with Romney, Perry, Paul, Bachmann in Gallup Poll"



You are preparing a big, “new” jobs program. You are going to unveil it after Labor Day. So, “who ya gonna call” for some ideas on fixing the economy? If you are the President of the United States on vacation on Martha’s Vineyard, you pick up the phone and call a couple business titans.



Continue reading "Obama Calls Warren Buffett, Ford's Alan Mulally to Talk About Economy"



President Obama declared today that “the Gadhafi regime is coming to an end and the future of Libya is in the hands of its people.” That, even though the administration admits it doesn’t know where Moammar Gadhafi is, or the fact that he has not surrendered.



Continue reading "Obama Hails Libyan 'Tipping Point' in Vineyard Address "



Vice President Joe Biden arrived in Ulan Bator, Mongolia, today where his hosts celebrated the first visit by a U.S. vice president since 1944 with performances of traditional music and dance, a Mongol-style wrestling competition and a gift: a Mongolian horse.



Continue reading "Biden Receives Mongolian Horse, Names It 'Celtic' "



President Obama has touted three pending U.S. trade deals as measures that could immediately spur job growth, if only Congress would approve them to become law. The only problem: the White House has not yet formally sent the deals to Congress for a vote.



Continue reading "Obama Says Congress Can Approve Trade Deals 'Right Now,' But Hasn't Sent Them to Hill"



From Stephanie Smith: As opposition forces descended on Tripoli and the nearly 42-year reign of Libyan dictator Moammar Gadhafi crumbled around him, President Obama was asked about the situation there. “We’re going to wait until we have full confirmation of...



Continue reading "President Obama Interrupts Vacation to Be Briefed on Libya"