Sandra Bullock Says Her Political Views Are Informed by What's Best For Her Son
Sandra Bullock says she’s not “politically vocal” but that doesn’t mean she isn’t opinionated when it comes to America’s leadership.

“I just want what’s best for our country,” Bullock said during a press conference for her new film, Our Brand Is Crisis, in Los Angeles on Friday.

Bullock, who plays Jane “Calamity” Bodine, a political strategist, in the upcoming movie, says her own views are colored by her son Louis.

“I would like my rights represented and those of my son – very selfish views and I think everyone else has them,” she says. “When this film came along, it came along at a time that I was having that internal discussion with myself about who in our country would step out of their comfort zone to help others for the greater good.”

Bullock, who says she’d “do anything” for her son, said this “internal discussion” hinged largely on who else, on a larger scale, would work to represent Louis’ best interests.

“What people would still get together and protest for the greater good? Have we all gotten too scared and too safe?” she asked.

The 51-year-old’s current political mindset was also influenced heavily by her parents. After growing up in a split home – one parent was a Republican, the other a Democrat – she says she learned how to push the limits.

The Oscar-winner says that her mother “did things that were definitely ahead of her time, as a woman.”

“I never realized that there were limitations where I was looked at as less than until I was actually pretty deep in this business and I had a pretty unsettling moment, and I went ‘Oh my god, I’m being treated this way because I’m female,’ ” she said.

How Sandra Bullock Found Happiness with Her ‘Great Guy’ Bryan Randall: All the Details of Their New Romance!

“I grew up to be exactly who I was supposed to be and have the opinions I wanted to have and didn’t realize there were limitations to that,” she adds. “So I thought, politically, I was pretty open minded and could speak my mind and then I realized I wasn’t supposed to.”

One politician who seemingly won’t get the star’s vote in the 2016 presidential election? Donald Trump.

“I don’t agree with that at all,” Bullock said of the candidate’s comments on Mexican-Americans. “That was not a statement that I can get behind. I don’t agree with that statement.”

•Reporting by NICOLE SANDS