Georgia: Abkhazia and South Ossetia
The conflicts related to the two separatist regions in Georgia—Abkhazia and South Ossetia—has its origins in Soviet and pre-Soviet politics in the (South) Caucasus. In total, over 80 ethnic groups live in Georgia, the largest, and politically most significant, ones being Georgians, Armenians, Russians, Abkhaz and South Ossetians (Cornell 2001: 63). Since 1988, Georgia has experienced two violent ethnic conflicts, as well as a short two-phase civil war (Cornell 2001: 75). The latter was between different political factions struggling over control of the Georgian state, while the former were essentially the result of increasingly aggressive Georgian nationalism during, and after, the dying days of the Soviet Union. Both Abkhazia and South Ossetia had enjoyed substantial autonomy throughout the Soviet period and even though the population of both regions was ethnically mixed, it was not until the intensification of Georgian nationalism from the late-1980s onwards that tensions emerged. The nationalist movement in Georgia became further radicalised after Soviet troops crushed a demonstration in April 1989. Calls for independence, the legal proclamation of Georgian as the only official language in August 1989, and Georgia referendum on independence and the subsequent election of nationalist leader Zviad Gamsakhurdia in May 1991 provide the background against which these tensions escalated into full-scale violent conflict: Abkhaz and South Ossetians wanted to preserve, and remain within, the Soviet Union considering their survival as ethno-cultural communities distinct from the Georgian majority to be in acute danger in an independent Georgian state (Cohen 2002, Coppieters 1999, Wennmann 2006).

South Ossetia

South Ossetians belong to the same ethnic group as the people of North Ossetia (now an autonomous republic of Russia which is considered to be the indigenous homeland of Ossetians). A (South) Ossetian presence in contemporary Georgia only dates back a few hundred years (Cornell 2001: 96), and is often used by Georgian nationalists to dispute any rights of South Ossetians to the territory in which they live. In 1989, South Ossetians made up just over two-thirds of their autonomous region’s population, roughly 65,000 out of a population of 98,000 (Cornell 2001: 99). Yet, at that time there were around another 100,000 Ossetians in other regions of Georgia. Tensions grew in the last years of the Soviet Union and escalated initially into full-scale conflict between November 1989 and January 1990. Prompted by the “March on Tskhinvali”, the South Ossetian capital, of between 20,000 and 30,000 Georgian nationalists in August, supposedly to protect the city’s Georgian population, the violence which ensued led to the death of six people and the injury of an additional 140 (Cornell 2001: 101). Subsequently, South Ossetians not only boycotted the political process in Georgia, including the September 1990 elections, but also declared their region’s independence, while Georgians effectively abolished South Ossetia’s autonomy with the proclamation of Georgia as an independent, unitary state with no internal borders.

Tbilisi initially only responded with an economic blockade, but 1991 saw a significant escalation of hostilities, leading initially to the Georgian occupation of South Ossetia’s capital, Tskhinvali. On several occasions in March, June and September, Gamsakhurdia, who tried to use South Ossetia to strengthen his own grip on power in Georgia (Wennmann 2006: 14), failed to restore full Georgian control over South Ossetia in the face of well-organised, highly motivated and Russian-backed resistance. The conflict lingered on for another year, but with the disposal of Gamsakhurdia in December 1991 and former Soviet foreign minister Edvard Shevardnadse’s assent to the Georgian presidency in March 1992,[1] it took only one final defeat of Georgian forces to pave the way towards the OSCE-mediated Sochi Agreement of June 1992, which established a permanent ceasefire and a military exclusion zone. It was followed by the deployment of an OSCE Observer Mission and a Russia-led CIS peacekeeping force, as well as the creation of the so-called Joint Control Commission, meant to facilitate cooperation between the sides on a day-to-day basis.

This arrangement worked relatively well during the presidencies of Edvard Shevardnadse, driven primarily by pragmatic considerations that assured all sides of benefits as a result of relative stability based on an acceptance of the status quo (cf. Lynch 2004). Saakashvili’s assent to power in 2003 changed this configuration significantly as the new president had made restoration of full sovereignty across the entire territory of Georgia on key campaign promise. The success he had in reigning in Adjara in April 2004 emboldened Saakashvili to move on South Ossetia in summer that year, under the pretext of abolishing the Ergneti market. While there is little doubt that trading on this market was connected to smuggling, it also presented one of the few opportunities for direct interaction between Georgians and South Ossetians. The violence during and after the closure of the market destroyed much of the confidence built between both sides and threw into jeopardy peace talks ongoing at the time. In fact, violence got so bad in early August that a formal ceasefire was agreed between Georgian and South Ossetian authorities, only to be broken within days. Violence continued through much of the summer, with Georgian forces making some strategic gains but eventually withdrawing its military forces and agreeing a further round of formal demilitarisation measures with South Ossetia in Sochi in November. Nonetheless, the 2004 events contributed to further polarisation and radicalisation on all sides, increasing the frequency and intensity of clashes along the ceasefire line up until the full-scale war in August 2008.

The conflict in South Ossetia led to around 1,000 people being killed, 100,000 being forced to flee, and extensive damage done to homes and infrastructure (International Crisis Group 2004: 4). In addition to ethnic Georgians and South Ossetians leaving the region for Georgia proper and North Ossetia, respectively, a very large number of South Ossetians were also driven from their homes in Georgia proper. Within South Ossetia, segregation between the two communities increased significantly as a result of the conflict with members of each ethnic group taking refuge in the areas controlled by ‘their’ side.

Abkhazia

Historically, the Stalinist period saw the persecution and destruction of the political and cultural elites of the Abkhaz population in Georgia. Abkhazia, during this period, additionally experienced a massive influx of Georgians, decreasing the share of ethnic Abkhaz among the resident population to around one-third from the late 1930s to the early 1950s, and had declined to under 18% by 1989. This policy of Georgianisation continued after the Stalin years, and triggered several short spells of violence in 1957, 1967, 1978 and 1981 (Cornell 2001: 155ff.) The resurgence of Georgian nationalism under Georgia’s first post-independence leader, Zviad Gamsakhurdia could not but be seen as a precursor of worse things to come by the Abkhaz and leading them to conclude that establishing their own state was all the more necessary to ensure their ethnic survival (International Crisis Group 2006: 3).

Following Georgia’s declaration of independence in 1991, and the simultaneous abolition of Abkhazia’s autonomy, the Abkhaz immediately reinstated their 1925 constitution, defining it as an independent state united with Georgia on the basis of special union treaty and proceeded to declare their desire to leave Georgia and remain part of the Soviet Union/Russian Federation. This quickly escalated into open violence with Georgian forces taking over the Gali region in August 1992 and cutting Abkhazia off from Russia. However, the pre-text of the attacks were alleged abductions of Georgians by supporters of Zviad Gamakhurdia who had been ousted in a coup in December 1991 by three Georgian warlords who subsequently asked Shevardnadse, a native of Georgia, to lead the country through this difficult period.

As a result of Georgian advances, the Abkhaz leadership was forced to retreat from Sukhumi but immediately regrouped and organised guerrilla-style resistance. Backed by North Caucasian, in particular Chechen, fighters, as well as Russian air support (Sabanadze 2002: 11), the Abkhaz quickly recaptured most of the territory initially lost, with Georgian control reduced to the Khodori Gorge and Gali. Ceasefires were agreed and broken time and again until May 1994 when the Moscow Agreement established a permanent ceasefire line with military exclusion zones on either side. In parallel, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 854 establishing the UN Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). The Russia-dominated CIS also dispatched a peacekeeping force to the region. Since then violations have been rare, even though the general security situation, especially in the Kodori Gorge, a Georgian-held area in Abkhazia, deteriorated sharply in 1998, 2001, 2006, and 2008, bringing both sides to the brink of new war. Around ten thousand people are believed to have been killed in total in the fighting; in addition, around a quarter of a million Georgians have been displaced from Abkhazia (Alertnet 2007).

Economic and Political Impact of the Wars

The economic and political impact of the wars in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, and of the subsequent sporadic flare-ups of violence throughout the decade-and-a-half after the ceasefire agreements, must be seen in the context of broader Georgian and regional developments, especially the weakness of the Georgian state and the turbulent transition of power during the Rose Revolution, the instability and violence in the Caucasus region as a whole, especially in relation to Chechnya, and the deterioration of Georgian-Russian relations.

The economic damage caused by the violence in Abkhazia is estimated at $11 billion (International Crisis Group 2006: 15), and economic recovery, if any, has been slow and initially almost entirely dependent on Russia. However, in January 1996, Russia agreed to a CIS embargo against Abkhazia in exchange for Georgian support in the first Chechen war. This had a seriously detrimental impact on Abkhazia. By 1999, Russian-Georgian relations worsened, and with the outbreak of the second Chechen war, the CIS embargo collapsed with Russia no longer enforcing it. In the last few years, the EU has also made a more significant political and financial effort to contribute to rebuilding the region’s economy. Moreover, Abkhazia is relatively privileged in terms of being self-sufficient with regard to food and electricity (Cornell 2001: 181). Revitalisation of tourism, especially after 1999 and in the context of improved Russian-Abkhaz relations, has further contributed to economic recovery.

South Ossetia has suffered similarly extensive damage during its war, but been far less able to recover. An extremely poor region, even by Georgian standards, there has until recently been hardly any investment in the economy. An OSCE-managed and EU-funded economic rehabilitation programme, as well as direct Russian donations have yet to show any significant impact. Moreover, Russia’s economic activities in the region, including energy supplies and construction of gas pipelines, have been deemed illegal (International Crisis Group 2007: 23). South Ossetia’s dependence on water supplies from Georgia proper has been a further source of tensions.

Politically, even before the Georgian-Russian war of August 2008, South Ossetia and Abkhazia had developed into de facto states, albeit relatively weak ones. This process, stretched out over the past decade-and-a-half was driven as much by personal political aspirations as by organised criminal activity. Above all, it remained politically, economically, and militarily entirely dependent on Russia, including use of the Russian rouble in almost all commercial and private transactions. Residents of Abkhazia and South Ossetia were allowed to acquire Russian citizenship and passports, which, at least in part, contributed to increased emigration to Russia, especially on the part of South Ossetians. In turn, it provided Russia with the basis for its claims that its actions during the August war were in defence of its own citizens.

The two regimes in Abkhazia and South Ossetia have always enjoyed at least a limited degree of political legitimacy in the eyes of the local population, but neither they, nor the elections from which they emerged or the referenda they conducted received any international recognition prior to 2008 when Russia, after the military confrontation with Georgia in August decided to recognise the independence of both entities. In both entities, power is concentrated in the hands of few politicians who have close links to security forces, business and organised crime, and easily dominate all branches of government. South Ossetia is under the control of Eduard Kokoity, a one-time wrestling champion who holds Russian citizenship and won in two successive rounds of presidential elections in December 2001 and November 2006. Neither the elections nor Kokoity enjoy any international legitimacy or recognition other than from Russia and other break-away regimes across the former Soviet Union who have since long established ‘diplomatic ties’ with one another. Abkhazia is an equally uncertain example of democracy. Its current president, Sergei Bagapsh, was elected in January 2005, after three months of turmoil following hotly disputed elections the previous October when, after alleged widespread irregularities, a split electoral commission declared Bagapsh winner over his Kremlin-backed rival, Raul Khadzhimba. The Abkhaz Supreme Court initially upheld the electoral commission’s decision, but was the intimidated by mobs supporting Khadzhimba into changing this decision. After further rioting and violence across Abkhazia, the former rivals agreed to stand on a joint ticket in the January 2005 re-run of the presidential elections. Both the now president and vice-president have previous government experience—Bagapsh as prime minister from 1997 to 2001, when he was succeeded by Khadzhimba who held the office until the October 2004 elections.

The combination of war-time economic devastation and political uncertainty and instability have also created opportunities for various local and transnational crime networks and fostered an environment in which, without proper government control, corruption can thrive, additionally aided by low living standards and weak law enforcement on all sides concerned. Abkhazia has become a heroin transit point, and is thus primarily connected with transnational organised crime, while poverty-stricken South Ossetia, one of the most heavily armed regions of Georgia, suffers predominantly from low-level local criminal activity, such as robbery, kidnapping and smuggling.

The Role of Russia

Georgian-Russian relations have, in almost equal measure driven, and been driven by, developments in both conflict zones. After becoming President of Georgia in 2004, Mikhail Saakashvili made the full and unconditional restoration of Georgia’s sovereignty across its entire territory a policy priority. While he succeeded in establishing Georgian control over another separatist region, Adjara, efforts to repeat this success with either South Ossetia or Abkhazia failed. Offers of autonomy and federal status to South Ossetia in 2004 and Abkhazia in 2006, respectively, were rejected, and tensions gradually escalated, requiring several high-level international interventions, such as George W. Bush’s public and private comments during his visit to Georgia in 2005, to prevent Georgian military adventures. The way in which Saakashvili stepped up his rhetoric was in sharp contrast to the more accommodating policy of Shevardnadse who did not directly challenge the status quo as established in the early 1990s. A direct consequence of Saakashvili’s policy was the deterioration of Georgian-Russian relations.[2]

As Georgia began to accuse Russia of de facto annexation of its territory through the distribution of pensions and passports to Abkhaz residents, financial support and training of the Abkhaz military, investment in and trade with the entity (International Crisis Group 2007: 5), Moscow, in turn, raised the issue of Kosovo as a precedent for international recognition of Abkhazia as early as 2006. Speaking at a press conference in January 2006, Vladimir Putin called for universal principles to settle the frozen conflicts: “We need common principles to find a fair solution to these problems for the benefit of all people living in conflict-stricken territories... If people believe that Kosovo can be granted full independence, why then should we deny it to Abkhazia and South Ossetia?” (RFE/RL 2006). This line of argument became official Russian policy, and gained in legitimacy following Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence in February 2008, and its subsequent recognition by a large number, predominantly western and pro-western countries.

Putin’s policy on Abkhazia and South Ossetia, and by extension Georgia, marked a clear departure from the Yeltsin era, when a generally weak Russia found itself in a prolonged war with Chechnya and sought Georgian cooperation in fighting it. Enabling Abkhaz and South Ossetians to gain Russian citizenship and passports, intensifying political, economic, and military cooperation with the two separatist regions, and the increasingly tough rhetoric and actions against Georgia were partly a reflection on Russia’s renewed assertiveness in the CIS and in the international arena more broadly. At the same time, however, Georgian policy made the pursuit of the Russian strategy at least easier: the isolation of South Ossetia and Abkhazia by Georgia left the two regions very few, if any, options than to forge closer ties with Russia, Georgia’s anti-Russia rhetoric was bound to encounter a response from Moscow, and Saakashvili’s rush to establish Georgia as a prospective NATO (and EU) member state could not but let alarm bells ring in the Kremlin.[3]

Moscow’s policy vis-à-vis both conflict zones was also driven by different groups who, while all lending support to local elites, did so for different reasons, including economic interests (especially in Abkhazia and related to tourism and port infrastructures), security concerns (regionally related to instability in the North Caucasus; globally related to fears of further NATO and EU expansion and a growing US presence), and simple resentment of Georgian nationalists.

Russia’s invasion of Georgia, triggered by Georgia’s violation of the existing cease-fire agreement, and the subsequent recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia are unprecedented in Russian policy vis-à-vis the so-called frozen conflicts in its neighbourhood. This escalation of means used to assert Russian interests in the CIS, however, has been followed by Russia’s willingness to become part of the EU-UN-OSCE co-sponsored Geneva talks, a new initiative on Nagorno-Karabakh, and signs of a greater willingness to find a compromise over Transnistria.

[1] Shevardnadse later became Georgia’s elected president until he was overthrown in the so-called Rose Revolution in October 2003 and replaced by Mikhail Saakashvili.

[2] During the Shevardnadse period, and after, another regional flashpoint, and source of Georgian-Russian tension was the Khodori Gorge, a Georgian outpost in eastern Abkhazia, which became a haven for Georgian guerrillas and Chechen irregulars, contributing further to local and regional instability in the Caucasus region (cf. Murer 2006).

[3] It has to be said that Russian policy has not always been a model of coherence: Russia at the same time sought to mediate between Abkhazia and Georgia over a possible federal arrangement between Abkhazia and Georgia and to integrate Abkhazia more tightly into the Russian economy. Current Abkhaz president Sergey Bagapsh was not Russia’s preferred candidate in the 2005 Abkhaz leadership election, nor was he initially a strong advocate of close ties with Russia, in contrast to his South Oseetian counterpart, Edvard Kokoity, who was elected in 2001 and had made close links with Russia his political priority.