'Undocumented and Unafraid': DACA Beneficiary Calls Trump 'Coward'
WASHINGTON – Former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro urged Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas) to support a clean DREAM Act that would offer a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants brought to the U.S. illegally as children.

“There is no doubt that President Trump has already created a mess and that there’s a looming tragedy if Congress doesn’t act. And it’s time for Senator John Cornyn to step up and show real leadership on this issue. Over 22,000 DREAMers have already been harmed by Trump’s arbitrary renewal deadline and Sen. Cornyn has to know how bad Texas DREAMers are being hurt living in limbo right now,” Castro said on a recent a conference call organized by America’s Voice.

“We also know that John Cornyn is in a position of leadership in his party to actually do something about this. He should make sure Congress passes a DREAM Act soon. If Cornyn doesn’t step up, the lives of Texas DREAMers as well as the Texas economy are going to be harmed,” he added.

Castro, the former mayor of San Antonio, said a “recent analysis” showed that 91 percent of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) recipients are employed, in school or serving in the military. He called on Rep. Will Hurd (R-Texas) to endorse a clean DREAM Act since many DREAMers live in his district.

“Another one who needs to step up is Congressman Will Hurd of congressional district 23. He represents a district that has many DREAMers in it and Hurd is completely wrapped up within the power structure of Congress in the party that controls Congress and the White House. So he needs to get off the sidelines and actually do something here for the people that live in his district. Ultimately, we will be a stronger and more prosperous nation if we provide a path to citizenship for our DREAMers."

Damaris Gonzalez, a recipient of DACA, vowed to “continue to turn up the heat” on members of Congress who oppose the DREAM Act.

“Without DACA and until a Dream Act is passed, on a daily basis, I put myself at risk of separation simply by working and providing for my mom, my dad, my sisters and myself. However, on a daily basis my family is terrified for what could happen to me as I go to and from work doing what I have to do in order to provide for my family,” she said. “No daughter should have to live with the constant uncertainty of whether going to work or to the store or to church is worth the risk of being separated from my mom and dad.”

Gonzalez said Congress should pass a DREAM Act without funding for additional border security agents or the border wall.