Another Link Between Top Obama Official and "9/11 Truther" Movement? Source Says No *
On Thursday an administration official told ABC News that controversial White House official Van Jones's signature on a 2004 petition suggesting that the Bush administration let 9/11 happen in order to justify war because he did not carefully review the language in the petition.

It's worth pointing out that Ben Smith at Politico has spoken to two signatories of that petition , Rabbi Michael Lerner and historian Howard Zinn, who say they were misled about what they were signing. And the conservative website Little Green Footballs points out that Rachel Ehrenfeld, author of “Funding Evil; How Terrorism is Financed and How to Stop It" has posted on her website, the American Center for Democracy: "PLEASE NOTE: Dr. Rachel Ehrenfeld is not a signatory of the 911Truth.org. She has asked several times to have her named removed from the list, but the organization failed to comply."

On Friday, another link between Jones and the Truther movement seemed to have emerged Friday, though a source close to Jones denied it.

It all seemed a distraction for the Obama administration, which spent much time and energy belittling the fringe "Birther" movement of those alleging, despite myriad evidence, that President Obama was not born in the U.S.

Jones said in a statement yesterday that he did not agree with the 2004 Truther petition and it "does not reflect my views now or ever."

On Friday a 2002 document emerged in which Jones was on the "organizing committee" of a newspaper called WAR TIMES -- "A New, Biweekly, Tabloid Newspaper Opposing the 'War on Terrorism.'"

The WAR TIMES document asserts that the "world's most powerful nation has mercilessly bombed Afghanistan and is installing a neo-colonial government of its own choosing, although that country has never attacked the U.S. Millions of Afghans have been displaced and face starvation this winter. The administration has also green-lighted massive Israeli assaults on Palestine, and it threatens to attack Iraq, Lebanon, Somalia, and other countries. The agenda seems clear: to remake the world in the rightwing image with little regard for human consequences."

WAR TIMES's announcement appeared with the announcement of a protest march demanding a congressional inquiry into whether and how much the Bush administration may have played a role in the September 11, 2001 attacks.

But a source close to Jones said that “Jones didn’t participate in and wasn’t part of this march at all. He spent a very brief time on the board of the magazine War Times.” The source says no other connections to the Truther movement other than the petition exist.

-jpt

* NOTE: This post has been updated with the latest information.