Like other GOP candidates, Carly Fiorina says no more Syrian refugees
Former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina is trying to position herself as the candidate most prepared to take on ISIS and issues of national security.

Fiorina addressed a crowd of about 100 people on Tuesday in Concord, speaking at the annual meeting of the New Hampshire Federation of Republican Women. Less than a week after terrorist attacks in Paris, Fiorina’s hawkish comments on national security – and her jabs at Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton – drew the loudest applause from the audience.

While Fiorina has no elected experience, she pointed to her experience advising the federal government on computer data-sharing related to national security due to her position in the tech industry. Fiorina’s resume includes the CIA’s External Advisory Board, as well as advisory work at the National Security Agency.

“I will make a strong statement,” Fiorina said. “I am the most qualified leader in foreign policy running in the Republican party. Why do I say that? Because I have spent decades in Europe, I have spent decades in the Middle East. Because I know more world leaders on the stage today than anyone running, with the possible exception of Hillary Clinton – but I didn’t do photo ops with them.”

Like other GOP candidates, Fiorina reiterated her call for the United States to stop admitting Syrian refugees. When asked about immigration, she said the federal government cannot appropriately vet refugees coming into the country.

“We cannot determine who they are or what their intentions are,” she said.

PolitiFact verified that refugees hoping to come to the United States do go through a vetting process – first with the United Nations High Commissioner of Refugees, then with the federal Department of Homeland Security. The entire process can take one to two years.

“As pitiful as these pictures are of mothers and their children – as pitiful as they are – the truth is this: The vast majority of these refugees are young, able-bodied men looking for work,” Fiorina said. “And we do not have a moral obligation to provide everybody looking for work with an opportunity to work. So let’s start with that.”

The claim that most Syrian refugees are young men is not accurate, however. Republican candidate Ben Carson made a similar claim in September and was “stretching facts,” according to FactCheck.org. Data from the United Nations High Commissioner of Refugees shows women are 50.3 percent of the registered Syrian refugee population. Only 22.1 percent of male refugees are between 18 and 59 years old.

As she has before, Fiorina also said the United States should give more aid to its allies in the Middle East.

“When we do not lead, when we do not stand with our allies, when we do not confront our adversaries, the world is a very dangerous and tragic place,” Fiorina said.

More than once, Fiorina compared herself directly to Clinton.

“Whether you’ve made up your mind who to support or not, in your heart of hearts, every single one of you know this – you cannot wait to see me debate Hillary Clinton,” Fiorina said, to the loudest cheers of the event. “And the reason you can’t wait is because you know I’ll beat her. And there’s only one way that happens. . . . I have to be the nominee.”

Voters – mostly women at this event – said national security is especially important in light of recent events.

Christine Peters, a 39-year-old from Amherst, brought her 10-year-old daughter Isabella to the event. Isabella likes Ted Cruz best of all the candidates she’s met, but her mother is still undecided.

“We definitely want to feel safe,” Peters said.

Celeste Wilson drove to Concord with friends from Massachusetts to hear Fiorina speak. The Obama administration, she said, is “scary.”

“I’m just hoping we survive the next few months with this president,” Wilson said.

While all undecided, the women liked what they saw in Fiorina on Tuesday.

“I’m more convinced she’s on my list,” Artemis Martakis said.

(Megan Doyle can be reached at 369-3321, mdoyle@cmonitor.com or on Twitter @megan_e_doyle.)