Despite primary loss, most New Hampshire superdelegates stand by Clinton
Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders won the most votes in the New Hampshire primary, but that victory didn’t shake up former secretary of state Hillary Clinton’s lead in the race for delegates.

New Hampshire has 24 base delegates to be divvied up by the popular vote.

Sanders captured 60 percent Tuesday, which translated to 15 delegates. Clinton earned 39 percent, or nine delegates.

But in addition to those 24, the Democratic campaigns rack up endorsements from superdelegates – party officials who can support the candidate of their choice. New Hampshire has eight superdelegates.

None have publicly backed Sanders; the Associated Press has reported six of those superdelegates are in Clinton’s camp. They include U.S. Sen. Jeanne Shaheen, U.S. Rep. Annie Kuster and Gov. Maggie Hassan, who all campaigned on Clinton’s behalf. Those leaders reiterated their support Wednesday, despite Clinton’s primary loss.

“Gov. Hassan is confident that we’re going to have a unified Democratic Party focused on critical priorities,” campaign spokesman Aaron Jacobs said, adding “the convention is a long way off.”

While party leaders said the delegation typically lines up behind one candidate by the time of the convention, two superdelegates remain silent about their support, even after the state’s primary.

One of them is state Sen. Martha Fuller Clark of Portsmouth, who said Wednesday she wants to hold off her endorsement until she knows which candidate wins national popular support.

“I’m reluctant to get between two Democrats, both of whom I think bring a lot to the table,” Fuller Clark said. “We should let this primary challenge go forward without officers of the Democratic Party taking a position in favor of one Democratic candidate as opposed to another. I know I’m somewhat unique in that position.”

The last superdelegate is state party Chairman Ray Buckley, who is barred from picking a candidate during the primaries. He noted a superdelegate endorsement isn’t binding; that person could change his or her support at any time before the convention.

And he pointed out the Granite State’s group of superdelegates traditionally unites to vote together.

“The New Hampshire delegation has a very long and proud history of being unanimous at the convention,” Buckley said.

Superdelegate and Democratic National Committeewoman Kathy Sullivan recalled the 2008 primary, when Clinton eked out a win in the Granite State. Then-Sen. Barack Obama had earned endorsements from several superdelegates.

“We didn’t ask them to switch their votes; I think there was great respect for the commitment and choice they had made to their candidate,” Sullivan, a Clinton backer, wrote in an email. “When we got to the convention, and it was clear that Barack Obama had the delegates necessary to win the nomination, we all decided to vote for him.”

But New Hampshire isn’t an anomaly.

The Associated Press has tallied 394 delegates for Clinton, based on the Iowa caucuses, the New Hampshire primary and her large number of endorsements from superdelegates. Sanders, by comparison, has 42.

To win the Democratic nomination for president, a candidate needs 2,382 delegates.

That process, however, has prompted some concern from activists and Sanders supporters. A petition began circulating online Wednesday, asking superdelegates to follow whatever the country’s popular vote will be.

That petition is a partnership between a California-based super PAC called Progressive Kick and the volunteer group Ready to Fight, which grew out of the movement to draft Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren to run for president.

President Joshua Gossman said Progressive Kick endorsed Sanders early on and still wants him to win, but the petition is not specific to a candidate.

“Whoever gets a majority of the votes in the primary and caucus process deserves to be the nominee of the party,” he said. “We ask all people who believe in democracy to join us, whether they support Bernie Sanders or whether they support Hillary Clinton.”

The petition had more than 100,000 signatures by Wednesday evening.

(Megan Doyle can be reached at 369-3321, mdoyle@cmonitor.com or on Twitter @megan_e_doyle.)