Gillibrand sticks with 2006 platform
Senator continues to stand behind ’06 platform

QUEENSBURY uWhen Democrat Kirsten Gillibrand launched her first campaign for the U.S. House of Representatives, her platform included allowing individuals to buy into the federal Medicare program.

A decade later, Gillibrand, now a U.S. senator, said the Medicare buy in, essentially establishing a single-payer health insurance system, would still have been a preferable option to the Affordable Care Act, President Obama’s controversial health care plan.

“Medicare for all! — Yes, that was still the better platform,” Gillibrand said in an interview in Queensbury in August, reflecting on 10 years since she entered politics.

Gillibrand, who lived in Greenport at the time, began her initial congressional campaign in 2005, leading to her defeat of incumbent Rep. John Sweeney, R-Clifton Park, in 2006, who previously represented the Glens Falls area.

Medicare is a federal health care program for the elderly and disabled.

Gillibrand said allowing younger and non-disabled people, if they wanted it, the option to get coverage under Medicare, at a cost, was a simple proposal.

One of the challenges of the Affordable Care Act is that it is so complex, she said. “It’s one of the reasons why the roll out was so horrible. It’s one of the reasons why we still have things we need to reform. … A lot of the complexity is why it’s taken so long to get it up and running.”

Gillibrand said legislation to allow individuals between 55 and 65 to buy coverage under Medicare almost passed the Senate in late 2009, but Sen. Joseph Lieberman, i-Conn., withdrew his support at the last minute.

“And he pulled out three days before the vote,” she said. “And it was so heart wrenching for me personally because I thought, ‘This is going to show the American people that ‘Medicare for all’ actually works.”

Gillibrand said she still supports the concept.

“So I still think that it’s a better way to go long-term for health care reform,” she said.

Gillibrand’s 2006 campaign platform also included setting a notice period of less than one year for the United States to begin withdrawing troops from Iraq and to pledge the U.S. would not have permanent military bases in Iraq.

Gillibrand, in the August 18 interview, said withdrawing U.S. troops from Iraq was the right decision, despite continued conflict with Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, a militant group attempting to gain control of Iraq and other Middle East countries.

“The principle that we were fighting for then was letting the people itself take ownership of the future of Iraq. And that’s truly what needs to happen now,” she said.

Gillibrand said the U.S. should not send ground troops back to Iraq.

“Iraq has to create a country that is more inspiring and has a hope for the middle class and a hope for a future that is more compelling than becoming a terrorist,” she said. “That’s their struggle. We can facilitate it and we can help, but we cannot solve their problems for them.”

Transparency was another plank in Gillibrand’s initial platform.

She pledged to post her daily schedule of meetings on her congressional office website, so constituents would know which lobbysts, advocates, business people and government officials she met with.

Gillibrand said other members of Congress were skeptical of her policy at first, but many have now followed her lead.

“I got some pushback. I got made fun of by some of my colleagues,” she said.

Keeping a record of meetings turned out to be practical, beyond the transparency aspect.

“You can keep track of how you’re spending your time and making sure it makes sense. … I think it’s a great lens on which to make decisions about how you spend your time.”

Gillibrand said she continues to post her daily schedule on her Senate office website, and she posts her annual personal financial disclosure reports and income tax returns.

She also now provides information through social networking.

“I didn’t have a Twitter account (in 2005). I didn’t have a Facebook account. And now I have all of those,” she said. “So the way we communicate with our constituents is different. It’s very different. It’s more rapid and it’s more concise.”