New AARP Ads on Age Tax Target Senators in Alaska, Arizona, Colorado and Nevada

Group Continues Actions Opposing Harmful Health Bill

WASHINGTON, DC—AARP today announced new television ads against the Age Tax and other provisions in the health care bill, urging Senators to “vote No” on the legislation. The seven figure ad buy began airing this week in the states of US Senators Jeff Flake (R-AZ), Cory Gardner (R-CO), Dean Heller (R-NV), Lisa Murkowski (R-AK), and Dan Sullivan (R-AK).

“Older Americans are very worried about the cost of their health insurance,” said AARP Executive Vice President Nancy LeaMond. “AARP is taking a strong stand against the American Health Care Act for one simple reason: it is a bad bill. It imposes an age tax on older Americans, weakens Medicare and protections for people with pre-existing conditions. On behalf of our 38 million members, we are urging Senators to scrap the AHCA and start over.”

In addition to the ad buy, AARP is mobilizing its members across the country to engage every member of the Senate through phone calls, email, and in-person. On June 7, staff and volunteers from all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands will come to Washington for AARP’s annual Lobby Day.

Below is AARP’s television script for the ads beginning this week that may be seen here:

VISUAL AUDIO Open on a storefront in a downtown street. The signage on the storefront reads “Ryan and Associates Financial & Tax Services.” Cut to the inside of the tax service office. An older couple (the Hutchins) sit at a desk. Their accountant takes a seat across from them and flips open a folder. His attitude throughout their interactions is detached and factual. Sitting at desk. Accountant: Alright…let’s get started. You’re both over fifty? Mrs. Hutchins: Yes. Accountant: OK…that’ll cost you. Mrs. Hutchins: Why? Accountant: The new health care bill in Congress. If you’re over 50, insurance companies can charge you 5 times more. It’s an age tax . Mr. and Mrs. Hutchins share a worried look. The accountant writes on the paperwork. Accountant: Any pre-existing conditions? Mr. Hutchins: I have asthma. Accountant: Ok…well, insurers can charge thousands more for that. He spins the paperwork around for the Hutchins to review. They look very concerned. Text on Screen: Tell Senator Flake/Gardner/Heller/Murkowski/Sullivan to vote “No” on the health care bill. CALL: 1-844-833-9667 Accountant: This is going to be a big bill. Voiceover : Tell Senator Flake/Gardner/Heller/Murkowski/Sullivan to vote “No” on the health care bill. Text on screen: AARP LOGO. Paid for by AARP.



# # #