Press Releases
AARP Expands Age Tax Ads Targeting 11 Senators in Alaska, Arizona, Colorado, Iowa, Ohio, Nevada, Tennessee, West Virginia

Steps Up Opposition to Harmful Health Bill with Visits to Capitol Hill, Phone Calls, Social Media

WASHINGTON, DC — AARP today announced new television ads against the Age Tax and other provisions in the health care bill, urging 11 U.S. Senators in eight states to “vote No” on the House-passed legislation. The seven-figure ad buy expands the successful ad campaign that began in May.

The new and continued ads will stay on the air as long as the Senate debates health care. The ads provide a phone number and ask constituents to contact US Senators Lisa Murkowski (R-AK), Dan Sullivan (R-AK), Jeff Flake (R-AZ), Cory Gardner (R-CO), Joni Ernst (R-IA), Chuck Grassley (R-IA), Dean Heller (R-NV), Rob Portman (R-OH), Lamar Alexander (R-TN), Bob Corker (R-TN), and Shelley Moore Capito (R-WV).

“As the Senate continues debating health care reform, AARP is stepping up our advocacy on behalf of our 38 million members and all older Americans. Last week, AARP volunteers and staff from all 50 states fanned out on Capitol Hill to talk to members of Congress about the harmful impact that provisions in the House-passed bill would have on older Americans,” said AARP Executive Vice President Nancy LeaMond. “Our members and other Americans over age 50 are very worried about legislation that would raise their premiums through what is, in effect, an age tax, weaken Medicare, undermine protections for people with pre-existing conditions, and make changes to Medicaid that would put some of our most vulnerable citizens at risk. We urge Senators to scrap the House bill and start over to craft something without these harmful policies.”

In addition to the latest ad buy, AARP continues to mobilize members across the country to contact their Senators via phone calls, email, social media, and in-person meetings. Last week, AARP volunteers and staff visited 330 Congressional offices during the organization’s annual Lobby Day.

AARP’s television ads may be seen here.

# # #