Project Overview – WIS 441 Tri-County Project
Read Latest News Releases and Closure Reports

View 2019 closures schedule

Welcome to the WIS 441 Tri-County Project construction website! The WIS 441 Tri-County Project will reconstruct and expand approximately 6 miles of US 10 / WIS 441 from 4 lanes to 6 lanes between Cold Spring Road (County CB) and Oneida Street (US 10) in Winnebago, Outagamie and Calumet counties and reconstruct five interchanges and the Roland Kampo Bridge.

Highlights of the project include:

Constructing a 2 nd parallel bridge over Little Lake Butte des Morts. (complete)

parallel bridge over Little Lake Butte des Morts. (complete) Reconstructing the I-41/WIS 441/US 10 system-to-system interchange to provide free flow movements to and from all highways. (complete)

Re-aligning US 10/WIS 441 to provide a safer facility designed for 70-mph.

Reconstructing the Appleton Road (WIS 47), Racine Road (County P), Midway Road (County AP) and Oneida Street (US 10) interchanges to provide a safer facility. (complete)

Adding auxiliary lanes on I-41 for safer highway merges. (complete)

The project finishes in 2019 with lane additions on WIS 441. You can view all work completed and remaining on the map below.

The project is needed to address safety concerns and traffic demands on one of the region’s vital transportation routes. Currently, the crash rates on US 10/WIS 441 exceed statewide averages for similar urban freeways. Traffic volume is expected to rise on US 10/WIS 441 in the years ahead, and additional traffic lanes are needed to safely accommodate this increase. The existing interchanges also need safety and capacity improvements.

Diverging Diamond Interchange (DDI) now OPEN at WIS 441/Oneida Street interchange!

DDI educational guides (pdf)

How to drive a DDI brochure – This easy-to-understand brochure shows drivers exactly what they need to know when driving in a DDI.

DDI guide for pedestrians and bicyclists – This easy-to-understand guide shows pedestrians and bicyclists what they need to know when walking or riding through a DDI.

Large Truck DDI brochure

Quick Links

WIS 441 Project traffic updates and road closures

WIS 441 weekly closure report and news you need to know – Our weekly closure report shows all the short-term and long-term traffic impacts on the WIS 441 Project. It is publish every Friday with a look ahead to next week’s traffic impact.

Twitter: @WIS441I41News or https://twitter.com/WIS441I41News – Get daily traffic updates and the latest breaking news on the WIS 441 Project.

Facebook Page: https://www.facebook.com/WIS441I41News – The WIS 441 Facebook page is great for daily photos, maps and interesting news about the WIS 441 Project.

Contact Mark Kantola, Regional Communication Manager, mark.kantola@dot.wi.gov

For information regarding all northeast Wisconsin construction projects, detours, local transportation news and much, much more: