BIOGAS RFP - The State of Wisconsin is exploring innovation in manure management that includes approaches to add efficiency to solids and liquids handling, decrease agricultural wastewater volumes, reduce hauling costs, improve the agricultural benefits of the materials that are land applied, address pathogens, and maximize the renewable energy benefits of anaerobic digesters. More information about this new opportunity can be found here ! Hot Topics - Quick links to important information or breaking news… The PSC is currently in the process of an overhaul to our web site. When navigating our pages, you will notice that some pages will be directed to a new URL, "apps.psc.wi.gov". These pages will have a new look and layout, but function in a similar way. This process is expected to be finished in the coming months, but stay tuned for other exciting announcements about our web pages and applications!

Port of Green Bay to remain open through Winter- The U.S. Coast Guard has announced it will conduct ice breaking operations in the bay of Green Bay in January in order to keep the shipping channel open for safe navigation and transport of economically-significant commercial shipments. In particular, this will allow for petroleum products to continue arriving at the Port, while the only fuel pipeline between Milwaukee and Green Bay is shut down.

Governor Walker announced the official launch of Wisconsin's Broadband Forward! Community Certification Program. This program coordinates and streamlines administrative procedures for the deployment of next generation broadband technologies by providing a new "Broadband Forward! Community" designation for units of local government who wish to participate. More information can be found here.

Welcome to the PSC's new Electronic Regulatory Filing (ERF) EZ Subscription service. Anyone interested in a specific case can now sign-up to receive e-mail notifications when new documents are filed. Individuals are not required to login or provide passwords.



Simply enter the docket (case) number, your e-mail address and click the Subscribe button. Electronic notifications containing links to the documents for that case will be sent to your inbox when new documents are received at the PSC. You can unsubscribe from these e-mails at any time by clicking on the link at the bottom of the message. You can even sign-up to receive notifications for multiple dockets, if you wish.

Link Directly to a Case The PSC recently updated many of it's application. These applications, including the docket search now reside here.