Just How High Should Progress Go?
THE egos were on parade.

Donald J. Trump -- yes, that one -- and Louis R. Cappelli, the builder changing the face of Westchester's cities, were standing on a sun-baked podium looking up at the county's tallest building -- their 40-story creation that is being named, you guessed it, Trump Plaza. Its steel skeleton was topped out on Monday, and that made it nearly twice as tall as anything around, visible from the tree-shaded Victorians and colonials in sleepier places miles away like Larchmont.

''This tower embodies a community that is rising in every way,'' Noam Bramson, the mayor of New Rochelle, exulted.

Andrew J. Spano, the county executive, spoke of ''Westchester B.C., Before Cappelli,'' glorifying the man who has already reshaped White Plains into Westchester's beckoning Emerald City. Mr. Trump, in his lord-of-the-manor style (this is someone who named his new baby Baron), asked the 36-year-old Mr. Bramson how old he was, as if he were addressing another apprentice for his TV show. Confetti showered the guests, a gargantuan flag was lofted to the top floor and a trumpeter played ''The Star-Spangled Banner.''

More than a few residents of New Rochelle and the surrounding villages think what Mr. Trump and Mr. Cappelli are putting up will forever change their suburban experience. They are wondering why skyscrapers this tall are needed in the unassuming city of New Rochelle, a place with a plainspoken Main Street of shops and restaurants whose proudest adornments were once department stores like Bloomingdale's and Macy's.

The novelist Cynthia Ozick, who prefers the privacy of a small town, has lived a few blocks from downtown since 1961 and likes walking to the library, the post office or a park where she can see swans skim the water. Until six months ago, the sky she saw through the trees was unbroken. But the Trump Plaza's nighttime lights give her a foretaste of what she will see when the trees lose their leaves.

''In the winter, there it will be, and I just feel destroyed by it,'' she said.

New Rochelle, with 73,000 people, is classified as a city, but it is essentially a sprawling suburb with a downtown cluster that runs for a mile or so along Route 1. Unlike White Plains, it is neither a county seat nor a home to Fortune 500 companies. Until five years ago, its tallest building was the Depression-era 13-story Kaufman Building. Then, in 2001, the Avalon on the Sound apartments reached 25 stories. Trump Plaza will be joined by Avalon on the Sound II, a skyscraper almost its height, and Mr. Cappelli has plans for two towers next door.

''Westchester's cities are ready for a skyline,'' argued Mr. Cappelli, who said he would build to 80 stories if the city let him. ''New Rochelle and White Plains have the ability to be mini-Manhattans. Some people criticize the Manhattanization of Westchester, but as you see from the downtown, it's bringing life.''

His opinions were echoed by Mr. Trump, the marketer to Mr. Cappelli's hands-on contractor. ''Height gives you views, it gives you prestige and it gives you the presence you don't get with a building without the height,'' he told reporters. ''If the building were two stories, do you think all you folks would be here?''

Everyone agrees that New Rochelle, the birthplace of Jay Leno and home at times to Lou Gehrig, Carl Reiner, Ossie Davis and E. L. Doctorow, needed a makeover. Its downtown had been moribund, with acres of empty blocks, low-priced restaurants and 99-cent stores. What started to change it was the opening in 1999 of a Cappelli project, New Roc City, a Disneyesque complex with 18 movie theaters and a bowling alley. At issue now are the bounds of revitalization.

With Manhattan prices increasingly affordable only for the rich, New Rochelle, a half-hour from Grand Central, is drawing developers. Trump Plaza's condominiums will range from $600,000 for a one-bedroom on a low floor to $1.8 million for a high three-bedroom, and, according to Mr. Cappelli, more than 40 percent are spoken for. They will have views of the houses stretching all the way to Long Island Sound and of the majestic Sound itself.

But for Paula Del Guercio, 75, a mother of eight who has lived on a salt pond in Larchmont for 40 years, the idyllic view from her kitchen window has been spoiled by the tower with flashing lights. ''It really ruins the landscape,'' she said.

And for Ms. Ozick, the developers have also spoiled her picture of her beloved city.

''I do want the city to come to life again,'' she said. But she called Trump Plaza ''out of proportion.''

She also mourns what has happened to her views. ''For the sake of some people's sky, you take away other's people's sky,'' Ms. Ozick said wryly.

Her consolation seems to be that as other skyscrapers rise, those gorgeous Long Island Sound views from Trump Plaza will be blocked, defeating the builders' purpose.

''The top floors of these mammoth buildings will see each other, and maybe they will wave at each other from their balconies,'' she said.



Photo (Photo by Alan Zale for The New York Times)