WASFA Privacy Statement

The Washington Student Achievement Council (WSAC) administers state financial aid including the Washington College Grant (formerly known as the State Need Grant), the College Bound Scholarship, and the Washington Application for State Financial Aid, or WASFA, for undocumented individuals. The Council is committed to providing opportunities and support to ensure every Washington student is able to pursue education beyond high school.

Regarding concerns that students, parents, and other partners may have about the confidentiality of information submitted on the WASFA, the purpose of the application is to provide eligibility information to colleges and universities in Washington that offer the Washington College Grant (formerly known as the State Need Grant) and the College Bound Scholarship. WSAC shares application information with campuses listed by the student so those schools may determine eligibility for resident tuition and financial aid. Campuses are not permitted to use the information for other purposes or share the data with other parties.

WSAC is committed to protecting the confidentiality of the information and privacy of students and families. Washington is a state committed to providing opportunities to students and protecting the rights of families.

WASFA (Washington Application for State Financial Aid)

State Financial Aid for Undocumented Individuals and Select Non-Citizens

Washington State offers financial aid programs to students who aren’t eligible for federal financial aid because of immigration status. These students still need to meet other program requirements.

To find out if you qualify, complete the free WASFA to apply for state financial aid.

Application

Which WASFA application year should I fill out?

Fill out the 2019-2020 WASFA application if you are planning on being enrolled in college (as a new student or continuing student) in fall term 2019 through spring term 2020.

Fill out the 2018-2019 WASFA application if you are enrolled, or plan to be enrolled, in college between now and spring term 2019.

If your first enrollment term will be Summer 2019, check with your college on what application to complete.

2019-20 WASFA Application Now Open!

New User Returning User Complete a WASFA for the first time

Eligibility questionnaire Make a correction/Add a school

Submit an application for a new year Start A New WASFA Returning User

DACA Update

On September 5, 2017, the federal government rescinded Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA).

But in Washington State, undocumented students may still qualify for in-state tuition and for some state financial aid programs. Undocumented students need to meet one of the following standards:

DACA standard 1079 standard

1. DACA Standard

Washington will continue to offer state financial aid and in-state tuition to students with DACA who meet requirements.

If your college has already determined that you meet the DACA standard:

You will continue to pay in-state tuition and receive state financial aid if you meet program requirements.

If you haven't enrolled yet:

You must have a DACA status (can be expired or unexpired).

You also need to live in Washington for one year (for reasons other than education) prior to enrolling in college.

If you meet the DACA standard, you could qualify for any of the following benefits:

In-state tuition rates

Washington College Grant (formerly State Need Grant)

College Bound Scholarship

Other state financial aid

Please note that each program may have additional eligibility requirements.

Additional DACA Information

Visit the Northwest Immigrant Rights Project website for information and a schedule of upcoming community forums.

2. 1079 standard

You must graduate from a Washington high school (or earn a GED or equivalent) after living in Washington for at least three consecutive years.

Live in Washington after earning high school diploma or equivalent until being admitted to college.

Sign an affidavit (written promise) saying you meet the above requirements. Non-U.S. Citizens must also promise that they will apply to become a permanent U.S. resident as soon as they are eligible. The affidavit is included as part of the WASFA.

Both students without DACA or with DACA can qualify.

If you meet this standard, you could qualify for any of the following benefits:

In-state tuition rates

Washington College Grant (formerly State Need Grant)

College Bound Scholarship

Determining eligibility

Colleges and universities usually determine eligibility one time. When students first apply for admission or financial aid, the college determines if they meet requirements for in-state tuition and state financial aid.

If you’ve enrolled, and your college has already determined that you meet the DACA standard:

You will continue to pay in-state tuition and receive state financial aid if you meet program requirements.

If you are going to college in the future:

Your eligibility will depend on which residency standard you meet at the time of application.

If you plan to transfer schools:

You need to check with your new college. Colleges may accept the residency determination from a previous college but this process varies by college.

Application Resources

WASFA Application Guide

College Goal Washington events where you can get free help completing your WASFA or FAFSA

Communication and Promotional Resources

Contact the Washington Student Achievement Council with questions at wasfa@wsac.wa.gov or 888-535-0747, option 2.