NIH Categorical Spending -NIH Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools (RePORT)
[*] The minimum reporting threshold for a specific disease/condition is $500,000. Reporting of $0 does not indicate that no research is being conducted.

[+] Indicates a new category. Funding support data not available prior to the initial year reported.

1/ Name revised in FY 2015 to account for more inclusive definition of research addressing the harms and benefits related to alcohol use.

2/ These categories were established pursuant to Section 230, Division G of the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2015 as related to reporting of NIH initiatives supporting the National Alzheimer’s Project Act (NAPA) https://aspe.hhs.gov/national-alzheimers-project-act. The Alzheimer’s Disease Related Dementias (ADRD) category reflects the sum of the three existing RCDC categories: Frontotemporal Dementia, Lewy Body Dementia and Vascular Cognitive Impairment/Dementia – where duplicates are removed. The category Alzheimer’s Disease including Alzheimer’s Disease Related Dementias (AD/ADRD) reflects the sum of the two existing RCDC categories: Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) and the above Alzheimer’s Disease Related Dementias (ADRD) – where duplicates are removed.

3/ Reporting for this category does not follow the standard RCDC process. The total amount reported is consistent with reporting requirements for this category to the U.S. Office of Management & Budget (OMB). The project listing includes non-project or other support costs associated with the annual total for this category. Additional information on this category is available at https://www.niaid.nih.gov/research/biodefense.

4/ Includes research funded from the Type 1 diabetes appropriation.

5/ Reporting for this category does not follow the standard RCDC process. Spending for this category is reported consistent with U.S. Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) requirements. This category includes only projects funded by NIDA. More information on this area is available at https://www.drugabuse.gov/drugs-abuse. FY 2018 actual and FY 2019/2020 estimates reported in RePORT can differ from levels identified in the FY 2020 Drug Control budget submission for those fiscal years where comparability, rounding or other adjustments have been applied.

6/ Reported total for this category encompasses research for anorexia, bulimia nervosa, binge eating disorders, and eating disorders not otherwise specified.

7/ Name revised in FY 2015 and definition refined. Category merges projects identified as Foodborne Illness with relevant projects from the prior "Food Safety" category. Historical data is maintained in separately to assure that information for predecessor categories is not conflated with the merged category.

8/ Reporting for this category does not follow the standard RCDC process. This category assigns project funding according to populations tracked by gender or ethnicity -- relying on either on new automated tools within the RCDC system for selection of qualified projects or subject matter expert reviews of manually collected project listings. The databases used to track gender/ethnicity are complex are not currently compatible with the RCDC system.

9/ The total for AIDS research includes both extramural and intramural research (including research management and support, Management Fund, and Service & Supply Fund), buildings and facilities, research training, and program evaluation, as well as research on the many HIV-associated co-infections and co-morbidities, including TB, hepatitis C, and HIV-associated cancers. It also includes all the basic science underlying this research. Other RCDC categories are not reported this way. As a result, the total for AIDS-related research is not comparable to spending reported for other RCDC diseases. More information on this area is available at https://www.oar.nih.gov/hiv_aids_information/index.asp.

10/ This category includes projects that are focused on basic, pre-clinical, clinical, biomedical, health services, behavioral, and social research relevant to sexual and gender minority (SGM) populations. The SGM population – which historically includes LGBT, is asterisked to recognize the diversity in membership as well as sensitivities associated with the variety of descriptive names in use by the medical communities and general public. This research pertains to people whose sexual orientation is not exclusively heterosexual, i.e. lesbian, gay, and bisexual or pansexual persons. Research projects can likewise focus on individuals whose gender identity differs from the sex originally assigned to them at birth, transgender (male-to-female or female-to-male), bi gender, gender non-conforming or gender variant, or who may not self-identify as LGBT (such as queer, questioning, two-spirit, asexual, etc.). Research also can cover individuals who are born with conditions in which development of chromosomal, gonadal, or anatomic sex is atypical, i.e. people who identify themselves as intersex or with differences/disorders of sex development (DSD). DSD can include, but are not limited to: Y chromosome aneuploidy, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, complete androgen insensitivity, partial androgen insensitivity, gonadal dysgenesis, mixed gonadal dysgenesis, hypospadias, Klinefelter syndrome, Turner syndrome, 5aRD2 deficiency, aromatase defects, MRKH syndrome and gynecomastia. For further information please refer to the SGMRO website.

11/ Reporting for this category does not follow the standard RCDC process. This category uses a non-standard approach involving subject matter expert reviews of manually collected project listings. The definition used to compile the project list was revised for clarification in FY 2016.

12/ The data provided reflects funding amounts reported by the NIH RCDC process for this category. Actual and estimate levels presented on this site supersede estimates detailed in OMB MAX DE application tables that may have been based on preliminary funding support information.

13/ Reporting for this category does not follow the standard RCDC process. This category includes all spending reported under the Drug Abuse category as well as projects categorized under the broader area of Substance Abuse. These are project listings only. More information on this area is available at https://www.drugabuse.gov/drugs-abuse.

14/ Name revised in FY 2018 from "Pain Conditions – Chronic."

15/ Name revised in FY 2018 from "Septicemia."

16/ Reporting for this category does not follow the standard RCDC process. Spending for this category is reported consistent with U.S. Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) requirements. This category includes only projects funded and administered by NIAAA. This category represents a subset of spending reported under the RCDC Underage Drinking category and involves manual review of the project listing by subject matter experts. More information on this area is available at https://www.niaaa.nih.gov/research/major-initiatives/underage-drinking-research-initiative. Actuals or estimates displayed in RePORT can differ from levels identified in the Drug Control budget submission to ONDCP for those fiscal years where either comparable, rounding or other adjustments have been applied or historical data was refined.

17/ Name revised in FY 2015 from "Clinical Trials".

18/ Name revised in FY 2015 from "Neuropathy".

19/ Estimates of United States disease burden are provided as mortality and prevalence figures for calendar year 2015. Figures for mortality data are drawn from the National Vital Statistics System (NVSS), and indicate the number of deaths in which a particular disease or condition was mentioned on a deceased individual's death certificate. Prevalence figures are drawn from National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) responses and report the percentage of respondents who indicated that they were affected by a particular health condition. Standard error, a measure of the uncertainty in the estimate, is presented in parentheses alongside the prevalence estimate. Estimates of mortality and prevalence are not available for all NIH spending categories. Further descriptions of these disease statistics can be found here.

20/ Name revised in FY 2016 from "Perinatal - Birth - Preterm (LBW)".

21/ Name revised in FY 2016 from "Perinatal - Neonatal Respiratory Distress Syndrome".

22/ Name revised in FY 2017 from "American Indians/Alaskan Natives".

23/ Name revised in FY 2017 from "Diagnostic Radiology".

24/ Name revised in FY 2018 from "Sexually Transmitted Diseases/Herpes".

25/ Name revised in FY 2018 from "Smoking and Health".

26/ The FY 2018 actuals and FY 2019 estimates for Opioids, Opioids Misuse and Addiction, and Pain Research include $500 million appropriated in FY 2018, and available for obligation over two years, to support the Helping to End Addiction Long-term (HEAL) Initiative. Approximately 85 percent of those funds were carried over and will be obligated in FY 2019, so they are part of the estimates for that year (in addition to the $500 million of annual appropriations in FY 2019). As a result, the FY 2018 actuals for those categories do not include much of the HEAL funding, and there is a one-time spike in the FY 2019 estimates.