Medicaid Factsheet 2015
December 02, 2015

Medicaid Factsheet 2015

What is Medicaid?

Medicaid is a social safety net program that provides health coverage for low-income pregnant women, children, the disabled and seniors.

Who is covered under Medicaid?

About 70 million people receive Medicaid benefits, including:

31 million children, including those on CHIP

11 million non-disabled 18 to 64 years old

8.8 million disabled

4.6 million seniors

Medicaid Expansion

Beginning in 2014, the Affordable Care Act has provided for the expansion of the Medicaid program to include coverage of individuals not previously covered, such as low-income males, and raises the income eligibility to include individuals with incomes up to 133% of the Federal Poverty Level ($15,521 for individual and $31,721 for a family of four; these figures are expected to rise slightly this spring). Not all states have agreed to expand their Medicaid program. To see if your state has expanded coverage, visit: http://bit.ly/1aP3AAi.

Long-term Care and Support Services

Medicaid is the largest payer of nursing home and home care services, paying for 62% of these services. Seniors with incomes up to 300% of Supplemental Security Income (SSI) qualifying levels ($26,388 for individual) may qualify to receive these benefits. Check with your state to see if you qualify. For state specific eligibility requirements, visit: http://bit.ly/1ffmdAb.

Cost-sharing Assistance for Low-income Seniors

The Medicaid program provides assistance with cost-sharing for low-income seniors, through the Medicare Savings Program (MSP). Under this program, Medicare beneficiaries with limited incomes may be eligible for assistance paying their monthly Part B premiums of $104.90. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in conjunction with states offer four different programs under MSP.

Medicare Savings Program

The chart below is a summary of programs available. It shows what each program will cover and the maximum income and assets allowed to qualify:

Proposals That Would Dramatically Cut Medicaid

HOUSE BUDGET – It “block grants” Medicaid and slashes its funding by $913 billion over 10 years. Currently, the Medicaid program pays for all Medically-necessary services. Under a block grant program, states would receive a fixed amount, making it difficult for them to continue to offer needed benefits. States will most likely change eligibility or increase cost sharing for individuals.