Heller’s Allies in the Trump Administration Continue Targeting Protections for People with Pre-Existing Conditions

Yesterday, the Trump Administration filed a court brief arguing that the Affordable Care Act’s rules guaranteeing coverage for people with pre-existing conditions are “unconstitutional”—seeking to undo one of the law’s most important provisions and go back to allowing big insurance companies to deny people health coverage based on their medical history. Last year, after Sen. Dean Heller broke his promise to protect Nevadans’ health care and caved to President Trump, he wound up helping craft a partisan repeal bill that also would have slashed coverage protections for people with pre-existing conditions.

Poll after poll this year shows that health care is the top issue for voters in 2018. Heller has already said that his re-election and the battle for control of the U.S. Senate will determine whether Washington Republicans can move forward with repeal.

Rosen for Nevada spokesperson Molly Forgey released the following statement:

“Sen. Dean Heller is already on the record on this issue - he sided with Republicans who want to dismantle the Affordable Care Act and remove coverage protections for pre-existing conditions. Access to affordable health care is a major concern for Nevada voters, and Heller’s disastrous record on health care is a litany of broken promises and self-serving politics. Sen. Heller will have to answer for this agenda to increase costs and strip access to health care for hardworking families by letting big insurance companies go back to denying Nevadans health coverage if they have a pre-existing condition.”

Vox: The Trump administration believes Obamacare’s preexisting conditions protections are now unconstitutional

By Dylan Scott

June 7th, 2018

Key points:

Insurers could once again deny people coverage based on their medical history, undoing the law’s most popular provisions.

The Trump administration argued in a court brief filed on Thursday that Obamacare’s protections for preexisting conditions should be ruled unconstitutional, opening up another front in the White House’s crusade to roll back the law’s core insurance reforms.

If the Trump administration’s argument were to prevail, insurers could once again be able to flat-out deny Americans insurance based on their health status. No amount of federal subsidies would protect them.

Read the full story here.