FLASHBACK! Head Of Alabama Democratic Party Faced Multiple Felonies & Misdemeanors
The head of the Alabama Democratic Party found herself in very hot water in 2007. She was indicted for several felonies and misdemeanors, according to WSFA 12. Former AL Secretary of State Nancy Worley turned herself in at the Montgomery County Jail and then was released on bond. The indictment came down charging the head AL Democrat with actions committed during her unsuccessful campaign for re-election in 2006.

Worley is just one in a long line of Democrats who have been charged and arrested. Everything from fraud, to perjury, to sexual misconduct have headlined the news on these politicians. Taxpayers have forked over an immense amount to try Democrats for crimes they committed while serving as “public officials.” It’s beginning to look like there are so few honest Democrats out there that states such as Alabama have become a stomping ground for people like Worley.

During the four years she spent in office, she was challenged by numerous complaints. They ranged from charges of abusing her position by utilizing a gas-guzzling SUV that the state of Alabama paid for, to causing low morale among a number of employees who were very unhappy with her so-called leadership. One of those individuals was Ed Packard. “I’m hoping that what this means is that the law that protects state employees is going to be enforced.” I would love to know what he meant by that and exactly what she did to him.

The indictment charges that Worley broke the law previously in one instance for writing a letter to her employees basically demanding that they vote for her, “I want to ask for your support and your vote in the June 2006 Democratic Primary Election.” The unsaid message there is, vote for me if you value your job. And there were other allegations over the years as well. This same woman has the gall to rant about Republicans who were allegedly kicked out of or “ousted” from office in Alabama for misconduct. She used this faulty reasoning to tell Alabamans that is why they should vote Democrat.

Worley went on to say that she had always requested her employees not discriminate against anyone because of his or her politics, race, religion or social status. She said, “If you choose to support another candidate you have every right to make that decision without any problems from me.” Evidently, that turned out to not be true. You won’t be shocked in the least to know she’s a huge supporter of Hillary Clinton as well. She learned very well from her mentor.

Worley’s attorney of course claims the above statement means employees were not pressured into contributing to her campaign, but Packard and others certainly see it differently. “Aside from it being illegal it just seems wrong for an elected official to request money or other kinds of campaign support from their subordinates because of that employer-employee relationship that could be coercive just by its very nature,” he said. That’s got to be a violation of campaign laws in that state.

Packard also pointed to other items Worley sent employees, such as bumper stickers and an envelope to volunteer or request a yard sign. Packard says his complaint represents a number of workers who were reluctant to do anything about it. Because they were afraid they would lose their jobs. Sound familiar? “I didn’t have any reluctance to file a complaint because I believe it takes people standing up and doing the right thing if we expect the right things to happen,” he said. Good for him. That was the right thing to do, as well as the hard thing to do.

Nancy Worley faced five misdemeanor and five felony charges. In the end, she “entered a ‘best interest’ plea to one misdemeanor count… and prosecutors agreed to drop four other misdemeanors and five felony charges,” according to AL.com. AL.com also reported that: “The “best interest” plea that Worley entered is rarely used in Alabama and is different from a no contest plea. With a best interest plea, a defendant does not admit to doing anything wrong, but agrees that a guilty plea is in her best interest.” She did not want to go on camera to respond to the accusations against her, but she did say, quote, “This is happening to Democrats throughout the country who don’t bow down to Republicans.” No, this is happening to Democrats across the country because they are corrupt and break the law. No Republican made her do that. She is solely responsible for her own actions here.

Her attorney James Anderson poo-pooed the then indictments as, “Much ado about nothing.”

In 2017 AL.com reported that Worley had not paid the fines related to the 2012 case. A few weeks after that story was published, Worley paid up.

Funny how Democratic politicians just keep getting away with their crimes isn’t it?

EDITORS NOTE: on 6/19/2018: Factcheck.org noted that our headline & story was misleading, we have updated both. We rewrote sections that contained outdated & incorrect information, and we have included the fact that all charges were dropped except one & that Worley pleaded guilty to that misdemeanor. We removed wording that indicated she was handcuffed or imprisoned & replaced it with the fact that she turned herself in & was released on bond. All parts of the story that indicated that this was a recent event have been removed & the correct timeline has been noted. In addition, our Facebook post for the story contained an unrelated photo of Nancy Pelosi who in 2007 was Speaker of the House. We have corrected the image. Also, we made an addition to the story noting that as of early March 2017 Worley hadn’t paid the fines related to the 2012 case and that she did pay them a few weeks after a story ran about it on AL.com. To read more information about what FactCheck.org wrote about our piece please click here