Mueller’s Insane Net Worth Just Uncovered And Everyone Wants To Know Where It’s From – Hillary?
In case you had any doubt as to Robert Mueller’s integrity, we now may be looking at confirmation of who he really is. And how crooked he really is.

Although the Democrats in the left wing media keep trying to convince us Robert Mueller is a stand-up guy, Red State Wave is now reporting that his bank statements may be saying otherwise.

The report is alleging that Mueller’s Net Worth is $18 million dollars while he earns an annual income of $2 million dollars. This would mean he has seen a hike of 64% over the past few years.

Mueller is an American attorney who was the sixth Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation but also keep in mind that the former FBI boss James Comey was only earning a salary of $172,000.

The website, finapp.co.in also goes on to claim that Mueller owns 4 luxury cars worth $740,000 and $8.4 million in various other investments.

“The highest level of bias I’ve ever witnessed in any law enforcement officer.” Trey Gowdy on the FBI’s own, Peter Strzok. Also remember that they all worked for Slippery James Comey and that Comey is best friends with Robert Mueller. A really sick deal, isn’t it? — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 18, 2018

Conservative Fighters reports:

“As the Russia probe moves forward, more and more dirty details on Robert Mueller are emerging.

The day it was announced that Mueller was leading the Russia investigation, Julian Assange released a Wikileaks bombshell.

The Wikileaks document showed that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton ordered Mueller to deliver a sample of stolen Highly Enriched Uranium (HEU) to Russia in 2009.

As more information comes to light, it has become clear that the only “Russian ties” have been on the Democrats’ side, and had nothing to do with President Trump or his family.

The left overplayed their hand, and had they not screamed and yelled about Russia-related conspiracy theories as loudly and often as they did, the American people might not be so keen to the fact that Democrats, not Republicans, are the ones who’ve been involved in shady dealings with Russia.

Robert Mueller should never have been allowed to serve as the head of the “Special Counsel” witch hunt against President Trump, simply based on his close ties with James Comey and the Clinton family, and should be investigated himself…

From Infowars

Assange’s email signaled an investigation is needed into Mueller and his complex involvement with Russia and Uranium One, the company Bill Clinton promoted with Canadian entrepreneur Frank Giustra while Hillary Clinton served as Obama secretary of state in a criminal saga that ended up with Secretary Clinton voting to give the Russian State Atomic Nuclear Energy Agency, Rosatom, control of approximately 20 percent of all uranium holdings in the United States.

Mueller’s involvement in the Clintons’ drive to profit from selling 20 percent of U.S. uranium to Vladimir Putin’s Russian government should properly make him the target of a Department of Justice grand jury convened to examine the Clintons’ involvement with Uranium One, thereby disqualifying him from serving as Special Counsel appointed to examine the “no evidence” Democratic meme that the Trump campaign “colluded” with Russia to steal the election from Hillary Clinton.

The Uranium One saga

The complex saga involves Uranium One, a company created by Canadian entrepreneur Frank Giustra, in conjunction with former president Bill Clinton, in a deal that began in 2005 when Guistra and Clinton decided to corner the uranium market in Kazakhstan and ended up with the Clinton Foundation receiving $500,000 to give a speech in Moscow, with the speaking fee paid by Renaissance Capital, RenCap, a Cyprus-registered corporation controlled by former Russian intelligence officers with close ties to Russian president Vladimir Putin.

Along the way, Clinton secretly established WJC, LLC, a limited liability company registered in Delaware using his initials as a code easily recognized by Clinton family members to serve as a “shell corporation” through which Giustra (and others) could make under-the-table money-laundered cash and stock payments to Clinton for services rendered, while various Canadian entrepreneurs made millions of dollars in mostly anonymous contributions shuffled to the Clinton Foundation in New York City via Clinton Giustra Sustainable Growth Initiative (CGSGI) in Canada.”

When did it become so lucrative to be a public servant? Back in the day, people used to get a job in government and they knew they were trading off not making as much money for security and a decent pension. Today when you get a job in the public sector you are guaranteed more money, benefits and a better pension than anyone else in the private sector, plus you don’t even have to work as hard or as often as people in the private sector. This needs to stop.

Not completely sure where Mueller’s millions came from and I’m not ready to make accusations but isn’t it about time we investigate the investigator? This man has spent the last year trying to take down our president over a fake narrative invented by Hillary Clinton and the others at the DNC, the least we should know about him is where his money originated from. Don’t you agree?