Black Panthers Protest Throughout Atlanta On Midterm Election Day
The election for Georgia governor is one of the tightest races in the country for the 2018 midterm elections. Tensions have been running high from Democrats in the weeks leading up to today who will stop at nothing to ensure their candidate, Stacey Abrams wins.

The Black Panthers made their presence known Sunday as groups of them showed up around Atlanta, armed to the teeth with rifles and ready for war. The intimidation tactic has now taken a major turn overnight as the group swelled in size and is now marching throughout the city on election, in support of Abrams.

Young Conservatives has the report of whats’s happening now at this election battleground:

Stacey Abrams is running for governor as a Democrat in Georgia and she’s been running as your typical Democrat. Hates Trump. Hates guns. Loves taxes. Loves ignoring immigration law. And so on. As far as the guns go, she even suggested that Georgians might need to turn their guns in if she becomes governor.

I'm confused why heavily armed #BlackPanthers are intimidating voters to help @staceyabrams win the #Midterms2018 when she intends to take people's guns. They don't know what they're voting for and I doubt they even voted.#ElectionDay2018 #ElectionDay #Election2018 @BrianKempGA — Amanda Shea (@TheAmandaShea) November 6, 2018

Obviously that’s an insane position especially in a place like Georgia but if she’s really worried about guns she might want to check in on her own supporters.

From Western Journal:

Members of the Black Panther Party marched through the city of Atlanta, strapped with assault rifles and brandishing Stacey Abrams campaign signs.

In a video posted on the group’s Facebook page on Saturday, members of the Black Panther Party are seen marching through the West End neighborhood of Atlanta in support of Stacey Abrams gubernatorial campaign. As they marched, the Black Panthers carried assault rifles and continually shouted slogans such as “black power” and “power to the people.”

From The Daily Caller:

When reached for comment by The Daily Caller News Foundation, the Abrams campaign forwarded a statement from spokeswoman Abigail Collazo. Her statement did not specifically address the Panthers’ march, but instead attacked Kemp.

“Brian Kemp is the only candidate in this race who has posed for pictures with supporters wearing racist, hate-filled t-shirts and refused to denounce them, while Abrams continues to condemn any racist, anti-Semitic, or otherwise discriminatory words and actions,” Collazo said.

That’s nice. Always helpful to have an organization that supports and has carried out the execution of police officers marching with guns to support you.

You think those guys know that Abrams wants to take their guns? Probably not.

EDITOR’S NOTE 11/13/2018: An original version of this story was headlined that the Black Panthers had taken over the city and there would soon be an all out war on election day. This was flagged by Politifact as false, That insinuation has now been corrected. The group had a non-violent presence in Atlanta, and were out in support of Democratic gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams. However, initially the headline was implying a ‘war’ as in protest’s and fights for the battle as in election campaigning was taking place. In context to the matter no war ever breaks out in the USA, and the article states that this is “now at this election battleground”.