Climate Models, Scenarios, and Projections
4.2: Future Scenarios Climate projections are typically presented for a range of plausible pathways, scenarios, or targets that capture the relationships between human choices, emissions, concentrations, and temperature change. Some scenarios are consistent with continued dependence on fossil fuels, while others can only be achieved by deliberate actions to reduce emissions. The resulting range reflects the uncertainty inherent in quantifying human activities (including technological change) and their influence on climate. The first Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Assessment Report (IPCC FAR) in 1990 discussed three types of scenarios: equilibrium scenarios, in which CO 2 concentration was fixed; transient scenarios, in which CO 2 concentration increased by a fixed percentage each year over the duration of the scenario; and four brand-new Scientific Assessment (SA90) emission scenarios based on World Bank population projections.16 Today, that original portfolio has expanded to encompass a wide variety of time-dependent or transient scenarios that project how population, energy sources, technology, emissions, atmospheric concentrations, radiative forcing, and/or global temperature change over time. Other scenarios are simply expressed in terms of an end-goal or target, such as capping cumulative carbon emissions at a specific level or stabilizing global temperature at or below a certain threshold such as 3.6°F (2°C), a goal that is often cited in a variety of scientific and policy discussions, most recently the Paris Agreement.17 To stabilize climate at any particular temperature level, however, it is not enough to halt the growth in annual carbon emissions. Global net carbon emissions will eventually need to reach zero3 and negative emissions may be needed for a greater-than-50% chance of limiting warming below 3.6°F (2°C) (see also Ch. 14: Mitigation for a discussion of negative emissions).18 Finally, some scenarios, like the “commitment” scenario in Key Finding 1 and the fixed-CO 2 equilibrium scenarios described above, continue to explore hypothetical questions such as, “what would the world look like, long-term, if humans were able to stabilize atmospheric CO 2 concentration at a given level?” This section describes the different types of scenarios used today and their relevance to assessing impacts and informing policy targets. 4.2.1 Emissions Scenarios, Representative Concentration Pathways, and Shared Socioeconomic Pathways The standard sets of time-dependent scenarios used by the climate modeling community as input to global climate model simulations provide the basis for the majority of the future projections presented in IPCC assessment reports and U.S. National Climate Assessments (NCAs). Developed by the integrated assessment modeling community, these sets of standard scenarios have become more comprehensive with each new generation, as the original SA90 scenarios19 were replaced by the IS92 emission scenarios of the 1990s,20 which were in turn succeeded by the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios in 2000 (SRES)21 and by the Representative Concentration Pathways in 2010 (RCPs).22 SA90, IS92, and SRES are all emission-based scenarios. They begin with a set of storylines that were based on population projections initially. By SRES, they had become much more complex, laying out a consistent picture of demographics, international trade, flow of information and technology, and other social, technological, and economic characteristics of future worlds. These assumptions were then fed through socioeconomic and Integrated Assessment Models (IAMs) to derive emissions. For SRES, the use of various IAMs resulted in multiple emissions scenarios corresponding to each storyline; however, one scenario for each storyline was selected as the representative “marker” scenario to be used as input to global models to calculate the resulting atmospheric concentrations, radiative forcing, and climate change for the higher A1FI (fossil-intensive), mid-high A2, mid-low B2, and lower B1 storylines. IS92-based projections were used in the IPCC Second and Third Assessment Reports (SAR and TAR)23 ,24 and the first NCA.25 Projections based on SRES scenarios were used in the second and third NCAs26 ,27 as well as the IPCC TAR and Fourth Assessment Reports (AR4).24 ,28 The most recent set of time-dependent scenarios, RCPs, builds on these two decades of scenario development. However, RCPs differ from previous sets of standard scenarios in at least four important ways. First, RCPs are not emissions scenarios; they are radiative forcing scenarios. Each scenario is tied to one value: the change in radiative forcing at the tropopause by 2100 relative to preindustrial levels. The four RCPs are numbered according to the change in radiative forcing by 2100: +2.6, +4.5, +6.0 and +8.5 watts per square meter (W/m2).29 ,30 ,31 ,32 The second difference is that, starting from these radiative forcing values, IAMs are used to work backwards to derive a range of emissions trajectories and corresponding policies and technological strategies for each RCP that would achieve the same ultimate impact on radiative forcing. From the multiple emissions pathways that could lead to the same 2100 radiative forcing value, an associated pathway of annual carbon dioxide and other anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases, aerosols, air pollutants, and other short-lived species has been selected for each RCP to use as input to future climate model simulations (e.g., Meinshausen et al. 2011;33 Cubasch et al. 201334 ). In addition, RCPs provide climate modelers with gridded trajectories of land use and land cover. A third difference between the RCPs and previous scenarios is that while none of the SRES scenarios included a scenario with explicit policies and measures to limit climate forcing, all of the three lower RCP scenarios (2.6, 4.5, and 6.0) are climate-policy scenarios. At the higher end of the range, the RCP8.5 scenario corresponds to a future where carbon dioxide and methane emissions continue to rise as a result of fossil fuel use, albeit with significant declines in emission growth rates over the second half of the century (Figure 4.1), significant reduction in aerosols, and modest improvements in energy intensity and technology.32 Atmospheric carbon dioxide levels for RCP8.5 are similar to those of the SRES A1FI scenario: they rise from current-day levels of 400 up to 936 ppm (ppm) by the end of this century. CO 2 -equivalent levels (including emissions of other non-CO 2 greenhouse gases, aerosols, and other substances that affect climate) reach more than 1200 ppm by 2100, and global temperature is projected to increase by 5.4°–9.9°F (3°–5.5°C) by 2100 relative to the 1986–2005 average. RCP8.5 reflects the upper range of the open literature on emissions, but is not intended to serve as an upper limit on possible emissions nor as a business-as-usual or reference scenario for the other three scenarios. Under the lower scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP2.6),29 ,30 atmospheric CO 2 levels remain below 550 and 450 ppm by 2100, respectively. Emissions of other substances are also lower; by 2100, CO 2 -equivalent concentrations that include all emissions from human activities reach 580 ppm under RCP4.5 and 425 ppm under RCP2.6. RCP4.5 is similar to SRES B1, but the RCP2.6 scenario is much lower than any SRES scenario because it includes the option of using policies to achieve net negative carbon dioxide emissions before the end of the century, while SRES scenarios do not. RCP-based projections were used in the most recent IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5)3 and the third NCA27 and are used in this fourth NCA as well. Within the RCP family, individual scenarios have not been assigned a formal likelihood. Higher-numbered scenarios correspond to higher emissions and a larger and more rapid global temperature change (Figure 4.1); the range of values covered by the scenarios was chosen to reflect the then-current range in the open literature. Since the choice of scenario constrains the magnitudes of future changes, most assessments (including this one; see Ch. 6: Temperature Change) quantify future change and corresponding impacts under a range of future scenarios that reflect the uncertainty in the consequences of human choices over the coming century. Fourth, a broad range of socioeconomic scenarios were developed independently from the RCPs and a subset of these were constrained, using emissions limitations policies consistent with their underlying storylines, to create five Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) with climate forcing that matches the RCP values. This pairing of SSPs and RCPs is designed to meet the needs of the impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability (IAV) communities, enabling them to couple alternative socioeconomic scenarios with the climate scenarios developed using RCPs to explore the socioeconomic challenges to climate mitigation and adaptation.35 The five SSPs consist of SSP1 (“Sustainability”; low challenges to mitigation and adaptation), SSP2 (“Middle of the Road”; middle challenges to mitigation and adaptation), SSP3 (“Regional Rivalry”; high challenges to mitigation and adaptation), SSP4 (“Inequality”; low challenges to mitigation, high challenges to adaptation), and SSP5 (“Fossil-fueled Development”; high challenges to mitigation, low challenges to adaptation). Each scenario has an underlying SSP narrative, as well as consistent assumptions regarding demographics, urbanization, economic growth, and technology development. Only SSP5 produces a reference scenario that is consistent with RCP8.5; climate forcing in the other SSPs’ reference scenarios that don’t include climate policy remains below 8.5 W/m2. In addition, the nature of SSP3 makes it impossible for that scenario to produce a climate forcing as low as 2.6 W/m2. While new research is under way to explore scenarios that limit climate forcing to 2.0 W/m2, neither the RCPs nor the SSPs have produced scenarios in that range. Figure 4.1 VIEW 4.2.2 Alternative Scenarios The emissions and radiative forcing scenarios described above include a component of time: how much will climate change, and by when? Ultimately, however, the magnitude of human-induced climate change depends less on the year-to-year emissions than it does on the net amount of carbon, or cumulative carbon, emitted into the atmosphere. The lower the atmospheric concentrations of CO 2 , the greater the chance that eventual global temperature change will not reach the high end temperature projections, or possibly remain below 3.6°F (2°C) relative to preindustrial levels. Cumulative carbon targets offer an alternative approach to expressing a goal designed to limit global temperature to a certain level. As discussed in Chapter 14: Mitigation, it is possible to quantify the expected amount of carbon that can be emitted globally in order to meet a specific global warming target such as 3.6°F (2°C) or even 2.7°F (1.5°C)—although if current carbon emission rates of just under 10 GtC per year were to continue, the lower target would be reached in a matter of years. The higher target would be reached in a matter of decades (see Ch. 14: Mitigation). Under a lower scenario (RCP4.5), global temperature change is more likely than not to exceed 3.6°F (2°C),3 ,36 whereas under the even lower scenario (RCP2.6), it is likely to remain below 3.6°F (2°C).3 ,37 While new research is under way to explore scenarios consistent with limiting climate forcing to 2.0 W/m2, a level consistent with limiting global mean surface temperature change to 2.7°F (1.5°C), neither the RCPs nor the SSPs have produced scenarios that allow for such a small amount of temperature change (see also Ch. 14: Mitigation).37 Figure 4.2 VIEW Future projections are most commonly summarized for a given future scenario (for example, RCP8.5 or 4.5) over a range of future climatological time periods (for example, temperature change in 2040–2079 or 2070–2099 relative to 1980–2009). While this approach has the advantage of developing projections for a specific time horizon, uncertainty in future projections is relatively high, incorporating both the uncertainty due to multiple scenarios as well as uncertainty regarding the response of the climate system to human emissions. These uncertainties increase the further out in time the projections go. Using these same transient, scenario-based simulations, however, it is possible to analyze the projected changes for a given global mean temperature (GMT) threshold by extracting a time slice (typically 20 years) centered around the point in time at which that change is reached (Figure 4.2). Derived GMT scenarios offer a way for the public and policymakers to understand the impacts for any given temperature threshold, as many physical changes and impacts have been shown to scale with global mean surface temperature, including shifts in average precipitation, extreme heat, runoff, drought risk, wildfire, temperature-related crop yield changes, and even risk of coral bleaching (e.g., NRC 2011;38 Collins et al. 2013;3 Frieler et al. 2013;39 Swain and Hayhoe 201540 ). They also allow scientists to highlight the effect of global mean temperature on projected regional change by de-emphasizing the uncertainty due to both climate sensitivity and future scenarios.40 ,41 This approach is less useful for those impacts that vary based on rate of change, such as species migrations, or where equilibrium changes are very different from transient effects, such as sea level rise. Pattern scaling techniques42 are based on a similar assumption to GMT scenarios, namely that large-scale patterns of regional change will scale with global temperature change. These techniques can be used to quantify regional projections for scenarios that are not readily available in preexisting databases of global climate model simulations, including changes in both mean and extremes (e.g., Fix et al. 201643 ). A comprehensive assessment both confirms and constrains the validity of applying pattern scaling to quantify climate response to a range of projected future changes.44 For temperature-based climate targets, these pattern scaling frames or GMT scenarios offer the basis for more consistent comparisons across studies examining regional change or potential risks and impacts. 4.2.3 Analogs from the Paleoclimate Record Most CMIP5 simulations project transient changes in climate through 2100; a few simulations extend to 2200, 2300, or beyond. However, as discussed in Chapter 2: Physical Drivers of Climate Change, the long-term impact of human activities on the carbon cycle and Earth’s climate over the next few decades and for the remainder of this century can only be assessed by considering changes that occur over multiple centuries and even millennia.38 In the past, there have been several examples of “hothouse” climates where carbon dioxide concentrations and/or global mean temperatures were similar to preindustrial, current, or plausible future levels. These periods are sometimes referenced as analogs, albeit imperfect and incomplete, of future climate (e.g., Crowley 199010 ), though comparing climate model simulations to geologic reconstructions of temperature and carbon dioxide during these periods suggests that today’s global climate models tend to underestimate the magnitude of change in response to higher CO 2 (see Ch. 15: Potential Surprises). The last interglacial period, approximately 125,000 years ago, is known as the Eemian. During that time, CO 2 concentration was similar to preindustrial concentrations, around 280 ppm.45 Global mean temperature was approximately 1.8°–3.6°F (1°–2°C) higher than preindustrial temperatures,46 ,47 although the poles were significantly warmer 48 ,49 and sea level was 6 to 9 meters (20 to 30 feet) higher than today.50 During the Pliocene, approximately 3 million years ago, long-term CO 2 concentration was similar to today’s, around 400 ppm51 —although this level was sustained over long periods of time, whereas today the global CO 2 concentration is increasing rapidly. At that time, global mean temperature was approximately 3.6°–6.3°F (2°–3.5°C) above preindustrial, and sea level was somewhere between 66 ± 33 feet (20 ± 10 meters) higher than today.52 ,53 ,54 Under the higher scenario (RCP8.5), CO 2 concentrations are projected to reach 936 ppm by 2100. During the Eocene, 35 to 55 million years ago, CO 2 levels were between 680 and 1260 ppm, or somewhere between two and a half to four and a half times higher than preindustrial levels.55 If Eocene conditions are used as an analog, this suggests that if the CO 2 concentrations projected to occur under the RCP8.5 scenario by 2100 were sustained over long periods of time, global temperatures would be approximately 9°–14°F (5°–8°C) above preindustrial temperatures.56 During the Eocene, there were no permanent land-based ice sheets; Antarctic glaciation did not begin until approximately 34 million years ago.57 Calibrating sea level rise models against past climate suggests that, under the RCP8.5 scenario, Antarctica could contribute 3 feet (1 meter) of sea level rise by 2100 and 50 feet (15 meters) by 2500.58 If atmospheric CO 2 were sustained at levels approximately two to three times above preindustrial for tens of thousands of years, it is estimated that Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets could melt entirely,59 resulting in approximately 215 feet (65 meters) of sea level rise.60

References