ActBlue — About
Innovative tools + the power of millions

ActBlue is a nonprofit, building fundraising technology for the left. Our mission is to democratize power and help small-dollar donors make their voices heard in a real way.

We develop top-of-the-line fundraising software and offer simple, intuitive tools to help campaigns and organizations connect with new and existing grassroots donors. As a result, nonprofits thrive and Democratic campaigns get more donations through ActBlue than any other platform. Together, we build powerful movements.

How do we make that happen? Well, first we test and retest our contribution forms to maximize conversion rates. We make it as easy as possible to give, no matter where the donor is, or on what device they’re using. And we make it free for campaigns and organizations — no tricks or add-ons. And with a top-notch tech team, our tools are always dependable, and we’re always working to upgrade them.

That’s why a majority of Democratic Senate and House campaigns — along with the DCCC, DSCC, DGA, over one-third of statewide campaigns, and advocacy organizations around the country — have chosen ActBlue.

But we’re so much more than a toolset.

Together, we’ve raised 3,507,599,996 dollars for Democrats and progressive causes in just 14 years. We’ve built more than just a fundraising platform. We’ve created the kind of grassroots power that can take on, and beat back, the power of corporate spending and secretive super PACs.

And that’s the difference that ActBlue makes to candidates, organizations, and the supporters who champion them.

The fine print we’re willing to shout from the rooftops:

ActBlue acts as a conduit federally and in most states, which means we provide the infrastructure for campaigns and organizations to fundraise online, but we don’t fundraise on behalf of anyone. Unlike groups that spend large sums of cash from undisclosed sources, ActBlue offers grassroots donors a way to give fully disclosed donations to the candidates and causes they choose.