Robert L. Gallucci
Distinguished Professor in the Practice of Diplomacy

Ambassador Gallucci served as Dean of the School of Foreign Service for 13 years until he left in July 2009, to become president of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. He was appointed dean in 1996, after 21 years of distinguished service in a variety of government positions, focusing on international security. As Ambassador-at-Large and Special Envoy for the U.S. Department of State, he dealt with the threats posed by the proliferation of ballistic missiles and weapons of mass destruction. He was chief U.S. negotiator during the North Korean nuclear crisis of 1994, and served as Assistant Secretary of State for Political Military Affairs and as Deputy Executive Chairman of the UN Special Commission overseeing the disarmament of Iraq following the first Gulf War. Ambassador Gallucci earned his Bachelor’s degree at the State University of New York at Stony Brook and his Master’s and Doctoral degrees at Brandeis University.

During his tenure as dean, Gallucci led in the creation of the School of Foreign Service in Qatar and helped raise Georgetown Masters programs in international affairs to number one ranking and the undergraduate program to number four as reported by Foreign Policy magazine. He also oversaw the creation of the Program for Jewish Civilization, an interdisciplinary research and teaching center, and the Mortara Center for International Studies, whose mission is to bring together scholars and policy makers in this important arena.

Ph.D (1974) Brandeis University, Politics

M.A. (1968 ) Brandeis University, Politics

B.A. (1967 ) State University of New York at Stony Brook

Publications:

Going Critical: The First North Korean Nuclear Crisis, with Joel S. Wit and Daniel B. Poneman (The Brookings Institution, April 2004).

Neither Peace Nor Honor: The Politics of American Military Policy in Viet-Nam (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1975).

“North Korea, Iran and the Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons: The Threat, U.S. Policy and the Prescription… and the India Deal,” in Stephen van Evera, ed., How to Make America Safe (Cambridge, MA: The Tobin Project, 2006), pp. 23-32.

“Averting Nuclear Catastrophe: Contemplating Extreme Responses to U.S. Vulnerability,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 607 (September 2006), pp. 51-58.

“America Deals with North Korea: A Realist’s Approach,” in Perspectives on Structural Realism, Andrew K. Hanami (Ed.) (Palgrave Macmillan, 2003).

“Weighing Sovereignty in the ‘Sit Room:’ Does It Enter or End the Debate?” in The Sacred and The Sovereign: Rethinking Religion and International Politics, John Carlson and Erik Owens, Eds. (Georgetown University Press, 2003).

“A Question of Strategic Nuclear Weapons Policy,” Review Essay in Naval War College Review (Winter 2002).

“Negotiating Korean Unification: Options for an International Framework,” in Korea’s Future and the Great Powers, Nicholas Eberstadt and Richard J. Ellings, Eds. (National Bureau of Asian Research, 2001).

“The U.S. – North Korea Agreed Framework and the Korea Policy of the United States,” in The Two Koreas and the United States (M.E. Sharpe Inc., 2000).

“U.S. Nonproliferation Policy: Lessons Learned from Our Experience with Iraq and North Korea,” in Pulling Back From the Nuclear Brink: Reducing and Countering Nuclear Threats (Frank Cass Publishers, 1998).

“Limiting U.S. Policy Options to Prevent Nuclear Weapons Proliferation: The Relevance of Minimum Deterrence” (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Center for Technical Studies on Security, Energy, and Arms Control, 1991).

“Factors Influencing the Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,” in Brito and Intriligator (eds.), Strategies for Managing Nuclear Proliferation: Economic and Political Issues (Lexington Books, 1983).

“Western Europe,” in Williams and Desse (eds.), Nuclear Non-Proliferation: The Spent Fuel Problem (Pergamon Policy Studies, 1979).