Texas Senate approves $4.6 billion tax cut package
The Texas Senate approved a bipartisan, but divisive tax cut package Wednesday worth more than $4.6 billion, sending the four-part plan to the Texas House, where it looks to face significant opposition.

With scant debate, the upper chamber handily approved legislation that would reduce school property tax bills for homeowners by more than $200 a year on average and slash the business franchise tax rate by 15 percent, as well as exempt an additional 61,000 smaller businesses from paying it.

Unlike a lot of major legislation, the package — championed by Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, who presides over the Senate — made it through the upper chamber without being significantly amended, although there were a few attempts to do so Wednesday, mostly by Democrats.

Patrick, a non-voting member, made his position clear in a later statement, which was headlined "TODAY MARKS THE BEGINNING OF THE END OF THE FRANCHISE TAX."

The bill that won the most support Wednesday was Senate Bill 1, filed by Sen. Jane Nelson, R-Flower Mound, which would cut school property taxes by more than $2 billion by altering the state’s mandatory homestead exemption, which has been a flat $15,000 since 1997. The measure, which would require voter approval as it would amend the state constitution, calls for an exemption equal to 25 percent of the statewide median home value, meaning it would increase or decrease as that number goes up or down.

It is expected to save homeowners $206 on average in 2016 and $233 on average in 2017.

State Sen. Kirk Watson, D-Austin, is among the five Senate Democrats co-authoring the measure and expressed support for it again Wednesday — contending that Central Texas homeowners are struggling with skyrocketing property tax bills — but he also reiterated a concern that it could negatively affect school funding.

Big business groups representing oil and gas, manufacturing and other industries have opposed the measure, along with the others in the package, saying the homestead exemption provision would increasingly shift the tax burden to businesses. They also have said they’d rather see reductions to business property taxes than the franchise tax, which smaller business — which are mostly happy with the Senate package — dislike.

The property tax cut measure is sure to face opposition in the Texas House, where GOP leaders also have promised to deliver more than $4 billion in tax cuts but say they want to cut the sales, rather than property, tax because they say it would provide more meaningful relief.

Both chambers appear poised to approve business tax cuts after Gov. Greg Abbott vowed last month to veto a budget that does not include them.

State Rep. Dennis Bonnen, R-Angleton, chairman of the tax policy-writing House Ways and Means Committee, said Wednesday he would unveil a $4.8 billion tax cut package next week that reduces the sales and franchise taxes.