Cathy Jordan, Florida Medical Marijuana Activist, Is Suing Manatee County Sheriff
President of the Florida Cannabis Action Network Cathy Jordan is suing Manatee County Sheriff Brad Steube for wrongful conduct after cops raided the her home like a SWAT team crashing into Pablo Escobar's mansion back in February.

Back on February 15, cops swarmed Jordan's home after a government employee who wasn't even visiting her spotted some marijuana plants on Jordan's property.

Turns out, Jordan is wheelchair bound and has been battling Lou Gehrig's disease since 1986. She uses marijuana as treatment.

On April 2, the State Attorney's office in Manatee County decided to drop the charges against Cathy's husband, Robert, who owns the home.

The case was dropped once it was established that Cathy needs marijuana for medical reasons.

Still, the sheriff's department has refused to return any of the cannabis confiscated from the Jordan's home.

Now Cathy is fighting back, because having cops treating people's homes like a drug czar's lair for no real reason is Orwellian and dumb.

The goal of the lawsuit is to get a declaratory judgment for the Jordans finding that they have a legal right to cultivate and possess medical marijuana under Florida law; an injunction barring the sheriff's department from making further seizures of medical marijuana from Cathy and Robert Jordan; and an injunction barring the initiation of criminal charges against either of the plaintiffs for their continued cultivation and possession of medical marijuana.

Norm Kent, a lawyer from Ft. Lauderdale, and chairman of National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), will be representing Jordan.

Meanwhile, the Cathy Jordan Medical Cannabis Act, a bill that would have legalized medical marijuana in Florida, was shot down by the legislature.

So now legal fees and time will be essentially wasted because cops raided the home of a law abiding wheel chair bound woman like she was a criminal cartel mastermind.

Follow Chris Joseph on Twitter