Exclusive: Donald Trump on Southern Border: 'Nobody can build a fence like me'
In an exclusive interview, Donald Trump says he would build a top notch fence along the southern border and have Mexico pay for it.

“Nobody can build a fence like me,” Trump tells The Brody File. “I would build a wall like nobody can build a wall. And nobody comes in illegally anymore…I build great buildings all over the world. I would have Mexico pay for it. Believe me. They will pay for it because they have really ripped this country off,” he said.

Watch below with a transcription.

MANDATORY COURTESY: CBN NEWS/THE BRODY FILE

Donald Trump: Now the southern border everybody comes in. You just walk by. So we are taking hundreds of thousands of people. Some good people and some rapists and some killers and drug lords and everyone else and they are flowing through the southern border. I would build a wall like nobody can build a wall. And nobody comes in illegally anymore.

David Brody: You scratch your head about this fence. Everybody talks ‘build a fence, build a fence,’ and nothing getting done.

Trump: Nobody can build a fence like me, David. You know that. I build great buildings all over the world. I would have Mexico pay for it. Believe me. They will pay for it because they have really ripped this country off. They have really taken advantage of us both economically and at the border. They will pay for that fence.

Brody File Analysis:

Hey look, you may not think of Donald Trump and evangelicals as being the perfect fit but that would be a lazy misread of the situation. I’m not saying Trump is a hit with all evangelicals. I know his egotism can rub some the wrong way. But let me clue you in to a little secret: Trump's ability to cut through the clutter and paint the world in “absolutes” attracts quite a few evangelical voters.

Remember, evangelicals hold true to their “biblical absolutes” so to see a person like Trump let it rip and tell it like it is becomes a somewhat endearing quality to some evangelicals. Trump takes hits for his boldness and evangelicals take hits from society for their biblical boldness too.

See the parallel? Those who think Trump would just be a presidential sideshow may want to think again if he jumps in. Let’s be honest: he has a huge megaphone and so he’s going to make news wherever he goes. Trump’s challenge (if he gets in) will be to lay out a cohesive message that becomes less about him and his personality and more about the voters he's looking to attract.

I think a "Donald Trump Listening Tour Across America" would be in order. This way Trump makes voters the priority. It would throw the media off their tired narrative and give Trump the upper hand. Having the upper hand is always good in business negotiations and, to coin a phrase, it can also be the “art of the deal’ in politics too.