ABC's '14 for 14' Hot Seat: Meet Mary Burke, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker's Worst Nightmare
Democrat Mary Burke is statistically tied in the latest polling with Wisconsin's Republican Gov. Scott Walker, who is often discussed as a possible contender for his party's nomination for president in 2016.

Burke, a Democrat whose family owns a successful bicycle business, is hoping to play spoiler in one of the most closely watched head-to-head races in the country this November. Recent polling from Marquette University Law School shows her with a one-point edge among likely voters, and within one point of Walker among registered voters.

The Wisconsin governor's race is part of ABC's "14 for 14? project, which is tracking key contests across the country between now and November.

ABC News conducted a rapid-fire question/answer session with Burke, delving into the candidate's thoughts on a range of topics, from her ties to Hartland, Wis. to forgiveness for future Packers Hall of Fame quarterback Brett Favre.

1. What's something voters don't know about you?

Well, I grew up in a small town in Wisconsin called Hartland and went to Swallow School and the big memory I have of Swallow is when one of the cows from the Vilter Farm got loose and ran out on to our playground. I'm a fourth-generation Wisconsinite. My great-grandparents were farmers and that's something that - those values drive me every single day.

2. What's something voters may not know about Gov. Scott Walker?

Some people are not aware that under Governor Walker our economy in Wisconsin is dead-last in the Midwest. Out of 10 Midwestern states, we're tenth in job creation under Scott Walker.

3. What do you think Gov. Walker believes about marriage equality?

He hasn't been straight with the voters in Wisconsin. He's been waffling on this issue and I think he owes it to the voters in Wisconsin to be clear about where he stands on the issue.

4. How much of your own money are you willing to put into your campaign?

Well, I've been pretty clear from the start. I will put into the race what I can of my own resources, but it's a fraction of what will be needed. Over 90 percent of my donations come of $100 or less, and we have had great success. So, I'm focused on raising the money to get my message out.

5. Should the Packers retire Brett Favre's jersey and induct him into the Hall of Fame? Yay or nay?

Definitely a 'yay.' Brett and his family have contributed a lot to Wisconsin, a lot to the winning tradition of the Packers, and I don't think we should be holding a grudge. I think we should be looking at all the contributions he made.

6. Spotted Cow or Summer Shandy?

Spotted Cow. New Glarus is a great brewery and Spotted Cow, you can only get it in Wisconsin and [it's] one of my favorites.

Get real-time election results and news about all the races you care about delivered right to your phone from now until November. To start, just "star" this story in ABC News' phone app. Download ABC News for iPhone here or ABC News for Android here.