Susan F. Wood -- Faculty Directory :: School of Public Health and Health Services :: George Washington University
Susan F. Wood, Ph.D.

Susan Wood is Associate Professor of Health Policy and of Environmental and Occupational Health. She is also the Executive Director of the Jacobs Institute of Women's Health.

On Capitol Hill, in the Department of Health and Human Services, and now at SPHHS's Project on Scientific Knowledge and Public Policy, in the Department of Health Policy, and the Jacobs Institute of Women's Health, Professor Susan Wood has dedicated her career to applying scientific evidence to health policy decision making. She joins the School from the FDA, where she was Assistant Commissioner for Women's Health and Director of the Office of Women's Health until 2005, when she resigned on principle over the continued delay in approving emergency over–the–counter contraception.



A long–time champion of women's health, Dr. Wood previously served as Director for Policy and Program Development at the U.S Department of Health and Human Services' Office on Women's Health. Prior to joining DHHS, Dr. Wood was an AAAS Congressional Fellow and then Deputy Director of the Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues. In that capacity, she was directly involved with policy initiatives and legislative proposals designed to advance biomedical research, women's health, family planning and health care reform. Professor Wood has been honored with the FDA Commissioner's Special Citation (2004), the DHHS Secretary's Distinguished Service Award (2003) and the Keystone Award in Women's Health Research (2000), among other awards.

Education

Bachelor of Science (Biology/Psychology), Southwestern at Memphis, 1980

Doctor of Philosophy (Biology), Boston University, 1989

Research Fellowship training (Neuroscience), Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1990

Research

Dr. Wood's expertise is women's health and the intersection of research, data and policymaking. In 2004, she received the Atlantic Fellowship in Public Policy to conduct research on women's health policy at the agency that regulates therapeutics in Great Britain. Prior to shifting focus to health policy, Dr. Wood engaged in basic biological research on the biochemistry of sensory transduction. She is the PI on the Scientists in Government Project, and co-PI on the DC Pharmaceutical Marketing project.

Community Service

As a board member of the National Women's Health Network, the Reproductive Health Technologies Project, the National Center for Research on Women and Families, the National Family Planning and Reproductive Health Association, WomenHeart, and a founding member of the board of advisors of Scientists and Engineers for America and a founding member and emeritus member of Women's Policy Inc., Dr. Wood maintains her focus on science-driven policy in public health. She has also served on the DHHS Coordinating Committee on Women's Health and on the Screening Committee of the Science Fellowship Program offered by the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Expertise

Environmental and Occupational Health

Maternal and Child Health

Women's Health

Departments

Institutes & Centers