Jerry Jones: 'Really disappointing' that NFL players are protesting national anthem
Dallas Cowboys' Dez Bryant, from left, head coach Jason Garrett and Jason Witten (82) stand during the playing of the national anthem before a preseason NFL football game against the Houston Texans on Thursday Sept. 1, 2016, in Arlington, Texas. (AP Photo/Michael Ainsworth)

Kaepernick, in the quarterback's own words, refuses to "show pride in a flag for a country that oppresses black people and people of color." Several players, including Kaepernick, knelt in protest during Week 1.

The number of NFL players doing so continues to increase. It started with San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick sitting during The Star-Spangled Banner before an Aug. 26 preseason game.

Jerry Jones is pleased that none of the Dallas Cowboys players or coaches have protested the national anthem. He's disappointed in those who have.

The Cowboys all stood while the national anthem played during their season opener Sunday afternoon.

"I got to give a big pat on the back to our entire team, our coaching staff, our entire organization," Jones said Tuesday morning on 105.3 The Fan's Shan and RJ show [KRLD-FM]. "We strongly, strongly support the flag. In every way, we support -- it's almost ridiculous to be saying it -- the people that for generations and generations have given it all up so we can get out here and show off in front of millions of people on television. We respect that so much. That's the real business.

"The forum of the NFL and the forum on television is a very significant thing. I'm for it being used in every way we can to support the great, great contributors in our society and that's people that have supported America, the flag, and there's no reason not to go all out right there. For anybody to use parts of that visibility to do otherwise is really disappointing."

Twitter: @jonmachota

Get the latest Cowboys news here | Follow dmn_cowboys on Twitter | Like our Cowboys Facebook page here