Baker Institute Blog
NOTE: The Baker Institute is responsible for this content, which is not edited by the Chronicle.

« Lessons from a mosque | Main | A Houston connection for a terrorism suspect? »

July 08, 2010

How liberal or conservative is your Texas state representative?

Political scientists have long used roll call votes cast by members of the U.S. Congress to plot legislators on the liberal-conservative (Lib-Cons) dimension along which most legislative politics in our nation's capitol takes place. Here, I provide similar information for members of the Texas House of Representatives for the 2009-2010 legislative session, ranked from 1 (most liberal) to 150 (most conservative), calculated using the DW-NOMINATE procedure developed by Professors Keith Poole and Howard Rosenthal.

While there are a host of interesting insights that can be drawn from these data, here I restrict my comments to four:

First, indicative of the high degree of partisan polarization currently present in the Texas House (a topic I will explore in a future entry), there exists no overlap among the Democratic and Republican representatives. The most conservative Democrat (Allan Ritter) is still significantly more liberal than the most liberal Republican (Tommy Merritt).

Second, three of the four most liberal Republicans will no longer be members of the Texas House in January 2011 (Delwin Jones and Tommy Merritt were defeated in the Republican primary, and Brian McCall resigned), while one of the four most conservative Democrats (Charles "Chuck" Hopson) switched to the Republican Party after the 2009 regular session. These three departures and one switch reflect a continuation of the gradual extinction of conservative Democrats and liberal Republicans that has taken place over the past 30 years in Texas.

Third, in contrast to his predecessor (former Speaker Tom Craddick, ranking of 125), Speaker Joe Straus, a Republican, has a relatively liberal Lib-Cons Score (ranking of 84). Only nine other Republicans possess a Lib-Cons Score that is lower (more liberal) than Straus', while 65 have higher scores (more conservative). Given the origins of Straus's election as speaker (i.e., based on the support of most Democrats and a handful of Republicans) this location is not surprising, but does leave him potentially vulnerable in the January 2011 speaker's race to a more conservative challenger. (That said, at present Straus is expected be re-elected as speaker).

Fourth, representatives from the Houston area are spread across the Lib-Cons spectrum (in the table, Houston-area Democrats are in blue and Republicans in red). Some of the House's most liberal (Garnet Coleman, Jessica Farrar) and conservative (Randy Weber, Debbie Riddle) members are from the Houston area; Weber is ranked as the most conservative member of the House (the most liberal member is Yvonne Davis of Dallas).

Most Liberal Representatives

Ranking Representative Lib-Cons Score Political Party Intra-Party Group 1 Yvonne Davis -0.712 Democrat Very Liberal 2 Abel Herrero -0.702 Democrat Very Liberal 3 Garnet Coleman -0.701 Democrat Very Liberal 4 Jessica Farrar -0.701 Democrat Very Liberal 5 David Leibowitz -0.700 Democrat Very Liberal

Most Conservative Representatives

Ranking Representative Lib-Cons Score Political Party Intra-Party Group 146 Dan Flynn 0.868 Republican Very Conservative 147 Debbie Riddle 0.873 Republican Very Conservative 148 Linda Harper-Brown 0.882 Republican Very Conservative 149 Sid Miller 0.885 Republican Very Conservative 150 Randy Weber 0.900 Republican Very Conservative

Download the full table with information on all 150 representatives (PDF).

Methodology Representatives who cast roll call votes during the 2009-10 session are listed below, including those who have resigned since the last regular session; Speaker Joe Straus' comparable Lib-Cons Score from the 2007-09 session is used because, under House custom, most speakers rarely cast votes. The theoretical range for this scale is -1.00 (extreme liberal) to 1.00 (extreme conservative). The 150 representatives are arrayed in the full table based on where their roll call vote behavior locates them on the liberal-conservative dimension which dominates legislative voting behavior in Texas, with the most liberal representative ranked "1" and the most conservative representative ranked "150." As a heuristic, the members of each party are divided into six distinct intra-party groups (three within each party) based on the criteria below. It is important to keep in mind that these Lib-Cons scores are statistical estimates, and thus have a small amount of error surrounding them. This suggests that where there exist small to moderate differences among legislators (e.g., less than 0.2), we should consider those representatives to not differ substantively from each other in terms of their location on the liberal-conservative ideological dimension. Democrats

Very Liberal: A Lib-Cons Score that is more than one standard deviation lower (more liberal) than the mean for the Democratic Party delegation.



Liberal: A Lib-Cons Score that is within one standard deviation (above and below) of the Democratic Party mean (-0.34).



Conservative: A Lib-Cons Score that is more than one standard deviation higher (more conservative) than the Democratic Party mean. Republicans

Liberal: A Lib-Cons Score that is more than one standard deviation lower (more liberal) than the mean for the Republican Party delegation.



Conservative: A Lib-Cons Score that is within one standard deviation (above and below) of the Republican Party mean (0.67).



Very Conservative: A Lib-Cons Score that is more than one standard deviation higher (more conservative) than the Republican Party mean. Mark P. Jones is a Baker Institute Rice scholar, the Joseph D. Jamail Chair in Latin American Studies and chair of the Department of Political Science at Rice University.

Posted by Baker Institute at July 8, 2010 10:58 AM

Share:

Interesting concept; keep up the great work.

Posted by: John Ballard at July 8, 2010 01:18 PM

Can you explain a bit more on how you came up with this? Were all votes in the House used, or did you select a specific sample? Strictly on an intuitive level, there are some rankings that seem very off base. I'm interested in seeing how the rankings were compiled.

Posted by: joe at July 8, 2010 01:50 PM

I take issue with using Straus's previous session votes landing on the next session's continuum: who is to say the nature of the 07 votes doesn't skew his ranking compared to what it would have been in '09. And the fact is, under Straus's leadership they cut general revenue spending for only the second time since World War II, they passed a balanced budget without a single "no" vote (meaning all those supposedly more conservative R's were with him on that key issue) and now he has joined the gov and lt gov in ordering immediate cuts at state agencies. Not to attack months of work, I just don't think it means much.

Posted by: Lupe at July 8, 2010 02:47 PM

Thanks. All non-lopsided House votes were included. Lopsided votes (where fewer than 2.5% of the representatives were on the losing side of the vote) are excluded by the DW-NOMINATE procedure due to the difficulty they pose for estimation. In the Texas House this means that where 3 or less of the 150 representatives were on the losing side, the vote is excluded.

Posted by: Mark P. Jones at July 8, 2010 03:01 PM

did any of these republicans vote for the 20% tuition money charges at state schools go to pay for students who could not afford it and that (like a tax) was hidden from the public? did they vote for this? we have a bunch of progressive republicans in the Texas house and senate and i am voting democrat until you republican idiots run some conservatives instead of this RINO STUFF YOU HAVE BEEN SERVING US CONSERVATIVES LATELY. STUFF IT.

Posted by: BOB at July 8, 2010 03:18 PM

While only the Liberal-Conservative Scores for the 2009-2011 House are reported, they are drawn from an overall analysis conducted using the DW-NOMINATE procedure of the entire 1973-2011 period, which allows for the scores to be compared across legislatures. Without getting into technical details, the DW-NOMINATE procedure takes advantage of the presence of large numbers of legislators in office for multiple terms to provide comparable information for legislators who served at different points in time. In sum, Straus's score for 2007-09 can be compared to those of representatives in 2009-11. The one caveat would be if Straus's ideological position changed significantly once he became speaker, and we are unable to register this change because he did not cast votes on the floor. Finally, conservatives did not vote against the final budget, the most conservative members of the Republican delegation (e.g., Randy Weber, Sid Miller, Linda Harper-Brown, Debbie Riddle, Dan Flynn) were on average on the losing side of over 2/3 of those votes which were at least moderately contested votes (i.e., those where at least 10% of those voting were on the losing side).

Posted by: Mark P. Jones at July 8, 2010 03:27 PM

Correction to final paragraph. Finally, while conservatives did not vote against the final budget, the most conservative members of the Republican delegation (e.g., Randy Weber, Sid Miller, Linda Harper-Brown, Debbie Riddle, Dan Flynn) were on average on the losing side of approximately 2/3 of those votes which were at least moderately contested votes (i.e., those where at least 10% of those voting were on the losing side).

Posted by: Mark P. Jones at July 8, 2010 04:14 PM

It would be very helpful to know what specific votes were used, or how "liberal" and "conservative" were determined. While this is a great tool for "insiders" or those who may understand the nuances a bit better, individual issues still matter a great deal more in telling us whether a legislator is liberal, conservative, etc - what they file, how they vote in committee, what they co-author/sponsor, all of that plays into whether they help or hurt an ideological agenda. In Speaker Straus' case, his committee chair appointments speak volumes.

Posted by: RedWhiteBlue at July 12, 2010 10:16 PM

All non-lopsided votes were used. For the intra-party rankings, the labels liberal and conservative were utilized following the methodology detailed at the end of the entry. It is important to keep in mind that these labels are used as a heuristic to help group the different representatives in each party. I concur that committee chair appointments provide a strong signal about the base of support for a Speaker in the House as well as the Speaker's preferences. In the original entry, I noted that 3 of the 4 most liberal Republicans and 1 of the 4 most conservative Democrats will not be in Austin in January. In addition to those 4 representatives, another of the 4 most conservative Democrats (David Farabee) chose not to run for re-election, and thus also will not be in the House next session.

Posted by: Mark P. Jones at July 13, 2010 09:34 AM

I would really like to know how this analysis defines conservative and liberal, the criteria to meet such classification, and/or what questions were asked and how responses were classified (conservative or liberal).

Posted by: TFZ at July 14, 2010 09:09 AM

"we have a bunch of progressive republicans in the Texas house and senate and i am voting democrat until you republican idiots run some conservatives instead of this RINO STUFF" speaking of 'idiots' ...The data shows CLEARLY that EVERY SINGLE DEMOCRAT is more liberal than EVERY Republican. If you want to protest the GOP not being conservative enough, you could at least find some 3rd party to lodge your protest vote, instead of voting for the party of extreme liberalism. Besides, as mentioned, the Republican primary voters expunged liberal Republicans like Tommy Merritt. If you are conservative, you should like the change.

Posted by: Owl Alert at July 14, 2010 08:42 PM

I invented the Partisan Rankings of the Texas House in 1991. Unless you reveal the votes and the method used to select those votes your list is just another piece of academic gobble-gook that is irrelevant to anybody but the Austin crowd who like to gossip and professors that don't have a clue how politics really works.

Posted by: The Inventor at July 20, 2010 06:38 PM

Thank you for the study. I have some comments and questions.



By definition, lopsided votes occur when both parties are voting together on an issue. Eliminating the lopsided votes will result in the two parties to appear more polarized compared with using all of the votes.



What are the total number of lopsided and non-lopsided votes were there during the 2009-2010 legislative session? If data is going to be eliminated, then it would be appropriate to report a confidence interval or something similar.



Also, isn't it true that if a Democrat and a Republican both had identical roll call votes for the 2009-2010 session, they would each get a different Libs-Cons score? I think this is a serious flaw in the study, since you have highlighted the supposed polarization between the two parties.

Posted by: Marko at July 21, 2010 02:33 PM

E-mail this entry

Email this entry to:





Your email address:





Message (optional):