Gov. Perry, annoyed, defends 'act of God' comment (UPDATE: White strikes)
« GOP, Democrats both threaten local control of schools, GOP candidate says | Main | Why Gov. Perry didn't take a 'gratuitous shot' at the Obama administration »

May 04, 2010

Gov. Perry, annoyed, defends 'act of God' comment (UPDATE: White strikes)

Gov. Rick Perry appeared decidedly annoyed when asked today about his mention of "acts of God" when answering a question in Washington yesterday concerning the BP PLC oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. He defended his comments this way:

"Here's what I said, and I think it's an interpretation issue with one reporter, is what I think. If you will go look up the definition of 'act of God,' we've used it in legal terms for a long time in this state and the -- Nobody knows what happened, and I said that in my remarks, that there were you know a lot of speculation -- it could have been an act of God, it could have been you know, who knows?

"And I think to speculate at this particular point in time, which is what I said in my remarks, and there are those that would rather focus in on one statement without -- either not understanding which I hope they're teaching better than that in journalism school -"

He was interrupted by another question. Then, when I asked him what he meant by "act of God," he said:







"Here's what I want you to do. I want you to go look it up , the definition, in the dictionary. I meant exactly what Webster's says by that. It's something that no one can put their finger on, and it may be an accident it may be something else. I do think it is very intriguing that those of you in the media have focused in on one statement when the clear definition of that is pretty easy to get your hands on."

Here's the definition from Merriam-Webster online:

Main Entry: act of God Date: 1783 : an extraordinary interruption by a natural cause (as a flood or earthquake) of the usual course of events that experience, prescience, or care cannot reasonably foresee or prevent

More in a bit.

UPDATE: Democratic candidate for governor Bill White, seizing the opportunity, released an analysis of what may have gone wrong with BP's drilling operation and suggested ways to prevent catastrophic spills in the future.

(The press release is subtitled, 'Energy expert explains situation and path forward' and it notes his work in the oil and gas business)

"It is important that we know both the causes and means to prevent this kind of disaster as quickly as possible," White said. "We cannot afford an energy policy that is based on either wishful thinking or irrational fear. Claims by those in public office or the industry that somehow this tragedy was unavoidable or some 'act of God' are not helpful to reasoned discussion."

White's camp also targeted Perry for saying that BP "historically had a very good safety record from my perspective," citing the deadly BP refinery explosion in Texas City.

Posted by Peggy Fikac at May 4, 2010 11:59 AM

Share:





E-mail this entry

Email this entry to:





Your email address:





Message (optional):