The Bold Action for a Brighter Future Plan
Dear Fellow Georgians:

In Laurens County, two busy parents drop off their two-year-old at a daycare center, worried about the bill that’s due at the end of the week. A single mom in Gwinnett heads back to work, her newborn in the care of a neighbor, which is all she can afford. Grandparents in Catoosa County, raising their three grandkids – ages 3, 7 and 11 – stay up late trying to figure out how they can stretch their budget for their new family.

Regardless of the family, taking care of our children from cradle to career stands as a clear and foundational goal. Quality child care and early learning are critical to fostering school readiness, graduation rates, reading proficiency and college-going rates. Afterschool programs deepen learning and support families where school ends before work does. Employees who have peace of mind about child care arrangements are more stable and productive workers, which in turn makes our state more competitive when attracting business. Workers also benefit by staying employed longer and earning more income.

Early learning is profoundly beneficial to our young children, who have higher cognitive and academic achievement scores in their teen years if they spent time in high-quality daycare as young children. From high-quality child care to pre-K, Georgia has long been a leader in early childhood learning, including launching one of the nation’s first universal, full-day pre-K programs for four-year-olds and its Bright from the Start standards. Yet, for families across our state today, quality child care has become expensive or unattainable. Afterschool programs improve academic performance and behavioral outcomes for children. For parents who work, programs can be a crucial support system, but too many communities have limited options.

Nearly half a million Georgia children under the age of six have both parents in the labor force, but access to quality child care, especially programs focused on early learning, remains a barrier for too many of our families. The average cost for infant care in Georgia is almost $7,700 annually – more than average in-state public college tuition – and those costs are rising. Child care for two children costs more than average rent in most parts of the state. According to one estimate, 62% of Georgia families pay more than 10% of their income to child care, and not enough families receive the subsidies they need to access quality care. Moreover, for non-traditional families, like grandparents and other relatives raising grandchildren, the state provides limited support for the more than 100,000 children who are in kinship care.

Location also has a tremendous impact on access. Thousands of children across the state, particularly in rural communities, live in educational care deserts where their parents are unable to find or afford high-quality child care. Sixty-two counties in Georgia do not have access to the main federal funding streams for afterschool. Child care workers are paid at abysmally low rates, and the barriers to enter the field are often too great for those who wish to do so. This hurts our children’s futures, cuts worker productivity and stifles our state’s growth.

Quality educational care grows resilient children, provides stability for employers whose employees know their children are in good hands, and invests in the future workforce, beginning in early childhood.

MY VISION FOR GEORGIA: Georgia will educate bold and ambitious children from cradle to career. As Governor, I will extend access to high-quality child care programs, ensure affordable options for children ages 0-3, increase access to pre-K, improve the livelihoods of teachers and expand statewide access to afterschool programs. Our children will be proof of our investment, and our workforce will be more productive.

Georgia has the resources to serve our children – and as Governor, I will have the vision and will to educate bold and ambitious children as our best legacy.

By eliminating tax loopholes as well as the $58 million tax handout that diverts public dollars to private K-12 schools, we can invest in our youngest Georgians and support the economic health of our families across the state.

I want to hear more from you about how we can best work together for our state’s educational and economic future. Please email [email protected], tweet @staceyabrams or visit my Facebook page to ask questions about our Bold Action for a Brighter Future Plan.

Sincerely,