My Interview With Governor Rick Perry
I always wanted to ask my own questions of Governor Perry. Questions that might not be asked by regular reporters. Since I had been invited to go clay pigeon shooting with the Governor, along with other Texas bloggers not too long ago, I decided to just ask and see if he would answer some questions for me. He was kind enough to do so. I’m sure it didn’t hurt that I had supported him here on this blog during the election..;-)

Enjoy!

(Q) You recently said to Politico “The idea of having a diverse Republican Party is very important”, especially regarding bringing Hispanics into the Republican party. I couldn’t agree more, but I don’t see a lot of the GOP doing much to make that happen. What do you think we could do better?

(A) When it comes to communicating our message, we can always do better. However, I’d say we made some significant inroads with the Hispanic community over the past few years. All along, it has been our desire to connect the dots between the Hispanic culture’s traditional conservative social values and the bedrock convictions of the Republican Party. The newly-elected Hispanic Republicans, as well as the recent move Texas Rep. Aaron Pena made from the Democrat to Republican Party, lend credence to our efforts and bode well for the future.

(Q) You seem to be a leading voice for state rights. Many people seem to have forgotten or never learned how important they were and are to the founding of our country. Why are state rights so important?

(A) The framers of the Constitution had seen the negative impact of a distant, centralized government in the form of oppressive taxation and the denial of basic rights by the British monarchy. They were also intimately familiar with the success of the individual colonies that were free to plot their own economic destiny. I believe their experience is what drove the creation of the Tenth Amendment which puts the federal government into a tidy little box, leaving the greater freedom and responsibility to the states. Unfortunately, Washington insiders have worked for decades to override those limitations and seriously limited our freedom in the process. That must change.

(Q) I have many liberal commenters who deride your comments about Texas secession when you answered a question from AP reporter, Kelley Shannon in 2009. Even Bill White brought it up in the campaign. What did you really mean? Was it more about warning Washington than it was an actual threat to leave the union? Or was it more tongue in cheek?

(A) It was a simple statement that Washington needs to start paying attention and listening to the people they represent. I identify with the frustration that people have toward Washington which was so passionately displayed during the Tea Parties on April 15, 2009. Anyone who believes that frustration with Washington and patriotism are irreconcilable opposites clearly doesn’t trust the strength of our union or understand the heart of its people. I simply want America to recapture the liberty that was the essential element at the beginning.

(Q) You have said that Social Security is a Ponzi scheme. I agree. I like your idea of States deciding what is the best way for people to choose how to save their own money in state run pension plans. How could we ever break through the gridlock in Washington to even have a conversation about that, much less an actual vote?

(A) The powers that be in Washington are, to use an old military expression, “dug in deep” and it’s going to take a while to root them out using our votes and our freedom of speech. People need to get engaged the political process on an ongoing basis, identifying candidates who are more concerned about individual liberty and responsibility than their own political ambitions, and will happily work themselves out of a job. As we keep sending such champions to Washington and standing up for our rights back home, the change will happen and the appropriate balance will be restored.

(Q) I consider myself a compassionate conservative. I love that our country comes to the aid of so many and has for generations. You wrote in your new book, ‘Fed Up, Our fight to save America from Washington,’ the following: “Americans have fed more people, clothed more people, healed more people, and improved the lives of more people — and more quickly — than any other society the world has known.” Given that, Why do you think there is so much anti American sentiment out there (and even in our own country)?

(A) I believe that Americans are genuinely compassionate people who are inclined to lend a hand to those in need. Unfortunately, I believe it’s part of human nature for people to decline help even when they’re in obvious need out of pride, shame or whatever. As a result, it seems that many countries and their citizens are anxious to get what they consider their share of our resources, but end up resenting us for our generosity. We can’t allow their pride to keep us from helping though. We need to remember that the motivation for doing the right thing shouldn’t be the promise of a ticker tape parade, but the fulfillment of heeding God’s call to love others.

(Q) It has been my experience that most Republicans believe in a safety net for those who cannot take care of themselves. But we all know how this system is abused and full of fraud and waste. How can we combat American’s growing dependency on government, while still providing help to those who truly need it?

(A) At least twice in scripture, Jesus himself said that the poor will always be with us, and I believe that’s true. It just is. However, that doesn’t free us from our obligation to the poorest among us. As we work to help those who cannot help themselves, we have to remain vigilant for those who would take advantage of our generosity, because they’ll always be with us too. The key is to keep cultivating a job-friendly economic climate as we have so successfully and provide an incentive to work.

(Q) There has clearly been a radical call for change with the Tea Party movement. Do you really see this movement having the ability to change things in Washington? Or do you see a future with the Tea Party breaking off and creating its own political party?

(A) The Tea Party is a beautiful thing in many ways, especially the general bias against being co-opted for other agendas. That said, true success for any organization, be it a sports team, a small business or a political movement requires leadership that is clearly identified, committed to a vision and accountable to the people. Without a leader who will stand up and say “if this is our plan, then this is our direction, let’s go” a large group will remain a large group, without the critical mass needed to really sway the process.

(Q) I know you were against the HealthCare bill that passed Congress. You don’t see a “one size fits all” type of solution as the way to go. In Texas, where we have SCHIP and the Texas Gold Card, do you think Texas does a good job in providing care for everyone?

(A) Texas has its fair share of challenges, many of which would be solved if the federal government wasn’t attaching arbitrary strings to how we can spend the taxpayer dollars they send back to us. Texas has come up with good ideas to effectively deliver care, like the waiver I submitted to the federal government which conveyed a vision for reducing the number of uninsured Texans by restructuring federal Medicaid funding. Unfortunately, this waiver, which presents a strategic alternative to continued reliance on government-run health care programs, has languished in a file cabinet at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for more than two years.

(Q) Why do you think that Pres. Obama refuses to meet with you about border security considering how dangerous the border has become recently? If you could meet with him, what would you advise or say?

(A) I’m convinced this Administration simply doesn’t understand the gravity of the situation we face along the border. Instead, they ignore it like so many of their other top priorities in their rush to interfere in areas where states should be left to their own devices. When I briefly met Obama upon his arrival in Austin, I gave him a letter outlining the issues I’d like to discuss including our proven strategy of putting more boots on the ground and more technology on the border so we can effectively keep our southern border with Mexico secure.

(Q) Who would you LIKE to see as the top four candidates for President in 2012 for Republicans?

(A) The most important characteristic we should look for in a candidate is a commitment to making Washington as inconsequential in our lives as possible.

(A) Recently you kept your own on the Jon Stewart show. I was impressed. It was very “alpha male” between the two of you. How was he toward you when the cameras were turned off?

(A) He was very cordial, and showed a genuine interest in my book. I thoroughly enjoyed my time on the show and would enjoy discussing these essential principles with him again because, unlike too many popular media figures, he actually listened and considered my position.