Texas on the Potomac
« Lawmakers criticize BP's 'sorry record' on safety | Main | Under pressure, BP agrees to make live feed of oil leak available to public »

May 20, 2010

Cornyn criticizes Calderon on guns, Arizona law

Texas Sen. John Cornyn took Mexican President Felipe Calderon to task today for criticizing the tough Arizona immigration law and the flow of illegal guns from the United States to Mexico.



AFP photo Sen. John Cornyn



"It was inappropriate for President Calderon to lecture Americans on our own state and federal laws," the San Antonio Republican said in a statement. "Arizona's immigration law has been amended to make clear it does not authorize racial profiling by law enforcement.

"Moreover, the Second Amendment is not a subject open for diplomatic negotiation, with Mexico or any other nation."

Calderon, in Washington for a state visit, addressed a joint session of Congress this morning.

Cornyn balanced his harsh words with some compliments.

"President Calderon said a few things Congress and the American people needed to hear," Cornyn said. "Mexico has gone all in against the drug cartels. Mexico is one of America's best trade partners, thanks in large part to NAFTA. Mexico has lowered its budget deficit to just one percent of GDP, a record of fiscal discipline that should shame Washington. And President Calderon has acknowledged that a lack of economic opportunities south of the border is a primary cause of illegal immigration north of it."

Additional Arizona-related reaction from Sen. Orrin Hatch on the jump page.

Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah: "The state of Arizona is stepping in where the federal government has failed. It is trying to stop waves of illegal immigrants, many of whom are dangerous gang members and drug and human traffickers, from crossing into its communities. It's inappropriate for a head of state to question our laws, especially when the state of Arizona only acted in the best interest of its citizens and with the support of seventy percent of its people."

Posted by Richard Dunham at May 20, 2010 12:03 PM

Share:

E-mail this entry

Email this entry to:





Your email address:





Message (optional):