See how they run: The 2016 presidential checklist
WASHINGTON (AP) -- Pertaining To the year, The Particular Related Press may be monitoring actions along with machinations regarding greater than the dozen prospective presidential candidates. Here's the most recent presidential prep checklist:NONDENIAL DENIAL: Cagey phrases that cloak presidential ambitions, none also convincingly.DemocratsVice President Joe Biden: "If I opt to run, think me, this will be the first guy I talk to. but which choice hasn't been made, with regard to real. As Well As there's plenty of time to suit your current needs to create that."-- April, CBS, within joint interview along with President Barack Obama.Former Secretary involving State Hillary Rodham Clinton: "I just want to get via this year, journey round the country, signal books, help in the midterm elections inside the fall and then take a deep breath and sort of go through my pluses as well as minuses." -- June, ABC. said Republican criticism associated with the girl handling in the Benghazi episode offers her "more of the reason to run."New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo: "I'm sorry, I'm losing you. We use a technical difficulty. I'm operating pertaining to governor regarding the state of New York." -- Seeming not necessarily to hear a new query concerning his presidential intentions. February, Fox Company Network.Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley: "No 1 ever moves down this road, I would hope, without passing on any great offer of thought and a great offer of preparation plus a large quantity of believed work, and so it is strictly what I'm doing." -- February, talking to reporters throughout Baltimore.RepublicansFormer Florida Gov. Bush: "I could honestly tell you in which I don't know what I'm planning to do." -- His standard disclaimer. Says he'll choose through year's end whether to run. 1 element in his decision: whether he can easily operate an optimistic marketing campaign and prevent the "mud fight" associated with politics.New Jersey Gov. Christie: "I'm certainly considering it, but I won't make any kind of selection until 2015, as well as I've got a new task to do." -- end associated with May, to be able to reporters within Tennessee. Also: "It's a new lifetime away until 2016."Texas Sen. Cruz: "My emphasis can be totally on doing function for Texans in the U.S. Senate." -- February. He asserted not necessarily throughout Texas as well as inside the Senate however in the important presidential main state associated with South Carolina.Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal: "It's something that we're certainly thinking about along with we're praying about. My wife and I, we won't create any decisions until after the November elections." -- May, after addressing Republican Leadership Conference within New Orleans.Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul: "We're definitely discussing it, my loved ones is actually referring to it. I really won't help to make my head up until after the 2014 elections. but I haven't been shy within stating we're contemplating it." -- March 9, Fox News.Texas Gov. Rick Perry: "I'd end up being fibbing to you if I informed anyone I knew what I'm going being doing."-- May, within Iowa. Says he'll decide in January.Florida Sen. Marco Rubio: "It's something I'll consider at the end of this year." -- May, about ABC. Will he really feel ready being president? "I do, but I think we have various other folks as well."Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan: "Janna and also I are usually planning to sit back within 2015 as well as give it the particular significant ... conversation, thought that will are needed regarding maintaining our options open. Yet right now I have got responsibilities within the vast majority in the Residence of Representatives that I feel I must go to to, and then I'll worry about individuals things."-- March, CBS.Former Pennsylvania Se. Rick Santorum: "I have no idea if I are capable associated with doing this. It's just tough." -- April, AP interview. Timing of decision? "A year in least, probably."Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker: "I'm really centered on 2014, not really getting before the actual game. ... A Person guys may predict all you want." -- January, CNN.___WRITING a BOOK: the perfect stage-setter for a campaign season, just ask Barack Obama ("The Audacity associated with Hope," 2006; "Dreams coming from My Father," 2004)DemocratsBiden: No, not necessarily since before 2008 election.Clinton: Yes. Splashy tour pertaining to "Hard Choices," introduced in June, has brought the woman's coming from Seattle in order to Paris.Cuomo: Yes, arriving 2014.O'Malley: No. "I'm unsure where I'd get the occasion regarding that." It's possibly just a matter of period before he finds time.RepublicansBush: Yes, about immigration.Christie: No.Cruz: Yes, book deal disclosed by simply his agent inside April.Jindal: Not Necessarily since before 2012 election.Paul: No, certainly not since just before the 2012 election.Perry: Not Necessarily since prior to 2012 election.Rubio: Yes, coming in late 2014 in the publisher involving his 2012 memoir.Ryan: Yes, arriving 2014.Santorum: Yes, "Blue Collar Conservatives" introduced within late April, says: "Do Republicans really care less about the person in underneath of the ladder than Democrats do? For You To become painfully honest, I could have to say in the few ways 'yes.'"Walker: Yes, outside in fall 2013.___GO TO IOWA: Its caucuses would be the opening act in the nomination contest.DemocratsBiden: Yes, spoke at Sen. Tom Harkin's fall 2013 steak-fry fundraiser, the must-stop for most Democrats seeking in order to compete in the leadoff caucuses. Then within May, attended party regarding Iowans which found Washington regarding annual lobbying trip. Raised funds with regard to Iowa congressional candidate Jim Mowrer. Schmoozed together with Iowa energy brokers in the particular program of 2013 inauguration week in Washington.Clinton: No, avoiding large primary/caucus states. Yet Ready for Hillary can be mobilizing for her inside the state.Cuomo: No.O'Malley: Yes, mid-June events. Headlined Harkin's 2012 fundraiser.RepublicansBush: Offers been holding off about splashy visits to be able to early voting states however hosted spring fundraiser Might 22 in Florida for Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad. Attended 2012 economic development meeting within Iowa.Christie: Summer visit expected. Can Easily test his theory that "they enjoy me within Iowa, too." Hosted Nj-new Jersey fundraiser for Branstad throughout May. Much More travel driven simply by politics within the cards now that will he's Victorian Houses Annapolis MD chairman associated with Republican Governors Association with regard to 2014 election year. Campaigned in Iowa throughout 2012.Cruz: Oh yes, 4 visits in eight months, as well as on tap to join a number of additional prospects with August Christian conservative event.Jindal: Yes, state GOP conference in June. Also, summer 2013 visit, then flew together with Iowa governor in order to governors association meeting within Milwaukee. Inside Iowa seven times throughout 2012.Paul: Yes, state GOP conference in June, right after three visits in 2013. Within March, snagged their state GOP chairman, who announced he was quitting to turn out in order to be outlined on Paul as an adviser.Perry: Yes, 3 x inside six months, much more in advance in July and also August. Campaigned with regard to Senate hopeful Matt Whitaker inside late may and also promised to come back frequently for Branstad's campaign. Visited Des Moines suburbs as well as Davenport inside February, meeting GOP activists as well as participating in an event sponsored by Koch brothers' Americans with regard to Prosperity. Satisfied Branstad as well as addressed Des Moines crowd regarding 400 inside November.Rubio: Yes, just days after 2012 election, but continues in order to be mainly holding off in a new wave involving trips for you to early voting states. That's changing.Ryan: Yes, had been keynote speaker regarding Iowa GOP's huge fundraising dinner throughout Cedar Rapids within April. Principal speaker at governor's annual birthday fundraiser inside November 2013, in very first visit since 2012 campaign.Santorum: Yes, state GOP conference in June, earlier visit along with strategists and also media. In Addition August 2013 speech in order to conservative Christians inside state where he won the actual 2012 caucuses. Screened his new Christmas movie inside Iowa in November.Walker: Yes, fundraiser final year.___GO TO NEW HAMPSHIRE: Nation's first main will come after Iowa and is merely as important.DemocratsBiden: Yes, raised money pertaining to three Democrats throughout March visit regarding job-training event. Quipped: "I'm here about work opportunities -- certainly not mine."Clinton: No. Yet Ready pertaining to Hillary provides sent folks there this year.Cuomo: No.O'Malley: Yes, spoke at Democratic Party supper within November, returned inside June. Furthermore spoke at 2012 convention of New Hampshire Democrats.RepublicansBush: No.Christie: Yes, in June, to help candidate regarding governor, after a lengthy absence. Visited 3 x in 2012.Cruz: Yes, 3 times since August 2013.Jindal: Yes, keynote speech to local Republican organization within March, headlined state GOP fundraiser throughout 2013, visited twice within 2012.Paul: Yes, addressed Freedom Summit in April. Won straw poll with March meeting associated with Northeast Republican Leadership Conference throughout Nashua. several visits final year.Perry: No, but had team involving 13 conservative leaders from your state in order to Texas with regard to private meeting within May.Rubio: Yes, splashy debut within May, very first visit with the 2016 season, headlining fundraisers, meeting neighborhood officials, giving interviews. Multiple visits just before 2012 election.Ryan: Yes, headlined Manchester fundraiser within February with regard to former house colleague. Canceled October 2013 visit since associated with government shutdown.Santorum: Yes, March speech to Northeast Republican Leadership Conference marked his return to circumstances exactly where he performed weakly inside 2012 campaign.Walker: Yes, headlined a new GOP state convention inside October 2013, keynote in state party convention inside September 2012.___DON'T FORGET SOUTH CAROLINA: Very first Southern main as well as large in its right.DemocratsBiden: Yes. Within May, gave commencement speech from College of South Carolina as well as headlined Democratic fundraiser, 1st visit since he spoke at state party's annual fundraiser per year earlier. several earlier visits since 2009.Clinton: No, yet situations are stirring. With a Could meeting in Columbia partly sponsored by Ready pertaining to Hillary, Virginia Sen. Tim Kaine urged Democratic females in order to "think concerning pledging the support right now" to be able to ensure she's "millions folks ready to adopt your field with her" if the girl runs.Cuomo: No.O'Malley: Yes, inside Could in order to marketing campaign for state Sen. Vincent Sheheen, Democratic candidate for governor. Additionally developed a 2013 speech to always be able to Democratic activists.RepublicansBush: Yes, 2012 speech.Christie: Summer visit expected, for you to raise funds with regard to Gov. Nikki Haley. Came inside 2012 in behalf regarding GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney.Cruz: Yes, speech at The Particular Citadel military school inside April has been third visit inside a year, next event together with religious conservatives in November and also speech in order to annual state GOP supper final May.Jindal: Yes, made third visit inside a year in June, as keynote speaker with state GOP's biggest gathering, the actual Silver Elephant dinner.Paul: Yes, foreign policy speech from the Citadel military college along with tiny GOP fundraiser throughout Charleston in November 2013 visit; headlined a amount of fundraisers earlier throughout year.Perry: Yes, two-day visit throughout December 2013, addressed state GOP. in August, raised cash with regard to Gov. Nikki Haley's re-election campaign.Rubio: Yes, headlined 2012 Silver Elephant dinner.Ryan: Yes, throughout 2012 campaign.Santorum: Yes, April GOP event in the Citadel military college, where two sons are generally cadets. Campaigned within April 2013 with regard to Curtis Bostic within GOP house runoff race; Bostic lost.Walker: Yes, attended August 2013 fundraiser regarding Haley, whom came to Wisconsin to become able to campaign for him throughout 2012 recall vote.___GO ABROAD: helps to give neophytes foreign policy cred, along with Israel is a touchstone pertaining to U.S. politicians.DemocratsBiden: An Individual bet. Took throughout Globe Cup soccer inside Brazil within June as a part of his ninth visit to South or even Central America since 2009. Attended June inauguration of Ukraine's new president. Eastern Europe inside May. Ukrainian capital within April in order to symbolize U.S. resolve for new government within its struggle against pro-Russian insurgents as well as threatening signals through Moscow. long in forefront regarding Obama administration's diplomatic maneuvers with Kiev. Sent to Poland as well as Lithuania inside March to reassure NATO allies anxious with regards to Russia's annexation of Crimea. December 2013 visits to become able to China, Japan and South Korea. Countless trips to Iraq and Afghanistan throughout 1st term.Clinton: another globe-trotter, almost 1 million miles as secretary of state. Restricted overseas journey within 2013: honorary degree at St. Andrews School in Scotland throughout September; vacation to London throughout October for a diplomacy award and a fundraising concert for the family's foundation. Attended memorial services regarding Nelson Mandela throughout South Africa throughout December. several engagements throughout Canada. Trip to Oxford, England, with regard to daughter's graduation in May.Cuomo: Doesn't get about much. Israel twice inside 2002.O'Malley: Yes, considerable. Israel this past year for a second occasion as governor; additionally visited there as Baltimore mayor. Furthermore Denmark, Ireland, France, Brazil along with El Salvador within 2013. Asia within 2011, Iraq throughout 2010.RepublicansBush: Yes, usually several overseas trips any year. 3 times in order to Israel since 1980s.Christie: Yes, Israel as well as Jordan inside 2012.Cruz: Yes, Ukraine inside May, meeting leaders of the protest movement which ousted pro-Russian president. Visited Israel, Ukraine, Poland along with Estonia to fulfill different leaders about the same trip. Offers been for you to Israel a pair of additional occasions since 2012, such as as a portion of Senate Republican delegation that will went together to Afghanistan, too.Jindal: January 2014 trade and also investment mission in order to Japan, South Korea along with Taiwan, first-time overseas as governor. Canada within August 2013 to speak to oil industry with regards to his support with the Keystone XL Pipeline.Paul: Yes, Israel as well as Jordan throughout 2013.Perry: Yes, provides visited Israel numerous occasions including an October trip that will included any photo op with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, meeting Cabinet members along with a separate stop throughout London to see British officials along with economic leaders.Rubio: Yes, visited the Philippines, Japan and also South Korea in January, foreign policy speech inside London within early December and Israel, Jordan, Palestinian Authority, Afghanistan inside February 2013. Furthermore went along to Israel after 2010 election for you to Senate.Ryan: Yes, Center East throughout congressional career; visited troops throughout Afghanistan as well as Iraq.Santorum: Scant foreign travel while in the Senate drew recognize in 2012 GOP campaign.Walker: Yes, China within 2013 trade mission.___MEET THE MONEY: to understand donors now's to tap these people later.DemocratsBiden: Yes, headlined fundraiser regarding Democrats within late Might in Bay Area residence associated with billionaire Tom Steyer, the leading Democratic donor. Can Be actively fundraising regarding Democratic committees as well as candidates throughout 2014 midterms. Frequently schmoozes contributors from private receptions.Clinton: Can Easily tap deep well involving Democratic as well as activist money. Former President Bill Clinton's vigorous fundraising for Democratic candidates further expands that possible supply of donors pertaining to her. She's been raising cash regarding Clinton foundation. the super PAC Ready for Hillary provides raised almost $6 million since its founding last year to guide the candidacy. Priorities USA said in January it'll back again Clinton if she runs, signaling support via senior members of President Barack Obama's marketing campaign team. Prominent bundlers such as The present biz industry moguls Jeffrey Katzenberg and also Haim Saban get indicated his or her support.Cuomo: Flush coffers pertaining to 2014 governor's race.O'Malley: Yes, has many bases covered as among the party's top fundraisers. Raised more than $1 million for President Barack Obama's re-election marketing campaign plus December ended his year as finance chairman for your Democratic Governors Association.RepublicansBush: Yes, addressed well-heeled crowd from Manhattan Institute, led through GOP benefactor Paul Singer, throughout May. Flew for you to Vegas in March to meet GOP super-donor Sheldon Adelson and also address Republican Jewish Coalition at Adelson's company airport hangar. in February, his short video to find a GOP fundraiser with Donald Trump's Palm Beach, Florida, estate would become a bigger hit as compared to Cruz's keynote speech. Party throughout summer associated with 2013 pertaining to his immigration e-book at home regarding Woody Johnson, owner in the The Huge Apple Jets along along with a leading Republican bundler. has longtime Wall Street connections.Christie: Yes, his year as GOP governors chairman gives him regular use of GOP's top national donors as he raises record sums to help candidates. A Few big donors, though, query whether he's even now any viable prospect right after scandal surfaced more than politically motivated targeted traffic tie-ups throughout New Jersey. Addressed Romney's Utah retreat drawing collectively donors and establishment-focused policy people. was among a new handful involving high-profile Republicans to satisfy along with super-donor Sheldon Adelson in Vegas from his resort casino in late March. followed up with additional Jewish donors at The big Apple event attended through Adelson within May. Courted donors with regard to his re-election marketing campaign within 2013 national tour, when Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg hosted an event with his Palo Alto home.Cruz: Yes, satisfied in March along with leading California conservative donors and keynoted Trump fundraiser. has list of prospective donors that's even now growing right after he collected more than 1.5 million signatures for that on-line petition "Don'tFundObamaCare," which usually he began throughout 2013.Jindal: Yes, met leading GOP donors throughout new York City, since many GOP prospects do more than time. among prospective candidates that visited Iowa GOP donor Bruce Rastetter's farm in August 2013 pertaining to annual fundraiser for your governor.Paul: Yes, headlined luncheon in April from Boston-area equity firm led through Romney's former national finance chairman as well as Romney's oldest son, Tagg, an event which drew together the actual 2012 presidential candidate's inner circle. In Addition attended Romney's 2014 along with 2013 Utah retreats. Offers met GOP donors inside The Huge Apple City.Perry: Yes, friendly together with huge donors nationwide as former head of Republican Governors Association and contains strong contacts each with grass-roots activists and mainstream GOP donors following consequently many many years in workplace within Texas. Throughout May, attended Manhattan Champions involving Jewish Values event together with mega-donor Sheldon Adelson as well as Christie. has led many job-poaching missions in huge states along with Democratic governors as well as achieved donors privately in the actual program of individuals trips, particularly in new York and California.Rubio: Yes, aggressive national fundraising outreach, such as trips for you to Ny along with California to fulfill potential donors. Raised more income this past year than prospective rivals Ted Cruz as well as Rand Paul. Amongst the handful regarding possible candidates in order to go to September 2013 event in the home regarding Woody Johnson, Ny Jets' owner along with Romney's 2012 national finance chairman.Ryan: Yes, attracts Wall Street interest. Addressed GOP donor Paul Singer's Manhattan Institute at identical Could event in which heard from Bush. Had any follow-up reception using Singer along with Woody Johnson. Attended Romney's 2014 along with 2013 Utah retreats, offers money connections through 2012 campaign.Santorum: 2012 shoestring campaign was mostly fueled with a super political action committee to that Republican donor Foster Friess gave greater than $2 million.Walker: Yes. Addressed Republican Jewish Coalition with a Vegas gathering within March exactly where main attraction had been Adelson, who's seeking where a person should location his bets in GOP field. Headlined 2013 fundraisers throughout The Large Apple along with Connecticut.___NETWORK LIKE MAD: Using their case for you to ideologues, activists and also party heavyweights who hold fantastic sway inside nomination race.DemocratsBiden: As Well As how. Addressed nation's governors within July, a amount of of them furthermore thinking about operating for president. Says he intends to campaign within greater than one hundred races in the 2014 election. Meets often using former Senate colleagues and congressional Democrats. Provides keynote speeches in annual state Democratic Party dinners throughout the country. making demands Residence Democrats' marketing campaign organization, assisting inside recruitment of candidates, speaking to liberal activists. Campaigned for brand name new Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe, Massachusetts Sen. Ed Markey. Speaks often in order to particular interests.Clinton: Frenetic pace of e-book tour features a distinct campaign feel. Within May, attended your ex initial political event with the year, a new fundraiser with regard to Pennsylvania congressional primary candidate Marjorie Margolies, mother-in-law involving Chelsea Clinton (Margolies lost). a steady presence now around the speaking circuit, delivering paid speeches in order to sector teams and conferences and also appearing just before university crowds along with teams together with ties for the Democratic coalition.Cuomo: Sparingly. Rarely leaves New York.O'Malley: Yes. Busy season, with speeches to always be able to Democrats in California throughout March, Wisconsin inside April, Massachusetts within May, Iowa in June, Nebraska inside July, more. "I'm going to do a significant little more traveling this summer ... supporting like-minded Democrats within states together with important races," he wrote in the Could fundraising letter via his political action committee. Appeared together with Bill Clinton with Clinton Global Initiative America event within Colorado in June; Clinton called him a "terrific governor." Had Been Democratic governors' chairman pertaining to two years until December 2012.RepublicansBush: Performing more this year politically following a any time period regarding time of "a little self-restraint." Currently the GOP institution favorite; Home Speaker John Boehner continues in order to be nudging him to run. recent travels to Tennessee, New Mexico, Nevada and also Texas. Endorsed GOP business favorites within North Carolina Senate and also California governor primaries. Skipped Conservative Political Motion Conference in March, following giving keynote speech for the influential team a year earlier, along with declined to deal with Faith as well as Freedom Coalition in June.Christie: Yes, a lot a lot more than 20 out-of-state appearances within no much less than states as chairman of GOP governors group. Bolstering his political network within important primary states. Spring speech pleased activists from Conservative Political action Conference, which snubbed him a 12 months ago simply because he'd been too chummy along with President Barack Obama in Superstorm Sandy's aftermath. Addressed Republican Jewish Coalition spring meeting within Las Vegas, spending a full day using best donors as well as GOP operatives, along with courted Christian conservatives from Faith and Freedom Coalition.Cruz: Yes, vigorously. Gave well-received speech and won presidential straw poll from Republican Leadership Conference throughout New Orleans inside late May. Has Been among headliners regarding Western Republican Leadership Conference inside Utah in April, the same month he addressed the actual NRA's April leadership forum by video. Addressed Conservative Political Motion Conference throughout March, following landing group's coveted keynote role in 2013, along with Faith along with Freedom Coalition within June. Addressed 2012 Republican National Convention before he was even elected towards the Senate.Jindal: Large time and tiny time, far and also wide. Advised Faith and also Freedom Coalition he senses a "rebellion brewing" via Americans ready to obtain a "hostile takeover" of Washington. Addressed South Carolina GOP supper too as Iowa convention in June, Might commencement address with Liberty School throughout Virginia, a familiar stop for prospective candidates. Addressed NRA annual leadership forum within April, Conservative Political action Conference in March, furthermore inside 2013. made time pertaining to fundraiser regarding nearby sheriff in Michigan. Altogether, provides expended significantly associated with his moment in your course of 6 many years as governor on the road, talking in order to GOP along with activist groups, supporting Republican candidates as well as promoting achievements. has relationships along with social conservatives. Produced political action committee to assist conservative candidates operating regarding Congress, providing him continued opportunities to network nationally.Paul: Yes, as well as now roaming freely beyond tea party tent. Kentucky Sen. Mitch McConnell used Paul's recommendations inside main marketing campaign which beat back again the tea party challenger. Paul had private audience in April together with Romney advisers from 2012 campaign, is helping Republicans across political spectrum, including reasonable Sen. Susan Collins associated with Maine, and contains pitched throughout with party leaders to heal divisions from final campaign. Had spring speeches from Harvard and also university regarding California. Generated buzz and also won symbolic straw poll with Conservative Political action Conference throughout March.Perry: Yes, interrupted by cries regarding "Run, Rick, run!" whilst addressing Republican Leadership Conference inside New Orleans within May, following latest appearances throughout Florida and also Pennsylvania. that speech went better than final summer, when he mistakenly referred to end up being able to being within Florida within a RedState Gathering event within New Orleans. Additionally spoke at past 2 Conservative Political Motion Conferences.Rubio: Yes, stepping it up. Faith and also Freedom Coalition within June. Private audience along with Republican National Committee in Memphis in May, correct right after his New Hampshire trip. Earlier outreach to conservative and also party activists dedicated to repairing tea party relationships strained over immigration. Well-received speech to always be able to Conservative Political action Conference within March. Throughout Virginia governor's race, campaigned regarding Republican Ken Cuccinelli, who lost. Speech to National Rifle Association inside April; furthermore foreign policy speech with University Or College associated with Texas, more.Ryan: Yes, prime networker as 2012 vice presidential candidate; now helping fellow Residence members raise money. one of countless prospective candidates from Romney's June retreat. Didn't ensure it is in order to Faith and also Freedom Coalition.Santorum: Took in gay marriage, a subject matter nearly all prospective rivals are usually playing down, within speech to Faith and also Freedom Coalition. Addressed NRA convention within April; speeches in order to groups round the country, which includes Conservative Political Motion Conference. His Christian-themed film company is his calling card using religious conservatives.Walker: 1 of only a few 2016 prospects that spoke to Republican Jewish Coalition. Skipped the big Conservative Political action Conference inside March, appeared there final year. Campaigned pertaining to GOP throughout Virginia governor's race. Spoke for you to Michigan Republican Leadership Conference in Mackinac Island in September 2013.___HOG THE TV: Achieving national recognition by sermonizing about the Sunday news shows, as well as going with regard to soft questions and simple laughs in late-night TV.DemocratsBiden: He's back. Following becoming mainly absent from your airwaves with regard to greater than the year, Biden provides resumed frequent interviews, including joint TV appearance using Obama in April. He do the TV blitz your morning after the State in the Union, the CNN interview aboard an Amtrak train and dished upon his skin care routine and his wife's oddball pranks in the program of an interview with Rachael Ray. Yet not just a Sunday news present fixture.Clinton: She's back. Performing high-wattage interviews to promote her book and also herself, beginning with prime-time ABC interview which was timed to book's release. Ended Up Being mainly absent through airwaves before that. but turned up regarding Barbara Walters' last taping involving "The View" inside May. Late-night TV host Jimmy Kimmel interviewed her in Arizona State School in March. Sat down using Walters, that named your ex the particular "Most Fascinating person regarding 2013" throughout December. Appeared jointly together with Obama about CBS's "60 Minutes" early throughout 2013.Cuomo: No. Prefers radio.O'Malley: Getting back in the swing. January 2014 Sunday news present appearance upon CNN has been first throughout months, accompanied by CBS within February.RepublicansBush: Blanketed the actual five Sunday exhibits one day in March 2013 for you to plug his e-book in immigration, several appearances various other times.Christie: He's back, too. Shook a new leg on "The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon" within June, marking his come again to late-night TV, where he liked to cut up ahead of the traffic scandal surfaced making him keep his head low. Final year, tended to steer distinct regarding the usual sober circuit -- nearly all conspicuously, the actual Sunday information exhibits -- although he appeared upon four of these the day after his 2013 re-election.Cruz: Yes, now the mainstay on Sunday news shows. Frequent guest about Fox news as well as CNN.Jindal: No, merely a couple of Sunday news present appearances since 2012 election.Paul: Leader in the chattering pack along with a lot a lot more than any dozen Sunday talk show appearances since 2012 election, such as one out of April through New Hampshire. Inside June, criticized Bush administration's record in Iraq on one show, while, about another, former Vice President Dick Cheney branded him an isolationist. Frequent guest in news networks, specifically Fox.Perry: Creating many national TV appearances whilst starring in flood involving media spots to influence businesses inside Democratic-led states to go in order to Texas. on NBC's "Meet your Press" in May: "I'm heading to be throughout the country discussing red-state versus blue-state policies. Hopefully engaged in a good, thoughtful, winsome conversation about how can we create America much more competitive."Rubio: staying in par with a fantastic deal of rivals throughout Sunday news show appearances, do one from New Hampshire throughout May. Blanketed almost all 5 Sunday exhibits one day in April 2013 to chat about immigration, before he dropped the actual subject. Frequent guest upon news networks.Ryan: Numerous Sunday news display appearances since 2012 election. Occasional guest about network news.Santorum: Yes, promoting his new book. Plugged his Christmas movie upon "The Colbert Report," Fox News, MSNBC and more. Radio, too. Teamed up with Democrat Howard Dean as sparring partners pertaining to debates about the air as well as using audiences.Walker: Previously about the Sunday information demonstrate scoreboard for 2014. Half dozen or consequently Sunday information show appearances since 2012 election. Also, Piers Morgan, Lou Dobbs, much more national TV interviews.___ACTUALLY DO SOMETHING: Pertaining To voters who want to support doers, not just talkers.DemocratsBiden: Leading Obama's overview of federal job-training programs, prime player within U.S. response for you to Ukrainian crisis. His workplace co-chaired a White Home process force to handle sexual assault on campuses. Point man upon gun control, which in turn failed. Negotiated fiscal cliff deal.Clinton: Record as secretary of state, senator along with initial lady. Latest initiatives to assist children's health insurance and education and learning and also status regarding women.Cuomo: 2014 spending budget proposal requires tax cuts regarding businesses, homeowners along with renters. Within 2013, pushed by means of nation's first gun-control law following the Newtown, Connecticut, college massacre. Led New York's effort to legalize same-sex marriage throughout 2011. Minimal wage boost, on-time budgets, teacher standards.O'Malley: Toughened gun laws, repealed death penalty, observed voters approve gay marriage after he got powering legislation for you to approve it, setup a framework to always be able to develop offshore wind power, won legislative approval throughout April associated with minimal wage increase, any 2014 priority.RepublicansBush: As Florida governor, revamped state educational system, cut taxes, managed state via hurricanes.Christie: Won November 2013 re-election, turning into initial Republican for you to earn greater than 50 % involving Nj vote inside quarter-century. Led state's reaction in order to Superstorm Sandy. Agreed to flourish state's Medicaid program beneath the new well being law even although some other Republican governors possess refused to complete so. Vetoed any bill that will might have sanctioned gay marriage but declined to appeal a new court ruling that will legalized it. Facing huge state spending budget deficit, proposed slashing pension fund payments more than the next season for you to balance budget.Cruz: Leading force within dispute in which partly shut the government, 21-hour Senate speech against Obama's wellness law. Argued prior to U.S. Supreme Court nine times, eight associated with these when he had been Texas' longest-serving solicitor general, among 2003 as well as 2008.Jindal: Privatized a lot of Louisiana's Medicaid program, shrank public hospital system, signed statewide voucher plan that will handles private college tuition for certain students. Signed abortion restrictions, fought liberalization involving adoption law, which helps make it impossible for gay couples in order to adopt jointly. Hurricane and Gulf oil spill disaster response.Paul: One-man, almost 13-hour Senate filibuster to protest drone policy place him from forefront regarding civil liberties debate.Perry: "Texas Miracle" job-creation boom found state create a third of net new jobs nationwide regarding ten many years ending in 2013, although Texas has disproportionately higher percentage involving hourly workers earning minimal wage or less. helped muscle through new abortion restrictions. Crucial figure within the unfolding Mexican border crisis, pressing Washington pertaining to National Guard troops to be able to secure border and employ involving drones to discover human traffickers.Rubio: Broker associated with Senate immigration overhaul, however he's gone quiet around the issue. Early leader regarding effort to hyperlink financing regarding health care law for you to government shutdown. Operating using anti-abortion teams upon Senate model regarding bill that will ban abortions right after twenty weeks.Ryan: Negotiated December 2013 bipartisan budget offer which scaled back across-the-board shelling out cuts, drawing contrast together with potential rivals who opposed it. Budget-hawk record to become judged on. Emerging as influential moderate on immigration.Santorum: Generating Christian-themed, family-friendly movies at the moment; record coming from Senate days.Walker: Curbs in public support unions became national flashpoint, but he won the some occasion and effort -- and the recall election which followed.___TAKE A New NATIONAL STAND: Successful state governance is great however leaders must develop national stature in problems with the day.DemocratsBiden: Eclectic. Guns, violence against women, gay rights, veterans.Clinton: Eclectic positions on the economy, housing, opportunities for women, voting rights, now being voiced with additional force. The Actual just main presidential prospect in both party in order to say Cuban trade embargo needs for you to be lifted. Yet avoided taking a place upon Keystone XL pipeline when requested regarding it after Toronto speech in June.Cuomo: Environmentalists nationally and also the power industry are closely watching his pending choice whether to allow fracking in upstate Ny counties close to become able to the Pennsylvania line.O'Malley: the liberal checklist: much more shelling out about education, infrastructure, transportation; supports same-sex marriage, immigration reform, repealing death penalty, pushes environmental protections.RepublicansBush: Unapologetic proponent associated with Typical Core education standards and immigration changes opposed simply by many inside GOP.Christie: Reasonable on the reach and functions regarding government; bipartisanship.Cruz: Anti-Obama's health care law, pushes broader tea party agenda.Jindal: a record involving privatization to exhibit he means government needs for you to be trimmed, pleased to hold any social conservative banner.Paul: Tea-party plus, using a libertarian streak in which places him for the left of rivals about a few issues, to the on others. Blames chaos inside Iraq in Bush administration's decision for you to invade, not necessarily in Obama. Fiscal conservative, criticizes surveillance state. Says GOP should back off in pushing state voter ID laws offensive to always be able to blacks. health law scold. joining within 2014 with liberal lawmakers and others throughout effort to be able to roll again several mandatory minimal sentences and give idol judges more versatility within installing punishment to crime.Perry: Front and center in the child-migrant crisis in the Mexican border, put Obama on the spot inside asking him to witness the actual scene throughout Texas fund-raising trip within July; Obama fulfilled the particular governor however declined the particular "photo opp" border visit. in June, Perry likened homosexuality to be able to alcoholism as a disorder in which may be controlled, bringing a sharp rebuke via Christie. Perry backed off, declaring he'd "stepped correct throughout it" with most the remark. Prominent voice on conservative issues since ahead of the birth in the tea party. wants for you to ban all abortion in Texas, relax environmental regulations, boost states' rights.Rubio: Proposes higher retirement age regarding Social Safety rewards pertaining to younger workers as well as restraints in advantage raises for the wealthy. 2014 initiative about poverty requires federal wage supplements pertaining to a few low-wage workers rather than earned income tax credit. Economy, abortion, tea party fiscal conservatism; immigration liberalization if he decides to obtain back to become able to it. Yet Another voice against health treatment law. Features turn straight into a leading GOP voice inside foreign policy, pressing regarding stronger U.S. action throughout geopolitical hot spots. In climate change: "I don't believe in which human exercise can be causing these dramatic changes to become able to our climate the strategies by which these scientists are portraying it."Ryan: cutting spending, taking about entitlements, rolling again Obama's wellness law. Anti-poverty initiative this year.Santorum: Social conservative activism goes way back. Focus about blue-collar economic opportunity. Speaking against libertarian streak throughout GOP, a new "strain involving conservatism which has zero time frame inside conservatism." Guide calls climate alter "hyped-up crisis."Walker: Fiscal stewardship, from the GOP point associated with view. tough guy contrary to the unions and liberal defenders of the status quo. Says GOP inside Congress will always be the party involving no.___BAGGAGE TO CHECK: It's by absolutely no means too early to manage skeletons in the closet; rivals will be rattling these people soon enough.DemocratsBiden: Flubs, fibs, age. Deflection: "I am which I am." Saddled simply by Obama's low approval ratings.Clinton: Age, Benghazi and the politics regarding getting any Clinton. on the actual defensive with regards to her prosperity since declaring the girl and also her husband had been "dead broke" upon leaving White House. Deflection: Says the woman's hefty college speaking fees -- $225,000, regarding example, with university regarding Nevada -- tend to be likely to the girl family's charitable foundation. Acknowledged your ex "dead broke" comment had been unartful. Republicans tend to be already raising questions, if not innuendo, concerning the woman's health, that she says is fine. GOP wants to pin blame on her regarding vulnerability involving U.S. diplomatic mission within Libya which came below deadly attack within 2012Cuomo: The Large Apple economy is dragging, his poll figures have got sunk, went via public along with bitter divorce with Kerry Kennedy, daughter associated with late Sen. Robert Kennedy, within 2005.O'Malley: State-run medical insurance exchange web site ended up being an expensive bust, prompting officials to produce an embarrassing switch inside April to 1 based on Connecticut's. Contraband- and drug-smuggling scheme from state-run Baltimore city Detention Middle that will resulted inside 44 people being indicted has state lawmakers looking to make reforms. Provides record involving raising taxes that will could probably be challenged through much less liberal Democrats, let alone Republicans.RepublicansBush: the Bush factor. does the nation desire a Bush dynasty right after presidents George H. W. and also George W.? Courting problems with the proper with positions upon schooling and also remarks within April in which individuals who cross in for you to the U.S. illegally do consequently as an "act involving love" for his or her families.Christie: If you have to always be able to declare "I am not really a bully," there is actually a problem. Apologized in January 2014 for highway lane closures apparently ordered by simply his aides as retribution against a new mayor which did not endorse him with regard to re-election. also fired his deputy chief of staff as well as denied knowledge in the machinations. Episode deepened questions by what Christie, or even these around him, will do in order to win as well as contributed to become able to a substantial drop inside his poll standings. Investigations continue. Blamed state's budget mess in Democrats, creating a range of deterioration upon his popularity as a bipartisan figure.Cruz: reputation as a hotheaded upstart, furthermore part of his appeal. Polarizing inside his party. In Addition comes with birther baggage: questions happen to always be able to be raised in any few quarters with regards to his constitutional standing in order to grow in order to be president simply because regarding his birth within Canada, to some Cuban father and American mother. Deflection: Renounced Canadian citizenship.Jindal: Ambitious program to replace state's personal and corporate taxes along with higher revenue taxes flopped, delivered dud of the speech when offered juicy platform involving answering Obama's first presidential address for you to Congress throughout 2009. Deflection: Poking entertaining with himself. Jindal administration's award of the $200 million Medicaid contract is actually below investigation by simply state along with federal grand juries.Paul: Dear outdated dad: Must transfer beyond Ron Paul's fringe reputation. Bridge-burning inside Congress endears him to be able to tea party, could bite him otherwise. Deflection: GOP outreach for you to minorities. Your Washington times canceled his column right after he is discovered to have used passages using their company people inside his speeches as well as writings as if they were his own. Deflection: Promising appropriate citations as well as footnotes for his pronouncements "if it will create individuals depart me the actual hell alone."Perry: "Oops!" Memories involving his stumbling 2012 campaign, a simple progression from a front-runner to always be able to flameout. Deflection: Owns approximately his "botched efforts" in final campaign. In Addition a prospective drag: a new grand jury investigation throughout Austin into regardless involving whether he abused power simply by cutting off state financing to possess an office regarding public corruption prosecutors led by method of a Democrat that refused to become able to resign right after becoming convicted associated with drunken driving.Rubio: Rift together with tea party constituency upon immigration, "a real trial for me." Deflection: Go aggressive on a few common ground, which he did within pledging to take apart your well being law. As Well As stop referring to immigration. response for you to Obama's 2013 State of the Union speech has been remembered just for his clumsy reach regarding water. Deflection: made entertaining associated with himself.Ryan: Spending Budget axe cuts each ways -- catnip in order to conservatives but individuals want their Medicare. Carries stigma regarding 2012 election loss as running mate. Tea party unhappy together using his late 2013 budget deal. comments within March about cultural "tailspin" inside inner cities struck some as veiled racism. Deflection: Known As his remark "inarticulate."Santorum: Overshadowed by simply newer conservative figures. Deflection: being overshadowed means becoming an underdog, and he can thrive in that. Feisty 2012 marketing campaign became the biggest threat for you to Romney's march towards the nomination. New book contains provocative passages with regard to long term rivals to dredge up.Walker: some things that supply him with large appeal with GOP conservatives -- using upon unions, the majority of notably -- would whip up Democratic critics generally election. Wisconsin has lagged inside task creation. release involving emails throughout February shed light on criminal investigation into regardless of whether Walker's aides had been illegally performing campaign work for that 2010 governor's election although being paid as county employees. Walker, then a new county executive, wasn't charged nevertheless the episode offers proved a distraction.___RUN SHADOW CAMPAIGN: 1 approach to run with out running is to have a political motion committee to advertise ideas or another candidates with regard to office, in order to hire advisers who is ready to change to a new marketing campaign once the moment comes.DemocratsBiden: Constrained by simply his present job yet tapped longtime adviser along with former lobbyist Steve Ricchetti to become his new chief regarding staff; maintains near connection with political advisers past along with present.Clinton: Ready regarding Hillary super PAC set up through supporters will be laying groundwork, so may be others. A number Of old Clinton hands tend to be advising the actual group, including Craig T. Smith along with Harold Ickes.Cuomo: Overshadowed by Clinton's shadow campaign. Considered the likely contender if Clinton winds up certainly not running.O'Malley: Set up a new PAC known as O'Say Could you See and also hired a pair of individuals for fundraising along with communications.RepublicansBush: He's a Bush, therefore he's got connections. Sally Bradshaw, chief of staff when he ended up being governor, can be his go-to political person.Christie: Republican Governors Association chairmanship permits him to cultivate his national profile with voters along with party officials with regular travel and key appearances. Began creating broad coalition associated with donors by means of his national fundraising tour within spring 2013. However the particular shadow with the traffic scandal even now hangs more than his shadow campaign.Cruz: Offers leadership PAC, jobs Growth as well as Economic Freedom. Offers been among the largest beneficiaries regarding Jim DeMint's Senate Conservatives Fund and contains gotten countless us dollars and grassroots logistical assistance from your Club for Growth, FreedomWorks and Ending spending PAC. Heritage action PAC helped sponsor Cruz's summer anti-health-law trip around Texas and also country.Jindal: Developed Washington-based nonprofit, America Next, throughout October 2013 in order to push policy suggestions nationally. for executive director, tapped Jill Neunaber, that done Romney's presidential marketing campaign within Iowa and also New Hampshire. Throughout March developed PAC to help conservative candidates.Paul: has formidable leadership PAC known as Rand PAC, features maintained ties in order to father's political network throughout early primary states and rewards coming from strong tea party support. is starting to construct teams around the ground throughout nearly all states.Perry: Produced Americans pertaining to Economic Freedom PAC within fall 2013 for you to raise his profile again, assist him test the actual waters as well as broadcast ads promoting Republican leadership around the country. group employed a lot more than $200,000 left over from the PAC that raised millions for his 2012 campaign.Rubio: beginning much more aggressive journey in order to early voting states, features lagged potential rivals about that will front. Ramping up throughout additional ways, too: Shuffled his staff and also directed political sources regarding his Reclaim America PAC to the few large Senate midterm races this year, among them your GOP main in Iowa.Ryan: His Prosperity action PAC. questions remain concerning regardless regarding whether he can produce a presidential bid provided his rising influence in Congress.Santorum: Keeps inside touch along with chief supporters regarding his winning 2012 Iowa caucus campaign, providing him the leg up on a campaign organization because state.Walker: Consults along with best Republican governor strategists like Phil Musser along with Nick Ayers.___GET WITH IT ON SOCIAL MEDIA: a must for spreading ideas, poking competitors, raising money, organizing events and showing a new individual side, though often an extremely canned version.DemocratsBiden: Launched Instagram account inside April. Certainly Not active about Facebook, occasional contributor for you to his office's vigorous Twitter account.Clinton: Regarding 1.4 million followers upon Twitter, her preferred social media outlet. Tweets photos regarding the girl posing together with Republican Sen. John McCain, members of the Russian feminist protest group Pussy Riot, more. Tweets that grandmother-to-be is "my many exciting title yet!"Cuomo: Couple Of if any private tweets; Facebook additionally generated primarily by simply staff.O'Malley: on Twitter, regular governor's fare nevertheless promotes uncommon appearances by his Celtic rock band, O'Malley's March, for which he sings along with plays guitar, banjo along with tin whistle. Posted photo of himself playing banjo inside downtown Annapolis within May. In Facebook, his PAC-generated page is a great deal more active when compared with official governor's account.RepublicansBush: Tweets and also posts many Wall Street Journal stories, education and learning thoughts and a new few Bush family members doings.Christie: more engaged inside Twitter ("It has been great to be capable of visit with the those which own Rossi's Rent-A-Rama inside Ortley today.") as compared to Facebook.Cruz: Active about Facebook as well as Twitter, much submissions are pumped out by staff. Tweeted Google map directions towards the Mexican border to assist Obama think it is -- the poke at the president's decision not to visit the actual scene with the child-migrant crisis within a Texas find-raising trip inside July. Yet the actual Texas senator himself has been no closer towards the border as compared to 150-plus miles since the actual crisis began.Jindal: Active upon Twitter and additionally on Facebook, where he lists among favorite books, "John Henry Newman: The Biography," regarding lately canonized British cardinal along with sage. In Addition favors James Bond movies.Paul: Aggressive. Bragged upon Twitter this past year that will he'd attracted greater than 1 million likes pertaining to his Facebook page, where he listed his or perhaps your ex own books as his favorites.Perry: Active. 1 well-liked tweet was accidental -- via his pocket, he was quoted saying -- as well as consisted associated with "I." Followers jumped within to complete his sentence. one offered: "I ... truly just like Obamacare." (He doesn't.) Facebook appears staff-generated.Rubio: Aggressive, using significant followings, appears to create individual use of Twitter greater than staff-generated Facebook. takes a lot of shots in the health law. In Facebook, lists "Pulp Fiction" movie along with "The Tudors" historical fiction TV series among favorites.Ryan: King regarding Facebook amongst prospective rivals inside both parties, along with practically 4.9 million likes. Seeks $10 donations with regard to "Team Ryan" bumper stickers with regard to his PAC along with kisses a new fish. Posts photo involving Obama with his feet up about Oval Workplace desk. Commanding presence about Twitter, too, by method of a totally free account connected along together with his PAC and an additional as congressman.Santorum: Active on Twitter and also Facebook.Walker: Posts vigorously on Facebook as well as on his Twitter accounts. Numerous exclamation points. "Glad USDA is maintaining cranberries on university menus. I consume numerous bottles involving cranberry juice every day!" Promotes policy achievements and his awesome TV appearances, reflects about sports, pokes Obama.___Associated Press writers Ken Thomas along with Josh Lederman inside Washington; Brian Witte within Annapolis, Maryland; Tom Beaumont within Des Moines, Iowa; Steve Peoples within Boston; Michael Virtanen in Albany, New York; Will Weissert inside Austin, Texas; Melinda Deslatte throughout Baton Rouge, Louisiana; along with Erik Schelzig throughout Nashville, Tennessee, contributed to this report.