Leaders meet to improve access to health care for Caribbean girls and women
Photo Credit: CARICOM Today

Leaders meet to improve access to health care for Caribbean girls and women

President Bill Clinton and Caribbean leaders convene to strengthen women’s health care at a Clinton Global Initiative forum

Clinton Foundation Blocked Unblock Follow Following Aug 4, 2017

By Lissy DeSantis, Director of Commitments, Clinton Global Initiative

(Editor’s Note: CGI continues to convene leaders from government, business, and civil society on specific issues. The forum discussed below helped expand support of a commitment launched in 2015 by the government of Jamaica and UNFPA to address health challenges facing girls and women in the Caribbean.)

Gender-based violence, teen pregnancy, and cervical cancer are threats to girls and women across the world, including in the Caribbean. When St. Kitts and Nevis Prime Minister Dr. Timothy Harris took the podium last month at a forum convened by the Clinton Global Initiative, he described the urgency of expanding access to Caribbean girls’ and women’s health care in stark terms to an audience that included President Bill Clinton and leaders from the CARICOM (Caribbean Community) region.

“Thirty-five percent of women in Latin America and the Caribbean encounter sexual violence,” said Prime Minister Harris, adding that “cervical cancer accounts for 13 percent of all cancers and 10 percent of all deaths among Caribbean women; 19 percent of young women become pregnant before they reach 18 years old, and a considerable number of adolescent girls are giving birth before the age of 15 years old.”

Prime Minister Harris, who serves as CARICOM’s lead Head for Human Resources, Health and HIV, delivered his remarks at a partnership engagement event designed to build on “Every Caribbean Woman, Every Caribbean Child”, a public health project championed by the CARICOM Heads of Government and the network of Caribbean spouses of Presidents and Prime Ministers. The initiative aims to reduce teenage pregnancy, prevent cervical cancer, and eliminate mother-to-child transmission of HIV across the Caribbean. The government of Jamaica and the United Nations Populations Fund came together at the 2015 CGI Annual Meeting to announce a Commitment to Action implementing the pilot phase of the initiative in Jamaica

Along with Prime Minister Harris and President Clinton, distinguished guests from the Caribbean attending July’s CGI convening included The Most Honorable Juliet Holness, first lady of Jamaica; Denese McFarlane, health specialist, Planning Institute of Jamaica; and Her Excellency Mrs. Sandra Granger, first lady, The Co-operative Republic of Guyana. Several high-level leaders from the health and human rights space were in attendance as well, such as Katja Iverson, CEO, Women Deliver, and Dr. Natalia Kanem, acting executive director, UNFPA.

In addition to discussing the public health challenges, Prime Minister Harris emphasized at the forum that “there is hope” and discussed encouraging progress in the region, including Cuba becoming the first country to eliminate mother-to-child HIV transmissions. He also noted the Clinton Foundation’s role in improving access to HIV/AIDS drugs in the Caribbean.

Participants at the forum engaged in productive discussions on potential partnerships to support the “Every Caribbean Woman, Every Caribbean Child” initiative, emphasizing in particular the need to involve youth at the forefront of advocacy efforts, the need to strengthen data collection efforts, and the need to engage NGOs and the private sector.

Read this story published by CARICOM Today for more information on the CGI forum. Visit the Clinton Foundation’s website for more on the pilot designed to improve health outcomes for Caribbean girls and women.