Bredesen visits Gallatin for community roundtable with local mothers to discuss healthcare, run for Senate
PHOTO: Former Mayor of Nashville and Governor of Tennessee Phil Bredesen visits with Sumner County mothers and discusses healthcare concerns at community roundtable on Monday, April 9.

By CHRIS LADD

Former Mayor of Nashville and Governor of Tennessee Phil Bredesen traveled to Gallatin’s Sumner Station Monday afternoon to participate in a healthcare roundtable with local mothers.

Bredesen announced on December 6, 2017 that he would run for Bob Corker’s open seat in the United States Senate, as Corker announced he wouldn’t seek reelection.

Over the past several months, Bredesen has been visiting with the residents of Tennessee. The roundtable in Gallatin was able to give him more insight on what hardworking moms are facing with healthcare.

“If you want to get answers to questions you have, you have to get outside of the usual suspects and just don’t call together a bunch of political people,” Bredesen said. “I just like to talk to people that are ordinary. Most of the group were middle aged moms working with careers and no political agendas, I always find this to be very helpful in terms of finding what’s really important.”

During the roundtable, the group discussed their concerns with the high cost of healthcare, paying high deductibles, choosing the right healthcare plan for their family, and among other healthcare concerns.

“It was very enlightening today,” Bredesen added. “I’m glad I did it.”

The biggest issue that has been talked about most on the campaign trail is the disgust and disappointment that people have in the national government.

“It’s the one thing ultra conservatives and academic liberals can all agree on,” Bredesen said. “They all agree that this [current political tumult] needs to stop and move forward. I believe this is something that I can help with.”

He also stated that healthcare and jobs are two of the other biggest concerns he often hears.

“It’s not about having a job… unemployment is low, but having a quality job with good wages and the stability of the job,” he said. “There are things you can do at a national level you can do to affect that.”

When it comes to healthcare, Bredesen said it’s a very complicated problem in a lot of ways. One of the things that he believes needs to happen is to stabilize the Affordable Care Act.

“I was not a big supporter of it when it was being considered,” he said. “After it was passed it’s the law of the land and we need to make it work.”

Bredesen believes that the uncertainty of it at the moment has insurance companies pricing the product based on the possibility of bad things happening. He said that tends to drive prices to a death spiral and the price gets higher and higher. Then, prices get so high that people can’t afford it.

“I personally believe we need to move to a much broader system that doesn’t have all of the holes that the current system does,” he said. “The people need some stability and I would love to work with other senators on trying to design something.”

For a while now, Bredesen has had concerns that there were problems in Washington D.C. Once Corker decided not to seek reelection, he thought this would be the best use of his time at this stage of his life.

“That’s one of the things that has worked well with me in my life,” Bredesen said. “If I see there is a problem, I go grab it and do something about it.”

With Bredesen being the former governor, he feels that this puts him in a decent position on winning the senate seat.

“I feel good about where I am… I have to do things right and get a break or two along the way,” he said. “I really believe I will be heading up there next fall.”