Donald Trump’s Irresponsible Claims About Vince Foster
Photo

You had to know it was coming. Having set a new standard for crass and ugly political discourse, Donald Trump was always going to bring up poor Vince Foster’s suicide. And it was suicide, regardless of the 20-year-old lies that Mr. Trump is resurrecting in his scorched-earth quest for the White House.

Mr. Foster worked with Hillary Clinton at the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock, Ark. and was a childhood friend of Bill Clinton. He joined the White House as deputy counsel when Mr. Clinton became president in 1993. Six months later, he was found dead of a gunshot wound to the head in Fort Marcy Park, Va. An 80-year old gun was in his hands.

During his short White House tenure, Mr. Foster was embroiled in several political controversies. He was also being treated for depression and after his death, a torn note in his briefcase hinted at desperation. “Here ruining people is considered sport,” he said of Washington.

His death generated conspiracy theories about a White House role and murder and led to five official investigations by highly qualified experts. As Glenn Kessler, the Washington Post Fact Checker, put it on Wednesday:

Yes, the bullet was never found. (Foster died in a wooded park.) Yes, the Clinton White House was sometimes slow to release information or took steps that at times raised suspicions, such as removing from Foster’s office files concerning an Arkansas real estate deal. But that was all examined, dissected, discussed, investigated two decades ago — and found to be not material. The fifth probe lasted three years — and still found nothing.

Of course, that is not good enough for Mr. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee. Everyone and everything, including truth and logic, is grist for his self-aggrandizing campaign. As The Post reported on Monday, he called theories of possible foul play in the Foster death “‘very serious’ and the circumstances of Foster’s death, ‘very fishy.’”

Having put that irresponsible claim out there, Mr. Trump provided himself an escape hatch. “I don’t know enough to really discuss it,” he said, raising the obvious question of why he did. “I will say there are people who continue to bring it up because they think it was absolutely a murder,” he added.

A stunning counterpoint to all this is Kenneth Starr, the former Whitewater independent counsel whose investigations of Mr. Clinton in the 1990s led to the impeachment of an American president for only the second time. In 1997, his exhaustive probe of Mr. Foster’s death concluded that it was suicide.

These days, Mr. Starr is lamenting the polarized and destructive political climate and praising Mr. Clinton. In remarks last week, the former federal judge referred euphemistically to his previous combative history with the Clintons as “the unpleasantness.” Amy Chozick of The Times reported that his comments “seemed almost to absolve Mr. Clinton, if not to exonerate him.”

There are plenty of real issues to discuss in this election but Donald Trump can’t win that way. Thanks to him, the dark message of Vince Foster’s suicide note — “Here ruining people is considered sport” — has gained new life.