Gay Republicans honor Mike Coffman; Dems challenge record
U.S. Rep. Mike Coffman’s varying positions on gay-rights issues — he’s seen as a supporter by advocates in some areas, but does not endorse same-sex marriage — have been met with criticism from some, while others have applauded him for taking steps such as signing on as a co-sponsor of the pending Employment Non-Discrimination Act. On Wednesday night, the Republican from suburban Denver was set to be one of several special guests at the Log Cabin Republicans’ annual Spirit of Lincoln Dinner in Washington, D.C., a high-profile event headlined by Mary Cheney.

The group, which advocates for gays and lesbians within the party, also included Coffman in its first batch of seven congressional endorsements Wednesday. The group counts Coffman as an ally, citing his ENDA co-sponsorship and his support for the 2012 renewal of the Violence Against Women Act. For the first time, it included language protecting LGBT people.

“I’m proud to be endorsed by the Log Cabin Republicans,” Coffman said in a statement. “I share their principles of limited government, a strong national defense, individual liberty, and a more inclusive Republican Party.”

While Coffman has made some big moves toward embracing gay-rights positions in recent years, his opponents — including the campaign of his Democratic challenger, Andrew Romanoff — are quick to point out other views and votes on which he’s disagreed with advocates. For instance: voting against the repeal of the military’s “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy, supporting the Defense of Marriage Act before the U.S. Supreme Court struck it down last year and voting recently against an amendment that would have allowed same-sex spouses of veterans to receive partner benefits no matter where they live. (In the latter case, Coffman’s campaign manager, Tyler Sandberg, told me that Coffman thought adding it to the bill at issue, which addressed another veterans issue, was inappropriate. But Coffman would support a standalone bill granting the partner benefits regardless of state of residency, he said.)

Citing the vote on that amendment — which failed in committee 13-12 — and other issues, Romanoff spokeswoman Denise Baron said Coffman has failed to show a full commitment to equality.

“If you’re committed to equality … you don’t oppose civil unions and marriage equality and the repeal of ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell,’ as Congressman Coffman does,” she said. She also suggested Coffman hasn’t been an aggressive-enough supporter of ENDA because it hasn’t received a floor vote in the Republican-controlled House.

But Sandberg said Coffman has been a leader on that and other equality issues. “Mike has always been an independent voice willing to buck his party to do what he believes is right,” he said, “and his support for ENDA and the LGBT-inclusive Violence Against Women Act is further proof of that.”

With the Wednesday dinner event’s guest list and endorsements, the Log Cabin Republicans gave a nod to their stance of trying to appeal to members of their party who don’t always agree with the group.

Among the seven candidates endorsed, Coffman is one of three who do not support same-sex marriage; the other two are Reps. Chris Gibson of New York and Frank LoBiondo of New Jersey. Coffman told The Post earlier this year that he still believes marriage should be between a man and a woman, but he now views same-sex marriage as an issue for the states to decide.

“These incumbents represent our strongest allies in Washington,” said Gregory T. Angelo, the Log Cabin Republicans’s executive director, in a news release announcing the endorsements. “This list features stalwart, equality-minded advocates who have long stood with Log Cabin Republicans, as well as new common-sense conservative allies in the GOP caucus of the United States House and Senate. We look forward devoting resources to ensure that all achieve reelection in November.”