Senate OKs education overhaul
TALLAHASSEE -- The Florida Senate approved a top-to-bottom overhaul of the state's education system, voting mostly along party lines Thursday to reshape Florida schools.

The changes include the creation of more than 100 academic positions to be appointed by Gov. Jeb Bush, including a new seven-member Board of Education which would choose the education commissioner.

The Board of Regents, charged with oversight of the 10 state universities, would be dismantled as of July 1. In its place, Bush would appoint 11-member boards of trustees for each university which would control tuition rates and programs.

The House version (CS-HB 1533) is slightly different and is still awaiting a vote, but the differences are not expected to keep the package from going to Bush.

Bush and Republican legislative leaders have made the school reconstruction, from preschool readiness programs to postgraduate work, a priority during the two-month legislative session which ends Friday.

The Senate approved the bill (SB 2108) by a 28-12 vote, with three Democrats joining Republicans to pass the measure.

''The Board of Regents did not want to listen to this Legislature, and that's why we got to the point where we wanted to get rid of the Board of Regents,'' said Sen. Betty Holzendorf, D-Jacksonville.

Now, Holzendorf said, the universities can make the same mistakes as the regents but without the Legislative oversight.

''That's a dangerous precedent to set and it will cause some of those universities to possibly close,'' Holzendorf warned.

Critics say dismantling the central higher education system will pit the universities against one another, with the smaller universities losing out as funds go to colleges represented by more influential lawmakers and trustees.

But Sen. Don Sullivan, R-St. Petersburg, argued that the state's university system was in dire need of improvement.

''The national ranking system gave our university system a D-plus for student access,'' Sullivan said. ''What's so great about this system that you're trying to save? ''

Sullivan urged lawmakers to break away from the status quo and said the system needs to expand so more students can earn degrees. The state's education department needs to be more responsive to students' needs, he said.

''We need to change our financial aid system so that the working mother is eligible for financial aid. Duh! ... You can get college credits for the arts and dance but you can't get credit for technical skills. Duh!'' Sullivan said.

''Someone's gotta take these people by the throat and wake them up,'' he said.

Rep. Evelyn Lynn, the bill's House sponsor, said although the bills were close, she was anxious to iron out the differences.

The chambers remain divided on who will lead the transition team and on the reorganization of the state's school readiness programs. The House bill removes the standards for child care licensing and reduces training requirements for readiness teachers. The Senate bill maintains the standards. Both measures shift all school readiness programs to the Agency for Workforce Innovation.

Lynn, R-Ormond Beach, said setting the standards too high drives up cost.

''You can't set it so high that you can't afford to pay for it,'' Lynn said.

While she was optimistic the two sides would reach an agreement, she said time was running short.

''If it gets to be too long, we're just not going to have a bill,'' said Lynn. ''It makes me nervous.''

------

On the Net:

Florida Legislature: http://www.leg.state.fl.us/Welcome/index.cfm