Jacksonville's craft brewers growling about legislation that favors beer distributors
Florida’s craft brewers were hoping for good things to come with this year’s session of the Legislature. Instead, they’re just hanging on and hoping things don’t get significantly worse.

They were hoping specifically for a change that would allow them to sell 64-ounce containers, called growlers, of their draft beer directly from their taprooms. That’s the standard size across the country, but Florida law allows only 32-ounce and 128-ounce growlers.

The bill currently in the Florida Senate, SB 1714, has gone through committee and goes to a full vote Monday. It would allow the 64-ouncers. But there’s more to it, and the trouble is that it keeps changing.

“It doesn’t change by the day,” said Mitch Rubin, executive director of the Florida Beer Wholesalers Association, the group behind the bill. “It changes every two hours.”

“A lot of it is just punitive,” said the Florida Brewers Guild’s Josh Aubuchon.

For example, a craft brewery can now sell bottles and cans of beer to go directly from its taproom just like a retail store. But the bill at one point required a brewery that sells at least 2,000 kegs a year to sell its beer to a distributor and then buy it back in order to sell retail.

Ben Davis, owner of Jacksonville’s Intuition Ale Works, sells six-packs of his beer from his King Street taproom. And each January, he sells several thousand 22-ounce bottles of Underdark, a much anticipated bourbon stout.

Distributors, he said, generally have a markup of about 30 percent.

“If I sell them $10,000 worth of beer,” he said, “it’d cost me $13,000 to buy it back. And when I’d sell them the beer, they’d have weeks to pay me. But when I’d buy it back, I’d have to pay them immediately.”

But by Friday, that requirement had been removed, Rubin said. As currently written, breweries can’t sell canned or bottled beer to go at all. Only draft to be consumed on premises or growlers to go.

But he said that by Monday, he expects that to change again.

“What we’re trying to preserve,” Rubin said, “is the three-tier system. You have all these entrants into the mature marketplace and they can’t see why they can’t all be brewery retailers.”

One problem, he said, is some breweries don’t actually brew their own beer. But allowing them to sell retail six-packs bypasses the usual retailers.

“The fundamental problem is the separation of the tiers,” he said. “A brewer can become a retailer, a retailer can become a brewer. What we want is brewers competing with brewers and retailers competing with retailers.”

The issue has created a lot of anger.

John Valentino, owner of four Mellow Mushroom restaurants in the Jacksonville area, has posted on Facebook, encouraging his customers to boycott Anheuser-Busch products, whose distributors make up the Florida Beer Wholesalers Association.

He said he thought about not even selling the beers, but is holding off to see what happens Monday.

“We’re trying to raise awareness,” he said.

The bill’s sponsor, Sen. Kelli Stargel, R-Lakeland, told the Tampa Bay Times that the purpose is to keep the state’s three-tier system — brewer/distributor/retailer — intact.

“Once you’re at a level where you’re brewing that much beer, you’ll have to play by the same rules as everyone else,” she said.

What also concerns Aubuchon is the bill’s language saying that anything not specifically permitted is prohibited.

“That just opens up a host of problems,” he said. “If a brewery wants to make mead or cider, now it gets a winery license. But it may not be able to do that under this.”

“The end game is to close our taprooms or make sure every beer we sell goes through the three tiers,” Davis said. “Now it’s bottles and cans, next it’s pints and growlers.”

“It won’t crush Cigar City or us, it will hurt us. But a new brewery depends on the taproom. But the big question is, why would anyone open a brewery in Florida when there are so many states that want breweries? Florida clearly doesn’t.”