Gov. Bush signs budget, vetoes some local projects
click photo to enlarge

GOV. JEB BUSH smiles as he prepares to sign the 2005-2006 budget on Thursday in Tallahassee.

AP Photo TALLAHASSEE -- Gov. Jeb Bush approved nearly $65 billion in state spending Thursday, struck $180 million in local projects from the budget and praised lawmakers for leaving $5.5 billion in reserves.

The level of spending grew nearly 4 percent over the current $62.3 billion budget, which is in effect until July.

State lawmakers, who passed the budget earlier this month, had billions of new tax dollars to work with because of Florida's booming housing market and economic activity spurred by the rebuilding from last year's four hurricanes.

Bush pointed Thursday to ongoing job creation and a tourism industry that set records last year despite the hurricanes.

"This state has busted loose," he said.

The veto list included a couple of hundred projects, including after-school programs, senior centers, outreach programs for troubled teens, water treatment plants, sewage systems, road projects and $600,000 that would have gone to help two hog farmers hurt by the 2002 constitutional amendment banning small crates to confine pregnant pigs.

Some specific vetoes:

n $5 million for a legal aid program for poor people needing assistance in disputes involving family law and federal benefits;

n $500,000 for a prison inmate training program that uses Scientology teachings;

n $400,000 for a statewide poison information network.

Bush said he almost vetoed a $4 million appropriation for the Salvador Dali Museum in St. Petersburg. He said he was persuaded to let the spending remain by a pledge from the city that the money would be used to create a waterfront park at a new museum home.

When lawmakers finished writing the budget, the governor said the amount of spending made him twitch a little. Spending money at record levels "gives me cause for pause," Bush said Thursday.

But he said his comfort level has gone up, thanks to the "tremendous amounts of reserves and ... dramatic increase in infrastructure spending."

He applauded the Legislature for resisting the temptation to spend all the state's money and touted the more than $200 million in tax cuts lawmakers passed on to Floridians.

Bush spent more time talking about the money that's going to victims of the hurricanes.

"In a time of incredible growth and prosperity, all around the state there are pockets where people are really suffering," he said.

Lawmakers sent Bush a budget with a bottom line of $63.1 billion. But additional spending outlined in separate bills, including a growth management measure that dedicates some $1.5 billion to roads, water projects and schools, boosted the bottom line to $64.7 billion.

The governor said many of the local projects he had decided to veto were well-intended but didn't go through the regular channels of review or didn't support a state priority.

Of greater significance, he said, is what did get funded. Health care and education get the biggest slices of Florida's budget.

"The first priority in our state must be and continues to be public education," Bush said, praising the 6 percent per student increase in public school spending.

That's about $1.3 billion in new money -- but most of the money, more than $800 million, comes from local property taxes.

Senate President Tom Lee, R-Brandon, said he thought lawmakers exercised restraint as they wrote the budget and that he was satisfied with the actions taken by the governor.

"As best I can tell, the governor was fairly consistent in requiring that these projects go through the planning process," Lee said.

House Majority Leader Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, said Bush clearly supported most of the budget.

"The few process-related differences highlighted by the governor's veto list pale in comparison to the agreement at large," Gardiner said in a release issued by his office.

Democrats, vastly outnumbered in the Capitol, were critical of the vetoes. Rep. Anne Gannon blasted Bush for vetoing $30,000 for a task force created last year to study cervical cancer.

Gannon, D-Delray Beach, said she didn't think investing that much in women's health was "asking too much."

And Rep. Dan Gelber, D-Miami Beach, said some of the projects Bush vetoed would have filled in gaps in current services.

"We have 17 percent of our state that doesn't have health insurance, we have the worst graduation rate in the nation, we have seniors who are still splitting their prescription drugs and a lot of these programs ... dealt with those needs."