Richland florist, who won’t supply gay wedding, sues the state
The owner of Arlene’s Flowers in Richland, who refused a longtime customer’s request to provide flowers for his same-sex wedding, has launched a counter suit against state Attorney General Bob Ferguson, who sued her for violating Washington’s Consumer Protection Act.

The counter suit, filed by an anti-gay-marriage group called Alliance Defending Freedom, argues that Ferguson’s suit is attempting to force Barronelle Stutzman to act contrary to her religious convictions in violation of her freedoms under the state constitution.

“In America, the government is supposed to protect freedom, not use its intolerance for certain viewpoints to intimidate citizens into acting contrary to their faith convictions. Family business owners are constitutionally guaranteed the freedom to live and work according to their beliefs,” said Dale Schowengerdt, senior legal counsel with the Arizona-based group.

Ferguson repeated his rationale for initially filing the suit.

“It’s the Attorney General’s job to enforce consumer protection laws which prohibit discrimination in the marketplace,” said the AG. “If Ms. Stutzman sells flowers to heterosexual couples, she must sell them to same sex couples. As an individual, she is free to hold religious beliefs but as a business owner, she may not violate our state’s laws against discrimination — no matter what she personally believes.”

The dispute between Stutzman and customer Robert Ingersoll has become the stuff of litigation and legislation. Early this year, after Washington legalized same-sex marriage, Ingersoll went to Stutzman and asked her shop to serve his wedding. She declined, in Stutzman’s words, “because of my relationship with Jesus Christ.”

The Attorney General has sued Stutzman. Ingersoll and partner Curt Freed, with the American Civil Liberties Union acting as council, have announced that they will sue Stutzman.

Thirteen Republicans in the state Senate have introduced broadly worded legislation to allow businesses to discriminate against gay and lesbian customers.

The bill, sponsored by Sen. Sharon Brown, R-Kennewick, would exempt from the state’s anti-discrimination laws businesses that deny goods or services to gay customers because of “sincerely held religious beliefs, philosophical beliefs or matters of conscience.”

The Senate bill is directed squarely at the LGBT community. Federal law prohibits discrimination based on race, religion or physical disability. Its sponsors include Republican lawmakers from Eastern and Southwest Washington, but only one Puget Sound-area legislator, Sen. Barbara Bailey, R-Oak Harbor.









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-5', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 5', target_type: 'mix' });









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-10', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 10', target_type: 'mix' });









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-15', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 15', target_type: 'mix' });









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-20', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 20', target_type: 'mix' });









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-25', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 25', target_type: 'mix' });









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-30', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 30', target_type: 'mix' });









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-35', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 35', target_type: 'mix' });



window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-36', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 36', target_type: 'mix' });























































Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 1 of / 37 Caption Close Image 2 of 37 Justin Goodman, left, fills out marriage paperwork with his partner Jake Bartholomy at the King County Administration Building. Justin Goodman, left, fills out marriage paperwork with his partner Jake Bartholomy at the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 3 of 37 King County Executive Dow Constantine signs a marriage license at the King County Administration Building. King County Executive Dow Constantine signs a marriage license at the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 4 of 37 Kelly Middleton, 24, and her partner Amanda Dollente, 29, embrace after they received their marriage license at the King County Administration Building. Kelly Middleton, 24, and her partner Amanda Dollente, 29, embrace after they received their marriage license at the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 5 of 37 Image 6 of 37 Jennifer Traband, left, and Emme Scheible give an oath that their information is accurate as same-sex couples are issued marriage licenses at the King County Administration Building. Jennifer Traband, left, and Emme Scheible give an oath that their information is accurate as same-sex couples are issued marriage licenses at the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 7 of 37 From left, Senator Ed Murray, Jane Abbott Lightly, her partner Pete-e Petersen and Rep. Jamie Petersen celebrate as gay couples wait for marriage licenses at the King County Administration Building. From left, Senator Ed Murray, Jane Abbott Lightly, her partner Pete-e Petersen and Rep. Jamie Petersen celebrate as gay couples wait for marriage licenses at the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 8 of 37 Junia Ribeiro holds a sign as she waits in line with her partner Patty Oh, right, outside of the King County Administration Building. Junia Ribeiro holds a sign as she waits in line with her partner Patty Oh, right, outside of the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 9 of 37 Same-sex couples wait in line outside of the King County Administration Building. Same-sex couples wait in line outside of the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 10 of 37 Image 11 of 37 Same-sex couples waiting in line applaud as King County Executive Dow Constantine speaks before the first marriage licenses are handed out. Same-sex couples waiting in line applaud as King County Executive Dow Constantine speaks before the first marriage licenses are handed out. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 12 of 37 Donna Candiliere rests on her partner of 10 years, Joy Pothan, as they wait in line. Donna Candiliere rests on her partner of 10 years, Joy Pothan, as they wait in line. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 13 of 37 Couples wait in line for their marriage licenses at the King County Administration Building. Couples wait in line for their marriage licenses at the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 14 of 37 Same-sex couples wait for marriage licenses at the King County Administration Building. Same-sex couples wait for marriage licenses at the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 15 of 37 Image 16 of 37 Jeri Andrews, left, and her partner of five years Amy Andrews share a moment as gay couples wait in line outside of the King County Administration Building. Jeri Andrews, left, and her partner of five years Amy Andrews share a moment as gay couples wait in line outside of the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 17 of 37 Jane Abbott Lightly and her partner Pete-e Petersen, right, take an oath that information provided is correct as King County Executive Dow Constantine presents them with a marriage license. Jane Abbott Lightly and her partner Pete-e Petersen, right, take an oath that information provided is correct as King County Executive Dow Constantine presents them with a marriage license. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 18 of 37 Supporters applaud as Jane Abbott Lightly and her partner Pete-e Petersen, right, receive their marriage license from King County Executive Dow Constantine. Supporters applaud as Jane Abbott Lightly and her partner Pete-e Petersen, right, receive their marriage license from King County Executive Dow Constantine. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 19 of 37 Kelly Middleton, 24, and her partner Amanda Dollente, 29, embrace after they received their marriage license. Kelly Middleton, 24, and her partner Amanda Dollente, 29, embrace after they received their marriage license. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 20 of 37 Image 21 of 37 Parents Amanda Beane and Anne Bryson-Beane are given their marriage license by King County Executive Dow Constantine. Parents Amanda Beane and Anne Bryson-Beane are given their marriage license by King County Executive Dow Constantine. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 22 of 37 Parents Amanda Beane and Anne Bryson-Beane have help hoisting their marriage license as they are among the first to get the document. Parents Amanda Beane and Anne Bryson-Beane have help hoisting their marriage license as they are among the first to get the document. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 23 of 37 Gay couples wait in line outside of the King County Administration Building. Gay couples wait in line outside of the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 24 of 37 Zone Montoya, left, and Tasha Bassett leave to applause with their marriage license. Zone Montoya, left, and Tasha Bassett leave to applause with their marriage license. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 25 of 37 Image 26 of 37 State Senator Ed Murray greets same-sex couples as they wait to get marriage licenses. State Senator Ed Murray greets same-sex couples as they wait to get marriage licenses. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 27 of 37 Zone Montoya, left, and Tasha Bassett give an oath that information the provided was accurate. Zone Montoya, left, and Tasha Bassett give an oath that information the provided was accurate. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 28 of 37 Jeri Andrews, left, and her partner of five years Amy Andrews have their marriage license signed by King County Executive Dow Constantine. Jeri Andrews, left, and her partner of five years Amy Andrews have their marriage license signed by King County Executive Dow Constantine. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 29 of 37 Michael Shiosaki, Senator Ed Murray and columnist Dan Savage share a laugh after Savage was issued a marriage license. Michael Shiosaki, Senator Ed Murray and columnist Dan Savage share a laugh after Savage was issued a marriage license. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 30 of 37 Image 31 of 37 Junia Ribeiro, left, and her partner Patty Oh are greeted as the walk out of the King County Administration Building. Junia Ribeiro, left, and her partner Patty Oh are greeted as the walk out of the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 32 of 37 Jeri Andrews, left, and her partner of five years Amy Andrews walk out of the King County Administration Building with their marriage license. Jeri Andrews, left, and her partner of five years Amy Andrews walk out of the King County Administration Building with their marriage license. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 33 of 37 Jane Abbott Lightly and her partner Pete-e Petersen, right, celebrate as King County Executive Dow Constantine signs their marriage license. Jane Abbott Lightly and her partner Pete-e Petersen, right, celebrate as King County Executive Dow Constantine signs their marriage license. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 34 of 37 Kelly Middleton, 24, and her partner Amanda Dollente, 29, both of Auburn, are first in line as gay couples wait outside of the King County Administration Building. Kelly Middleton, 24, and her partner Amanda Dollente, 29, both of Auburn, are first in line as gay couples wait outside of the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 35 of 37 Image 36 of 37 The choir from the Madrona Liberation United Church of Christ performs as gay couples wait in line for marriage licenses outside of the King County Administration Building. The choir from the Madrona Liberation United Church of Christ performs as gay couples wait in line for marriage licenses outside of the King County Administration Building. Photo: JOSHUA TRUJILLO / SEATTLEPI.COM Image 37 of 37 Richland florist, who won't supply gay wedding, sues the state 1 / 37 Back to Gallery

The Alliance Defending Freedom, in its counter suit against Ferguson, cites Section 11 of the state constitution, which protects “freedom of conscience in all matters of religious sentiment, belief and worship” and guarantees that “no one shall be molested or disturbed in person or property on account of religion.”

The litigation, filed in Benton County Superior Court, argues that Stutzman had a problem “promoting” the same-sex ceremony, not with serving customers who identify as gay or lesbian. It notes that Stutzman “has been creating floral arrangements for Robert Ingersoll for nearly nine years.”

Anne Levinson, a former judge and Seattle deputy mayor, responded to the suit by arguing: “Ms. Stuzman, like any other business person, is entitled to her own beliefs, but that does not give her the right to pick and choose whom she will serve based on those beliefs. The Constitution protects the freedom to worship as one chooses, not the freedom to use religious beliefs to justify denying service.”

Levinson cited another case with origins in Oklahoma.

“In a federal lawsuit before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit, a police captain is arguing that he too has a religious right not to serve certain members of the public because they do not share his faith. The Islamic Society of Tulsa held a Law Enforcement Appreciation Day in 2011 to thank local police for protecting their center after it received threats during the previous year.

“The police captain claimed that attending or sending officers to the event would violate his religious beliefs, which require him to proselytize anyone who does not share his Christian faith. So one can readily see that this argument that religious beliefs should allow for discrimination in business and in the public square is not just about flowers.”

Washington, Maine and Maryland, in last November’s election, became the seventh, eighth and ninth states to approve marriage equality. The same-sex marriage legislation, Referendum 74, passed with a big margin in Puget Sound population centers but lost heavily in the Tri-Cities (Richland, Pasco and Kennewick).

Legislatures in Rhode Island, Delaware and Minnesota have, this year, brought to 12 states (and the District of Columbia) those in which couples of the same gender can wed. Gay and lesbian weddings in Washington began last December.