Democratic gov. candidate Jeff Greene: NRA ‘turns our kids into target practice’
Jeff Greene, a Democratic candidate for governor, has a new mailer accusing the National Rifle Association of "turning our kids into target practice."

The explosive mailer, sent out months after a school shooting in Parkland claimed 17 lives, harshly criticizes the national gun rights group for advocating for policies that Greene says make Floridians less safe.

"Gun violence has ravaged our state and families," reads the mailer, promoted by the campaign Tuesday. "Jeff will take on the NRA to make sure schools are safe for our kids and families are safe in our communities."

Longtime Florida NRA lobbyist Marion Hammer responded to the mailer Tuesday, calling it " repulsive."

"As a mother, grandmother and a proud NRA member for decades, I find his mailer repulsive," Hammer said in an email to the Tampa Bay Times. "It is clear that Jeff Green is bankrupt of ideas and he has to resort to these dumb ideas to try and get attention for himself and his campaign. When people can't win on fact, they have to resort to cheap stunts like this."

The mailer goes on to broadly list a number of Greene's gun-related policy proposals, saying he "will ban assault weapons and high-capacity magazines, fix the broken and loophole-ridden background check system, and block Trump's crazy plan to arm teachers."

All four of Greene's opponents in the Democratic primary — Andrew Gillum, Gwen Graham, Philip Levine and Chris King — have shared similar visions for Florida gun policy, but none have used imagery as dramatic as Greene's mailer.

Greene, a South Florida real estate billionaire, was the last of the five Democratic gubernatorial candidates to enter the race. At last week's gubernatorial debate, he made waves by promising to invest some of his fortune in Democratic candidates "up and down the ballot" should he claim the nomination.

Read more: Jeff Greene makes debut at Democratic debate with a special money offer

Check out the mailer here.

This post has been updated with reaction from NRA lobbyist Marion Hammer.