McCain Rejects Hagee Backing as Nazi Remarks Surface
SAN JOSE—Senator John McCain rejected the endorsement on Thursday of the evangelical leader, the Rev. John C. Hagee, three stormy months after it was first announced as part of an effort to shore up Mr. McCain’s standing among Christian conservatives.

The rejection of Mr. Hagee’s endorsement occurred after another controversial sermon from the televangelist and pastor of Cornerstone, a mega-church in San Antonio, surfaced in which he argued that biblical verses made clear that Adolf Hitler and the Holocaust was part of God’s plan to chase the Jews from Europe and drive them to Palestine.

“Obviously, I find these remarks and others deeply offensive and indefensible,” Mr. McCain said in a statement Thursday. “I did not know of them before Reverend Hagee’s endorsement, and I feel I must reject his endorsement as well.”

Audio of the latest controversial sermon by Mr. Hagee, from the late 1990s, was first posted last week by the Web site, Talk to Action, which scrutinizes the Christian right, and then reported by the Huffington Post.



Mr. Hagee quoted from the Old Testament Book of Jeremiah, Mr. Hagee said in his sermon, according to the Huffington Post, “And they the hunters should hunt them,” arguing this referred to “the Jews.”

He went on to read from the same passage, “From every mountain and from every hill and from out of the holes of the rocks.”

“If that doesn’t describe what Hitler did in the Holocaust, you can’t see that,” Mr. Hagee said.

At roughly the same time Mr. McCain’s campaign issued a statement repudiating Mr. Hagee on Thursday, Mr. Hagee himself put out a statement saying he had withdrawn his endorsement of Mr. McCain.

“Ever since I endorsed John McCain for president, people seeking to attack Senator McCain have combed my records for statements they can use for political gain,” Mr. Hagee said. “They have had no qualms about grossly misrepresenting my position on issues most near and dear to my heart if it serves their political ambitions. I am tired of these baseless attacks and fear that they have become a distraction in what should be a national debate about important issues. I have therefore decided to withdraw my endorsement of Senator McCain for President effective today, and to remove myself from any active role in the 2008 campaign.”

Prior to its repudiation of Mr. Hagee’s endorsement on Thursday, the McCain campaign had already endured a series of other disclosures of controversial past statements from Mr. Hagee about his views of Catholics, especially, as well as Jews.

Mr. McCain subsequently distanced himself from Mr. Hagee, saying he did not endorse all the views of his endorsers and condemned any of Mr. Hagee’s views that were offensive to Catholics. Mr. Hagee also sought to make amends with Catholics, who represent a crucial swing constituency in the general election.

The latest remarks from Mr. Hagee to surface strike at the heart of Mr. McCain’s efforts to reach another critical group, Jews, who have viewed Mr. McCain’s likely Democratic opponent, Senator Barack Obama, with suspicion.

Mr. Hagee’s controversial views are explained in part by his adherence to what is known in evangelical circles as dispensationalism, a literalistic approach to biblical prophecy that places a special emphasis on the role of the nation of Israel in the end of history.

Dispensationalists, who scholars say likely represent a vocal but small faction of evangelicals, believe that Israelites’ return to the promised land are a requirement of the second coming of Jesus Christ.

Mr. McCain’s advisers have admitted they did not vet Mr. Hagee’s background enough, although they began seeking his endorsement more than a year ago.

Mr. McCain has a rocky history with evangelicals, having once called the Rev. Jerry Falwell and the Rev. Pat Robertson “agents of intolerance.” Many evangelicals, who were crucial to President Bush’s re-election in 2004, remain skeptical of Mr. McCain, with many Republican leaders fretting they will not turn out for him this fall.

Mr. Obama, of course, has had his own troubles with regard to religious leaders, drawing fire for the controversial remarks of his former pastor, the Rev. Jeremiah Wright.

Mr. McCain sought to distinguish his ties to Mr. Hagee from Mr. Obama’s with Mr. Wright in his statement, saying: “I have said I do not believe Senator Obama shares Reverend Wright’s extreme views. But let me also be clear, Reverend Hagee was not and is not my pastor or spiritual advisor, and I did not attend his church for twenty years. I have denounced statements he made immediately upon learning of them, as I do again today.”

Updated | 10:10 p.m. Later today, Mr. McCain also rejected the endorsement of the Rev. Rod Parsley of the World Harvest Church of Columbus, Ohio, whose anti-Muslim sermons were broadcast on ABC’s “Good Morning America” on Thursday.