Report: Puerto Rico Truckers Union, “Frente Amplio”, Refuse to Deliver Supplies – Use Hurricane Maria as Contract Leverage…
Puerto Rican born and raised, Colonel Michael A. Valle (”Torch”), Commander, 101st Air and Space Operations Group, and Director of the Joint Air Component Coordination Element, 1st Air Force, responsible for Hurricane Maria relief efforts, has the following comment:

…They have the generators, water, food, medicine, and fuel on the ground, yet the supplies are not moving across the island as quickly as they’re needed.

“It’s a lack of drivers for the transport trucks, the 18 wheelers. Supplies we have. Trucks we have. There are ships full of supplies, backed up in the ports, waiting to have a vehicle to unload into. However, only 20% of the truck drivers show up to work. These are private citizens in Puerto Rico, paid by companies that are contracted by the government”.. (link)

The ports are so full of relief supplies they can’t fit any more on the available space. CNBC ground report confirms Colonel Valle’s ground report. WATCH:

.

The reason for truck drivers not showing up? The Puerto Rican Truckers Union, Frente Amplio, is refusing to move the product.

The older man in this video (below) is the boss of a very sketchy (corrupt and violent) Puerto Rico trucker’s union called Fente Amplio. The Union Leader’s name is Victor Rodriguez. The reporter is pleading with Rodriquez to set aside his political grievances with the Puerto Rican governor. Mr. Rodriquez (toothless) angrily shouts NO, and states the truck drivers have a right to be mad and will punish Puerto Rico to prove their union’s strength.

Labor union head Victor Rodriquez is complaining about a law that the governor passed three weeks ago. The reporter CONFIRMS that the truck drivers are refusing to work in order to get revenge on the governor. Rodriguez says that the governor’s policies have impacted truckers, so now truckers will show the country THEIR OWN suffering. The reporters says, “But all this stuff is in the past. In the present, it’s an emergency.” Rodriguez guy says that the country can now experience what the truckers experience due to the governor’s policies. Rodriquez says the truckers are not responsible for helping the country. That’s the governor’s job. Three weeks earlier, nobody cared about the plight of the truckers, so now the truckers don’t care about the country. This is all the governor’s fault, Rodriguez says. He passed a law, and now he has to live with it. The governor didn’t understand the suffering of the working man, so now the truckers will show the country what suffering is. Since the country doesn’t care about truckers, the truckers won’t help. (link)

Here’s another report with three independent sources confirming the work stoppage:

WAPA Television confirmed that the strike is related to a recently passed law known as “The Senate Project 525 meant to Administratively Transform the Public Service Commission.” The law covers the recognition of UBER and other transportation methods but Rodriguez refuses to listen to reason or hear related facts. The law is more commonly known as “The Senate’s 525 Project.” This video should dispel the rumors as to whether or not the supplies are sitting in the port because there isn’t fuel or because the drivers have been instructed NOT to drive.

There is no question that drivers were ordered NOT TO TOUCH THE TRUCKS as a retaliatory measure against the Governor of Puerto Rico. The Mayor of San Juan, Carmen Yulin decided to keep her mouth shut about the strike and insult President Trump instead. It was a foolish and unfortunate choice considering Puerto Rico is out in the middle of the ocean. President Trump doubled down his efforts and was preparing for the tragedy “even before” the hurricanes hit Puerto Rico.

Being a builder by profession and knowing what construction can handle (or not) Pres. Trump took tremendous measures and made extraordinary attempts to get goods to Puerto Rico and succeeded. The last thing he expected was that the local drivers would refuse to drive the trucks. When the statement of a rumor came up, we confirmed with three (3) independent and directly involved sources within media on the island as well as with Victor Rodriguez whether the “strike rumor” was true or not. Rodriguez stated that he would not change his position. (read more)

Did mayor of San Juan mention union workers at port are on STRIKE & demanding money first before distributing supplies off boat? #amjoy — Kambree Kawahine Koa (@KamVTV) September 30, 2017

50% of Puerto Rico's native National Guard members didn't report for duty when called in. https://t.co/uylhuKps35 — TheLastRefuge (@TheLastRefuge2) September 30, 2017

US MILITARY ON PUERTO RICO: "THE PROBLEM IS NOT FEDERAL, IT'S LOCAL DISTRIBUTION" https://t.co/SvSyYRcelx via @HuffPostBlog — TheLastRefuge (@TheLastRefuge2) September 30, 2017

Meanwhile, amid floods and lack of power the Mayor of San Juan, Carmen Yulin Cruz, finds a way to get propaganda T-Shirts to politicize the tragedy on very fake news CNN.

Go figure.