Mueller’s Insane Net Worth Just Uncovered And Everyone Wants To Know Where It’s From – Hillary?
In case you had any doubt as to Robert Mueller’s integrity, we now may be looking at confirmation of that he really is. And how crooked he really is.

Although the Democrats in the left wing press keep trying to convince us Robert Mueller is a stand-up guy, Red State Wave is currently reporting that his bank bills could be saying otherwise.

The report is alleging that Mueller’s Net Worth is $18 million bucks while he earns an yearly income of $2 million bucks. This would mean he has seen a hike of 64% over the past few decades.

Mueller is an American lawyer who had been the first Director Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation but also keep in mind that the former FBI manager James Comey was only earning a salary of $172,000.

The site, finapp.co.in goes on to claim that Mueller owns 4 luxury cars worth $740,000 and $8.4 million in several other investments.

“The highest degree of bias I’ve ever witnessed in almost any law enforcement officer” A really sick bargain, is not it?

“As the Russia probe moves forward, a growing number of dirty details on Robert Mueller are now emerging.

The day it was announced that Mueller was directing the Russia investigation, Julian Assange released a Wikileaks bombshell.

By Infowars

Assange’s email signaled that an investigation is needed to Mueller and his complex involvement with Russia and Uranium One, the firm Bill Clinton encouraged with Canadian entrepreneur Frank Giustra while Hillary Clinton served as Obama secretary of state in a criminal saga that ended up with Secretary Clinton voting to provide the Russian State Atomic Nuclear Energy Agency, Rosatom, management of approximately 20 percent of all uranium holdings in the USA.

Mueller’s involvement in the Clintons’ push to gain from selling 20 percent of U.S. uranium to Vladimir Putin’s Russian government should properly make him the target of a Department of Justice grand jury convened to examine the Clintons’ involvement with Uranium One, thus disqualifying him from functioning as Special Counsel appointed to examine the”no evidence” Democratic meme the Trump campaign”colluded” with Russia to steal the election from Hillary Clinton.

Along the way, Clinton secretly established WJC, LLC, a limited liability company registered in Delaware with his initials as a code easily recognized by Clinton family members to function as a”shell company” through which Giustra (and many others ) could make under-the-table money-laundered stock and cash payments to Clinton for services rendered, while various Canadian entrepreneurs left countless dollars in largely anonymous donations shuffled into the Clinton Foundation in New York City through Clinton Giustra Sustainable Development Initiative (CGSGI) in Canada.”

When did it get so rewarding for a public servant? Back in the day, people used to get work in government and they knew they had been trading off not earning as much cash for safety and an adequate pension.

Now when you get work in the public sector you are guaranteed more money, benefits and a better retirement than anyone else in the private industry, and you don’t have to work as hard or as often as men and women in the private sector. This must stop.

Not completely sure where Mueller’s countless came from and I’m not prepared to make accusations but isn’t it about time we investigate the investigator?

This guy has spent the past year seeking to take down our president on a fake story invented by Hillary Clinton and the others at the DNC, the very least we ought to understand about him is where his money originated from. Don’t you agree?

Featured Image Source H/T: RWNOfficial