Here's A List Of All The Monuments Liberals Want To Tear Down So Far
In the wake of the violence that took place in Charlottesville over last weekend, numerous activists and politicians have called for the destruction of more historical monuments, although a significant majority of Americans (62 percent) think the monuments should stay put. Only 27 percent of Americans think these statues should be removed for fear of offending some people. As usual, public opinion’s not stopping liberals from pursuing an unpopular agenda.

Though by no means comprehensive, here’s a list of the monuments that are facing calls for removal or have already been torn down.

1. The Jefferson Memorial in Washington DC

In a PBS interview, Al Sharpton called for the Jefferson Memorial in Washington DC to be abandoned because the third president of the United States and author of the Declaration of Independence was a slave owner.

2. Statues In The Capitol

Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) and Sen. Cory Booker (D-N.J.) have both called for statues commemorating Confederates to be removed from the U.S. Capitol.

I will be introducing a bill to remove Confederate statues from the US Capitol building. This is just one step. We have much work to do. — Cory Booker (@CoryBooker) August 17, 2017

The HuffPost got in on the action with this over-the-top headline.

The U.S. Capitol is basically a confederate statue bazaar https://t.co/I32ctS62mA pic.twitter.com/FsNJKKxtpR — HuffPost Politics (@HuffPostPol) August 17, 2017

3. Mount Rushmore

Vice News’s Wilbert L. Cooper called for Mount Rushmore to be destroyed because the U.S. presidents whose visages are carved into the mountainside are problematic by today’s standards.

4. Monuments In Baltimore

Baltimore Mayor Catherine Pugh had Civil War monuments removed from the city in the cover of night, without any public hearings or any public discussion process. Pugh told The New York Times that she used her emergency powers as mayor to take down statues of Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson from a public park — surprising even some members of the city council.

Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan also called for a statue memorializing Roger B. Taney, a Supreme Court justice who penned the infamous Dred Scott decision, which determined that anyone descended from a slave could not be an American citizen, be removed from the pedestal where it had been erected since 1887.

5. Stone Mountain

Democratic gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams called for a frieze depicting Confederate soldiers to be removed from Stone Mountain in Georgia.

6. Albert Pike Statue In Washington DC

In Washington DC, a group of protestors gathered on Sunday to call for the statue of Albert Pike, a Confederate general, to be torn down.

7. Chicago Parks Named After Washington And Jackson

A Chicago pastor has asked the mayor to remove the names of two former presidents — George Washington and Andrew Jackson — from city parks because both men owned slaves.

8. Confederate Soldiers Monument In Durham, North Carolina

The Confederate Soldiers Monument was torn down by protesters from its spot in front of the old Durham County Courthouse on Monday. Four have been arrested in connection to this instance of vandalism. The Workers World Party released a statement claiming that it should be their right to tear the monuments down.

9. Monuments Throughout The State of North Carolina

North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper has called for additional monuments to be torn down and is asking the state legislature to repeal a 2015 law that prevents the destruction of Civil War monuments.

10. Monuments Throughout The State of Virginia

In a statement released Wednesday afternoon, Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe is asking state legislators and city officials to tear down monuments throughout the Old Dominion.

11. ‘Old Joe’ Statue In Gainesville, Florida

In Gainesville, Florida, a statue of a Confederate soldier was removed Monday from outside a county administrative building.

12. Statues In Lexington, Kentucky

The City Council of Lexington, Kentucky voted unanimously on Tuesday to remove Confederate statues from the lawn in front of an old county courthouse. In response, a white nationalist group is reportedly planning a protest.

13. Statues In Louisville, Kentucky

On Monday, protesters gathered in favor of removing a statue of Civil War officer John B. Castleman from Louisville, Kentucky.

14. Statues In Nashville Tennessee, Including One On Private Property

In Nashville, Tennessee, protestors gathered to call for the removal of a monument depicting Nathan Bedford Forrest, a lieutenant in the Confederate army, from the state capitol on Monday. People have also called for a memorial of Forrest, which sits on private property, to be hidden from view of the nearby highway.

15. Two Statues Vandalized In Wilmington, North Carolina

“A white flag was hung on the gun of the statue and its head and feet were spray painted,” WECT reports. “Officers were called back to the scene and found a rope tied to the statue’s neck. Upon examination, officers said they believe it was likely tied to a vehicle in an attempt to pull the statue over.”

Another statue was marked with graffiti.

16. A Cemetery Marker In Los Angeles

A statue that stood in the Confederate section of Hollywood Forever Cemetery for more than 90 years was toppled on Wednesday, Los Angeles Times reports. A plaque commemorating Jefferson Davis was also removed from a park this week.