Reports of Jay-Z setting up $15 million trust fund for Nipsey Hussle’s kids are false
In the midst of finding out the beloved rapper and Crenshaw community hero Nipsey Hussle was fatally shot and killed, emotions ran high and stories swirled — some even tried to profit off of clicks generated from a very painful episode in rap culture.

READ MORE: After death of Nipsey Hussle social media sleuths take on Dr. Sebi conspiracy theories

One such story was of Jay-Z creating a $15 million-dollar trust fund in the name of Hussle’s two children. It was a clutch-the-pearls, feel good type story that made many who read it applaud the rapper for stepping up for a fallen hip hop comrade. And it seemed true enough given Jay’s reputation for benevolence, except it was all fake news.

The false report was started from a random hip hop blog that specializes in sensational news in an effort to promote ads, South African news website The Times Live reports.

Sadly, once folks got wind of that one report, the fake news spread like wildfire with Jay receiving high praise for what folks’ thought was a very honorable philanthropic act.

Mehn JAY Z got this hip hop OG on lock! Man moving tables to support and help always. pic.twitter.com/p8Tw1WKin5 — ex (@shawnexes) April 4, 2019

Others warned against allowing fake news to consume them at a very vulnerable time.

The tragic murder of Nipsey Hussle has left many in search of light in a seemingly endless dark tunnel. Please don’t allow fake news to bank on your grief. pic.twitter.com/rzJJUNwvOm — DeMicia (@_miciagirl) April 4, 2019

But it turns out no representative from ROC Nation, the entertainment company founded by Jay-Z himself ever put out any announcement of such an act. The rapper does have a history with Hussle, having purchased 100 copies of one of his early mixtapes, catapulting his rap career.

Hussle had also requested ROC Nation to participate with him in a meeting with the LAPD to address gang violence in Los Angeles on April 1, but he was killed a day before it was set to take place.

READ MORE: Nipsey Hussle Murder Trial: Why is O.J. prosecutor Chris Darden defending accused shooter Eric Holder?

Nipsey Hussle’s memorial to be held at Staples Center

Meanwhile, Hussle’s family of slain rapper after searching multiple venues, have announced that his memorial service will be held Thursday, April 11 at L.A.’s Staples Center, TMZ confirmed.

The 21,000-seat venue had previously hosted Michael Jackson’s memorial in 2009. According to social strategist and close family friend, Karen Civil, tickets to the memorial service will not be sold or made available to the public as has been reported by several outlets.

READ MORE: Nipsey Hussle’s memorial service to be held at famed L.A. Staples Center