Trump Jr. retweets Roseanne's conspiracy theory about George Soros
Donald Trump Jr. Donald (Don) John TrumpManafort’s plea deal – the clear winners and losers Kerry: Trump should be worried about Manafort talking to Mueller, not me talking to Iranians Five takeaways from Manafort’s plea deal MORE retweeted a conspiracy theory promoted by Roseanne Barr saying in part that Democratic mega-donor George Soros was a Nazi.

The retweets from the president's eldest son come after Barr issued a string of tweets on Monday falsely claiming Chelsea Clinton was married to Soros's nephew and that Soros's goal was to overthrow the U.S. government.

"Sorry to have tweeted incorrect info about you!I Please forgive me! By the way, George Soros is a nazi who turned in his fellow Jews 2 be murdered in German concentration camps & stole their wealth-were you aware of that? But, we all make mistakes, right Chelsea?" Barr tweeted on Tuesday morning.

"Soros' goal; the overthrow of us constitutional republic by buying/backing candidates 4 local district attorney races who will ignore US law & favor 'feelings' instead-and call everyone who is alarmed by that 'racist'," she wrote in another tweet.

ICYMI: Don Jr. has been retweeting Roseanne. pic.twitter.com/0sv8XjOSLb — Kyle Griffin (@kylegriffin1) May 29, 2018

Chelsea Soros Clinton — Roseanne Barr (@therealroseanne) May 29, 2018

soros' goal; the overthrow of us constitutional republic by buying/backing candidates 4 local district attorney races who will ignore US law & favor 'feelings' instead-and call everyone who is alarmed by that 'racist'. — Roseanne Barr (@therealroseanne) May 29, 2018

Trump Jr. retweeted her comments later on Tuesday.

Soros responded to the claims through his spokesperson on Tuesday, saying the remarks calling him a Nazi were an insult to Holocaust victims.

ADVERTISEMENT

"George Soros survived the Nazi occupation of Hungary as a 13-year-old child by going into hiding and assuming a false identity with the help of his father, who managed to save his own family and help many other Jews survive the Holocaust," Soros's spokesperson said in a statement to New York Daily News.

Barr also sent out a racially charged tweet in which she referred to former Obama adviser Valerie Jarret as a child of the Islamist organization Muslim Brotherhood and the movie "Planet of the Apes."

Barr later apologized for the post, but ABC announced on Tuesday it would be canceling its "Roseanne" sitcom reboot in light of Barr's comments.