McConnell maintains that Senate won't take up election reform bill
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellTaylor Swift urges GOP senator to support Equality Act: 'I personally reject the President's stance' Two years after Trump's Paris climate move, frustrated Democrats eye 2020 Hillicon Valley: Mueller remarks put spotlight on election security bills | US to ask visa applicants for social media info | Tech blasts Trump tariffs on Mexico MORE (R-Ky.) maintained Wednesday that the upper chamber wouldn't take up a House election reform bill.

McConnell reiterated his position when pressed about why he has only pledged to bring the progressive Green New Deal to the floor for a vote and not the election reform bill.

"Because I get to decide what we vote on," McConnell quipped.

Q: "Why is the #GreenNewDeal getting a vote in the Senate when #HR1 is not?"@senatemajldr: "Because I get to decide what we vote on." pic.twitter.com/3AMXoedktS — CSPAN (@cspan) March 6, 2019

ADVERTISEMENT

The Kentucky senator said earlier this week that House Democrats' sweeping anticorruption bill, known as H.R. 1, would never become law.

"This sprawling 622-page doorstop is never going to become law. I certainly don't plan to even bring it to the floor here in the Senate," McConnell said of the legislation Monday.

The legislation aims to expand voting rights by creating automatic voter registration and making Election Day a national holiday for federal workers.

McConnell, who as Senate GOP leader controls the chamber's floor schedule, acknowledged that "there's always improvements and reforms to be made, but this certainly isn't."

Meanwhile, McConnell has vowed to force a vote on the Green New Deal resolution before the August recess.

The resolution, which was introduced last month by Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Alexandria Ocasio-CortezOcasio-Cortez returns to bartending in support of tipped workers: 'Still got it!' 20 percent of Americans can't define 'socialism' even as it's become the focus of 2020 Gallup editor-in-chief: Democratic socialist parties in Europe have popularized the political philosophy MORE (D-N.Y.) and Ed Markey Edward (Ed) John MarkeyHillicon Valley: Facebook shareholders reject proposals to limit Zuckerberg's power | Google cracks down on video game 'loot boxes' | California moves closer to protecting gig economy workers Google cracks down on video game 'loot boxes' amid child gambling concerns Hillicon Valley: Assange hit with 17 more charges | Facebook removes record 2.2B fake profiles | Senate passes anti-robocall bill | Senators offer bill to help companies remove Huawei equipment MORE (D-Mass.), calls for the federal government to make bold reforms as part of an effort to reach net-zero greenhouse gas emissions.

McConnell argued last month that Democrats were trying to avoid going on record about the liberal policy aimed at combating climate change.

"The only thing I would ask is if this is such a popular thing to do and so necessary, why would one to dodge the vote. This is an opportunity to go on record. … It's a debate we'll have in all likelihood sometime before the August break," McConnell said.

Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Charles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerDemocratic strategist says McConnell's comments on Supreme Court vacancy are 'a blessing' Democrats blast McConnell for saying Republicans would fill a 2020 Supreme Court vacancy McConnell says Republicans would fill 2020 Supreme Court vacancy MORE (D-N.Y.) has criticized McConnell's motives, arguing that his plan to force a vote on the progressive proposal is a "diversion" from having a debate on climate change.

"The games they are playing here will have no meaning. This is not a debate. It's a diversion. It's a sham," Schumer said from the Senate floor last month.