CNN’s Camerota presses Kaine over refusal to do any Senate business before shutdown ends
CNN anchor Alisyn Camerota on Wednesday pressed Sen. Tim Kaine Timothy (Tim) Michael KaineNortham faces mounting calls to resign over KKK, blackface photo Overnight Defense — Presented by Raytheon — Senate admonishes Trump on Syria | Trump says 'time will prove' him right over Intel chiefs | Dems demand transparency on border troops | Sexual assault, harassment spike at military academies Senate admonishes Trump on Syria MORE (D-Va.) over the vow of some Senate Democrats to block all votes during the partial government shutdown.

Camerota, the host of "New Day," said Democrats were making "the wheels of government grind to a complete" halt.

ADVERTISEMENT

"That's not what we're doing," Kaine responded.

"There is a bill on the desk of the Senate — actually two bills right now. One to fund all the government through the end of the year, the shuttered agencies, except the immigration agencies, they would be funded through February 1," Kaine added.

"I believe the top priority of Congress right now should be to reopen government and quit punishing worker citizens," he said.

Pres. Trump “wants immigration as a talking point to rev people up and he's willing to say anything. … There is a deal to be had here, but first we've got to reopen government,” Sen. @timkaine says on the shutdown https://t.co/dNAG3uER7O pic.twitter.com/pe8QeR22V4 — New Day (@NewDay) January 9, 2019

Kaine in a tweet earlier this week called for the Senate to not vote on any legislation until the government is reopened. He and other Senate Democrats are looking to pressure Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellFive takeaways from the latest fundraising reports in the lead-up to 2020 Endorsing Trump isn’t the easiest decision for some Republicans Overnight Defense — Presented by Raytheon — Senate admonishes Trump on Syria | Trump says 'time will prove' him right over Intel chiefs | Dems demand transparency on border troops | Sexual assault, harassment spike at military academies MORE (R-Ky.) into allowing a vote to reopen the government.

“So the right strategy is to reopen government and then we can find an immigration and border security deal and deal with the other business that's before us," he said on Wednesday.

The shutdown, currently in its 19th day, began after President Trump Donald John TrumpDozens of undocumented workers terminated from Trump properties: report Trump: Pelosi is 'very bad for our country' Dem lawmaker to bring former Trump property undocumented worker to State of the Union MORE refused last month to sign a funding bill that didn't include at least $5 billion for a wall along the southern border.

Trump is scheduled to meet Wednesday with Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) and Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer (D-N.Y.) to resume negotiations over border security.

The meeting will come after Trump gave a prime-time address from the Oval Office on Tuesday evening in which he claimed a wall is necessary to confront a “growing humanitarian and security crisis” at the southern border.

Democrats have vowed not to approve any funding for a wall.