Two prosecutors leaving Mueller team
Two Justice Department prosecutors assigned to special counsel Robert Mueller Robert (Bob) Swan MuellerSchiff says Intel panel will hold 'series' of hearings on Mueller report Schiff says Intel panel will hold 'series' of hearings on Mueller report Key House panel faces pivotal week on Trump MORE's ongoing investigation are leaving the office to return to previous postings.

Peter Carr, a spokesman for the special counsel's office, confirmed in an email to The Hill that Kyle Freeny and Brandon Van Grack are leaving the probe.

The two prosecutors had worked on the criminal cases involving former Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort Paul John ManafortKey figure that Mueller report linked to Russia was a State Department intel source Key figure that Mueller report linked to Russia was a State Department intel source Ocasio-Cortez says Manafort, others should be released from solitary confinement MORE, Carr added.

Van Grack recently left the probe to return to the agency's national security division, while Freeny will remain on until mid-October before returning to the agency's criminal division.

Carr said Van Grack will continue to contribute to the special counsel investigation "on specific pending matters that were assigned to him during his detail."

ADVERTISEMENT

The spokesman told CNN that the prosecutors' return to previous postings were not a result of disciplinary measures.

The investigation reached a new milestone last month with an agreement from Manafort to plead guilty ahead of a second trial in Washington, D.C., to numerous criminal charges surrounding his lobbying work in Ukraine and subsequent efforts to launder money through foreign bank accounts.

Manafort is set to be sentenced later this year as part of his trial in Virginia, where a jury convicted him on eight counts. Former national security adviser Michael Flynn, who pleaded guilty in 2017 to lying to the FBI about his contacts with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak during the presidential transition, is also slated to be sentenced later this year.

BuzzFeed News reported in late September that Mueller's team is still investigating millions of dollars in payments made between two organizers of the June 2016 Trump Tower meeting between Donald Trump Jr. Donald (Don) John TrumpTrump property in Ireland promotes president's visit Trump property in Ireland promotes president's visit Six notable moments from Trump's Europe trip MORE, top Trump campaign executives and a Russian lawyer who promised damaging information on Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonChris Pine on 'MAGA' slogan: 'What period of history are we talking about? Jim Crow?' Chris Pine on 'MAGA' slogan: 'What period of history are we talking about? Jim Crow?' Biden World shell-shocked amid Hyde furor MORE.

The president has frequently lashed out against the ongoing investigation, which he has characterized as a "witch hunt" conjured by "angry Democrats" to undermine his presidency.