The 81 names targeted in Democrats' expansive Trump probe
House Judiciary Committee Chairman Jerrold Nadler (D-N.Y.) on Monday issued document requests to 81 individuals and entities as part of a sweeping investigation into President Trump Donald John TrumpTrump says 'Failing New York Times' should be held 'fully accountable' over Russia report Trump says 'Failing New York Times' should be held 'fully accountable' over Russia report Trump tweets ICE will begin removing 'millions' of undocumented migrants MORE’s campaign, business and administration.

The investigation will focus on three key areas, Nadler said: obstruction of justice, public corruption and abuses of power.

Here’s a look at each person or group Nadler served with document requests.

1. Alan Garten

Garten serves as the chief legal counsel for the Trump Organization.

2. Alexander Nix

Nix previously served as the head of Cambridge Analytica, a data firm that did work for the Trump campaign and was later embroiled in a Facebook privacy scandal.

3. Allen Weisselberg

Weisselberg is the chief financial officer of the Trump Organization, and has worked for the Trump family for decades. Michael Cohen identified him last week to lawmakers as an individual who was aware of the president’s asset inflation and a scheme to silence women who alleged affairs with Trump.

4. American Media Inc. (AMI)

AMI is the publisher of the National Enquirer and has been accused of engaging in “catch and kill,” a scheme to purchase unflattering stories about Trump and bury them.

5. Anatoli Samochornov

Samochornov was a translator for Russian lawyer Natalia Veselnitskaya at a 2016 Trump Tower meeting. Veselnitskaya had promised Trump associates damaging information on former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonBroadway play 'Hillary and Clinton' closing early due to low ticket sales Broadway play 'Hillary and Clinton' closing early due to low ticket sales Facing challenge from Warren, Sanders touts strength against Trump MORE ahead of the meeting, but other attendees — including Donald Trump Jr. Donald (Don) John TrumpEx-state senator in North Carolina enters race against Tillis Trump remarks deepen distrust with intelligence community Trump remarks deepen distrust with intelligence community MORE — said no such information was shared.

6. Andrew Intrater

Intrater is the head of investment firm Columbus Nova and has ties to Russian oligarch Viktor Vekselberg. The New York Times reported that Intrater gave Trump attorney Michael Cohen a $1 million consulting contract in 2017.

7. Annie Donaldson

Donaldson served as chief of staff to former White House counsel Donald McGahn Donald (Don) F. McGahnAmerica has no time to wait for impeachment Election agency limps into 2020 cycle The Memo: Mueller's depictions will fuel Trump angst MORE, who left the administration in October.

8. Brad Parscale

Parscale worked for the Trump Organization prior to joining the president’s 2016 presidential campaign to oversee digital operations. Parscale is the campaign manager for the president’s 2020 reelection bid.

9. Brittany Kaiser

Kaiser is a former employee of Cambridge Analytica and was subpoenaed earlier this year in special counsel Robert Mueller Robert (Bob) Swan MuellerKamala Harris says her Justice Dept would have 'no choice' but to prosecute Trump for obstruction Kamala Harris says her Justice Dept would have 'no choice' but to prosecute Trump for obstruction Dem committees win new powers to investigate Trump MORE’s investigation.

10. Cambridge Analytica

The data firm made headlines last year over a privacy scandal involving millions of users’ Facebook data. The firm did work for the Trump campaign and has ties to former White House chief strategist Stephen Bannon.

11. Carter Page

Page served as a foreign policy adviser to the Trump campaign and has faced intense scrutiny over his contacts with Russia. Page is also the subject of a Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act warrant issued against him to wiretap his conversations over concerns raised by his Russian ties. Some House Republicans have claimed the warrant was an overreach of Justice Department surveillance powers and proof of bias against Trump within the department.

12. Columbus Nova

Columbus Nova is a private equity firm headed by Andrew Intrater, who is cousins and business associates with Russian oligarch Viktor Vekselberg.

13. Concord Management and Consulting

The Russian consulting firm is one of several groups indicted by Mueller for interfering in the 2016 presidential election and is accused of helping to fund a Russian troll farm. The company is linked to Russian oligarch Yevgeniy Viktorovich Prigozhin, who is known as “Putin’s chef” over his proximity to Putin. Concord is the only Russian entity to fight Mueller’s charge in court.

14. Corey Lewandowski Corey R. LewandowskiMichael Caputo eyes congressional bid Clinton lawyer: Mueller's failure to draw conclusion on obstruction a 'massive dereliction' of duty Mueller's facts vs Trump's spin MORE

Lewandowski worked as Trump’s campaign manager until his firing in June 2016.

15. David Pecker

Pecker is the chairman of American Media Inc., the publisher of the National Enquirer. He reportedly received immunity from prosecutors in the investigation into payments to women who alleged affairs with the president.

16. Department of Justice

Trump has come under scrutiny for his frequent criticism of DOJ officials, including former FBI Director James Comey James Brien ComeyPress: Why do we need a new press secretary? Five memorable moments from Sarah Sanders at the White House Five memorable moments from Sarah Sanders at the White House MORE, former Deputy FBI Director Andrew McCabe Andrew George McCabeMcCabe says it's 'absolutely' time to launch impeachment inquiry into Trump McCabe says it's 'absolutely' time to launch impeachment inquiry into Trump Feds gone wild: DOJ's stunning inability to prosecute its own bad actors MORE and former Attorney General Jeff Sessions Jefferson (Jeff) Beauregard SessionsSarah Sanders to leave White House Sarah Sanders to leave White House Barr compares his return to DOJ to D-Day invasion MORE, who each at one point had oversight for the Russia probe. The president’s firing of Comey sparked the appointment of special counsel Robert Mueller.

17. Donald McGahn

McGahn worked as the White House counsel until his departure in October. McGahn reportedly sat for hours of interviews with the special counsel’s office and is said to have persuaded the president not to fire Robert Mueller.

18. Donald J. Trump Revocable Trust

The trust holds the president’s business assets, ostensibly so that he avoids conflicts of interest during his presidency. Experts, however, have warned that that the trust provides little distance between Trump and his business empire.

19. Donald Trump Jr.

The president’s oldest son is an executive vice president of the Trump Organization, and has drawn scrutiny from investigators over his involvement in and subsequent cover-up of a summer 2016 meeting with a Russian lawyer who promised damaging information on his father’s then-opponent, Hillary Clinton.

20. Dylan Howard

Howard is the chief content officer for American Media Inc. Michael Cohen testified that Howard would have information on “catch and kill” efforts on stories related to the president.

21. Eric Trump Eric Frederick TrumpTrump property in Ireland promotes president's visit Trump property in Ireland promotes president's visit Six notable moments from Trump's Europe trip MORE

Eric Trump is the president’s son and an executive vice president of the Trump Organization, largely overseeing the family business during his father’s presidency.

22. Erik Prince

The former Blackwater head caught the eye of investigators over a meeting he reportedly arranged between Donald Trump Jr. and a Gulf emissary in August 2016, the first sign a country other than Russia had sought to influence the presidential election. Prince, whose sister is Education Secretary Betsy DeVos Elizabeth (Betsy) Dee DeVosThe Hill's 12:30 Report — Presented by MAPRx — Biden, Sanders to share stage at first DNC debate The Hill's 12:30 Report — Presented by MAPRx — Biden, Sanders to share stage at first DNC debate The Hill's Morning Report — Uproar after Trump's defense of foreign dirt on candidates MORE, said last year that he has cooperated fully in the Mueller probe.

23. Federal Bureau of Investigation

Trump has been fiercely critical of former FBI leaders James Comey and Andrew McCabe. The president fired Comey in May 2017, sparking the appointment of the special counsel. The bureau first began investigating possible Russian interference in the 2016 election

24. Felix Sater

Sater is the Russian businessman at the heart of negotiations over the attempted Trump Tower Moscow project. Sater worked with Michael Cohen on the real estate project, which never came to fruition. Sater will also appear in a public hearing before the House Intelligence Committee later this month.

25. Flynn Intel Group

The Flynn Intel Group is a now-defunct lobbying organization created by former national security adviser Michael Flynn. The retired general and another partner at the group have since been implicated in illegal lobbying efforts in Turkey.

26. General Services Administration

The federal agency was reprimanded in an internal watchdog report last month stating it failed to properly assess the constitutional ramifications of allowing the Trump family to continue its lease on the old D.C. post office building following the 2016 election.

27. George Nader

Nader is a Lebanese-American businessman who serves as an adviser to the crown prince of the United Arab Emirates. The special counsel’s office has reportedly examined Nader’s influence on Trump administration policy.

28. George PapadopoulosGeorge Demetrios PapadopoulosInquiry into origins of Russia investigation is a scam Trump accuses Democrats of crime amid rising calls for impeachment Comey: Trump peddling 'dumb lies' MORE

The former Trump campaign staffer was first thrust into the national spotlight when he pleaded guilty to lying to FBI agents as part of special counsel Robert Mueller’s probe. Since that guilty plea, Papadopoulos has disputed the Trump campaign’s assertion that he was essentially a “coffee boy” for the campaign, saying he consulted on foreign policy.

29. Hope Hicks Hope Charlotte HicksThe Hill's Morning Report - Trump and House Democrats resume battle The Hill's Morning Report - Trump and House Democrats resume battle Hope Hicks agrees to testify before House panel MORE

Hicks worked as the spokeswoman for the Trump campaign in 2016 and later joined the White House as the communications director. She left the administration in February 2018.

30. Irakly Kaveladze

Kaveladze is an associate of Russian developer Aras Agalarov and was one of the attendees of a 2016 meeting at Trump Tower where a Russian lawyer promised Trump associates damaging information on Hillary Clinton.

31. Jared Kushner Jared Corey KushnerDemocrats ask OSC to review whether Kushner violated Hatch Act Democrats ask OSC to review whether Kushner violated Hatch Act Financial disclosure form shows Ivanka Trump earned M from DC Trump hotel MORE

Kushner is married to Trump’s daughter, Ivanka, and serves as a senior adviser to the president. He has come under scrutiny during his time in the administration over concerns regarding his security clearance. The New York Times reported that the president last year ordered Kushner be given a top secret clearance against the concerns of intelligence officials.

32. Jason Maloni

Maloni worked as a spokesman for Paul Manafort Paul John ManafortJustice Department intervenes, keeps Manafort from being sent to Rikers Island: report Justice Department intervenes, keeps Manafort from being sent to Rikers Island: report The Hill's 12:30 Report — Presented by MAPRx — Supreme Court double jeopardy ruling could impact Manafort MORE, the former Trump campaign chairman who was convicted of bank and tax fraud in the Mueller investigation.

33. Jay Sekulow

Sekulow is one of Trump’s personal attorney representing the president in the special counsel’s investigation.

34. Jeff Sessions

Sessions served as the attorney general until his resignation in November. He recused himself from overseeing the special counsel’s investigation because of previously undisclosed contact with a Russian official during the 2016 campaign, prompting relentless criticism from the president.

35. Jerome Corsi

Corsi, a conspiracy theorist known for promoting the unfounded Obama birther theory, landed in investigator’s crosshairs over messages he exchanged with Roger Stone Roger Jason StoneHouse panel subpoenas Flynn, Gates House panel subpoenas Flynn, Gates Court orders release of sealed documents in mysterious Mueller grand jury case MORE about WikiLeaks’s forthcoming release of hacked Democratic emails during the 2016 campaign. He also was given draft court documents by Mueller’s team last year alleging he had made a false statement to the investigators, but has since said he no longer believes he will be indicted.

36. John Szobocsan

Szobocsan was an associate of the late Peter Smith, a GOP operative who sought to track down missing Hillary Clinton emails from Russian hackers.

37. Julian Assange

The infamous WikiLeaks founder has been at the heart of investigations over his organization’s release of damaging Democratic emails ahead of the 2016 presidential election. But Assange may already be facing sealed charges filed against him, after a court filing in a separate case mistakenly named him.

38. Julian Wheatland

Wheatland was named the chief executive of Cambridge Analytica in April in the aftermath of a privacy scandal that plagued the data firm, according to The Wall Street Journal.

39. Keith Davidson

Davidson was an attorney for both Stormy Daniels and former Playboy model Karen McDougal. He arranged agreements between the women and American Media Inc. as part of “catch and kill” schemes to silence their allegations of an affair with Trump.

40. K.T. McFarland

McFarland was deputy to former national security adviser Michael Flynn. She came under fire after her testimony before the Senate claiming she was “not aware” of Flynn’s contacts with Russians during the transition was at odds with emails she exchanged during that period of time. She also has interviewed with Mueller, but revised her statement after the conflicting accounts emerged.

41. Mark CoralloMark CoralloThe 81 names targeted in Democrats' expansive Trump probe The Memo: Capitol Hill braces for Cohen fireworks The Memo: Trump allies fret as legal troubles multiply MORE

Corallo previously worked as a spokesman for Trump’s legal team who reportedly spoke to the special counsel about the administration’s attempts to coordinate an explanation for a summer 2016 Trump Tower meeting with a Russian lawyer.

42. Matt Tait

Tait is a U.K.-based security consultant who alleged the late GOP operative Peter Smith tried to recruit him to find Hillary Clinton’s missing emails.

43. Matthew Calamari

Calamari is an executive vice president of the Trump Organization. He previously worked as Trump’s bodyguard.

44. Michael Caputo

Caputo worked as a communications adviser on the Trump campaign and has spoken with special counsel Robert Mueller’s team.

45. Michael Cohen

Cohen worked for roughly a decade as Trump’s personal attorney and "fixer." In testimony to House lawmakers, he implicated the president in potentially criminal activity, including bank fraud and campaign finance law violations. Cohen faces a three year prison sentence for a host of charges he pleaded guilty to last year.

46. Michael Flynn

Flynn served a brief stint as Trump’s national security adviser, but has remained a central figure in investigations into the administration. Trump said in February 2017 that he fired Flynn for lying to the vice president, but later tweeted he also fired the retired general for lying to the FBI, raising questions about whether the president obstructed justice. Flynn has pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI about contacts with a Russian official and admitted to lying about lobbying efforts for Turkey.

47. Michael Flynn Jr.

Flynn Jr., the son of the former national security adviser, had a brief role on the Trump transition team, but was fired after he promoted a conspiracy theory.

48. Paul Erickson

Erickson is a conservative political operative and the boyfriend of Maria Butina, who admitted last year to working as an agent of the Russian government. Butina’s attorneys identified Erickson as an individual who helped her establish unofficial lines of communications with people able to influence U.S. politics leading up to the 2016 election.

49. Paul Manafort

Manafort was the Trump campaign's chairman for the months leading up to the 2016 election. He has since been convicted in the special counsel’s investigation on bank fraud and tax fraud charges.

50. Peter Smith (Estate)

Smith, a longtime GOP operative who died by suicide last year, had reportedly raised thousands of dollars to try to obtain emails he believed were stolen from Hillary Clinton ahead of the 2016 election. But investigators are likely most interested in the Wall Street Journal’s reporting that Smith was in touch with Michael Flynn ahead of his search for Clinton’s emails.

51. Randy Credico

Credico, a New York radio host, found himself testifying with congressional investigators after Roger Stone claimed that Credico was his back channel to WikiLeaks. Credico has repeatedly denied the allegation, saying that he did not get inside knowledge from Julian Assange and the group ahead of the WikiLeaks email dumps.

52. Reince Priebus Reinhold (Reince) Richard PriebusOvernight Defense: Inside the 3B House defense policy bill | Senators take new tack to challenge Saudi arms sales | Raytheon, United Technologies to merge Overnight Defense: Inside the 3B House defense policy bill | Senators take new tack to challenge Saudi arms sales | Raytheon, United Technologies to merge Former Trump chief of staff Reince Priebus officially joins Navy MORE

Priebus was the chairman of the Republican National Committee during the 2016 campaign and went on to serve as Trump’s first chief of staff. He left the administration in the summer of 2017.

53. Rhona Graff

Graff served as President Trump’s longtime secretary at the Trump Organization. Michael Cohen repeatedly pointed to her as being able to corroborate his testimony during his public hearing last week.

54. Rinat Akhmetshin

Akhmetshin, a former Soviet military officer, was one of several Russians who attended a meeting in Trump Tower with Trump campaign officials during the 2016 election. BuzzFeed News reported last month that he received half a million dollars in deposits linked to a Russian businessman around the time of the meeting.

55. Rob Goldstone

Goldstone is a British publicist who set up the 2016 meeting at Trump Tower between members of the campaign and a Russian lawyer promising dirt on Hillary Clinton.

56. Roger Stone

The self-described GOP political trickster has been eyed by investigators for years now, after Stone made statements during the 2016 presidential election that suggested he had prior knowledge of WikiLeaks’s dump of damaging Democratic emails. Stone, who was arrested and charged earlier this year by Mueller for making false statements to Congress, has denied having any direct contact with WikiLeaks, maintaining that he instead had a back channel to the group.

57. Ronald Lieberman

Lieberman is an executive vice president of the Trump Organization. Michael Cohen testified that Lieberman was aware that the president had inflated his assets to an insurance company.

58. Sam Nunberg

Nunberg served as a staffer for the Trump campaign before being fired for breaching a confidentiality agreement. He has testified with Mueller’s team, after initially publicly announcing that he would defy the subpoena, and has also met with congressional investigators. Nunberg is also known to have made false statements in the past.

59. SCL Group Limited

SCL Group Limited is the parent company of Cambridge Analytica, the data firm with ties to the Trump campaign that was embroiled in a Facebook data privacy scandal last year.

60. Sean Spicer Sean Michael SpicerWhat President Trump needs in his next press secretary Five memorable moments from Sarah Sanders at the White House Five memorable moments from Sarah Sanders at the White House MORE

Spicer was the communications director for the Republican National Committee and worked as the party’s chief strategist leading up to Trump’s election. He went on to serve as White House press secretary for six months.

61. Sheri Dillon

Dillon has worked as a tax lawyer for the president. House lawmakers said earlier this month that Dillon may have given false information to government ethics officials about payments to women who alleged affairs with Trump.

62. Stefan Passantino

Passantino previously oversaw compliance with ethics rules during a stint in the Trump White House. He has since reportedly joined a private law firm run by former White House chief of staff Reince Priebus.

63. Stephen Bannon

Bannon worked as the chief executive on the Trump campaign and went on to serve as White House chief strategist. He left the administration in the summer of 2017.

64. Ted Malloch

Malloch, an American businessman said to have played a minor role in the Trump campaign, claimed last year that he was detained and questioned by the FBI at Boston’s Logan Airport about his involvement in the Trump campaign and his contacts with Roger Stone.

65. The White House

White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Monday that White House officials will review and respond to Nadler’s request “at the appropriate time.”

66. Trump campaign

The president’s 2016 election bid has been the subject of several investigations, probing whether it colluded with Russia to win the election. Campaign figures, including former head Paul Manafort, Donald Trump Jr. and Jared Kushner, have been questioned by investigators over their roles and what they observed during the course of the campaign.

67. Trump Foundation

The president’s private charity is already the subject of a lawsuit with New York state, alleging that it participated in a “shocking pattern of illegality.” Among the allegations are that Trump used the charity to illegally benefit his campaign, as well as settle issues with his privately owned Mar-a-Lago estate.

68. Trump Organization

Questions about the president’s private business have been a sticking point for Democrats, some of whom have suggested that Trump may be using the presidency for financial benefit. Trump handed over responsibility of his company to his adult sons, Eric Trump and Donald Trump Jr., but questions about the role of the Trump Organization even before the election, including negotiations on the Trump Tower Moscow project, have lingered.

69. Trump transition

The team overseeing Trump’s transition into the presidency is also facing questions from investigators. Michael Flynn’s contacts with Russians during the transition and Jared Kushner reportedly being the official who ordered him to do so have captured widespread media attention.

70. Viktor Vekselberg

Vekselberg is a Russian billionaire with ties to the Kremlin. He was a target of U.S. sanctions last year related to Russia's election interference. He reportedly attended Trump’s inauguration and has spoken with investigators from the special counsel’s team.

71. WikiLeaks

The group known for its distribution of classified materials has been facing intense scrutiny from Congress and reportedly from federal prosecutors. WikiLeaks released sensitive Democratic emails in the months ahead of the 2016 presidential election in two separate dumps. Mueller has indicted a dozen Russian military officers in the hack of the Democratic National Committee, the source of some of the emails shared by the group.

72. 58th Presidential Inaugural Committee

The president’s inaugural committee is reportedly under investigation for possible misuse of funds. Multiple attorneys general have also subpoenaed the organization for documents related to how it raised and spent money.

73. Christopher Bancroft Burnham

Burnham is the head of Cambridge Global Capital and served on Trump’s State Department transition team. He was recently named an independent director at EN+, a business with ties to Russian oligarch Oleg Deripaska.

74. Frontier Services Group

Frontier Services Group is a private security and logistics firm founded by Erik Prince, the ex-head of Blackwater.

75. J.D. Gordon

Gordon worked in the George W. Bush administration and served as a national security adviser to the Trump campaign. He reportedly exchanged messages with Maria Butina, a woman who admitted last year she worked as a Russian agent.

76. Kushner Cos.

Kushner Cos. is owned and operated by the family of White House senior adviser Jared Kushner.

77. The National Rifle Association

The NRA has come under scrutiny from Democrats over its communications with the Trump campaign in 2016.

78. Richard Gates

Gates worked as an aide on the Trump campaign and is a business associate of Paul Manafort. Gates pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI as part of a plea deal with the special counsel and later testified against Manafort.

79. Tom Barrack

Barrack is a longtime Trump associate and was chairman of the president’s inaugural committee in 2016.

80. Tom Bossert

Bossert worked as Trump’s top homeland security aide from the time the administration took office until his resignation in April.

81. Tony Fabrizio

Fabrizio worked as a pollster for the 2016 Trump campaign and was once an associate for former Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort. He was spotted by CNN reporters late last year interviewing with Mueller’s team.