Thanks, Birth Control
Celebrate all that birth control makes possible for women, men, children, and society. That’s why we want you to join us on Tuesday, November 10th to say Thanks, Birth Control!

So what is Thanks, Birth Control? A social media campaign that asks everyone to publically support birth control and all that it makes possible for individuals and society. We want to turn up the volume and turn down the controversy. To do that, we’re asking you to speak up, dispel myths, share facts, and mobilize your friends and colleagues to say #ThxBirthControl with us.

What's the point? Well...birth control matters: The ability to plan, prevent, and space pregnancies is directly linked to benefits to women, men, children, and society, including more educational and economic opportunities, healthier babies, more stable families, and reduced taxpayer burden. Among adult women who have had sex, 99% have used birth control. It’s a normal part of life and should not be a taboo topic or the subject of political posturing. The vast majority of single young adults say they don’t want a pregnancy right now, yet four in 10 of those who are having sex are not using contraception consistently. More than half of sexually active college-age women say they would be more comfortable using contraception if more people talked about it in a positive way.

I'm in. How can I help? We have e-cards, social media messages, and statistics worth sharing with your friends, family, colleagues, and everyone in between. Get ideas from some of the documents below! You can also get a t-shirt. Take a selfie. Share the love. We have an array of Thanks, Birth Control t-shirts. Find the one that’s right for you at Bedsider.org/thxbirthcontrol, or look for the t-shirt link below. Then take a pic wearing it and post it to your social media channels on November 10, 2015 using the hashtag #ThxBirthControl.

Keep an eye on this page for updates or sign up for The National Campaign EGRAM to get weekly updates about all of our events including #ThxBirthControl 2015!