Grayson: Tea Party foe is “undead minion” in Palin “zombie army” – Central Florida Political Pulse – Orlando Sentinel
Less than a week after Sarah Palin directed her zombie army to “take out” Congressman Alan Grayson, one of her undead minions has risen to the challenge. Peg Dunmire has filed to run as the Florida Tea Party’s candidate against Grayson in November. Dunmire evidently is the first person to qualify as an official Tea Party candidate in any House race in the country. “I read Dunmire’s announcement,” said Grayson. “I then forwarded it to the Guinness Book of World Records, for consideration under the category ‘Most Consecutive Cliches.’ This kind of right-wing drivel gave America $4-a-gallon gas and two endless wars, and drove us all to the brink of national bankruptcy. Was she living in a cave for eight years?” Grayson was asked why he thinks that Dunmire decided not to run as a Republican. He laughed out loud. “Dunmire is not running as a Republican, because the Republican Party of Florida smells worse than a rotting carcass. The stench reaches all the way to the Georgia state line,” Grayson said. “For goodness’ sake, on the day that their state leader resigned in disgrace, a ‘Shred-It’ truck rolled up to Republican headquarters. Dunmire doesn’t want any part of what the grand jury in Orange County rightly called their ‘Culture of Corruption.’”

Symbol of the Republican Party of Florida “Whatever money you give to the Republican Party in Orange County ends up in Chairman Lew Oliver’s pocket,” Grayson continued. “He’ll probably take that money from the Palin event, and lease a Lexus. Oliver had to rig his own election to win the job, and then he had to cancel all those local Republican Party meetings to keep it. Lew Oliver couldn’t find his rear end with both hands, unless there was a twenty-dollar bill sticking out of it.” A recent poll of registered Republicans in FL-8 showed Grayson leading the Republican primary, with over 28% of the vote. Grayson’s dozen Republican challengers collectively polled 14.5%, with the remainder undecided. Grayson’s campaign has 14 times more cash on hand than all Republican challengers combined. Grayson was asked whether he was concerned about Dunmire’s announcement. He said, “not at all. It doesn’t matter to me whom I beat in November.”