Does Dan Webster want to cut your Social Security? – Central Florida Political Pulse – Orlando Sentinel
Yes, says U.S. Rep. Alan Grayson, the freshman Democrat in Florida’s 8th Congressional District. Yes, says the Huffington Post.

No, says Webster himself, who hopes to emerge from the pack in the Republican primary and face Grayson in November.

The tempest stems from a debate last week among the GOP candidates. Asked about his top priorities, Webster said it was to cut federal spending to 2007 levels: “…does it roll back some salary increases? Yes. Does it get rid of TARP and health care and all of the other things, including the stimulus package? Yes, it does that. Does it take back some of the COLAs for the entitlement programs? Yes, it does that, too. But it’s only three years ago. If we took that budget and passed it, it would self-balance in two more years.”

The reference to “COLAs” — cost-of-living adjustments — is the key point. Grayson and the Huffington Post say he was talking about increases to Social Security payouts in 2008 and 2009 that amount to about $100 a month. Webster “wants to slash Social Security for every single senior and disabled person in America,” Grayson said in an email to the Orlando Sentinel.

Webster says that’s not so. He says he was talking about COLA salary increases given to federal workers, not seniors.

“I’ve never stated that Social Security benefits should be cut or reduced for those who are currently receiving benefits or those near retirement age,” Webster says in a written statement. “Social Security is a mandatory program that is not included in the budgetary process. I simply stated that the budget should be rolled back to 2007 levels to help address our national budget crisis. Rolling back the budget to 2007 will eliminate what is left of the bailouts, stimulus packages, salary increases (COLA) for federal employees — which includes congressmen, and Obama’s health care plan.”

Webster seemed to leave the door open to cuts for younger workers. Responding to a follow-up question, the campaign said, “Senator Webster realizes that Social Security isn’t solvent at this time. Its trust fund has been raided, baby boomers are reaching retirement age, and our government is deep in debt. Many things must be done to save social security if we ever intend to have the program serve younger Americans. At the rate the program is going now, Social Security will not be around for young Americans who are currently paying into the system!”

So there you have it. Except for one thing: At the debate, Webster said his idea would take back COLAs for “some of the entitlement programs” — not salaries for federal employees. So, did he misspeak, or is the campaign playing damage control?