Was Rep. Murphy right to break with Dems on Obamacare?
U.S. Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Jupiter, won one of his party’s most stunning victories last November, ousting incumbent Rep. Allen West, who had been a Republican/tea party star.

But Rep. Murphy had been a relatively recent convert to the Democrats. And he has said that he is looking for chances to embrace bipartisanship.

What he sees as bipartisanship, some Democrats will see as betrayal.

In two recent votes on the Affordable Care Act – also known as Obamacare – Rep. Murphy voted with the Republican majority in the House. Specifically, he voted to delay by one year the mandate that employers provide health coverage if at least 50 people work for them. And he voted to delay by one year the requirement that individuals buy health insurance.

People and businesses that don’t comply with the law face fines.

However, President Barack Obama unilaterally delayed the employer mandate. The president and Democrats opposed the House vote on that aspect as unnecessary.

They opposed the delay in the individual mandate as yet another futile “show vote.” House Republicans have voted roughly three-dozen times to limit or kill Obamacare. But they have no chance of getting such measures through the Democratic-controlled Senate.

Mr. Murphy was one of just 35 Democrats to vote for the delay in the employer mandate and one of just 22 Democrats to vote for the delay in the individual mandate.

“While I believe these delays are important,” he said – to give the administration time to work out complexities in the law – “I do not support a wholesale repeal of the Affordable Care Act, which is already providing important protections and security to individuals and families who previously didn’t have access to affordable, quality health insurance.”

The votes were purely symbolic. So did Rep. Murphy earn himself a little credibility with Republicans at no cost to his own party, or did he lose a little credibility with Democrats for no tangible gain?

What do you think? Was Rep. Murphy right to break with his party on Obamacare? Take our poll and/or leave a comment.

Tags: Affordable Care Act, bnblogs, Obamacare, Patrick Murphy