U.S. Senate Candidate Steen Miles Speaks Out on Syria
Miles, of DeKalb County, says the U.S. does not have adequate justification to intervene in the conflict.

Former Georgia State Senator Steen Miles, a Democratic candidate for U.S. Senate, issued the following statement in opposition to U.S. military intervention in Syria:

“An overwhelming number of Georgians are opposed to U.S. military intervention in Syria limited or otherwise. While the majority-media created “presumptive” Democratic nominee takes a hawkish approach and aligns herself with those who want to commit our troops to another unwinnable civil war, it is not in the best interests of the American people and does not represent the sentiments of Georgians who she would seek to represent. And, I clearly do not agree with the reported position of outgoing Republican Senator Saxby Chambliss.

In addition to being dragged into another ill-advised war, we put our key ally Israel in harm's way because they are the closest U.S. target for Syrian retaliation. There is no empirical evidence of an eminent threat to the United States and our national security. Therefore what is the mission? While our hearts break at the pictures of the alleged victims of chemical warfare, we must negotiate, we must use sanctions and other peaceful means to show our opposition to this horrific situation. If indeed these images are actual victims of chemical warfare, then Syrian President Assad is a murderer and Syrians and other countries in the region should seek remedy. But we have mass murderers here at home mowing down innocent children in schools and we can't get laws passed to expand background checks and ban assault weapons to prevent this carnage on our own soil? So, what business do we have going to Syria interfering in their affairs when we can't take care of our own here at home?

Because I do not like what is happening in your home gives me no right to neglect mine to interfere in your affairs. Our strained and limited resources should be directed to getting immediate help for the treatment of the mental and physical wounds of our already battle fatigued veterans and their families. We also have thousands of troops remaining in harm's way in Afghanistan. We simply do not have adequate justification or resources in manpower and finances to enter into another ill-advised conflict. We need to listen to the voices of the people and stay out of Syria.”