Education
A Vision for Tomorrow: Public Education The greatest investment our city can make is in our young people. Before Toni Preckwinkle was an alderman, she was a history teacher in Chicago Public Schools. Her grandchildren are current Chicago Public School students. One of Toni’s main goals as mayor would be making sure that all of our city’s children are receiving the best education available. We need to make sure that what’s possible for some of our children, is the reality for all of Chicago’s children. "As mayor, I commit to a vision of our education system that values, listens, and represents the students and families of Chicago."

Fighting for an Elected School Board Feeling valued goes hand in hand with being heard. Currently, Chicago is the only school district in Illinois, and the Chicago Board of Education currently is filled with corporate executives. Toni's support of an elected school board for Chicago Public Schools to make sure that every family in Chicago has a say in their child's education. Instead of reducing class sizes, providing support for students with needs, and improving our aging physical infrastructure, a huge portion of taxpayer funds is pulled from the classroom in order to pay back the debt incurred by the Mayor’s appointed board. It is essential that Chicago has an elected school board that lessens the influence of special interests and outside money and ensures that communities have an opportunity to elect a representative that can adequately represent their needs.

Stopping School Closures When we close a school, we are not just reallocating resources or addressing logistical challenges – we are making a public withdrawal of support from a community that already lacks critical resources and investment. Studies have shown that school closings actually widen the achievement gap between black and white students. Toni believes that it’s not enough to promise a temporary moratorium on school closings - we need to secure a long-term funding resource to help us make real investments in the schools that have been chronically underfunded. In 2012, Mayor Emanuel diverted $29.5 million in property tax dollars from the public school system to subsidize the construction of River Point, an upscale office building at 444 W. Lake Street in the West Loop, one of Chicago's wealthiest neighborhoods. That is not investing in our children and in our future. As mayor, Toni will make sure that every student in Chicago is invested in and valued.

Educating the Whole Child The needs of Chicago’s students go beyond what is being taught in the classroom. Chicago Public Schools have too few nurses, social workers, and special ed teachers to serve students with physical and mental health needs. This is one of the reasons why Toni supports changes in the TIF program to dedicate yearly surplus to public schools. It’s not just enough to fund positions - our city must ensure consistency of care as too many nurses must oversee multiple schools and therefore students must rely on different professionals with different training, experience and familiarity.