Tony's Track Record
Tony Thurmond’s only experience in overseeing schools was his term as a West Contra Costa Unified School District Board Member. The Obama Administration’s Department of Education Office for Civil Rights investigated Thurmond’s district and found a climate of widespread sexual harassment across school campuses during his term on the school board. The findings strongly criticized the district for failing to set appropriate policies, take corrective action, address student concerns, or protect those who had come forward as victims.

The investigation pointed out the pervasive nature of sexual harassment across school campuses, in hallways, classrooms, and in the gymnasium. Sexual harassment and assaults of students had occurred between students. There were also cases where adult staff had harassed students, which were mishandled by the district.

The findings of the investigation pointed out that, due to the mishandling of sexual assault and harassment in the district, students were being denied their fundamental right to an education guaranteed under Title IX.

Systemic Failures of Policy and Oversight

The investigation revealed serious shortcomings in how the district addressed issues related to sexual harassment. These included systemic failures of policy and oversight, which reflects poorly on the district and the school board.

The investigation was spurred by two high-profile sexual assaults including a rape by several men of a female student after a high school homecoming dance, as well as a high school coach making inappropriate contact with female players. Although the district took some steps, including reporting the incident to local authorities and expelling the alleged offenders, the Office for Civil Rights’ report was highly critical of the district for failing to address student trauma and protect students in the aftermath.

At a district elementary school, "a substitute teacher’s inappropriate touching and sexually inappropriate language directed at certain students…was witnessed by an entire sixth grade class." But the district "took no action to assess and address the impact of the harassment on the numerous students who experienced and witnessed it."

The teacher was fired, but the district "did not inform the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing" so it could conduct the proper follow-up investigation. "Indeed, several months later, the district erroneously rehired the substitute to teach at the same elementary school."

Students Felt Harassment Was "Inevitable," "Normal," and "Condoned"

The investigation found various "female students who experienced unwanted touching said that it made them angry or sad, while others described feelings of resignation and a sense that the conduct was inevitable."

The OCR found one of the reasons students didn’t report harassment or assault was because they had a "sense that the conduct is normal or condoned…They stated that they do not tell teachers because teachers often appear either not to care or are afraid to respond to the incidents."

Witnesses told the OCR "that staff only infrequently refer students to counselors or administrators to respond to conduct that might constitute sexual harassment."

The investigation went into detail about what went on in these incidents:

No Staff to Carry Out Title IX Civil Rights Responsibilities Other than in Athletics, Minimal Training on Harassment

Title IX Civil Rights law "requires school districts to designate at least one person to coordinate their efforts to comply with and carry out their responsibilities under Title IX…"

However according to the OCR, at the beginning of the investigation, "the district had not designated an individual to coordinate the district’s efforts to comply with and carry out its responsibilities…other than in the area of athletics…"

The investigation also found "the majority of administrators and employees interviewed…were not sufficiently aware of the types of conduct that constitute sexual harassment, were uncertain of their responsibility to respond to such conduct, and received minimal training..." The OCR also stated "the schools did not have procedures or district-wide guidance for responding" to sexual harassment or assault.

The investigation determined students in the district often "do not understand the conduct they are experiencing constitutes harassment…[or]…that they have a right to complain..." or they have "a belief that staff will not respond effectively…"