Fraud Warning
Diversity Visa

Program Scammers Sending Fraudulent Emails and Letters

The Department of State, Office of Visa Services, advises the public of a notable increase in fraudulent emails and letters sent to Diversity Visa (DV) program (Visa Lottery) applicants. The scammers behind these fraudulent emails and letters are posing as the U.S. government in an attempt to extract payment from DV applicants. All applicants should be familiar with information about DV scams provided by the Federal Trade Commission. Applicants are encouraged to review the rules and procedures for the DV program so that you know what to expect, when to expect it, and from whom.

While DV applicants may receive an email from the U.S. government reminding them to check their status online through DV Entrant Status Check, they will not receive a notification letter or email informing them that they are a successful DV entrant. Applicants can only find out if they were selected to continue with DV processing by checking their status online through the DV Entrant Status Check at http://www.dvlottery.state.gov.

Finally, remember that fees for the DV application process are paid to the U.S. Embassy or consulate cashier at the time of your scheduled appointment. The U.S. government will never ask you to send payment in advance by check, money order, or wire transfer.

Anti-Fraud Tips for Applicants

When entering the U.S. Diversity Visa Lottery, the most basic way to ensure you are not scammed or your entry is not disqualified is to read and follow the instructions at the Diversity Visa Program page on travel.state.gov. Just as important is to be honest! Entering fake information or submitting fake documents may disqualify your entry or even keep you from ever going to the United States.

If at all possible, fill out the form yourself. If you need help, make sure the person helping you is entering your true information. Avoid visa consultants who offer to improve your chances by adding false information to your application. False information can disqualify you. Also avoid visa consultants who charge money because they claim they can improve your chances of winning. We do NOT work with consultants and they CANNOT improve your chances of being selected.

When entering, use your own e-mail address and make sure you keep the entry confirmation number. You will need the entry confirmation number to check the results to see if you have been selected. If someone is helping you to apply, make sure they give you the entry confirmation number. A free email account can be set up from a computer or smartphone if you don’t have one.

Only submit one entry per eligible person. If you are entered more than once, you will be disqualified. Make sure your photo was taken in the last six months. Photos more than six months old will be disqualified.

If you are selected to apply for a visa, do not add any person who is not legally your spouse or child to your visa application. Doing so may disqualify you and may keep you from ever going to the United States. If you are selected and have been pressured by a visa consultant to add people to your application who are not your legal family members, immediately inform the Consular Officer at your interview.

Visa Related Fraud Information - Refer to these frequently asked questions.