California Will Automatically Register All Illegal Aliens to Vote
California issued nearly a million illegal aliens drivers licenses in 2017 without proof of citizenship – they are now registered voters.

23.6k SHARES Facebook Twitter

California Department of Motor Vehicles has issued approximately 905,000 driver’s licenses through June 2017, under Assembly Bill 60, the law requiring applicants to prove only their identity and California residency, rather than their legal presence in the state.

Update: My original title was “California will automatically register all illegal aliens to vote … democrat” because in all likelihood they will be Democrat voters however, since there is no statistical proof, I changed the title to the fact that “California will automatically register all illegal aliens to vote.”

That being said, is there any doubt that these newly registered [illegal] voters will be Democrats – of course they they will be.

take our poll - story continues below What is your top alternative to Facebook? - FIXED What is your top alternative to Facebook?

What is your top alternative to Facebook? * MeWe Gab Cobias Instagram Twitter Pinterest Reddit Trump Town Tea Party Community

Email *

Email This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Completing this poll grants you access to Truth Uncensored updates free of charge. You may opt out at anytime. You also agree to this site's Privacy Policy and Terms of Use. “We are very pleased that Californians will have easier access to voter registration,” said Jeremiah Levine, an attorney with Morrison Foerster who represented the voting-rights groups. “We are especially satisfied that changes will be made before California’s statewide and federal primary elections.”

WND reports:

California will take the next step in blurring the lines between citizens and non-citizens beginning April Fool’s Day when the state complies with a court order to begin automatically registering to vote all those who are granted driver’s licenses.

The state has long provided driver’s licenses to all who simply claimed, without proof, that they were citizens of in the country legally. There were no checks made or documentation required.

But beginning April 1 every person who gets a California driver’s license will be automatically entitled to vote.

The state complied with the order under a program dubbed the California New Motor Voter Act. Signed into law in October 2015, the new statute requires the DMV to forward records for all eligible applicants to the Secretary of State’s Office for registration unless those applicants elect not to register to vote.

The League of Women Voters and three other groups sued the state’s Department of Motor Vehicles and Secretary of State’s Office in May 2017, claiming the state burdens would-be voters by making them fill out the same information on two separate forms to register to vote.

According to the lawsuit filed last May, California ranks “a dismal 46th in the nation” in its rate of registered voters. More than 5.5 million eligible voters were unregistered as of February 2017, according to state data.

Other plaintiffs in the lawsuit include the ACCE Institute, California Common Cause and the National Council of La Raza.

Sources: WND, The New American, and Daily Mail.

A leaked memo reveals why the Democrats have been fighting so hard on behalf of the Dreamers – they are a “critical component of the Democratic Party’s future electoral success.”

The Democrats are not fighting for the Dreamers out of the goodness of their hearts, they are trying to secure a new base of dependent loyalists.

Michael Bastasch of The Daily Caller reports:

The Center For American Progress (CAP) Action Fund circulated a memo on Monday calling illegal immigrants brought here at a young age — so-called “Dreamers” — a “critical component of the Democratic Party’s future electoral success.” The memo, co-authored by former Clinton communications director Jennifer Palmieri, was sent around to allies calling on Democrats to “refuse to offer any votes for Republican spending bills that do not offer a fix for Dreamers and instead appropriate funds to deport them.” […]“The fight to protect Dreamers is not only a moral imperative, it is also a critical component of the Democratic Party’s future electoral success,” reads Palmieri’s memo, obtained by The Daily Caller News Foundation. “If Democrats don’t try to do everything in their power to defend Dreamers, that will jeopardize Democrats’ electoral chances in 2018 and beyond,” reads the memo. “In short, the next few weeks will tell us a lot about the Democratic Party and its long-term electoral prospects.”

Here is CAP’s memo on Dreamers:

Many DREAMers are of voting age and WILL VOTE DEMOCRAT. The ones who have yet to be of voting age will most certainly vote Democrat and permanently entrench the Democrat party.



Read the full story here.