Texas education issues in national spotlight
Two national figures with Texas ties are drawing attention to the state's education issues, but for very different reasons.

Former First Lady Barbara Bush got things rolling with some public comments about possible statewide cuts to education funding in the state. Bush penned an op-ed for the Houston Chronicle this month called "We can't afford to cut education."

Bush continued the theme last week on Fox News with an interview with Greta Van Susteren, where the pair lamented Texas' education ranking.

Van Sustern: How do we get people going on education? I saw the numbers in your article, Texas 36th in the nation [on] high school graduates. And 3.8 million Texans don't have a high school diploma.

Bush: No, you are killing us.

Van Sustern: It is horrible.

Later in the interview, Bush says she is opposed to schools teaching "English as a second language."

Action star and conservative activist Chuck Norris cites Bush's op-ed and interview in a column published on WorldNetDaily Monday. The Walker, Texas Ranger star was less interested in possible cuts to education funding and more focused on the recent kerfuffle in Mansfield.

The Mansfield school district recently scrapped plans to launch an Arabic studies program this semester. The program was to be funded by a five-year, $1.3 million Foreign Language Assistance Program federal grant. More than 200 parents showed up with questions at a meeting last week at Cross Timbers Intermediate School. Some were upset about the plans to teach Arabic. Others were less troubled by the curriculum and more bothered by a lack of communication in advance about the program from the school district.

"Thank God for the parental passions and patriot fires of almost 200 parents who showed up at a school meeting last Monday night to question the wisdom of officials at Cross Timbers Intermediate School," Norris writes. "Good for them! They are fighting in their own personal education Alamo and presently have the upper hand."

Norris also praised Bush's "non-politically correct stance on the primacy of English in America."

-Aman Batheja