Our view on campaign fairness: McCain attack ad cheapens campaign. More to come?
Ever since gasoline prices crossed most people's pain threshold earlier this year, the hunt for scapegoats has been in full swing. First it was oil executives , who were hauled before congressional committees, just as they are every time prices go up. Then came speculators , who were supposedly driving up prices by bidding up the price of oil on commodities markets.

Now Republican presidential candidate John McCain thinks he's found the real villain — his rival, Democrat Barack Obama.

In a McCain TV ad, "Pump," that hit the airwaves and YouTube recently, a narrator ominously intones that gas prices have gone to "$4, $5 [with] no end in sight, because some in Washington are still saying no to drilling in America. No to independence from foreign oil." Then the announcer asks, "Who can you blame for rising prices at the pump?" A crowd chants, "Obama, Obama," and Obama's face appears.

Even by the elastic standards of political ads, this is more than a stretch. It's baloney. It's also a marker on the path toward the kind of simplistic, counterproductive demonizing that many expect will poison the fall campaign.

Perhaps the silliest implication in the ad is that any one person, even a U.S. senator, is singlehandedly responsible for rising gasoline prices. That discounts factors such as America's own diminishing oil production, increasing demand from China, India and other developing nations, supply disruptions and uncertainties in volatile areas such as Iraq, Iran and Nigeria, and — more to the point — decades of feckless energy policy by Congress and a succession of presidents.

McCain himself has said this nation's dependence on foreign oil has been "more than 30 years in the making," an awkward assertion in light of the fact that he's been a member of Congress for 25 of those 30 years — not that he's solely accountable either.

The ad is right, at least in our view, in saying more drilling would help. But any implication that drilling alone would solve the energy problem is simply fiction that distracts attention from actually fixing the problem.

Significant production from new offshore areas is years away, and while proof that the U.S. is finally getting serious about its energy problems would send a valuable signal to the markets, its effect on prices in the short term would likely be negligible. McCain himself recently conceded that drilling would have only a "psychological impact" now.

Any major effect on future prices is equally improbable. A report by the U.S. Energy Information Administration says that by the time any significant production occurs — likely around 2030 — the impact on prices would be "insignificant" in the context of the world market, of which U.S. supplies make up just a small part. The primary goal of drilling isn't to lower prices, but to develop supplies that aren't subject to the whims of an unstable global market.

Further, if offshore drilling is the answer — and it is now the focus of the drilling debate — McCain has long been part of the problem himself. He opposed it until he changed his view this year.

The pity of misleading ads like this is that McCain and Obama have both shown signs that they can embrace good ideas and elevate the debate. McCain supports more nuclear energy, Obama wants to require utilities to produce a portion of their electricity with renewable fuels, and both men support tax incentives for solar, wind and other forms of energy. The best approach would combine all of those tactics, and that still might not be enough to solve the problem.

If "Pump" represents the standard of truth in advertising for this presidential campaign, it's going to be a long and distressingly fact-free three months until Election Day.