Donald Trump Says 'I Don’t Know Much' About Hillary Clinton’s Religion
As the sparring heats up between the presumptive nominees of each party, Donald Trump is subtly hitting Hillary Clinton in a familiar, yet hard to combat form; through the power of suggestion.

In a closed door meeting Tuesday with religious leaders in New York, organized by United in Purpose, Trump was recorded saying, “We don’t know anything about Hillary in terms of religion. She's been in the public eye for years and years and yet there's nothing in there.”

During an interview with “World News Tonight” anchor David Muir, Trump was asked what he meant.

“I don’t know much about her,” Trump responded. Muir followed up: “What would you like to know that you don’t know about Hillary Clinton?”

“I just don’t know,” Trump said. “Somebody asked me the question. I didn’t bring it up. Somebody asked me the question. I said I don’t know much about her religion.”

A source who attended the meeting said that no one asked about Clinton’s religion.

Trump gained notoriety for seeming to suggest that President Obama was a Muslim, despite the then-Senator’s insistence that he was not. He has also made another suggestion about Obama and the Orlando massacre that happened earlier this month.

"Our government is led by a man who is a very — look guys, we're led by a man that either is not tough, not smart, or he's got something else in mind. And the something else in mind, people can't believe it," he said on Fox News.

Trump declined to answer definitively in September when ABC News' George Stephanopoulos asked him about the president's faith, which is Christian.

"I haven't raised the question. I don't talk about it, and I don't like talking about somebody else's faith. He talks about his faith, and he can do that," Trump said. "But I don't talk about other people's faith. It's not appropriate for me to talk about somebody else's faith."

Clinton has spoken about her faith at length out on the campaign trail. In January in Iowa, she told a voter, “I am a person of faith. I am a Christian. I am a Methodist.” She added, “I think that any of us who are Christian have a constantly, a constant conversation in our own heads about what we are called to do and how best to do it."

On Wednesday, Trump will deliver his postponed speech on “all things Clinton.” He told Muir that he hopes the campaign can remain high-minded, despite him going after Bill Clinton for his infidelities.

“I hit Bill couple of times because once he’s in the campaign, you know if he’s in the campaign I guess he deserves to be hit,” Trump said. “But I would much rather have it based on issues and policy I think we win on issues and policy. I would much prefer to keep it at a high level but I saw parts of her speech, I wasn’t able to watch it.”

The Clinton camp declined comment.