How the IRS is Supposed to Vet Social Welfare Groups
AP

The Internal Revenue Service is in hot water for its special scrutiny of conservative groups, such as those with “tea party” or “patriot” in their names and others, including ones worried about government spending, debt or taxes, according to new details of a government probe.

The concern is that the IRS subjected tea party groups to a higher level scrutiny than others in reviewing tax-exempt applications.

Normally, though, the IRS is supposed to draw lines of distinction between “social-welfare” non-profits and political groups.

“Most people don’t realize that the IRS has a legitimate need to distinguish political organizations from social welfare organizations,” said Richard Schmalbeck, a Duke University law professor who studies non-profit tax issues.

A problem is that the regular guidelines are too vague to be useful, Mr. Schmalbeck told Law Blog.

Tax-exempt groups organized under section 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code may engage in some political activity, but they must be “primarily engaged” in promoting social welfare.

But deciding what counts as too much political activity is far from an exact science. The IRS is supposed to apply what’s known as a “facts and circumstances” test, basically a souped-up version of “know it when you see it.”

According to an IRS guidance memo from 1995, the IRS is supposed to weigh a myriad of factors like “the amount of funds received from and devoted to particular activities; other resources used in conducting such activities, such as buildings and equipment; the time devoted to activities (by volunteers as well as employees); the manner in which the organization’s activities are conducted; and the purposes furthered by various activities.”

A political educational organization that qualifies for a 501(c)(4) exemption must “conduct its activities in a non-partisan manner.” A group’s philosophy may be consistent with that of a major political party, but that’s OK if its activities are primarily educational.

If “its activities are under the direction of a Board of Directors whose members were appointed by the national committee of a major political party,” that’s a problem, according to the guidance memo. If the group “selects issues to study based on the needs of the party, and receives substantial financial support from the party,” that’s also a red flag.

An “action” group — another type of 501(c)(4) — may engage in political campaign activities if those “activities are not the organization’s primary activity.”

The memo offers an example of an action group that crosses the line:

Organization E sponsors public appearances of candidates favoring its positions on issues; conducts non-scientific polls designed to create the appearance of public support for candidates who support its positions on issues; and provides transportation for people who have indicated their support for selected candidates, and who would otherwise be unable to vote. It also engages in substantial lobbying activities with regard to voting laws. Organization E is primarily engaged in political activities, and does not qualify for exemption under IRC 501(c)(4).

Mr. Schmalbeck said the IRS exposed itself to charges of bias when it started using “loaded terms strongly associated with one side” to help make these distinctions.

(Lawyers for Tea Party groups also contend that the groups marked for extra scrutiny were required to answer detailed questions — about their membership and communication with members of Congress — that went beyond the scope of legitimate inquiry.)

Ideally, the IRS would carefully read through an application before deciding if it warranted special scrutiny. Doing that across the board is a real strain for a “chronically understaffed” agency, said Mr. Schmalbeck, who said that unless the IRS hires a lot more people, the review process may just have to take longer for everybody.

“There is no quick litmus test that I can think of to sort them into the piles needing more, or less, scrutiny,” he said.