Is Houston Undercounting Murders?
Houston has been undercounting its murders in recent years, according to a local television-news investigation. The developing story, which this week raised the ire of a Texas Congressman and former judge, has illustrated two unfortunate facets of crime statistics: (1) They are self-reported, and therefore subject to fudging; and (2) Despite their weaknesses, the stats have a broad influence.

Last November, Houston’s Channel 11 reported that nearly 30 violent deaths in 2005 and 2006 it had reviewed weren’t classified as murders even though crime experts told the station they should have been. Some of these have since been reclassified by the police. If the crimes had been classified as murders, instead of suicides or accidents, they would have been treated differently by police. What’s more, Houston would have edged past Dallas in murders per capita in 2005, and ranked second among cities with one million people or more, instead of third, according to murder stats compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

The FBI advises against ranking cities by self-reported crime rates, as such rankings “often create misleading perceptions adversely affecting cities and counties, along with their residents.” But that doesn’t stop convention organizers from using crime rates in deciding where to meet next. “If it means the difference between being the murder capital of Texas and not being the murder capital of Texas, that’s significant,” Phillip Jones, president of the Dallas Convention and Visitors Bureau, told KHOU. He added, “Most groups do factor in the crime rate in their decision-making process.” The difference in this case is minuscule. In 2005, there were 16.4 murders per 100,000 people in Dallas. The rate in Houston initially was reported at 16.3 per 100,000, but was revised upward to 16.5 after the police department reclassified four more deaths as murders.

The Houston Police Department didn’t respond to my request for comment. In a guest column last month in the Houston Chronicle, its chief defended his department’s record, writing, “We take the responsibility of accounting for crime very seriously.” He also said the FBI had audited the city’s numbers, but the FBI told me it had reviewed just 278 reports in 2006 — a small fraction of the city’s crime reports that year, which included 24,250 violent crimes and 121,053 property crimes. Houston’s mayor has resisted calls for the city to seek an audit of its federally reported crime statistics from the Texas Department of Public Safety, which has prompted U.S. Reps. Ted Poe and John Culberson to push for an audit.

Further reading: Crime statistics feed into safety rankings, such as the annual one produced by CQ Press. I wrote last year about other factors that make ranking cities by crime rates questionable. One ranking that adjusts for demographic data places Houston 17th in the country among 65 major cities in 2006 in murder rate. In the latest Atlantic Monthly, Hanna Rosin analyzes rising crime rates in some American cities.

Houston activist Jay Wall, who has followed the local stat controversy, suggested I look into it.