Mitch McConnell Says He Will Allow Senate Vote on Ex-Im
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell in March. Associated Press

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) said he opposes reauthorizing the Export Import Bank, but will allow a vote on the contentious federal agency on the Senate floor later this year.

Republicans in recent years have been divided over the agency, which helps support U.S. exports, sparking an intraparty tussle over GOP ideology each time its authorization nears lapsing. The bank’s charter will currently expire June 30.

Some conservatives view the agency as inappropriate government interference in the market, while other Republicans view it as key to keeping U.S. exporters competitive with foreign rivals who receive similar help from their own governments.

“I personally think the Ex-Im Bank has outlived its usefulness and ought to go away,” Mr. McConnell said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal this week. “But I’m not going to prevent a vote from occurring on it.”

Some other Senate Republicans and many Democrats support extending the bank’s charter.

“American businesses, large and small, cannot unilaterally disarm against our global competitors,” Senator Mark Kirk (R., Ill.) said last month when introducing bipartisan legislation extending the bank’s charter until September 30, 2019.

The GOP divide is sharpest in the House, where top Republicans including Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R., Calif.) have said they support winding down the bank. Bank officials declined to comment Thursday.

The agency faces another, lower-profile hurdle in keeping its board of directors large enough to make business decisions. The board must approve every transaction over $10 million and requires three directors to make a decision, according to the bank’s charter.

The five-member board already has one vacancy and two other directors’ terms expired on Jan. 20. They are able to serve until their replacements are confirmed by the Senate, or six months beyond the end of their term, whichever comes sooner.

With nominations generally moving slowly through the Senate, the agency’s board will be whittled to just two directors after July 20 if no replacements are confirmed.

Mr. McConnell said he would not use the nomination process to try to cripple the bank.

“With regard to appointments, we just sort of take them as they come,” he said.

Under the bank’s charter, no more than three directors can belong to one party. President Barack Obama has already nominated Patricia M. Loui for a second term. The other director whose term has expired is Sean Mulvaney, who has previously worked for House Republicans.

When Republican appointments open, Mr. McConnell works with the White House on the nomination. He indicated he was likely to do the same with the Export-Import spot.

“I don’t think I would want to refuse to send him a name if it were somebody that I was responsible for putting forward as a protest,” he said.