Obama Nabbed by the Patriot Police

By Michael Dobbs



Obama salutes the flag



"He refused to not only put his hand on his heart during the pledge of allegiance, but refused to say the pledge...how in the hell can a man like this expect to be our next Commander-in-Chief? "

--Chain e-mail attacking Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama.

To all the other hazards of presidential campaigning in the Internet age--the blogosphere, the 24-hour news cycle, attack ads on You Tube--add one more, the anonymous viral e-mail. By now, millions of Americans have received an e-mailed photographs of Obama in a relaxed pose standing next to his fellow candidates, Bill Richardson and Hillary Clinton, with their hands firmly over their hearts as they listen to the national anthem. Several readers have asked us to investigate the provenance of this photograph, and we are happy to oblige.

The Facts

The photograph was taken on September 16, 2007, at Senator Tom Harkin's annual steak fry festivities in Iowa, an important ritual for Democratic presidential hopefuls. Contrary to the e-mails attacking Obama for disrespecting the flag, the candidates were not reciting the pledge of allegiance. They were standing for the national anthem.

As far as we can ascertain, the photograph first appeared in Time Magazine on October 1. Visit Time's website for a larger version. It was then picked up by the NewsBusters blog (Motto: "Exposing and Combating Liberal Media Bias"), and from there made its way into all those in-boxes.

To his credit, the NewsBusters blogger does not try to pretend that the photograph had anything to do with the pledge of allegiance. Instead he cites Title 36 or the U.S. Code, which states the following:

During a rendition of the national anthem, when the flag is displayed (A) all present except those in uniform should stand at attention facing the flag with the right hand over the heart; (B) men not in uniform should remove their headdress with their right hand and hold the headdress at the left shoulder, the hand being over the heart;

By that standard, everybody in the picture (Obama, Richardson, Clinton, and Ruth Harkin) was infringing the Code, as they had their backs to the flag. On the other hand, the Code refers specifically to "Patriotic and National Observances." We welcome the opinion of protocol experts, but we are not sure that a steak fry qualifies as a "Patriotic Observance," even in Iowa. Since the steak fry was awash with flags, it is quite possible that the aforementioned political candidates were facing the flag and had their backs to the flag at the same time.

We should note that this is not the first time that Obama (does that name remind you of anybody?) has run afoul of the patriotic police. Fox News has criticized him for refusing to wear a Stars and Stripes pin in his buttonhole, on the grounds that the gesture has become "a substitute for true patriotism." Previous anonymous e-mails have claimed--falsely--that Obama is a Muslim.

Asked whether Obama normally puts his hand over his heart while listening to the national anthem, Obama spokesman Bill Burton replied by e-mail: "Sometimes he does, sometimes he doesn't. In no way was he making any sort of statement, and any suggestion to the contrary is ridiculous."

To demonstrate the senator's "true patriotism," Burton e-mailed two photographs of Obama with his hand firmly over his heart. One photograph is at the top of this post; the other is below.

The Pinocchio Test

Anonymous attacks by e-mail are, or at least should be, un-American. This particular one was also wrong on the facts: the ceremony in question had nothing to do with the pledge of the allegiance. We award the scoundrel who put the e-mail into circulation four Pinocchios.

(About our rating scale.)