Bill the Attack Dog

By Michael Dobbs



The Clintons on the campaign trail.



Bill Clinton "continues to make statements that aren't supported by the facts, whether it's about my record of opposition to the war in Iraq or our approach to organizing in Las Vegas."

--Barack Obama, ABC Good Morning America, Jan. 21, 2008.

"President Clinton's statements about Sen. Obama are true."

--Hillary Clinton website, The Fact Hub.

Barack Obama has accused former President Bill Clinton of "violating the standards of honesty" in political discourse, and distorting the record in order to support his wife's presidential bid. The Clinton campaign has dismissed the charge as sour grapes following two straight losses for Obama in New Hampshire and Nevada. "They are frustrated and they are attacking Bill Clinton out of frustration," said Clinton communications director Howard Wolfson.

Some of the issues first raised by Bill Clinton resurfaced in the Democratic debate televised by CNN on Monday night, with Hillary Clinton criticizing Obama for talking about "admiring Ronald Reagan" and saying that he "really liked" Republican ideas of the last 15 years. So what are we to make of the Obama complaint?





The Facts

In his interview Monday with Good Morning America, the Illinois senator singled out three instances where he felt that Bill Clinton had made incorrect statements. The two campaigns followed up with a vigorous back-and-forth on their websites here and here. Let's examine Clinton's statements one by one.

Obama's record on Iraq. Bill Clinton has repeatedly complained that Obama has been inconsistent in his opposition to the war in Iraq, and that he had been allowed to get away with "the biggest fairytale I have ever seen" by uncritical reporters. As evidence, he cites interviews that Obama gave in 2004 around the time of the Democratic national convention. In one interview, Obama said he was unsure whether he would have voted to authorize military action against Iraq had he been a U.S. senator in 2002. In another interview, he said there was "not much difference" between him and George Bush on whether to keep troops in Iraq.



I have already examined this debate in a post here and a detailed chronology here. The chronology makes clear that Obama was always opposed to the original decision to invade Iraq, but has changed his views on the question of withdrawal. (In 2004, he talked about sending more troops to Iraq to stabilize the country. By 2005, he was talking about a phased withdrawal.) The former president has used very selective quotes to make his case against Obama.



Dirty tricks in Las Vegas by Obama supporters. Last Friday evening, Clinton claimed that he had personally witnessed an attempt by the Culinary Union at voter suppression in Nevada. He described an incident that allegedly took place in a Las Vegas hotel in which a union representative allegedly told workers that they would be required to work (and thereby be prevented from voting) during the caucus if they failed to support Obama, the union's preferred candidate. "I haven't seen anything like that in America in 35 years," Clinton complained.



The Clinton campaign has failed to provide convincing support for the former president's charge. Instead, they cited an article by the Las Vegas Sun which described pressure on some union members to caucus for Obama. But there was no mention in the article of a threat to keep Clinton supporters away from the caucus sites.



The "party of ideas." Both Bill and Hillary Clinton attacked Obama last week for saying that the Republicans had "all the good ideas" during the 90s. What Obama actually said, in an interview with the Reno Gazette Journal, was that "the Republicans were the party of ideas for a pretty long chunk of time there over the last ten, fifteen years, in the sense that they were challenging conventional wisdom." That is rather different from saying that the Republicans had "all the good ideas." Many historians would agree with Obama that, for good or ill, the Republican party was the party with the most new ideas during the 90s. Obama went on to criticize the Republican obsession with tax cuts.





The Pinocchio Test

It is pretty standard fare for presidential campaigns to attack rival candidates by a selective use of quotes. Surrogates such as Bill Clinton are often assigned the role of attack dog. The Obama campaign is certainly not above such tactics itself. Obama probably opened himself up to attack by saying nice things about Ronald Reagan and the Republicans. In the three cases cited above, however, it seems clear that the former president has overstated the case against Obama in a way that distorts his original arguments.

(About our rating scale.)