The Overseas Buildings Operations directs overseas building programs
The Bureau of Overseas Buildings Operations (OBO) directs the worldwide overseas building program for the Department of State and the U.S. Government community serving abroad. In concert with other State Department bureaus, foreign affairs agencies, and Congress, OBO sets worldwide priorities for the design, construction, acquisition, maintenance, use, and sale of real properties and the use of sales proceeds.

OBO’s mission is to provide safe, secure and functional facilities that represent the U.S. government to the host nation; and to support our staff in the achievement of U.S. foreign policy objectives. These facilities should represent American values and the best in American architecture, design, engineering, technology, sustainability, art, culture and construction execution.

The London team consists of:

The Construction Management Office who provide the management oversight and on-site construction supervision for the OBO team. CM assumes the primary responsibility for the execution of construction contracts through the Project Director who serve as the Contracting Officer’s Representative’s (COR’s) and who hold limited Contracting Officer’s warrants. The Project Directors report to the Chiefs for the geographic branches that serve as the liaisons for all issues between the field and OBO headquarters.

And:

The Security Management Division who are here to ensure that all appropriate physical, technical and procedural security measures are incorporated into the project design, and to manage construction security programs that prevent physical and technical penetration and safeguard against mob violence and terrorist attacks.

The New London Embassy is funded entirely from the proceeds of sale of U.S. government properties in London, the design by Kieran Timberlake has demonstrated exceptional environment leadership that has gone above and beyond the OBO already stringent requirements. By completion of the project the new embassy building will be at, or even ahead, of leading environmental practices by incorporating the following: