Election Spending FAQ

Confused about who's raising and spending what kind of money in which kind of way to influence the elections? Here's a handy FAQ on outside political spending, brought to you by Sunlight Editorial Director Bill Allison, along with links to where you can find Sunlight Foundation's latest data.

1. What is outside spending?

By outside spending, we mean money spent to influence the result of an election by organizations other than the campaigns of the candidates themselves. Before the Supreme Court's decision in the Citizens United case, political parties and traditional political action committees were responsible for the vast majority of outside spending that advocated the election or defeat of federal candidates. THe Citizens United ruling held that corporations can make independent expenditures to influence elections. As a result, for-profit companies, trade associations like the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, labor unions like the National Education Association and social welfare organizations like Citizens United itself can all spend on elections. This overview shows how much outside spending there's been in 2014 federal elections, this page lets you view both candidate and outside spending in any House or Senate contest, while this page shows the most recent outside spending nationwide.







2. What is dark money?

Simply put, dark money is money spent to influence the outcome of one or more elections by any group that does not disclose its donors. The Supreme Court’s Citizens United decision held that incorporated entities, including nonprofits, can spend their money to influence elections. Groups that do not have to disclose their donors, including trade associations like the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, labor unions like AFSCME and nonprofit social welfare organizations like Citizens United, spend most of the dark money, though some limited liability corporations do as well. This page shows the most recent expenditures of dark money.







3. Is all outside spending dark money?

No. Many outside spenders--like political parties, traditional political action committees and independent expenditure-only committees, better known as super PACs--disclose their donors. Dark money spenders are a subset of all outside spenders.







4. What does outside spending buy?

There are a few different types of outside spending, but the most important are independent expenditures and electioneering communications. Outside spending groups make independent expenditures, or "IEs," to pay for ad buys attacking or supporting candidates, door-to-door canvassers to reach out to voters, rental vans to get them to the polls, among other things. In 2014, we’ve seen IEs for as little as one cent (we are not making that up--scroll down) and for as much as $2,999,825 (Crossroads GPS, for a media buy). Less than 20 days before an election, the spending must be disclosed at the FEC within 24 hours, and otherwise within 48 hours. For the latest independent expenditures, click here.

Unlike an independent expenditure, electioneering communications are always advertisements that mention or depict at least one federal candidate but do not expressly advocate their election or defeat. Electioneering communications must be reported to the FEC if aired within 30 days of a primary or 60 days of the general election. Because groups running electioneering communications within those 30- and 60-day windows, few dark money groups air them. However, they air a great deal of them outside those windows, as Sunlight has reported in the past. Real-Time FEC tracks the latest electioneering communications.







5. Are super PACs dark money groups?

No. Super PACs file regular reports with the Federal Election Commission in which they disclose their donors and their spending like other political committees. After the Citizens United decision, a federal court ruled, in the Speechnow.org decision, that if corporations can make independent expenditures to influence elections, then individuals could pool their money to do the same. The Federal Election Commission created “independent expenditure only” committees, or super PACs, to accommodate them. Not only can super PACs take contributions in unlimited amounts from individuals, but also from corporations, labor unions and nonprofits. Real-Time FEC features a complete list of super PACs and their latest filings with the FEC. You can download a file of all contributions to super PACs in the 2014 election cycle here and all their independent expenditures here.

It is worth noting, however, that super PACs can take contributions from dark money groups--say, a nonprofit organization that doesn't disclose its donors or a limited liability corporation that doesn't have to list its owners. We call this dead end disclosure.







6. Can super PACs contribute to candidates?

Generally speaking, no, with one notable set of exceptions. Super PACs make independent expenditures (in fact, their formal name in campaign finance parlance is independent expenditure-only committee), however, there are a small number of super PACs that have separate, segregate funds that allow them to contribute to candidates. Known as hybrid super PACs, they maintain two, separate bank accounts, one raising contributions in amounts of $5,000 or less from individuals that can be used to contribute to candidates, and a second that can take contributions in unlimited amounts and spend them on polling, advertising, get-out-the-vote operations or other expenditures to influence federal elections.







7. Do super PACs work with candidates?

Yes and no. Federal candidates can raise money for super PACs, provided the solicit donations of no more than $5,000. They cannot, however, coordinate their spending with super PACs.