Marco Rubio, Bill Nelson, Ted Deutch Continue Efforts to Get Iran to Release Bob Levinson
Florida’s two U.S. Senators--Democrat Bill Nelson and Republican Marco Rubio--and U.S. Rep. Ted Deutch, D-Fla., continued their efforts to press Iran about a missing American.

Citing reports that Iran is not helping with efforts to get Bob Levinson home, the three members of the Florida delegation weighed in on Monday. Levinson worked for the FBI and DEA and went missing in 2007 during a private investigation case in Iran involving cigarette smuggling. Back in 2013, the Associated Press ran a story insisting Levinson worked for the CIA.

“Shortly after the 11th anniversary of Bob Levinson’s disappearance, Iran falsely claimed that they have no information on Bob’s whereabouts and that they had made no commitment to the U.S. in helping to bring him home,” said Rubio. “We know that little happens in Iran without its dictatorship knowing about it, so the Iranian regime's duplicitous behavior further demonstrates its evil nature. I urge the Trump Administration to immediately call out Iran and press them to uphold their commitments to Bob’s case. To the Iranian regime, know that we remain resolved in our mission to bring Bob home.”‎

After eleven long years, it’s simply unconscionable for Iran to pretend like it doesn’t have a responsibility to find Bob and bring him home,” said Nelson. “The bottom line is, if Iran doesn’t have Bob, they know where to find him—we can never let them off the hook.”

“This is a despicable attempt by Iran to absolve itself of past commitments to help locate Bob and bring him home," said Deutch. "If Iran wants to be treated like a member of the international community, it needs to live up to its past promises – and basic human decency – and reunite Bob with his family. Numerous times Iran has offered its assistance on Bob’s case. We haven’t forgotten. The Iranian government is wrong if it thinks we will just sit and wait; we expect, and the Levinson family deserves, more than this.”

The three members of the Florida delegation brought out the “Iran Human Rights and Hostage-Taking Accountability Act” a the start of the year which imposes sanction on Iranian leaders involved in taking American hostages. Back in July, Nelson led a letter calling on the Trump administration to put more pressure on Iran to continue efforts get Levinson home.

In 2016, Nelson and Rubio got the Senate to pass a resolution demanding Iran offer more assistance in getting Levinson back home while Deutch did the same in the House.

READ MORE FROM SUNSHINE STATE NEWS

Ted Deutch Presses Trump Administration for Answers on Middle East

Florida Senators, Reps Urge White House Push Iran to Get Bob Levinson Back Home