Leadership
Carly Fiorina Chairman, Unlocking Potential Project

Carly is a true leader and a seasoned problem-solver. She is a passionate, articulate advocate for conservative policies that advance economic growth, entrepreneurship, innovation, and effective leadership. Through extensive experience she has learned that human potential is a limitless and uniquely powerful resource that can be unlocked, inspired and focused on worthy goals and common purpose. She knows that conservative principles, applied in a twenty-first century context, are the most effective way to unleash this potential for positive change in communities, organizations of all kinds and our nation.

Carly started out as a secretary for a small real-estate business. She then joined AT&T; in an entry-level sales position. Fifteen years later she led AT&T;'s spin-out of Lucent Technologies and then Lucent's North American operations. In 1999, she was recruited to Hewlett-Packard where she would become the first woman to lead a Fortune 50 business. In her six years as Chairman and CEO of HP, she would double its revenues to $90 billion; more than quadruple its growth to 9%; triple the rate of innovation to 11 patents a day; achieve market leadership in every market and product category and quadruple cash-flow. She traveled the globe and made lifelong friends from countries in Europe, Africa, Asia and the Americas.

Carly has always believed in giving back to the community and has been an active participant in government and politics. She has served in a large number of advisory and policy-making positions for national and state governments. She currently serves as the Chairman of the American Conservative Union Foundation, which annually hosts CPAC (the largest annual gathering of conservatives) and was founded by William F. Buckley and others; the Chairman of Good360, the world's largest product philanthropy organization; and the Chairman of Opportunity International, a Christian-based organization that lifts millions out of poverty through micro-finance.

Taking on tough challenges has been a hallmark of Carly's life. In 2010, she didn't shy away from a challenging run for the U.S Senate when she took on one of Washington's most entrenched liberals, Barbara Boxer, from the deep blue state of California. On the campaign trail, Carly became known for her proud adherence to conservative philosophy and her mastery of the issues.

During the hard-fought battle for votes and ideas, Carly was also battling breast cancer. At the same time, she and her husband Frank suffered the terrible tragedy of the loss of the younger daughter, Lori. Throughout these difficult times, Frank and Carly were sustained by the redemptive power of their Christian faith and the strength of their family. Carly has many blessings but the most important are her husband, their oldest daughter Tracy and her two granddaughters. They inspire Carly to make a positive difference every day.