News Releases/Statements
Boeing, Vietjet Finalize Vietnam’s Largest Ever Commercial Airplane Purchase

His Excellency Mr. Trần Đại Quang, President of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, President Barack Obama witness historic event

Order includes 100 737 MAX 200s

HANOI, May 23, 2016 – VietJet Aviation Joint Stock Company and Boeing [NYSE: BA] have finalized an order for 100 737 MAX 200 airplanes, the largest ever single commercial airplane purchase in Vietnam aviation. His Excellency Mr. Trần Đại Quang, President of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, and U.S. President Barack Obama, witnessed the historic agreement, valued at approximately $11.3 billion at current list prices.

The signing ceremony, conducted by Vietjet President and CEO Nguyễn Thị Phương Thảo and Boeing Commercial Airplanes President and CEO Ray Conner, took place at the Presidential Palace in Hanoi, at approximately 11:40 a.m. local time.

"Vietjet is efficiently operating a fleet of narrow body airplanes. Our investment in a fleet of B737 Max 200 will accommodate our strategy of growing Vietjet's coming international route network including long haul flights,” said Madam Nguyễn Thị Phương Thảo during the signing. “Through this agreement, Vietjet will contribute increasing bilateral trade turnover between Vietnam and the United States, as well as the integration and development of the aviation industry in Vietnam.‎”

The airplanes will be delivered from 2019 through 2023, supporting Vietjet’s continuous growth of its domestic as well as international network in the region. This agreement also helps Vietjet to increase its fleet to more than 200 airplanes by the end 2023, with the most modern and advanced technology in the world.

“Boeing is proud to again play an integral role in advancing Vietnam’s aviation industry. We’re honored to be joined by President Quang and President Obama for this historic milestone and order of 100 737 MAX 200 airplanes,” said Conner. “Incorporating the latest design and technology features, the highly efficient 737 MAX 200 will provide Vietjet’s growing network with market-leading economics, a superior passenger experience and contribute significantly to their future success.”

The 737 MAX incorporates the latest technology CFM International LEAP-1B engines, Advanced Technology winglets and other improvements to deliver the highest efficiency, reliability and passenger comfort in the single-aisle market. The new single-aisle airplane will deliver 20 percent lower fuel use than the first Next-Generation 737s and the lowest operating costs in its class – 8 percent per seat less than its nearest competitor. To date, the 737 MAX has accumulated 3,098 orders from 65 customers around the world.

About Vietjet

Vietjet is the first airline in Vietnam to operate as a new-age airline with low-cost and diversified services to meet customers’ demands. It provides not only transport services but also uses the latest e-commerce technologies to offer various products and services for consumers. The airline recently won IOSA Certification from the International Air Transport Association (IATA) after just over three years of operations. Vietjet was also declared “Best Asian Low Cost Carrier” at the TTG Travel Awards 2015, which compiles votes from travelers, travel agencies and tour operators in Asia. The airline was also rated as one of the top three fastest growing airline brands on Facebook in the world by Socialbakers and the most favorite airline in Vietnam in 2015. Currently, the airline operates more than 250 flights each day. It has already operated 50 routes in Vietnam and across the region to international destinations such as Thailand, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, China, Myanmar and Malaysia. It has carried approximately 25 million passengers to date. Looking ahead, the airline plans to expand its network across the region. To prepare for this plan, Vietjet has signed agreements with the world’s leading aircraft-manufacturers to purchase more brand-new and modern aircraft. Like Vietjet on Facebook, https://www.facebook.com/Vietjetvietnam, follow us on Twitter, @Vietjetvietnam, and watch our videos at https://www.youtube.com/user/Vietjetvietnam

About The Boeing Company

Boeing is the world's largest aerospace company and leading manufacturer of commercial jetliners and defense, space and security systems and also provides numerous commercial airline and military support services. Boeing has been the premier manufacturer of commercial jetliners for decades, and with its long tradition of aerospace leadership and innovation, continues to expand its product line and services to meet emerging customer needs. Boeing provides products and support services to customers in more than 150 countries and is one of the largest U.S. exporters in terms of sales. With corporate offices in Chicago, Boeing employs approximately 160,000 people across the United States and in more than 65 countries. Learn more at www.boeing.com.

# # #

Contacts:

Joanna Pickup

International Communications

Boeing Commercial Airplanes

+1 425-879-6077

joanna.pickup@boeing.com

Nguyễn Thu Thúy (Ms.)

Vietjet

+84 989386379

thuynguyen@vietjetair.com

Nguyễn Thanh Tùng (Mr)

Vietjet

+84 932629858

tungnguyenthanh@vietjetair.com