USATODAY.com
Hurricane scale invented to communicate storm danger

By Jack Williams, USATODAY.com

The National Hurricane Center uses the Saffir-Simpson damage potential scale to give officials and the public an idea of what to expect from an approaching hurricane.

The scale is named after Herbert Saffir, a consulting engineer in Coral Gables, Fla., and Robert Simpson, who was director of the National Hurricane Center from 1967 through 1973.

Saffir, an engineer and expert on wind damage who helped write the Dade County, Fla., building code, developed the first version of the scale in 1971 for a United Nations report on construction that could stand up to high winds. It used wind speeds as a guide to the damage to expect.

As director of the Hurricane Center, Simpson had responsibility for not only forecasting when, where, and how hard Hurricane Camille would hit as it approached the Mississippi Coast on August 16, 1969, but also convincing emergency management officials and the public that the storm was looking like the most-dangerous hurricane to hit the USA in decades, maybe the most dangerous ever to hit the USA.

A new computer model of how much storm surge particular hurricanes are likely to create, and an Air Force hurricane hunter airplane that discovered Camille had one of the lowest barometric pressures ever measured up to then in the Western Hemisphere - the lower the pressure the stronger the storm and the higher the surge - convinced Simpson that extraordinary warnings were needed.

When the Hurricane Hunter crew radioed in Camille's low pressure, Simpson says, "This shook everyone up. I rang the bell pretty loud."

How hurricane and tornado scales differ Saffir-Simpson hurricane scale numbers are applied before a storm hits, based on measurements of the storm from hurricane hunter airplanes, or other sources. The scale shows how much damage a storm could do. Figures used in the Fujita tornado scale are always based on after-the-fact damage surveys. Tornadoes don't last long enough for advance strength measurements, and also quickly change strength. The scale shows how much damage a tornado actually did.

At the same time, Chester Jelenianski of the Weather Bureau's Techniques Development Laboratory in Washington, D.C., had developed the first computer model designed to forecast the height of a storm's surge. When he fed Camille's numbers into the model it calculated that Camille could push ashore 20 feet of storm surge.

Simpson broke the Weather Bureau's rule against using specific wind speed or surge figures or wind speeds in forecasts - they were supposed to say things such as "strong winds and dangerously high water are expected."

Instead of beating around the bush like that, Simpson said that Camille's surge would be 15 to 20 feet. (The highest turned out to be 22.6 feet in Pass Christian, Miss.) Today, those who study Camille believe it killed 172 people, maybe a few more, when it hit Mississippi, but without the extra warning, fewer people would have fled inland and many more, maybe hundreds of the 81,000 people who fled, would have died. (Camille killed another 112 people in floods when its remnants dumped 12 to 31 inches of rain on Virginia's Blue Ridge Mountains.)

After it was all over, despite the success of the evacuations, Simpson felt he needed a better way to communicate what a storm is capable of doing. He correlated Saffir's wind damage rankings with the surge potential to create the scale used today.

(Adapted from: Hurricane Watch: Forecasting the Deadliest Storms on Earth by Dr. Bob Sheets and Jack Williams)