Vote.nd.gov
Voting Basics for North Dakota

What do I need to know before voting?

ID must be provided when voting either at the polling place or by absentee or mail if the preference is to mark your ballot at home and submit it before election day. Click ID Required for more information. Where can I obtain an ID for voting if I don’t have one?

ND Department of Transportation (DOT) driver’s license – Licensing Sites DOT Nondriver’s ID cards – Provided at no cost Tribal government issued identification (including those issued by BIA for a tribe located in North Dakota, any other tribal agency or entity, or any other document that sets forth the tribal member’s name, date of birth, and current North Dakota residential address) Long term care identification certificate (provided by North Dakota facility)

What if my ID doesn’t have my current residential address?

Most ND driver’s licenses and nondriver ID cards can be updated at no cost by calling the DOT at (701) 328-4353 or online. The card itself does not need to be replaced, notifying DOT is enough. Tribal IDs are updated with your tribal office. In this case the ID must be replaced.

What if I am unable to update my ID before voting?

Another document may be provided to the election official if the address hasn’t been updated with the appropriate official. Documents that may be used are:

A current utility bill; A current bank statement; A check issued by a federal, state, local, or tribal government (including those issued by BIA for a tribe located in North Dakota, any other tribal agency or entity, or any other document that sets forth the tribal member’s name, date of birth, and current North Dakota residential address); A paycheck; or A document issued by a federal, state, local, or tribal government (including those issued by BIA for a tribe located in North Dakota, any other tribal agency or entity, or any other document that sets forth the tribal member’s name, date of birth, and current North Dakota residential address).

What if a residential address has not been assigned to the location where I live? Contact the 911 Coordinator for your county to start the easy, quick, and free process. What information about voting procedures has been provided to my tribal leaders? Memo to Tribal Leaders. What contests will be on my ballot? My Sample Ballot, select the option you would like to use to find the information, enter the information, and click Search. Where do I find out more about the ballot questions that are on the November ballot? How do I get an absentee or mail ballot application? Answer the questions, print out the form generated, sign and date it, and send it to your County Auditor at the address given. Your ballot will be sent to you; mark it and return it to the County Auditor no later than Monday, November 5, 2018. How can I find my polling place to vote in person? Is there a map I can use to get to my polling place? Can I vote if I am not a citizen of the United States? To be eligible to vote, an individual must be a citizen of the US, a resident of ND, have lived in a precinct for the 30 days before an election, and be 18 years of age or older. Why do poll workers ask if I am a US citizen? They are doing their job to make sure that ballots are cast by only those who qualify. Isn’t there a way for the poll worker to tell this by looking at my driver’s license or nondriver’s ID card? Yes, in some instances. Starting in 2017, DOT started including “TEMPORARY,” “*PERMANENT,” or “NON-DOMICILED” on driver’s licenses and ID cards for those residents of our state who are not citizens of the US. When a noncitizen renews his or her driver’s license or nondriver’s ID card, that indication will be included. Until that time, the question must be asked of all voters by the poll workers. Samples.

Where can I find the results of the election after the election?

For additional help please call (701) 328-4146.