Muslims against Terrorism





"By God, he is not a true believer,

from whose mischief his neighbors do not feel secure."

Prophet Mohammed (Bukhari, Muslim)

CAIR: Video shows Bin Laden's complicity in 9-11 attacks

(Washington, DC, 12/13/2001)

"Hurt no one so that no one may hurt you. Remember that you will indeed meet your Lord, and that He will indeed reckon your deeds."

From the last sermon of Prophet Mohammed



Whoever does good equal to the weight of an atom shall see it...



...and whoever does evil equal to the weight of an atom shall see it.

(Quran 99:7-8)

Prohibitions on Terrorism, and Exhortations to Living with Mercy, Compassion and Patience in the Qur'an

Murdering innocent people in the name of religion is unacceptable

"Islam is not the source of terrorism, but its solution", says author Harun Yahya.

"It is time that we Muslims acknowledge that the freedoms we enjoy in the US are more desirable to us than superficial solidarity with the Muslim World. If you disagree, then prove it by packing your bags and going to whichever Muslim country you identify with."

Dr. M. A. Muqtedar Khan

Ed Bradley: Correct me if I'm wrong, but isn't it the responsibility... Does not Islam, does not Allah require that Muslims police their own religion and rid themselves of extremists?

Hamza Yusuf: Yes, absolutely. It's an obligation for Muslims to root them out. And I think it is a jihad now for the Muslims in the Muslim country to rid themselves of this element.

CBS's 60 Minutes, September 30, 2001

"Who has the greatest duty to stop violence committed by Muslims against innocent non-Muslims in the name of Islam? The answer, obviously, is Muslims."

Ingrid Mattson, Vice President, Islamic Society of North America

"Our nation must be mindful that there are thousands of Arab-Americans who live in New York City, who love their flag just as much as [we] do. And we must be mindful that as we seek to win the war, that we treat Arab-Americans and Muslims with the respect they deserve. I know that is your attitudes as well. Certainly the attitude of this government, that we should not hold one who is a Muslim responsible for an act of terror. We will hold those who are responsible for the terrorist acts accountable and those who harbor them."

President George W. Bush, September 13, 2001

"Hijacking Planes, terrorizing innocent people and shedding blood constitute a form of injustice that can not be tolerated by Islam, which views them as gross crimes and sinful acts."

Shaykh Abdul Aziz al-Ashaikh, Grand Mufti of Saudi Arabia and Chairman of the Senior Ulama, on September 15th, 2001

"The terrorists acts, from the perspective of Islamic law, constitute the crime of hirabah (waging war against society)."

September 27, 2001 - Fatwa, signed by:

Shaykh Yusuf al-Qaradawi, Grand Islamic Scholar and Chairman of the Sunna and Sira Countil, Qatar

Judge Tariq al-Bishri, First Deputy President of the Council d'etat, Egypt

Dr. Muhammad s. al-Awa, Professor of Islamic Law and Shari'a, Egypt

Dr. Haytham al-Khayyat, Islamic scholar, Syria

Fahmi Houaydi, Islamic scholar, Syria

Shaykh Taha Jabir al-Alwani, Chairman, North America High Council

"Neither the law of Islam nor its ethical system justify such a crime."

Zaki Badawi, Principal of the Muslim College in London. Cited in Arab News, September 28, 2001.

"It is wrong to kill innocent people. It is also wrong to praise those who kill innocent people."

Mufti Nizamuddin Shamzai, Pakistan. Cited in the New York Times, September 28, 2001.

"What these people stand for is completely against all the principles that Arab Muslims believe in."

King Abdullah II, of Jordan; cited in the Middle East Times, September 28, 2001.

The above statements by high ranking international Muslim scholars and leaders appeared in an advertisement placed by the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, in the New York Times, October 17th, 2001 (p. A 17)

"I'm a Muslim. I've been a Muslim for 20 years. I want the world to know the truth about Islam. I wouldn't be here to represent Islam if it were the way the terrorists make it look...Islam is for peace."

Former World Heavyweight boxing champion, Muhammad Ali, at the telethon benefit concert, September 21, 2001.

"Those terrorists must be reading a completely different Quran than the rest of us. This isn't about Islam. It's about terrorism."

US Marine Corps Captain Aisha Bakkar-Poe.

"Terrorists claiming to act in the name of Islam is like a knife through my heart - that people would practice Islam, but do deeds like what they've done. It's not true faith. Some people twist religion to the way they think."

US Army Captain Arneshuia Balial, a convert to Islam since 1987.

Britain's terror connection

U.K. crackdown on radical Islamists is driving network further underground.

Olivia Ward, Toronto Star, November 18, 2001.

Britain's terror connection - a Muslim speaks out

Abubakar N. Kasim decries those who "spoil the image of Islam" and "mislead the public by their hateful actions".

The Next Mahdi

An Osama bin Laden whose forces in Afghanistan are routed on the final days of Ramadan, 1422 and who mysteriously disappears, can live to fight another day... Especially if he is already dead!

By American convert to Islam, Siraadj Munir, Fri, 14 Dec 2001

Fanatics and terrorists misguided

"America's fight against terrorism is justified by the Quran", says Imam Tammam Adi, Director of the Islamic Cultural Center of Eugene, Oregon

"Islam Denounces Terrorism"

by Harun Yahya

December, 2001 (First Edition, AmalPress)

200 Pages/210 Photographs | A4 Full Colour

An Interview with Osama Bin Laden

extracts from a translation carried by the Dawn newspaper of Pakistan.

Bin Laden's violence is a heresy against Islam

"Mainstream theologians have come out unanimously against the terrorists. What we must now ask them is to campaign more strongly against the aberrant doctrines that underpin them", writes British Muslim convert scholar, Abdal-Hakim Murad.

A Memo to American Muslims

"The worst exhibition of Islam happened on our turf."

In the wake of September 11, Dr. M. A. Muqtedar Khan calls for soul searching, reflection and reassessment among US Muslims.

Call for holy war condemned by Florida Muslim cleric

Osama bin Laden and his call for a jihad, or holy war, against the United States were denounced in a scathing address by the leader of one of Florida's largest mosques.

Reject call for holy war, Florida Muslim leader says

"How could the Muslim leaders in the U.S. denounce armed forces against the Taliban when you've got Afghanis against the Taliban? I see some strong hypocrisy here.''

Imam Shafayet Mohamed, the religious leader of Darul Uloom in Pembroke Pines, South Florida's largest mosque.

Muslims in America ignore Osama Bin Laden's call for holy war.

Bay Area Muslims think more peaceful measures should have been taken by the U.S., but say the suspect has no legitimacy

By Sandy Kleffman and Sonia Krishnan, Contra Costa Times, October 8, 2001

Looking for Answers In Islam's Holy Book

Despite Contradictions, Koran Favors Peace Over War, Scholars Say

'Osama bin Laden and other Muslim extremists "pick and choose" passages from the Koran to support a global jihad, or holy war, against the United States and other countries', said Barbara Stowasser, a Koranic scholar and director of the Center for Contemporary Arab Studies at Georgetown University

By Bill Broadway, Washington Post, Saturday, September 29, 2001

Experts Say bin Laden Is Distorting Islamic Law

Leading American scholars and practitioners of Islam said yesterday that Osama bin Laden had twisted and debased Muslim theology in a videotaped statement in which he called on "every Muslim" to "rush to make his religion victorious" by emulating those who attacked the United States on Sept. 11.

By JACQUES STEINBERG, New York Times, October 8, 2001

American Muslims Have a 'Special Obligation'

An American Muslim leader asks: Who has the greatest duty to stop violence committed by Muslims in the name of Islam? - Muslims!

By Ingrid Mattson Vice President, Islamic Society of North America

Prominent American Muslims denounce terror committed in the name of Islam

Transcript of CBS's 60 Minutes interview on Sept 30, 2001 between Ed Bradley and

Shaykh Hamza Yusuf of California

Imam Siraj Wahaj of Brooklyn

Imam Farid Esack, Visiting Professor in Religious Studies at the University of Hamburg

Imam Faisal Abdur Rauf of Lower Manhattan

Dr. Vali Nasir, Professor of Political Science at the University of San Diego.

African Islamic Professor Condemns Terrorism, Praises Muslim Charitable Organizations

Professor Doctor Abdallah Dumbuya, a Gambian scholar with a double Doctorate degree in Islamic Jurisprudence and Sciences, has strongly condemned organisations and groups using Islam as a justification for terrorism and violence.

Rallying to make a difference

Hundreds of families and community leaders, Muslim and non-Muslim, attend a Dallas rally against terrorism, sponsored by the Council on American-Islamic Relations

By Katherine Morales, The Dallas Morning News, October 21, 2001

Muslims in the American armed forces speak out against acts of terrorism.

AFRTS video report. Requires RealPlayer.

The American Muslim Council Supports President Bush’s Campaign Against Terrorism

Text of Press Release (Washington DC, 10/08/2001)

Canadian Muslim Scholars Reject "Misguided" Calls for Jihad

(Ottawa, Canada) - The Canadian office of the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR CAN) and the Canadian Muslim Civil Liberties Association (CMCLA) today denounced a series of recent statements made by Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaeda network that state that Muslims should wage a "jihad" against Americans.

Koran a Book of Peace, Not War, Scholars Say

Osama bin Laden, who is widely assumed to be the force behind the September 11 hijackings in the United States, cites the Koran, Islam's most holy book, as the inspiration for terrorist attacks. But Muslim scholars around the world who are reviled by such actions explain that the Koran preaches peace.

Peter Standring, National Geographic Today, September 25, 2001

Peace, The Greater Jihad

a poem by Yahya.

Islam For Today has only three photos like this...

Dallas Muslims rally against terrorism, October 20, 2001