Gillibrand Announces Healthcare Solutions Plan
Submitted by Phil Giltner on September 24, 2006 - 10:53am.

Gillibrand: "Providing health care solutions must be an economic security priority"

Saratoga Springs - Kirsten Gillibrand, Democratic candidate in New York's 20th Congressional District met with over 50 area supporters at a "kitchen table forum" on healthcare today, to discuss an affordable and accessible health care system. Gillibrand will be holding one "kitchen table forum" each week between now and Election Day in several locations across the district.

"Providing health care solutions must be an economic security priority." Gillibrand continued, "Strong leadership should be providing real solutions for more affordable and accessible health care for our families and small businesses, yet the last few years the government has been failing on this front. Forty-six million Americans do not have health insurance, this is a national crisis. Investing in a comprehensive health care plan will not only lower costs but will provide coverage for the people most failed by the system."

Gillibrand went on to outline several of the reforms necessary to increase the quality and improve access to the health care system.

Lower the cost of healthcare for everyone, the solutions includes a measure to allow anyone to buy into Medicare Improve services for rural areas Reform the Medicare Prescription Drug Program by allowing the government to negotiate directly with the drug companies Insure all children and protect Medicaid and Medicare Long-term investments for a healthier America

Voted for the Medicare Prescription Drug Bill giving billions to the health care industry, while forcing seniors to accept annual increases in premiums and deductibles and a growing gap in coverage for the prescription drugs they buy. (HR 1, Vote 669, 11/22/2003)

Voted to cut Medicaid by $10 billion in the fiscal 2006 budget resolution. (HCR 95, Vote 149, 4/28/2005)

Voted against allowing millions of Americans to import U.S.-made prescription drugs from industrialized nations. (HR 2427, Vote 445, 7/25/2003)

Sweeney has received $17,500 from the pharmaceutical industry.(FEC reports)

Aims of Gillibrand's Health Care Solution Plan:Sweeney's Record on Health Care

Gillibrand is running for Congress because new ideas will bring real change to our communities, our district and our country.