Rick Scott for Governor
May 11, 2010 by Campaign Staff

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE CONTACT: Jennifer Baker

Tuesday, May 11, 2010 954-915-3365

Rick Scott for Florida Campaign Releases “Conservative Commentary” on Illegal Immigration

Expresses his support of the Arizona immigration law

Fort Lauderdale – The Rick Scott for Florida gubernatorial campaign today released the third in a political commentary series addressing the issue of illegal immigration where Rick Scott speaks to his support of the newly passed Arizona immigration law.

“A legal immigration system where everyone plays by the rules is fundamental to our economic and national security,” said Rick Scott. “The Arizona law is a common sense enforcement of already existing law. If you break the law then law enforcement should be able to ask for identification that shows you are in the United States legally. The only people who have reason to fear the law are people who are here illegally. States like Arizona are in a crisis situation because the career politicians and the federal government have FAILED to secure our border.”

Rick Scott’s position on this important issue creates a clear contrast with Bill McCollum, his leading opponent in the Republican primary. McCollum, the chief law enforcement officer for the state of Florida, has called the law “far out”.

McCollum: Florida Doesn’t Need ‘Far Out’ Immigration Law. “But the candidate for governor was pretty clear about whether he would like a Florida version of Arizona’s law empowering local police to become de facto immigration officers. ‘I think Arizona has its own unique problems. I don’t think Florida should enact laws like this — quite that far out,’ McCollum said.” (Caputo, Marc, “Bill McCollum on ‘far out’ immigration law, oil-drill veto threat,” Naked Politics, 4/27/10)

The third edition of the conservative political commentary with Rick Scott began airing this week on statewide radio. To listen to audio visit: http://www.rickscottforflorida.com/home/2010/05/11/immigration/

Text of the commentary is below.

ANNCR: And now…Florida Conservative Commentary…with Rick Scott, Republican for Governor.

RICK: This is Rick Scott…today’s topic – common sense on immigration:

RICK: If we have laws in this country….shouldn’t police officers be allowed to enforce them?

For years Washington has limited local police ability to enforce immigration laws.

Now Arizona is changing that….and Florida should too.

If someone gets stopped for speeding or arrested for robbery, the police should be allowed to determine if they are here legally.

It’s just common sense.

President Obama and other liberals call it discrimination. Nonsense.

As Republicans, we reject any discrimination of any kind.

This is simply a common sense effort to enforce the law.

America is a nation of immigrants, and that makes us strong.

We are also a nation of laws and these are dangerous times.

It’s time we start enforcing those laws, and that’s what I’ll do as Governor.

ANNCR: Florida Conservative Commentary with Rick Scott.

DISC: Political advertisement paid for and approved by Rick Scott, Republican for Governor

###