The British National Party — Blog — Islamic Colonisation of Britain Continues: NHS Relaxes Hygiene Measure to Accommodate Muslim Staff but Bans Crucifix
April 11, 2010 - By BNP News

The National Health Service has amended its hygiene rules to allow Muslim staff not to wash before attending to patients — in the same week when it was ruled that a British nurse’s crucifix could not be worn at work.

The open display of anti-British bias will now put patients in hospitals at even greater risk of infection by the “superbug” epidemic which has directly paralleled the increasing numbers of ethnic NHS staff.

According to an announcement by the Department of Health (DoH), female Muslim staff will now be exempt from the rule that all personnel be scrubbed and bare below the elbow.

Long sleeves have been identified as one of the leading causes for the spread of bacteria responsible for the superbugs.

In addition, the DoH also announced that Sikh employees could wear bangles “as long as they can be pushed up the arm during direct patient care.”

At the same time, British nurse Shirley Chaplin was ordered in an employment tribunal called to adjudicate on a discrimination battle with Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital Trust, to stop wearing a crucifix because it “might carry bacteria” and could “scratch patients.”

The ruling discarded evidence showing that Mrs Chaplin, 53, had worn the crucifix around her neck since she was 16 and there had never been any evidence that it had ever harmed a single patient in any way.

“I don’t believe my cross is a danger, so this is double standards. What can you say? It seems that life is stacked up against Christians these days,” Mrs Chaplin was quoted as saying in a newspaper.

The lifting of the sleeve ban is a direct result of agitation from the Muslim community that female NHS workers should dress modestly in terms of Koranic teaching and that this included not baring their arms in mixed company.

The multiculturalist ideology promoted by decades of Tory and Labour rule has led to these demands, and the measure to prevent the spread of disease will now only be applied to non-Muslim staff.

The NHS is proposing an utterly pathetic alternative which consists of “disposable sleeves” for Muslim staff.

This scheme was dismissed by Derek Butler, chairman of MRSA Action UK, a campaign group headed by respected microbiologist Professor Hugh Pennington.

“My worry is that by allowing some medics to use disposable sleeves you compromise patient safety because unless you change the sleeves between treating each patient, you spread bacteria. Scrubbing bare arms is far more effective,” Mr Butler was quoted as saying.

“I’ve seen doctors and nurses fail to change their gloves, and I’ve no doubt this will see exactly the same thing happening. These sleeves are just another risk, and you cannot take risks with patient safety.”

Once again, the interests of British people are put last before the demands of the increasingly bold Islamic colonisers.

The British National Party is the only party to demand that the NHS be completely revamped to ensure that it is staffed primarily by British people and that First World standards are enforced and maintained.

A BNP government will ensure that sufficient funding is given to the NHS to recruit and train British people for work at livable wages in this vital sector.

The extra money for this process will be drawn away from the £9 billion per year foreign aid budget, the £70 billion illegal foreign wars budget and the £60 billion per year EU membership fee.

In addition, a BNP government would invest heavily in training up our own people to fulfil important roles in the NHS, and not rely on stealing staff from Third World countries.