Claim that Baldwin voted against body armor for troops far from truth
Visit our election section for complete coverage of the 2012 spring, fall and recall elections.

It's one of the more outrageous claims of the U.S. Senate campaign.

Democratic candidate Tammy Baldwin opposed legislation that would have provided body armor for troops.

No wonder former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani was so upset with Baldwin while speaking last week on behalf of Republican candidate Tommy Thompson.

"Who the heck would vote against armor-piercing protection for our troops, except for someone who's hanging so far out on the left that she can't even think straight?" Giuliani asked.

Now a variation on that theme is the centerpiece of a new Thompson ad ripping Baldwin.

"She fought to block funding that provides body armor for our troops just to make a political point," the TV spot says.

But experts say the measure coming under scrutiny is a feel-good bill that wouldn't lead to federal defense cuts, much less slice federal funding for body armor.

That's just political spin.

"The notion that, if this bill would pass, it means that Tammy Baldwin would be denying body armor to troops, is ludicrous," said Kenneth Mayer, professor of political science at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Four times in the past, Baldwin was listed as a co-sponsor for legislation that would allow peace-loving taxpayers to get a conscientious objector exemption from the Internal Revenue Service to stipulate that their income taxes wouldn't be used for war. Their taxes would go into a "peace tax fund," with the money being divvied out for non-military items.

Every two years, Democratic U.S. Rep. John Lewis of Georgia introduces the bill, and then it sits in the House Ways and Means Committee without a vote. Baldwin most recently backed the bill three years ago.

The bill was the centerpiece of a 2009 story in the Atlanta Journal Constitution on bills and resolutions "on the road to nowhere."

Earlier this month , Media Trackers - a conservative group that digs up dirt on Democrats - was the first to suggest that Baldwin's support for this measure meant she favored "denying body armor and medical supplies to U.S. military personnel" fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan.

From there, the story took off. It was picked up by Breitbart, a conservative online news site, and plugged by talk show hosts Jerry Bader and Charlie Sykes.

Brian Sikma, who wrote the Media Trackers' piece, has defended his original post, saying he never contended the peace fund bill would "cut" funding for anything in the military. He said his point was that under the bill, anyone would be able to "block" their taxes from being used to support the U.S. Department of Defense.

But even Sikma went beyond that in a television appearance over the weekend.

"Tammy Baldwin clearly has a credibility problem when it comes to national security issues," Sikma said on Sykes' "Sunday Insight" show on Sunday. Among other things, he said, "She voted against body armor and medical supplies."

Except there was no vote.

The measure has not come up for a vote in committee or on the House floor during Baldwin's 14 years in Congress. The last time anything happened on the proposal was July 1995 when a House committee held hearings on it.

"This would never pass," said Mayer, who hasn't contributed to either Thompson or Baldwin and recently worked as a consultant for both liberals and conservatives, including the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and state Supreme Court Justice David Prosser. "If it did come up for a vote, you would have 18 people (in the House) vote for it."

But just suppose it did.

The bill would still have no impact on defense spending, say officials.

Todd Berry, longtime president of the nonpartisan Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance, noted that federal tax dollars are "fungible." That means, Berry said, if the income taxes from conscientious observers could not be used on military items, lawmakers would simply dip into another pot of tax dollars to underwrite war-related expenses.

Berry referred to the legislation as "symbolic."

"In reality, the bill doesn't mean very much because (tax) money is fungible," said Berry, who has not given to or endorsed either U.S. Senate candidate. "But it makes us all feel better."

Even the group promoting the legislation acknowledges as much.

In a lobbying brochure available on its website, the National Campaign for a Peace Tax Fund argues that the measure is "not a threat to the tax system."

"Under the Religious Freedom Peace Tax Fund Bill, individual tax payers will not be able to specify where their money would go, nor will their participation in the Peace Tax Fund directly decrease the amount of money spent on war," the brochure says.

A 1992 study by the Joint Committee on taxation agreed: "To the extent that tax receipts remaining in the general fund and not deposited into the Peace Tax Fund are sufficient to pay for the military activities, there would be no overall reduction in the Government's funding of military activities as a result of the bill."

Andrew Reschovsky, a public affairs professor at UW-Madison, said if individual taxpayers could dedicate their tax dollars for, say, preschool education, Congress would simply lower the amount going to preschool education from other sources when crafting a federal budget.

The same, he said, would apply to the peace bill.

"These are purely symbolic gestures," said Reschovsky, who has previously donated to President Barack Obama and former U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold, a Wisconsin Democrat.

Mayer said symbolic measures can have meaning. But he said the bill won't affect the federal budget. There aren't enough conscientious objectors in the U.S. for the measure to force Congress to curb how much is being spent on the military.

"It will have absolutely zero impact on any amount of money the government spends - not a penny," Mayer said. "So in that sense, it is silly."

Perhaps that would have been a more pertinent angle for the Thompson campaign to attack: Why was Baldwin wasting her time on a silly and meaningless bill that had no chance of passing?

Lisa Boothe, spokeswoman for the Thompson campaign, emphasized that Baldwin still had voted against a number of Department of Defense appropriations bills. So, regardless of the peace fund bill, the Thompson ad is accurate, Boothe said.

"She did in fact vote against funding for body armor," Boothe said.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice.