U.S. House of Representatives
Congressman Patrick E. Murphy represents Florida's 18th Congressional district, which includes northern Palm Beach, Martin, and St. Lucie counties. He currently serves on the House Committee on Financial Services and the House Select Committee on Intelligence.



Patrick was born and raised in Florida, spending most of his childhood in the Florida Keys. He earned his B.S. in business administration from the University of Miami, graduating with dual degrees in accounting and finance. He went on to work as a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) for Deloitte and Touche, auditing Fortune 500 companies. Patrick is one of only 9 CPAs currently serving in the House of Representatives.



Congressman Murphy is dedicated to working in a bipartisan manner to tackle the many challenges facing the nation, chairing several bipartisan caucuses and efforts in Congress. He is the co-founder of the United Solutions Caucus, which is a group of over 30 like-minded members, both Democrats and Republicans, who are focused on finding long-term solutions to fiscal issues. One of the group's major legislative initiatives is the SAVE Act, which will cut $479 billion in wasteful government spending. Patrick's voting record was recently ranked with the top 5% most independent in the entire House, and he was one of only 7 Democrats to receive the “Spirit of Enterprise” award by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.



As a native Floridian, Murphy also understands the importance of protecting the environment and the role it plays in the local economy. He is a strong supporter of Everglades restoration efforts, beach renourishment, and inlet dredging. These projects not only protect important ecosystems, but are found to have a major return on investment.



Whether it's protecting our waterways, cutting wasteful spending, or creating an environment conducive to job growth, Congressman Murphy is working to protect the middle class and the American dream. He is committed to working with members of both parties to find common-sense solutions for the Treasure Coast and Palm Beaches, the state of Florida, and our nation.