The totally unheard-of idea that movies like making businessmen the villain
Some liberal writer at the Huffington Post was excited to find out that I’ve been talking to Wisconsinites about how enthusiastically the entertainment media spread a “business is bad” message.

He seems to get hung up on the way I mentioned “The Lego Movie,” a children’s movie “in which the bad guy is a heartless businessman intent on destroying the world for profit. ‘That's done for a reason,’ Johnson said. ‘They're starting that propaganda, and it's insidious.’”

The writer, who’s named Ryan Grim, even links to a video of me talking to people in Cedarburg. I urge you to watch it, because I think I’m making a pretty good point: “Our news media is not on our side, certainly not entertainment media. I actually called a gentleman, it was probably a couple months ago, that was so upset when he took his children to an animated movie, 6- and 7-year-old children, to an animated movie -- and guess who the villain was. Evil Mr. Businessperson, OK? So it’s insidious it’s that propaganda starts very early.”

The Huffington Post writer, Grim, can’t seem to figure out why I or anyone else would say this about “The Lego Movie,” and he insinuates some kind of conspiracy. Actually, it’s pretty simple: I read a great piece in the Wall Street Journal in which an entrepreneur pointed out that the plot revolved around “the evil exploits of its villain, President Business.”

It was the latest, said the essayist, Doug Haugh, in a series of movies that reflexively say business leaders are villains:

“As the president of the energy company Mansfield, and the father of 6- and 7-year-old children, both of whom love animated movies, I have found that these characterizations hit me particularly hard. They prompt my children to view me not as the leader I’m supposed to be, but as a movie-villain incarnate.”

He’s tired of it. He wrote:

“Business leaders who work daily to increase their company’s income by making other people wealthier—whether it is their employees, customers, suppliers or stockholders—should provide a robust defense of wealth creation. They should explain how this process of free, mutually beneficial exchange makes both parties richer, growing the size of the pie, not taking a bigger slice at someone else’s expense.

“Businesses—which provide the products and services that make our lives more comfortable—are responsible for much of what has made America the richest nation in the history of the world.”

I agree. I called the guy, since I was so impressed by his essay. It was a good conversation.

But even if it weren’t for that essay, the point that “The Lego Movie” was an especially grievous slam on business was made by others. For instance, The Weekly Standard, the Economist, the Boston Globe – even the liberal Atlantic and the far-left New Statesman.

The strange thing isn’t that a kids’ movie was anti-business, it is that someone claiming to be a journalist never encountered the idea before.