Paid leave
Paid family and medical leave

It’s time to guarantee paid family and medical leave in America.

Hillary will:

Guarantee up to 12 weeks of paid family and medical leave.

Ensure at least a two-thirds wage replacement rate for workers.

Pay for paid leave by making the wealthiest pay their fair share—not raising taxes on working families.

“For many workers, staying home to take care of a sick child or an aging parent means losing a paycheck—or worse, even losing a job. That is an impossible choice we shouldn’t ask anyone to make—and yet American workers are forced to make it every day.”

Hillary, NOVEMBER 9, 2015

Today, the United States is the only developed nation in the world with no guaranteed paid leave of any kind. In fact, only 13 percent of American workers have access to paid family leave—with the lowest paid workers up to four times less likely to have access than the highest paid.

Hillary has long believed it’s past time for that to change. In an economy where both men and women typically hold down a paying job and women are breadwinners in two-thirds of families with children, paid family and medical leave is core to our economic growth and competitiveness. Paid leave helps families remain economically stable, benefits children’s early health and development by allowing parents to care for their newborn children, and reduces employee turnover. The availability of paid leave bolsters our economy by allowing more Americans to participate fully in the workforce and ensures that we don’t leave any talent on the sidelines.

As president, Hillary will:



Guarantee up to 12 weeks of paid family and medical leave. Under Hillary’s plan, workers—men and women—will be guaranteed up to 12 weeks of paid family leave to care for a new child or a seriously ill family member, such as an elderly, ailing parent or a spouse with cancer, and up to 12 weeks of medical leave to recover from a serious illness or injury of their own.

Enable hard working Americans to support their families economically while on leave. To ensure families remain stable and supported during both joyful and stressful times—like when a new baby arrives, a worker gets cancer, or an employee must care for an elderly parent suffering from Alzheimer’s—Hillary’s plan will provide financial support to workers taking leave. Under her plan, workers who have met a minimum number of hours the previous year will receive a percentage of their income during leave.

Ensure at least a two-thirds wage replacement rate for workers. Hillary’s plan will ensure that the wage replacement rate is at least two-thirds of a worker’s current wages, up to a ceiling, so that low-income and middle class workers receive the financial support they need to take the leave they need.

No new business or employee mandate. Hillary’s plan will not impose additional costs on businesses, including small businesses. There is no business or employee mandate to pay for leave, nor is there a payroll tax to pay for it.

Fund paid leave by making the wealthy pay their fair share, not by increasing taxes on working families. Hillary strongly believes that middle class families deserve a raise, not a tax increase. American families need paid leave, and to get there, Hillary will ask the wealthiest Americans to pay their fair share. She’ll ensure that the plan is fully paid for by a combination of tax reforms impacting the most fortunate.

Paid leave is crucial for families and critical to economic growth.





For too long, issues like paid leave have been dismissed as just “women’s issues” or “family issues,” but those days are over—paid leave is critical to economic growth and Hillary’s goal of raising incomes for working families. The availability of paid leave bolsters our economy by allowing more Americans to participate fully in the workforce and ensures that in America we leave no talent on the sidelines.





As Hillary said in a recent major economic speech, “The movement of women into the American workforce over the past 40 years was responsible for more than $3.5 trillion in economic growth. But that progress has stalled. The United States used to rank seventh out of 24 advanced countries in women’s labor force participation. By 2013, we had dropped to 19th. That represents a lot of unused potential for our economy and for American families. Studies show that nearly a third of this decline relative to other countries is because they’re expanding family-friendly policies like paid leave and we are not. We should be making it easier for Americans to be both good workers and good parents and caregivers. Women who want to work should be able to do so without worrying every day about how they’re going to take care of their children, or what will happen if a family member gets sick.”





Hillary has a record of fighting for families: