State Sen. Black holds on to 13th District seat

State Sen. Richard H. Black, a former Marine combat pilot and state delegate who is among the Virginia General Assembly’s most conservative members, was re-elected to a second term in a contentious spotlight race between polar-opposite candidates.



Black defeated Democrat Jill McCabe, a pediatric surgeon and emergency room director at Inova Loudoun Hospital who was making her first political run.



Black, 71, won Virginia's predominantly Republican 13th District, representing Loudoun and parts of Prince William County, with 52 percent of the vote.



The race pitted the ultra-conservative Black, some of whom said represented “old” Loudoun County attitudes, against McCabe, 47, a “power mom” from Ashburn who appealed to a younger generation of citizens and their families.



It was viewed as an important race that could tip the political balance of the Virginia Senate, which appeared to remain in the hands of Republicans despite a full-on press by Democratic Gov. Terry McAuliffe. All 140 seats in Virginia’s General Assembly were on the ballot Nov. 3, races that could establish the state’s political foundation through the 2016 presidential race.



Following Nov. 3's elections in Virginia, Republicans commanded a majority in the House of Delegates.



The Black-McCabe race focused attention on the culture wars between conservative Republicans and moderate Democrats, as well as the gender wall in the state senate. Only seven of the 40 state senators are women.



Facing his first re-election campaign in a state Senate district that falls primarily in Loudoun, Black came under repeated attacks by Democrats for previous comments on abortion and rape.



With wedge-issue passion, Black has incited controversy with comments about spousal rape, military sexual assault, homosexuality and abortion. He once questioned whether a husband commits rape if he forces his wife to have sex. He sent plastic pink models of fetuses to lawmakers as they prepared to vote on an abortion bill, and he compared abortion to the Holocaust.



Black made national headlines this spring with a letter to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad calling his army’s actions “heroic.” To the chagrin of veterans, Black appeared in campaign literature wearing his military uniform, crossing the line between service and politics. Department of Defense rules require a disclaimer acknowledging that a candidates is not endorsed by the DoD.



McCabe cast Black as an out-of-touch extremist in fast-growing Loudoun, where demographics are changing. Black responded by going hard at McCabe, belittling her "experience" as a doctor and mother.



When the heavily edited video clips of a Planned Parenthood doctor being duped by an imposter into talking about the donation of fetal tissue surfaced, Black used that to accuse McCabe of being a doctor who “supports selling late-term abortions for bigger body parts.”



The tactic worked. The conservative Republican won re-election to his seat easily despite the heavy focus by Democrats on his colorful record.



Comments

Post a comment

Comments express only the views of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of this website or any associated person or entity. Any user who believes a message is objectionable can contact us at [email protected].



More News