NASA CONFIRMS EARTH WILL EXPERIENCE 15 DAYS OF DARKNESS IN NOVEMBER 2016
We have come across many reports regarding earth and its changes in recent times and not many materialize. However, this time NASA has confirmed that earth will experience total darkness for 15 days in November 2016 starting from November 15 to November 29.

According to NASA this phenomenon was in the pipeline for a long period and the astronomers from NASA have informed that the world will experience a strange event from November 15 at 3:00 am and it is likely to continue until November 30, 4:45 pm.

The officials believe this blackout is the result of an astronomical event between Venus and Jupiter. Charles Bolden, head of NASA issued a 1000 page document which explains the event in detail to the White House.

The reports claim that Venus and Jupiter will be very closely engaged and they will be separated by a mere 1 degree. Venus will surpass to the south-west of Jupiter which results in Venus shining 10 times brighter than Jupiter and this light will heat up the gases in Jupiter causing a reaction. The resulting gas reaction will release a never before seen amount of hydrogen into the space which will make contact with sun at around 2:50 am.

When hydrogen makes contact with sun it will cause a massive explosion on the sun’s surface and it will have an effect on the temperature which increases to 9,000 degrees kelvin in no time.

The heat caused by the whole process will force sun to turn into bluish colour and once it changes it colour it will take at least 14 days to restore its normal temperature and retaining its normal colour of Red Giant.

Meanwhile, the light from sun will be much dimmer than normal and people will experience the change only after 2:58 am on November 15th.

“We do not expect any major effects from the Blackout event. The only effect this event will have on Earth is an increase of 6 – 8 degrees in temperature. the polar cap will be mostly affected by this. No one should worry much. This event would be similar to what Alaskans experience in the winter”. Bolden said.