BREAKING: Black Lives Matter Leader Kept ‘Virtually All’ Donations
3.1k SHARES Share Tweet

Before he decided to enter the political scene and the public service, President Donald Trump had many other occupations and interests. Most notable were probably his real estate investments and his show business days on Celebrity Apprentice.

Many people thought that this would be a disadvantage to his political career but instead it might have actually helped him win the presidential seat in the end. Because of the fact that Donald Trump is not known in the political sphere, he is very unpredictable and other politicians find it hard to “handle” him.

In fact if there is one thing we can be certain about when it comes to the president, is that he is unpredictable. Now, even though he constantly has highly trained secret service protection, one of his former TV star colleagues surprised him with a one-of-a-kind gift.

According to Forbes, Jesse James, a firearms maker, has specially crafted a custom .”45 for 45″

“Jesse James, who appeared on the second season on “Celebrity Apprentice,” has made a .45 for Donald Trump, the 45th President of the United States.The CEO of Jesse James Firearms Unlimited, an Austin, Texas-based firearms manufacturer, James has remained friendly with the President and says Trump “has seen the finished product, and he is very pleased.”

James intends to present the President with the firearm at a future date. ‘I will take the gun to the White House and give it to him,’ James explained in an email. ‘Hopefully, it will end up on display in his presidential library.’The Trump .45 is a bespoke version of the JJFU Grand Master X 1911 pistol.

‘This would give me enough real estate to put his full name down,’ James noted. ‘Makes a bold statement with no abbreviations. Plus the gun is pretty bad a**.’

The pistol is not just an ordinary one, it’s made out of 412 stainless steel combined with 24-karat gold plating, and the wood inlay is from one of George Washington’s chestnut trees.

On one of the sides of the hand-gun, is engraved “Donald J. Trump” and on the other “The 45th President United States of America.” The engraving also includes the presidential seal.

The creator of the gun, Jesse James reportedly said : “I don’t want to disclose the value, but it did take me a solid year to finish.”

Upon being asked about what were his expectations of Trump’s response, he said “I’m pretty sure he’s going to want to put some rounds through it.”

James also said “I hope he uses it as a negotiation tool. You know, just casually pull it out and set it on his desk, ‘Have you seen my Jesse James pistol?”

As the report from Forbes states, James has a history of making firearms for other prominent people as well. “Before the demise of Brangelina, he made a pair of custom Cisco 1911 pistols for Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie. Jolie’s was engraved: ‘MAMA KNOWS BEST.’ Pitt’s was engraved: ‘BIG PAPA.’ His customers also include Rick Perry, the Texas governor turned Secretary of Energy under Trump, who described James as an ‘amazing artist’ on Instagram — and added ‘#1911heaven.’ In addition, he’s made 1911s for Eric Clapton, Kid Rock, and is working on ‘a new super size one for Shaq.”

The President’s creation came in a specialized handcrafted presentation box, which was also made of wood from Washington’s original chestnut trees.

James documented his progress and shared it with his followers, while he was still working on the project of making the presidential custom pistol. He explained why he decided to make this gift for the President, on his personal Instagram feed, where he declared: “I think it’s pretty much the Law.” Adding, “If you build guns and your friend becomes President. You build him a Bada** gun!’ That post generated nearly 60,000 likes.”

It looks like James couldn’t have thought of a better gift for a President such as Donald Trump.

What do you think?

Share this post if you like the “45 for the 45” !

Featured Image Source H/T : Freedom Daily

Like this: Like Loading...

Related