President Trump Just Made Trey Gowdy The Most Powerful Man In Capitol Hill
1.4k SHARES Share Tweet

As it appears, Obama is facing some hard time.

One man, a brother of a deceased Border Patrol Agent has taken to the social media to try and attract the President’s attention, to make an informal request for Trump to go after Obama for some things he has done during his time in office.

Kent Terry, asked that President Donald Trump reopens the case that might bring some serious trouble upon the former president. It will at least certainly ruin his legacy for good.

His brother, Brian Terry, died in 2010 when he was killed by an illegal alien who ruined a part of the Fast and Furious Operation. The part referred to here, incorporated the so-called “gun walking,” which ultimately found Brian Terry at gun point, and in the end took his life away.

However, his brother is determined to fight for justice. Kent Terry is evidently very much upset that he is unable to find answers for his brother’s death. He just can’t grasp the fact how a man who had spent 22 years protecting America’s border, was left to die just like that.

#FastAndFurious @realDonaldTrump Sir it's been 7 yrs .my family ask you reopen Obama's gun scandal that cost my brother his life..I talk to you back on the campaign trail here in Michigan and you offered to reopen the books into this senseless scandal .thank you.God bless — Kent terry (@terry_superman) March 3, 2018

According to a report from Fox News, “Brian Terry was killed in 2010 by an illegal immigrant with a weapon used in the botched “gun-walking” program Operation Fast and Furious. His brother, Kent Terry, tweeted at Trump on Saturday, asking him to “reopen the books” and get to the bottom of the scandal that cost his brother his life.”

The report goes on to say that Terry appeared on “Fox and Friends” recently where he said : “We need to find out the truth, exactly what happened, how it happened, why it happened. We need Mr. Trump, President Trump, to unseal the documents, reverse executive privilege so that we know what happened, and that we can hold the people accountable that are responsible.”

He believes that the people at the Justice Department and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) should answer for the government-approved operation which permitted thousands of guns to cross our border.

Terry said : “Everybody’s still actively working, nobody’s been punished, maybe just a slap on the hand, and that’s about it.”

He added: There needs to be justice for my brother. He deserves it. He spent 22 years serving his country as a law enforcement officer, a Marine, and that’s what he deserves.”

He also revealed that he never had much hope that his brother’s case would be resolved during the time Obama was president, but he trusting that President Trump will be able to get to the bottom of it.

In addition to this, Terry also mentioned something about meeting the President during his campaign back in 2016, when they managed to briefly discuss the incident. He said that the President looked very empathetic and apologetic for what happened with his brother.

The president even reportedly mentioned something about having Sessions reopen the case to find out more bout the actions that lead to the death of Border Patrol Agent Brian Terry.

Back in 2014, Newsmax wrote about this case, saying : “Fast and Furious” started as a way to capture drug dealers in violent Mexican drug cartels. It ended as part of a scandal involving the Barack Obama presidency that had to be wrapped up following unnecessary deaths. Gun-buyers, many of whom the feds suspected were criminals, were permitted to take firearms purchased in the U.S. and walk into Mexico without interference from agents; the intention was that once the guns were sold to powerful drug cartels, the ATF would later trace the firearms. Whistleblowers and investigators, however, found no attempt to trace the guns.”

The possible scenario is that the weapons that the government was supposed to track, found their way into the hands of criminals, which caused the operation to get out of hand and cause an even bigger problem. The result was a shootout that lead to the death of Border Agent Brian Terry.

Featured Image Source H/T: Daily Vine

Like this: Like Loading...

Related