Board of Trustees Membership
Haywood D. Cochrane, Jr. (Haywood)

Chair

Elected 2013; term ends 2021

2016 Muirfield Court

Elon, NC 27244

(336) 584-1004

haywoodcochrane@yahoo.com

Haywood Cochrane, a native of Weldon, NC, is the Past Chairman of the Board of Directors of DARA Biosciences, Inc. He began his career in banking and moved into healthcare where he specialized in being part of a team that rebuilt and grew a number of public and private companies- with the support of venture capital and private equity partners- to create jobs and build long-term shareholder value. He received his B.A. in Political Science from UNC, where he was a Morehead Scholar, a North Carolina Fellow and Secretary of the UNC Chapter of Phi Beta Kappa. He is has held a number of senior management and executive positions at companies such as: Allied Clinical Laboratories, Inc., Roche Biomedical Laboratories, Inc., National Health Laboratories, Inc., Laboratory Corporation of America Holdings, and CHD Meridian Corporate Healthcare, Inc., now a unit of Walgreens. He has served as director of I-trax, Allied Clinical Laboratories, Inc., Tripath Imaging, Inc., EV3, Inc., American Esoterics, Inc., JDN Realty, Inc., Sonus Corp., Unilab, Inc., and Ameripath, Inc., as well as other private companies. He and his two teenage sons reside in Elon, NC.

Charles G. Duckett (Chuck)

Vice Chair

Elected 2013; term ends 2021

Battle & Associates, Inc.

733 North Avalon Road

Winston-Salem, NC 27104

(336) 761-8243

cgd@unc.edu

Duckett is a partner in Battle & Associates, Inc., a marketing services firm he joined in 1989. He is also a partner in GRINS Enterprises, LLC. He graduated from Carolina in 1982 with a B.A. degree in political science and history. He is married to Beth Brady Duckett who also graduated from UNC. All three of their children have graduated from Carolina. His past service to the university includes work on the National Development Council, the Board of Visitors, the Steering Committee for the Carolina First Campaign and the board of WUNC FM. He established the Bill Guthridge Mathematics Scholarship and helped establish the Bill Guthridge Endowed Professorship in Mathematics along with John Burress. He is Chairman of the University Affairs Committee, and serves on the Finance, Infrastructure and Audit Committee, the External Relations Committee and the Personnel Committee. He is a member of the executive board of the Rams Club. He has also served on numerous community boards.

Julia Sprunt Grumbles (Julia)

Secretary

Elected 2015; term ends 2019

350 Tenney Circle

Chapel Hill, NC 27514

(678) 640-3101

juliagrumbles@gmail.com

Julia Sprunt Grumbles, retired corporate vice president of human resources, public relations and corporate marketing resources for Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. (TBS, Inc.). She also served on the TBS, Inc. Executive Committee.

She is past president of the International Women’s Forum of Georgia and served as an executive committee member of the board of trustees for the Atlanta Girls School and the Advisory Board for Trust for Public Land. She also served as a member of the board of directors for the Atlanta Botanical Gardens, Georgia Campaign for Adolescent Pregnancy Prevention (G-CAPP), North Carolina Outward Bound, and Atlanta Landmarks, Inc. (Atlanta’s Fox Theatre). She is former chair of UNC’s Institute of Arts and Humanities and served on the boards of UNC’s Lineberger Cancer Center and UNC Health Care System. She also served on the national steering committee for the Carolina First campaign, was co-founder of UNC’s Carolina Women’s Leadership Council and taught in UNC’s Entrepreneurship Minor. She is the recipient of UNC’s Davie Award and General Alumni Association’s Distinguished Service Medal and is a member of the Golden Fleece. Grumbles served as Interim Vice Chancellor for Development at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. She currently is a member of UNC’s Board of Trustees and serves on UNC’s national steering committee for the Campaign for Carolina. Grumbles is a native of Memphis, TN, holds a bachelor’s degree from the University of North Carolina and is married to Bill Grumbles.

Jefferson W. Brown (Jeff)

Elected 2013; term ends 2021

Moore & Van Allen PLLC

100 N. Tryon Street, Suite 4700

Charlotte, NC 28202

(704) 331-1144

jeffbrown@mvalaw.com

Brown is a partner in the law firm of Moore and Van Allen in Charlotte. Born in Chattanooga, TN, Brown received his B.S. from UNC-Chapel Hill in 1981, where he graduated Phi Beta Kappa, and his J.D. from Vanderbilt University. Brown focuses his practice on the representation of investors & developers in sophisticated commercial real estate transactions, ventures and developments. He has been recognized by Best Lawyers in America (including Charlotte Lawyer of the Year, Land Use), NC Super Lawyers and Business NC Legal Elite. Brown is a recipient of the City of Charlotte “Mayor’s Award” recognizing one Charlotte Citizen, who has demonstrated unselfish community leadership and a recipient of the YMCA of Greater Charlotte George Williams Award. He was a William C. Friday Fellow for Human Relations with the Wildacres Leadership Initiative. Brown has served on the Foundation Boards for UNC Charlotte and Central Piedmont Community College, the Executive Committees for the Charlotte Chamber of Commerce and Charlotte Metropolitan YMCA, and City of Charlotte Citizens Committees related to transit and privatization. At UNC, Brown has served on search committees for the Dean of the Law School, the University General Counsel among others. He has served as Chair of the Board of Trustees Personnel Committee and Vice-Chair of the University Affairs Committee. He is married to the former Cantey Venable Sutton, UNC-CH ’80 and great-granddaughter of former UNC President Francis Venable.

W. Low ry Caudill, Ph.D. (Lowry)

Past Chair

Elected 2011; term ends 2019

104 Tennwood Court

Durham, NC 27712

(919) 724-6545

wlcaud@email.unc.edu

Caudill co-founded Magellan Laboratories Incorporated. He received a BS degree in Chemistry at UNC Chapel Hill in 1979 and a PhD in Analytical Chemistry at Indiana University in Bloomington in 1983. He was Chair of the UNC Chapel Hill Board of Trustees from 2013 through 2015. He is a Co-Chair of the $4.25 billion Campaign for Carolina. He is an Adjunct Professor of Chemistry, a member of the Chemistry Department External Advisory Board, a member of the UNC Lineberger Board of Visitors, past Chair of the Executive Board of the Educational Foundation and a member of the Carolina Research Ventures Fund Board of Directors. He is a member of the Advisory Working Group for the Shuford Program in Entrepreneurship in the College of Arts and Sciences, is Co-Chair of the Shuford Program’s Fundraising Campaign. He was a Steering Committee member of the $2.4 billion Carolina First Campaign, Chair of the Private Fundraising Steering Committee for the Physical Science Complex and Chair of the Chancellor’s Innovation Circle, and taught in the Shuford Program in Entrepreneurship for 12 years. In 2008, he received the Distinguished Alumnus Award, in 2013, was inducted into the Order of the Golden Fleece and in 2014, received the Distinguished Service Medal from the UNC General Alumni Association. In 1998, he and his Magellan Laboratories business partner, Alfred G. Childers, were named Life Sciences Entrepreneurs of the Year for the Carolinas and in 2002, they received the North Carolina Council for Entrepreneurial Development Entrepreneurial Excellence Award. He is a member of the Board of Directors of Higher Education Works and is Chair of the Board of Directors of Purcado Incorporated. He is married to Susan Self Caudill, UNC ’80 and parent of three UNC Chapel Hill graduates.

Kelly Matthews Hopkins (Kelly)

Elected 2013; term ends 2021

2414 Forest Drive

Charlotte, NC 28211

(704) 904-7430

kmhopkins@unc.edu

Kelly is a life and development coach in Charlotte, NC. She is an active volunteer both in Charlotte and Florida. She serves as a trustee of the Henry Morrison Flagler Museum and of the Relgalf Charitable Foundation, located in South Florida. Kelly founded and is currently a member of the Whitehall Society of the Flagler Museum. She serves as an advisory member of the Mint Museum Auxiliary in Charlotte, NC. Kelly received a M.S. in Organization Development at the McColl School of Business at Queens University in Charlotte, NC. She is a member of the Hull Fellows class of 2013 through the Southeastern Council of Foundations. Kelly received her B.A. in Education from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Formerly, Kelly was an elementary school teacher in the Charlotte Mecklenburg School System for six years. Kelly is married to Rick, also a University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill graduate, and they have two children.

William A. Keyes, IV, Ph.D. (Bill)

Elected 2015; term ends 2019

P.O. Box 6865

McLean, VA 22106

(703) 869-5260

keyes@unc.edu

Bill Keyes was elected to the Board of Trustees in 2015. He has served as Secretary, chairman of the External Relations Committee, vice chairman of the University Affairs Committee, and member of the Personnel Committee.

Prior to his election to the Board of Trustees, Keyes served on the Board of Visitors, the Graduate Education Advancement Board, the Board of Advisors of the School of Media and Journalism, the Board of Directors of the Media and Journalism Foundation, and the Advisory Board of the Leadership Institute, which he helped to create. He recently joined the Senior Advisory Board of the UNC Institute of Politics. He is honored to have been tapped for the Order of the Golden Fleece and the Frank Porter Graham Honor Society.

Keyes is a native of Washington, NC but has worked in Washington, DC for four decades. He has worked on Capitol Hill and served as a White House Senior Policy Advisor. However, his most important work has been the establishment and direction of the Institute for Responsible Citizenship, which serves some of America’s best and brightest African American male college students. Institute alumni have become Rhodes Scholars, Fulbright Scholars, Truman Scholars, and the recipients of many other honors and awards.

For his extensive work in education, Keyes was presented the Mac A. Stewart Distinguished Award for Service by the Todd A. Bell National Resource Center at Ohio State University, the Dr. Asa G. Hilliard Model of Excellence Award from the College Board, and the Warrior Award at the 2017 International Colloquium on Black Males in Education.

He earned a Ph.D. in Communication Studies, with a special focus on rhetorical criticism, at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Keyes and his wife, Lola, live in McLean, Virginia.

Allie Ray McCullen (Allie Ray)

Elected 2015; term ends 2019

P.O. Box 1205

Clinton, NC 28329

(910) 592-1298

mccullenre@aol.com

Allie Ray is a lifelong resident of rural Sampson County and lives on the family farm in Keener, NC. He attended NC State University and was inducted into the Phi Eta Sigma Fraternity. He transferred to UNC-Chapel Hill where he graduated in 1968 with a B.A. in history. Allie Ray is owner of The McCullen Group, Inc. which is a real estate sales and appraisal firm located in Clinton, NC. Over the years, he has served on a number of state and federal Boards and Commissions including the State Banking Commission and the USDA-A.S.C.S. Committee. Locally, he has been a member and Chairman of the Board of Sampson Community College. Until recently, he served as a member of the Sampson Regional Medical Center Board of Trustees (18.5 years) and as Chairman for 9 years. He is currently a member of the Sampson County Board of Health.

W. Edwin McMahan (Ed)

Elected 2015; term ends 2019

1959 Queens Road West

Charlotte, NC 28207

(704) 561-3402

emcmahan@littleonline.com

Ed McMahan, a native of Asheville, is the former Chairman and CEO of Little-McMahan Corp., an architectural-engineering, development and construction firm headquartered in Charlotte. He earned his BS Degree in Industrial Relations from UNC Chapel Hill and has served on the UNCCH Alumni Board, the Board of Visitors and a four year term on the UNC System Board of Governors. McMahan also served six terms in the NC House where he chaired numerous Committees and Study Commissions including the 2001 Congressional Redistricting Commission; NC Non-Profit Study Commission and the NC Lien Laws Review Commission. He also served on the 2004 Higher Education Capital Needs Study Commission that allocated the $3B of Capital Bonds across the 16 UNC campuses and the 58 Community Colleges.

McMahan is the recipient of the Legislator of the Year Awards from the NC Public Transportation Commission, American Society of Landscape Architects, and the NC Chapter of American Planning Association. He also received the Pinnacle Award of Excellence from the NC Association of General Contractors. McMahan is currently married to Suzy Sweeny McMahan and three of their five children have received a degree from UNC Chapel Hill.

Hari H. Nath (Hari)

Elected 2015; term ends 2019

102 Loch Stone Lane

Cary, NC 27518

(919) 803-0478

Hnath45@yahoo.com

Hari Nath, a retired entrepreneur has served on the UNC System Board of Governors for the past four (2011-2015) years. Mr. Nath also served on the Board of Center for International Understanding, a UNC organization created to promote business, educational and cultural collaboration with emerging market countries and NC. Mr. Nath was Founder and CEO of an IT management consulting firm Technology Planning and Management Corp (TPMC) with its Headquarter in Research Triangle Park, NC and offices on the east coast. After the acquisition of TPMC s in 2001, Mr. Nath has served the town of Cary and the North Carolina community in several nonprofit organizations. He currently serves as Co-Chairman of the Board of Advisors at the Carying Place Inc. a Cary, NC based non-profit organization that provides transitional housing for low income citizens. Mr. Nath received his Master of Science degree in Industrial Engineering from the University of Missouri, Columbia in 1971. Mr. Nath received BE (Mining Eng.) from the University of Jodhpur, Rajasthan India, He is married to Kalpana and has two married children.

Richard Y. Stevens (Richard)

Past Chair

Elected 2017; term ends 2021

132 Lochwood West Drive

Cary, N.C. 27518

(919) 851-0228

richardstevens@unc.edu

Stevens, an attorney with the Smith Anderson Law Firm and a five-term North Carolina Senator from 2003-2012, previously served on the UNC-Chapel Hill Board of Trustees from 1995-2003, including two terms as chair from 1997-1999. He also served on the Board of Visitors from 1991-1995. Stevens earned his bachelor’s, master’s and Juris Doctor degrees from Carolina and has scholarships named for him at the UNC School of Law and the UNC School of Government. Prior to his service in the Senate, he was the County Manager of Wake County and worked as a management consultant. Stevens has chaired the UNC-Chapel Hill Endowment Fund, the UNC-Chapel Hill Foundation, Inc., the UNC General Alumni Association, the Board of Visitors for UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Hospital and The Carolina Club. He has also received numerous awards from Carolina and beyond, among them the UNC Distinguished Alumnus Award, the UNC General Alumni Association Distinguished Service Medal, the American Society for Public Administration and the National Academy of Public Administration Public Service Award, the Order of the Long Leaf Pine, the William Richardson Davie Award and the North Carolina Chamber of Commerce Award for Distinguished Public Service. Stevens is a member of numerous distinguished societies including the Order of the Golden Fleece, the Order of the Grail-Valkyries and the Order of the Old Well.

Dwight D. Stone (Dwight)

Immediate Past Chair

Elected 2013; term ends 2021

1102 Country Club Drive

Greensboro, N.C. 27408

(336) 288-9393

ddstone@unc.edu

Dwight Stone, originally from Dunn, NC, is married to Diane Perrou Stone and has three children, all graduates of UNC-CH. He is president and chairman of D. Stone Builders, Inc. in Greensboro, NC. Stone received a B.A. from UNC-Chapel Hill in 1973. Most recently, he served as chairman of the UNC Chapel Hill Board of Trustees (2015-2017). Previously, he has served as president of the Greensboro Sports Council, the Board of Directors of the Greensboro Sports Council, chairman of the MS Dinner of Champions, 2011 UNC Search Committee member for the UNC Athletic Director, 2012 UNC Chancellor’s Search Committee member, and is the past chairman of the Board of Directors for The Educational Foundation. Stone has also served on the Executive Committee for Greensboro Builders Association, the Board of Directors for the Greensboro Sports Commission, as chairman of The Executive Cup for UNC, the Habitat for Humanity Raising Roofs Committee, and the Greensboro Board of Directors for BB&T. He is a recipient of the Gulledge Award for Greensboro Leadership, and in 2018 was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal from the General Alumni Association.

Ashton B. Martin (Ashton)

Ex-Officio Member 2019-2020

Student Body President

3109E Carolina Union

Campus Box 5210, Box 47

Chapel Hill, NC 27599-5210

abmartin@live.unc.edu

Martin is a Morehead-Cain Scholar from Roxboro, North Carolina majoring in Political Science with a minor in Philosophy. Before attending UNC Chapel Hill, Martin attended Roxboro Community School where she served as Student Body President. Prior to being elected UNC’s Student Body President, she was a dedicated member of the Undergraduate Student Government, serving at various times as an Executive Assistant to the Chief of Staff and Vice President, and member and later chair of the Academic Affairs committee. Martin is a member of the Carolina Indian Circle, UNC’s Native American organization, and has served as an Admissions Ambassador for two years. Beyond her roles at UNC, Martin is an active volunteer with her tribe, hometown, and the Chapel Hill community.

Assistant Secretary

Clayton D. Somers (Clayton)

UNC-Chapel Hill

Office of Public Affairs

310 South Building – CB #9150

Chapel Hill, NC 27599-9150

clayton@unc.edu

Executive Assistant to the Board of Trustees

T.J. Scott (T.J.)

UNC-Chapel Hill

Office of Public Affairs

03A South Building – CB #9150

Chapel Hill, NC 27599-9100

tj_scott@unc.edu