BREAKING! Terrorist Attacked Trumps At Mar A Lago
2.2k SHARES Share Tweet

Since President Trump has been in office, the left has been in an uproar and doing their best to create as much civil unrest as possible. These angry leftists in their rage over the fact that Trump trounced Hillary in the 2016 presidential election have been fanning the flames of division in our country and promoting violence against the president. Over the last year, several liberal Democrat politicians and unhinged Hillary Clinton fanatics have made explicit death threats against President Trump which has kept the Secret Service on high alert. Now, over this holiday weekend, President Trump and his family had an urgent situation unfold that had the police rushing to the scene, and has everyone wondering when the violence will end?

There was a time in our nation’s history that no matter who won the presidential election, the American people and the loser of the election would band together behind the elected president for the good of the nation. However, those days seem far behind after the last eight years of Barack Obama and his divisive nature that has thrust our country into constant turmoil. Now, instead of those in the Democrat party cheering on President Trump to ensure that he does a job well done for the American people, they have been actively doing their best to sabotage his presidency. For instance, over the last year, the left has been doing whatever they can to oust Trump from office with their phony Russian collusion story, and since that has not worked the way, they had hoped they are turning to threats of physical violence.

Threats of violence toward President Trump is not anything new in this “brave new world” of politics, in fact just earlier last month, Democratic Congressman Tom Suozzi promoted acts of violence against Trump during a town hall meeting he attended. Then last year, Missouri Democratic State Senator Maria Chappelle-Nadal posted on Facebook that she hoped that President Trump was assassinated, are you starting to notice a pattern here?

So, it should come as no surprise that civilians in the country would attack Trump, his family, and now his property, which is what happened over the weekend at his Mar-a-Lago resort.

Here is more from Local 10 News:

“Someone in West Palm Beach, Florida, took the term “paint the town red” a bit too literal on Saturday night.

The entrance to Trump International Golf Club, the president’s course du jour while at the so-called Winter White House in Mar-a-Lago, had new decoration on Saturday evening in the form of red paint splattered all over one of the entrance signs.

The red paint was tossed haphazardly on the left entrance with a can of paint visible on the ground. It’s unclear exactly when the vandalism happened.

Two vans from the Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Department were on scene investigating the apparent vandalism Saturday at about 10 p.m.

Neither the U.S. Secret Service nor the sheriff’s department responded to inquiries from ABC NewsSaturday night.

Donald Trump spent Saturday at Trump International Golf Club, according to the Tampa Bay Times, though it’s not clear if he was on the course. Trump was at the club on Friday as well. The president is usually secretive about whether he actually hits the links or not.

Fox News host Sean Hannity and PGA golfer Dustin Johnson spent time with Trump at the golf club on Saturday as well, according to Palm Beach Post reporter George Bennett. Donald Trump Jr. shared a photo on Instagram of his daughter Kai with Johnson, the current world No. 1 player, and 2016 U.S. opener winner, on the course.

It’s not clear whether any of the Trumps were at the club when the vandalism occurred.

Trump opened the golf club in 1999, the first of what is now many courses in his portfolio. According to ABC News’ analysis of public records of Trump’s schedule, the president spent 109 days at one of his properties in his first year in office.

The president’s Mar-a-Lago estate is just a 15-minute drive from Trump International.”

Entrance to Trump International Golf Club in Florida splattered with red paint https://t.co/tEACIbJq61 pic.twitter.com/q3yRcAnWt2 — The Hill (@thehill) April 1, 2018

Now, while this attack on Trump’s property is disgusting, it is not the first time it has been done. Earlier last year, another of Trump’s hotels were vandalized when a light was projected onto the Trump International Hotel in Washington, DC, several anti-Trump messages.

Here is more from Business Insider:

“Several messages were displayed in a bluish light. The Washington Post reported that the words “PAY TRUMP BRIBES HERE” appeared above the entrance to the building, along with an arrow pointing toward the entrance of the hotel.

Another projection read, “EMOLUMENTS WELCOME” — an apparent reference to the emoluments clause that became a point of contention amid arguments about Trump’s financial conflicts of interest in the early days of his presidency. The “emoluments” message was displayed over a backdrop of Turkey’s flag.”

Whether or not you agree with the president in office there is a proper way to air your grievances but to destroy private property is not the way. One can only hope that the people who did this to Trump’s resort will be found and prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law to send a clear message to others who may think this behavior is acceptable when it most certainly isn’t.

H/T [ABC News Go]