About
Welcome To The PedoGate – Your Gateway To All Things PizzaGate And Pedogate

Key Point: Pizzagate represents only a single American franchise within a global child trafficking and exploitation operation known as Pedogate.

The Internet is now overwhelmed by misinformation, disinformation and false information about the Washington, D.C. scandal known primarily as Pizzagate.

This website is here to provide both the global context and additional perspective for concerned people throughout the entire planetary civilization. Pedogate is going on practically everywhere.

Pizzagate is Local, Pedogate is Global

Many have complained that Pizzagate should be called Pedogate.

In fact, Pizzagate is just one of many Pedogates occurring around the world at this very moment. “Pizzagate Represents Only a Single American Franchise Within a Worldwide Child Trafficking Operation Known As Pedogate“.

It’s true that Pizzagate is a uniquely American franchise that operates primarily in Washington, D.C., but also includes operations in New York City, Chicago, Los Angeles and other major metropolitan areas.

There are many other Pedogates, which have nothing to do with Pizzagate, taking place all over America at this time. Are these related? Yes, some much more than others.

For instance, the ongoing Hollywood Pedogate is joined at the hip with the D.C. Pizzagate. The very reason that many Hollywooders came out of the woodwork to support Hillary R. Clinton and bash Donald J. Trump is because of this close association of decade-long child abuse scandals in both D.C. and Tinseltown.

The most critical point here is that Pizzagate is the lynchpin that is inextricably connected to all the other Pedogates. Because it represents the child exploitation operation in the nation’s capital and related power centers, its outing has the capacity to expose the whole bloody child abuse culture. Yes, Pizzagate is that prominently configured within the world-wide Pedogate scandal.

It involves a Who’s Who of American society and especially the political class.

Many are in awe watching Pizzagate and Pedogate mushroom into a global citizen’s investigation overnight. This massive research project is the product of the new form of Alt Media journalism. Pizzagate itself is also profoundly different from all the other Washington scandals. Because grave criminality is being committed against our children, it is occurring in everyone’s back yard. Just as there are now children also literally swiped from their front yard in broad daylight so bold are the perps getting. In other words, there are no NIMBYs where it concerns Pizzagate. Everyone has a daughter or son, granddaughter or grandson, niece or nephew, brother or sister who is vulnerable to the dangers of such an out-of-control child exploitation enterprise. The very nature of this beast, then, has drawn everyone into figuring out how to kill it. Who would ever want such a beast roaming free — as it has for centuries — devouring children practically at will? Not In My Back Yard! Or in anyone else’s back yard either!