The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
Olivia S. Mitchell

International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans Professor; Professor of Business and Public Policy; Professor of Insurance and Risk Management; Executive Director, Pension Research Council

PhD, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1978; MA, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1976; BA, Harvard University,1974

Recent Consulting

ESRI-Japanese Government; InterAmerican Development Bank; U.S. Social Security Administration; U.S. Government Accounting Office; U.S. Treasury; World Bank

Career and Recent Professional Awards; Teaching Awards

Roger F. Murray Prize, Institute for Quantitative Research in Finance; Carolyn Shaw Bell Award of the Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession; Fidelity Pyramid Research Institute Award; Doctorate (Honorary), University of St. Gallen; INA International Prize for Insurance Sciences from the Instituto Nazionale Delle Assicurazioni/Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei; TIAA-CREF/Paul A. Samuelson Award for Outstanding Scholarly Writing on Lifelong Financial Security; various research awards and grants for research on retirement and pension economics.

Academic Positions Held

Academic Positions Wharton: 1993-present: International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans Professor and Executive Director Pension Research Council; Professor of Insurance & Risk Management. 2008-present; Director, Boettner Center for Pensions and Retirement Research. 2012- Present: Professor of Business Economics & Public Policy. Previous positions: Wharton Department Chair Insurance & Risk Management; Cornell University Assistant/Associate/Full Professor. Visiting appointments at University of New South Wales, Australia; Goethe Universitat of Frankfurt; Celia Moh Visiting Professor, Singapore Management University, Harvard University, NBER.

Other Positions

Professional Leadership 2009-2012 Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research; Senior Scholar, Centre for Silver Security, Sim Ki Boon Institue, Singapore Management University. Also Co-PI and Executive Committee for Health and Retirement Study; Michigan Retirement Research Center Executive Committee; Scientific Advisor for Centre for Pensions and Superannuation UNSW; Advisory Board Netspar-Netherlands; Executive Committee, Penn Aging Research Center; Senior Editor, Journal of Pension Economics and Finance; Board of Editors, Journal of Pensions Management; Board of Editors, Industrial and Labor Relations Review; Senior Fellow, Wharton Financial Institutions Center; Senior Fellow, Leonard Davis Institute. Corporate and Public Sector Leadership 2009-2012 Trustee of the Wells Fargo Advantage Trust Boards; Central Provident Fund Advisory Board of Singapore