John Kerry Facing Prison After Interfering With Iran
President Donald Trump enraged liberals everywhere on Tuesday night when he withdrew from the Iran deal. In the weeks leading up to this decision, Barack Obama’s former Secretary of State John Kerry met with his former counterpart in Iran, foreign minister Javad Zarif, both publicly and in secret.

Now, this may have come back to bite Kerry in a huge way.

Western Journal reported that Kerry also held meetings with high-level dignitaries in multiple European nations in order to convince them to pressure Trump not to withdraw from the deal. Trump called out Kerry for this on Twitter.

“The United States does not need John Kerry’s possibly illegal Shadow Diplomacy on the very badly negotiated Iran Deal. He was the one that created this MESS in the first place!” Trump tweeted on Monday.

The United States does not need John Kerry’s possibly illegal Shadow Diplomacy on the very badly negotiated Iran Deal. He was the one that created this MESS in the first place! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 7, 2018

Trump’s “possibly illegal” remark refers to the fact that Kerry has been blatantly violating the Logan Act, something that legal expert Alan Dershowitz has since confirmed.

“Fortunately for everybody, the Logan Act (is a) dead letter, but if it were in existence, my friend John Kerry would be violating the Logan Act,” Dershowitz said Saturday on Fox News. “He is negotiating, though he is not in the administration, and there are real problems with doing that.”

Kerry’s Logan Act violation and the lack of outrage about it from Democrats is noteworthy given what happened to former National Security Advisor Michael Flynn, who was “outed” by Obama administration holdovers and the media for making contact with the Russian ambassador during that transition period.

“John is a friend of mine. I’ve known him for a long, long time. But remember how this investigation against Trump begins,” Dershowitz said. “It begins by the theory that people in the Trump campaign may be violating the Logan Act, by going and speaking to people when they haven’t yet been president.”

SHARE this story if you think John Kerry should be INVESTIGATED!

H/T easternreport