TRUMP SENDS IN THE FEDS – Sanctuary City Leaders Arrested
BREAKING: Libby Schaaf, the liberal mayor of Oakland, California, has found herself in hot water after it was revealed she may have committed a felony over the weekend when she warned illegal aliens in her city that Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agents were about to conduct raids in the area.

“I am sharing this information publicly not to panic our residents but to protect them,” Schaaf said in a statement Saturday night, adding that she did not know the details about when the ICE raids would take place. Hot Air reported that Shaaf went on to give out a link to a Centro Legal de la Raza’s website which offers information about legal rights and options for people facing detention.

“We understand ICE has used activity rumors in the past as a tactic to create fear; our intent is for our community to go about their daily lives without fear, but resiliency and awareness,” said Schaaf.

Schaaf claimed that Oakland schools, police officers and business owners are prohibited from assisting ICE agents.

“Oakland is a city of law-abiding immigrants and families who deserve to live free from the constant threat of arrest and deportation,” she said. “I believe it is my duty and moral obligation as Mayor to give those families fair warning when that threat appears imminent.”

However, according to the Cornell Law School, Schaaf may have violated federal law in doing this:

8 U.S. Code § 1324 (a) (1) (A) (iii)

Any person who, knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact that an alien has come to, entered, or remains in the United States in violation of law, conceals, harbors, or shields from detection, or attempts to conceal, harbor, or shield from detection, such alien in any place, including any building or any means of transportation shall be punished as provided in subparagraph (B).

8 U.S. Code § 1324 (a) (1) (B) (ii)

A person who violates subparagraph (A) shall, for each alien in respect to whom such a violation occurs in the case of a violation of subparagraph (A)(ii), (iii), (iv), or (v)(II), be fined under title 18, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.

SHARE this story if you think Libby Schaaf should be INVESTIGATED and LOCKED UP!