Santa Fe School Shooter’s ANTIFA Connections Discovered!
As I write this, the nation is still recovering from another horrific tragedy at a high school, this time in Santa Fe, Texas, where a young man has been arrested after opening fire and killing at least 10 individuals.

This is the second high profile rampage at a high school in America in approximately 90 days, with the Parkland, Florida school massacre occurring on Valentine’s Day 2018. In that case, as well as in Santa Fe, our young, white, male shooter has been apprehended alive, and is currently being questioned by police.

In Parkland, it took several days for the writing on the wall to become clear: Nikolas Cruz was a severely deranged young man who openly admitted to taking instruction from the “demon voices” within his head which compelled him to create chaos at his former high school. In the case of Santa Fe shooter Dimitrios Pagourtzis, that motivation is not yet known.

Dimitrios Pagourtzis, identified as the Texas high school shooter, is being held on capital murder charges with no bond, Galveston County Sheriff Henry Trochesset said.

More charges may follow, the sheriff said. Ten people were killed and several others injured at Santa Fe High School on Friday morning, authorities said. An armed person walked into an art class at the school and began firing what looked like a shotgun, a witness told CNN affiliate KTRK.

We do have some clues as to the mind of Pagourtzis, however, thanks to his now deleted Facebook profile that was scoured by internet sleuths in the moments after his arrest. As it turns out, Pagourtzis leaned heavily to the political left, at least according to his choice of clothing and accoutrements , flying both the Hammer and Sickle and Nazi iron cross on pieces of outerwear in his closet.

Pagourtzis attempted to explain the meaning of the symbols in the caption to the post, writing, “Duster Hammer and Sickle = Rebellion Rising Sun = Kamikaze Tactics Iron Cross = Bravery Baphomet = Evil Cthulhu = Power.”