SENATE VOTES TO MAKE AMERICA DANGEROUS AGAIN
Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence

For Immediate Release

Contact: Brendan Kelly, bkelly [at] bradymail [dot] org

Phone: 724-612-3453

SENATE VOTES TO MAKE AMERICA DANGEROUS AGAIN

Senate passes H.J. Res. 40

WASHINGTON - Rather than side with 93 percent of their constituents who want to expand Brady background checks to all gun sales, 57 Senators voted today to weaken that background check system that keeps guns out of the hands of people who may be a danger to themselves or others.

If signed into law, H.J. Res. 40 will reverse Social Security Administration efforts to identify and report individuals to the Brady background check system based on ATF input–and in compliance with a law that the Senate already passed unanimously in 2007. Twenty-two of those Senators flip-flopped today, voting against the very policy they helped pass ten years ago.

Brady Campaign president Dan Gross said, "This heartless resolution puts the most vulnerable Americans at risk. Make no mistake, this vote was really about deepening the gun industry's customer pool, at the expense of those in danger of hurting themselves or others. America's mayors, law enforcement officials, prosecutors, and educators all opposed this measure. It seems like the only voice these lap dog politicians listened to today was the corporate gun lobby. It’s not the kind of vote constituents will easily forget."

Among the organizations opposed to H.J. Res. 40 are NAACP, United States Conference of Mayors, National League of Cities, American Federation of Teachers, and Prosecutors Against Gun Violence.

Under the SSA's current rule and in accordance with the 2007 NICS Improvement Act, individuals are entered into the background check system and prohibited from buying guns if two conditions are met:

they are unable to work due to severe “mental impairment” and they are unable to manage their own social security financial benefits.

If President Trump signs H.J. Res. 40, all that goes away and people considered a danger to themselves or others will once again be allowed to get guns, no problem.

##

The mission of the Brady organization and its Million Mom March is to create a safer America by cutting gun deaths in half by 2025. For more insight on gun violence prevention, follow us on Facebook and Twitter @BradyBuzz.

About Us: The Brady Campaign and Center, united with the Million Mom March, is a national network of over 90 grassroots chapter affiliates mobilized to prevent gun violence at the community level. The network has played a vital role in expanding Brady background checks in the six states that have passed legislation since the shooting in Newtown, Connecticut and produced the largest national protest of gun violence in U.S. history - The Million Mom March, Mother's Day 2000.