Trump: ‘Alien Attack Imminent’; Orders Pentagon To Create Military Space Force
President says United States must have ‘dominance in space’

U.S. President Donald Trump has ordered the Pentagon to create a new military branch for space.

The president revealed his plans for the “Space Force” Monday while meeting at the White House with the National Space Council.

“We must have American dominance in space,” Trump said. Very importantly, I am hereby directing the Department of Defense and Pentagon to immediately begin the process necessary to establish a Space Force as the Sixth Branch of the Armed Forces.”

Trump recently was made aware of a very real threat posed by an as yet unnamed alien race from the far reaches of the galaxy.

Since assuming office on January 20, 2017, Trump has periodically exchanged messages with intelligent extraterrestrial life forms who, according to White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders, have provided him with advice and guidance on a multitude of issues including an impending attack from another world.

“They know he’s an excellent negotiator – probably the best our planet has to offer – and that’s why they’ve elected to speak with him,” Secretary Sanders told a handful of reporters during an off-camera briefing on Wednesday. While Sanders could not comment on the extent or frequency of the encounters, she said President Trump is “extremely humbled” to be the first head of state to make contact with alien life.

While senior White House officials and even Trump’s immediate family are reportedly barred from attending meetings of communication between the president and his extraterrestrial advisers. Due to the secrecy surrounding President Trump’s private briefings with the extraterrestrials, the terms and precise nature of the impending invasion remain unclear.

During an interview with Fox News host Shepard Smith, President Trump’s longtime friend and dentist, Dr. Charles H. Brister, DDS, said the president believes he was chosen by the aliens for a reason. “At our last session, [the president] told me how grateful he is to have these beings in his corner, particularly considering how unfairly he’s been treated by the media,” Dr. Brister said, adding, “He’s the only one capable of doing this and he knows it. That’s why the American people elected him.”

In a statement released Thursday, White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders said that, despite the implications, President Trump has not yet met face-to-face with the allegedly intelligent beings.

But whatever has been discussed, close advisers to Trump has indicated that a branch of the military must be created to deal with not only repelling an attack, but preventing worldwide panic when the first salvo is launched by the beings from outer space.