Bernie Sanders Says Christianity Is An Insult To Muslims
Following a fast backlash, the B-list celebrity backtracked, however, it was too late. Now, he has learned his

punishment.

“Want stop this f**king monster? Really wanna cease this giant a**hole? 90 MILLION PEOPLE IN THE STREETS ON THE SAME WEEKEND! WE need to GET EVEN MORE ANGRY WITH THESE REPUBLICANS,” he composed a collection of unhinged tweets that just got worse.

“WE SHOULD RIP BARRON TRUMP FROM HIS MOTHER’S ARMS AND PUT HIM IN A CAGE WITH PEDOPHILES AND SEE IF MOTHER WILL STAND UP AGAINST THE GIANT A**HOLE SHE IS MARRIED TO. 90 MILLION PEOPLE IN THE STREETS ON THE SAME WEEKEND IN the Nation. F**K,” the actor, who is the brother of anti-American actress”Hanoi” Jane Fonda, composed in all caps.

It should not be a surprise that a part of the Fonda family is speaking from the president against his own state. Nevertheless, it was a surprise to many, even liberals, he would go after a kid.

The president’s oldest son, Donald Trump Jr., shot back at Fonda and challenged him to shoot him on. An obstacle that Fonda never reacted to.

“You are clearly a sick person and everybody is an online badass but rather than attack an 11 year old like a bully and a coward why not pick on someone a bit larger.

You’re clearly a sick individual and everyone is an internet badass but instead of strike an 11 year old like a bully and a coward why don’t you pick on somebody a bit larger. LMK. https://t.co/8OhiQ0aZmO

— Donald Trump Jr. (@DonaldJTrumpJr) June 20, 2018

But Fonda did respond to this backlash by issuing an apology for his abhorrent statement. “I tweeted something highly inappropriate and indecent about the president and his family in reaction to the catastrophic images I was watching on television,” he said in a statement. “Like many Americans, I am very impassioned and distraught over the situation with children separated from their families at the boundary, but I went way too much.”

“It was wrong and that I should not have done it. I immediately regretted it and apologize to the family for what I stated and any hurt my words have caused,” he added.

Trump Jr. was not the only first family member who went to the assault against the”Easy Rider” celebrity.

Sony Pictures Classics stated on Wednesday it would still release its movie”Boundaries,” in which he had a minor role. And how ironic is it that the movie is termed”Boundaries” when the actor proved he has none?

“Peter Fonda’s remarks are abhorrent, reckless and dangerous, and we all know them completely. It’s very important to be aware that Mr. Fonda plays an extremely minor role in the film.

To pull or alter this film at this point would unfairly punish the filmmaker Shana Feste’s achievement, the numerous actors, crew members and other creative ability that worked hard on the job. We plan to open the movie as scheduled that weekend, at a limited release of five theatres,” the studio said.

Now leaders of the National Border Patrol Council (NBPC) have labeled the actor a”domestic terrorist” for his tweets. In a statement on its site, the council said,”Law enforcement isn’t pleasant Peter, it is not a movie where you are always being catered to by sycophants and you are pampered, protected and made to believe you are really someone better compared to the rest of us. You are not!”

NBPC officials wrote,”For us, the poor guys and the continuous danger are real. Request the Tucson agent who was taken last week by illegal aliens, Peter. Yes Peter, the bullets were really real.

Do his traumatized children deserve to be terrorized at their schools because he’s a Border Patrol agent. What about the children of agents who have been killed in the line of responsibility Peter? Should they be terrorized at school too?”

“Peter, you’re a despicable, hateful, spoiled, and entitled punk. Your lifetime of privilege since birth isn’t what most people deal with. We must work hard every day to make a living for our families.

A number people do dangerous jobs that many Americans wouldn’t touch. Demonizing us is reduced. But encouraging domestic terrorism against our kids is unforgivable.

Encouraging violence against the President’s kid is unforgivable. Asking people to kidnap the DHS secretary, strip her naked, put her in a cage and letting folks poke her with sticks demonstrates how unhinged you are,” it added. “Peter, find some mental health treatment. You need it!”

Fonda is just part of the problem. From Kathy Griffin to Tom Arnold, several have called for its kidnappings, murder and terrorizing of members of President Trump’s administration and his assistants.

Following the shooting of Rep. Steve Scalise a year ago, you’d think they would learn their words could incite a terrorist, but their unhinged minds don’t allow them to think of anything other than themselves. If any kind of domestic terrorist incident against the government or its supporters occurs, the palms of Hollywood will be saturated with blood.