Former Clinton Aide Indicted For Child Sex Trafficking
One of Hillary Clinton’s closest aides has been indicted on child trafficking charges as part of an investigation into an elite Hollywood pedophile ring.

Clare Bronfman, the heiress to Seagrams fortune, is set to face prosecutors in July as part of the NXIVM child sex cult case.

Bronfman invested $150 million of her fortune into NXIVM and officially donated at least $30,000 to the Hillary Clinton 2008 presidential campaign. In addition, Bronfman gave large chunks of her remaining “hundreds of millions” into helping promote Hillary Clinton’s agenda.

Bigleaguepolitics.com reports: NXIVM’s former publicist and foremost whistleblower Frank Parlato tells Big League Politics that Bronfman is preparing herself for prosecution.

“I worked as the publicist,” Frank Parlato told Big League Politics. “We ran into a major disagreement and we split. At the time I worked for them I thought they were a little peculiar but it wasn’t until the end that I realized they were a downright evil group.”

“There are women on the record who are now adults who have accused Raniere of statutory rape and there are some very suspicious incidents where Mexican girls came under the perimeters of Raniere’s control and left under suspicious circumstances. They came from Chihuahua Mexico. I reported this to the authorities,” Parlato said.

Parlato described the bizarre human experiments that Raniere and his benefactors the Bronfman sisters oversaw at the Rainbow Cultural Garden, where they separated children from their parents. Dr. Porter is identified as Raniere’s human experiments chief.

“They do the human fright experiments where they subject women to surprise graphic viewings” similar to A Clockwork Orange, Parlato said.

“The most diabolical experiments that he conducts are experiments where babies are subjected to a constant succession of strangers who take care of them instead of their parents, and the strangers teach them foreign languages,” Parlato said.

“The cult members’ children, they are pressured to give up their children to Raniere. They pay $10,000 to Raniere for the privilege of having Raniere teach them how to speak.”

Seven different nannies would spend time with the children each day and speak seven different languages, rendering the children illiterate, confused, and permanently intellectually damaged.

“Adults are shellshocked now having been through this,” Parlato said.

“The children are housed with their parents and then the children either go to a school, Rainbow School, or the nannies who were sex slaves come to the house,” he said. “The courses run for 6 months to 7 years or so, at which point Raniere alleges the young child’s brain is most susceptible to these different languages and cultures. They get them right at 6 months and the program has only been around for (a few years) so there’s only a limited number of parents.”

Gillibrand’s family

“Her father Doug Rutnik came to work as a consultant for NXIVM…he was fired, they sued him, and they had to pay him $100,000,” Parlato said, referring Gillibrand’s father.

“Her father’s wife, her stepmother, was also a member of NXIVM…Doug got her into the cult, Gillibrand’s father got Gillibrand’s future stepmother into the cult. Doug left the cult because he was sued. Clare Bronfman after her father was sued donated money to Gillibrand. Gillibrand accepted it.”

“One is inclined to call her a liar,” Parlato says of Gillibrand.

“The Clintons got a lot of money from NXIVM, NXIVM members, one of their main NXIVM members was a guy named Richard Mays, he encouraged Clinton to indict their enemies, to use their political influence in Arkansas to indict enemies of Raniere,” Parlato said…