MEXICO'S NEXT PRESIDENT Calls for An Invasion Of The US By Mexican Citizens: “must leave their towns and find a life in the United States” * 100PercentFedUp.com
Well…at least a leader of Mexico is admitting what’s been going on for a loooong time. The radical open borders element on both sides has been welcoming millions of illegals for decades. Yes, decades…

Open borders advocates on the left see policing the border as a form of cruelty and American imperialism. There are also radical organizations that feel Mexico deserves a southern portion of America.

La Raza aka “The Race” is a radical organization seeking open borders along with many of the George Soros-funded open borders groups:

THE FUTURE PRESIDENT OF MEXICO… Andrés Manuel López Obrador aka AMLO:

(From the Daily Caller) […] “And soon, very soon — after the victory of our movement — we will defend all the migrants in the American continent and all the migrants in the world,” Obrador said, adding that immigrants “must leave their towns and find a life in the United States.” He then declared it as “a human right we will defend.”

The Conservative Treehouse warns:

It would take Mexico several decades to achieve a level of wealth even close to the U.S., and they have no structural (political) systems in place to form the foundation of such an approach. So, AMLO’s faster plan is to use migration into the U.S. to break down barriers, collapse the economic dam and allow the natural flood of U.S. wealth to flow into Mexico.

From the Mexican perspective this is a pretty solid economic approach that just might work; and they have open-border comrades within the progressive, democrat, republican and corporate political systems (all over the U.S) who already support such a strategy.

So when you see the headlines about the Mexican President telling his people to leave; and when you see him telling government officials to formulate plans and policies to expedite entry into the U.S., don’t laugh them away. It is a viable plan with just as much possibility of success as any other.