Kamala Harris Says Schools In Berkeley Weren’t Integrated When She Was a Child — But Yearbook Photos Prove Otherwise
Democrats think California Senator Kamala Harris could be our next president, but she was just caught in yet another major lie when she exclaimed that her public schools in Berkeley, California, were not integrated when she was a kid. Then people found her school yearbooks!

Harris took to her Twitter account to claim that her public school class was only the second to integrate 20 years after Brown v The Board of Education, the famed Supreme Court ruling that forced states to integrate their public school systems.

“Two decades after Brown v. Board, I was only the second class to integrate at Berkeley public schools. Without that decision, I likely would not have become a lawyer and eventually be elected a Senator from California. That’s the power a Supreme Court Justice holds,” Harris tweeted on July 9.

But as Gateway Pundit noted, there is just one problem with Harris’ tweet, the whole thing is a lie:

Kamala’s parents were successful professionals. Kamala went to school in Berkeley for only 2 years. She then moved with her mother at age seven to Canada where she attended grade school and high school. Kamala Harris was born in 1964 She claims she was only the second class to integrate at the Berkeley public schools. Kamala lied. Actually the classrooms in Berkeley were already integrated in 1963 — before she was born.

Gateway then presented two photos from Berkeley high school year books that show a sea of black faces. The books came from the year before Harris was born and her first year of life, 1963 and 1964.

So, when Kamala Harris throws the race card, remember this: she lies… a whole lot.

Indeed, she has been caught lying quite a bit. Just last week, for instance, she was seen pushing the AP’s false story that Trump was “dismissing immigrants from the Army.”

In another recent case, only a few weeks ago she was at it again, this time lying about Trump’s ideas about abortion. And last year she was slammed for lying about the GOP tax cuts.

So, yeah, if you see Kamala Harris’ mouth moving, you should assume she is lying.