FOX NEWS JUST CONFIRMED OBAMA RIGGED ELECTION WITH 4 MILLION ILLEGAL VOTES
Obama Was Caught Rigging The Election

Voting is a great right to have in the United States. It is so sacred that military veterans have put their lives on the line to make sure that we still have this right in the country. People take voting very seriously. It’s one of the essential parts of a democracy.

Therefore when it comes out that people are messing with the people’s right to vote, it should be considered a big deal. And that is exactly what is happening in this country.

The Democrats have been trying to fix the elections that have been going on in this country. They are doing this to make sure that they remain in power in the White House. Voter fraud has become so rampant that Fox News had a guest come on and say that there are at least four million dead people on U.S. voter rolls.



Democrats and Bad Ideas go hand in hand

The Democrats Are Trying To Rig The Election!

Yes the dead people are voting! Except this isn’t a joke like you would hear in Chicago, where the saying is “vote early vote often.” People that have been dead for years are suddenly rising out of the grave to vote for the Democrats. Elections expert J. Christian Adams has confirmed this and he is one of the leading experts on voting.

He was the Voting Section Attorney at the United States Department of Justice, so it is fair to say that he knows what he is talking about. He has filed six lawsuits against Philadelphia and Broward County, Florida, where it was shown that the voter rolls are corrupted

What the Democrats attempt to do is sue to make sure that the voter rolls stay exactly the way that they are. The reason is because that the current voter rolls greatly benefit the Democratic Party. The data also shows that the dead people that are voting are overwhelmingly in favour of the Democrats.

So where is the Obama administration in this? They are doing absolutely nothing! They don’t want to do anything because they are in favor of the Democrats. This also shows that the Obama administration is fully in support of the election fraud that is taking place because it will mean that they are going to win some of the elections!

Adams has also said, ““Dead people are voting and it’s something this administration does not want to do anything about. They must like it. They must like who they are voting for… Now we have four million, four million Steve, ineligible and dead voters on American voter rolls according to the Pew Charitable Trust.”

Part of this is because of the online voting machines that the country has become used to. Obama has actually sold part of the online vote counting machines to George Soros and his foundation. Yes he has sold them to make sure that the Democrats can retain power that they need.



If that means that he is going to take the voting machines that he has bought and make sure that they come up with a pro-Democratic result every single time. But this isn’t just affecting the presidential election.

This is affecting all election races! That means that all the elections that have Democrats in them, whether it’s the Senate, the House of Representatives, or even the presidential race, are going to turn out pro-Democratic. As we all know, having control of Congress is crucial to making sure that bills can get passed.

Having a Republican controlled Congress would mean that they could pass laws that would be conservative in nature. Not to mention that Congress is also responsible for making sure that some laws that the President doesn’t pass can get through.

That was the sole reason that the 9/11 bill that would allow members of people that were killed in terrorist attacks are now allowed to file lawsuits against the governments that have sponsored terrorism. President Obama had unsuccessfully tried to veto the bill.

Thanks to the Republican controlled Congress that bill was eventually passed and now people that are looking to get justice for their actions are now able to do so. But this is the reason that the Congressional races are just as important as the presidential race.

But with Soros controlling part of the online voting machines, the Republican congress members are already at a disadvantage. This also means that they are going to try and pass bills that would further their globalist agendas.

Conservative Daily Post has covered the event that the event that had the 9/11 bill passed despite the president’s veto. President Obama has tried to defend the Saudi Arabian government for their actions on 9/11. That is extremely un-American.

But Obama has had a history of being un-American. He has released terrorists that have caused damage to the people of the United States. He released a terrorist that was responsible for the deaths of 17 United States sailors!

Share this article to show that Obama is doing what he can to rig the election. He doesn’t care that there are dead people and illegal people voting because they are voting for the Democrats. That means that he is going to stay in power.

This is exactly why we need Donald Trump in office. He is going to put an end to this corruption that the Democrats are responsible for. He will restore the American right to vote.