Red Alert: Major Signs of Voter Fraud Uncovered In Ohio
Kirsters Baish| Troy Balderson is currently running in Ohio’s 12th Congressional district. He is winning by a small margin as of last night’s special election. This just goes to show that voter fraud can have a huge impact on all kinds of elections in our country.

There was a margin of less than one percent, or roughly 1,700 votes. Breitbart News explains it as “the most recent attempt by Democratic activists to fight efforts to prevent voter fraud from occurring.”

Leftist billionaire George Soros has been funneling millions into weakening the Ohio election system’s security for the last four years. He has been putting money into blocking the requirement of Voter ID and stopping the state from getting rid of inaccurate registrations.

The Hungarian billionaire investor handed over $5 million to Hillary Clinton’s campaign attorney, Marc Elias, an his work on fighting voter identification laws in the state of Ohio in addition to two other states leading up to the 2016 presidential election. The lawsuit was filed by Elias in Ohio, representing multiple groups. Among these groups was the Ohio Organizing Collaborative, where one employee eventually went to prison for voter fraud.

Breitbart News writes:

In 2016, liberal activist groups Demos and the ACLU filed suit against the state of Ohio in an attempt to stop its efforts to remove inaccurate voter registrations from its rolls. Soros gave 1.25 million to Demos in 2016, on top of the more than $3 million he had given in previous years. And Soros has been even more generous with the ACLU, giving over $35 million for Trump related lawsuits.

Ultimately, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Ohio’s efforts in a 5-4 decision earlier this year.

Even with voter identification laws in place and purged voter rolls, Ohio elections still face some serious problems.

Take into account the fact that there were 170 voters in the state of Ohio that were listed as older than 116. These names still sat in Ohio’s 12th Congressional district’s rolls when the data was collected by GAI in August of 2017. This is equivalent to 10 percent of the margin that Balderson is currently leading by, without provisional ballots. More than 72 percent of Ohio voters over 116 years old who are “living” in the district Balderson is running in voted in the 2016 election…

Liberal America isn’t finished trying to make favorable voting conditions for themselves in Ohio. Former Ohio Secretary of State Ken Blackwell has stated that “hyper-partisan liberals…have their eyes on Ohio.” Breitbart explains, “Electing a Democrat as the state’s top elections official would undoubtedly roll back the hard-won safeguards Ohio has implemented. And as Blackwell points out, as goes Ohio, so goes the Presidency.”