Kimmel Lied to you Kanye! Barack Obama Separated 72,410 Children From Their Families in 2013 Alone
Last night while Kanye West was on the Jimmy Kimmel show, Kimmel lied right to Kanye’s face and left Kanye speechless. Why is it that white liberals think that it is ok to lie to black men especially on national TV. It’s only because Kanye was unaware of the facts, that he was left speechless. I wish Kanye would’ve pulled out his cell phone right then and called Candace Owens! Maybe that’s what Jimmy was afraid of and why he broke to a commercial break.

The truth of the matter is that it was not Donald Trump’s policies that begin separating children from their parents. Those policies were in place long before Donald Trump took office.

With all the liberal tears, wailings and gnashings of teeth over 2,000 illegal children being separated by the Trump administration you would think the 72,410 Obama separated in one year would spark a nation wide protest, wouldn’t you? No viewer of CNN (Neither of the two) will ever see that stat on their TV. And do you really believe Rachel Madcow will fall to pieces over 72,410 separations like she did Trump’s 2,000? Not on your life! It will never be mentioned. Jeh Johnson freely admitted on TV that the Obama administration did the very same thing. He also said that we need to get rid of catch and release, an opinion he has stated often.

The Huffington Post reported:

Immigration and Customs Enforcement last year carried out more than 72,000 deportations of parents who said they had U.S.-born children, according to reports to Congress obtained Wednesday by The Huffington Post.

The reports were sent by ICE in April to the Senate Appropriations Committee and the Senate Judiciary Committee, as required by law. ICE confirmed the authenticity of the two reports, which lay out 72,410 removals of immigrants who said they had one or more U.S.-born children in 2013.

The reports show that even parents of U.S. citizens are among the hundreds of thousands of undocumented immigrants being expelled from the United States each year…

… When a parent is deported, their U.S.-born children sometimes leave with them. But some stay in the U.S. with another parent or family member. Some children end up in U.S. foster care.

Jeh Johnsoin said:

“Without a doubt the images, and the reality, from 2014, just like 2018, are not pretty. And so we expanded family detention. We had then 34,000 beds for family detention. Only 95 of 34,000 equipped to deal with families. And so we expanded it. I freely admit it was controversial. We believed it was necessary at the time. I still believe it is necessary to remain a certain capability for families.”

Terrence Williams sets Jimmy Kimmel straight in his video showing how Kimmel lies to Kanye, and then cut to a commercial break.

Jimmy Kimmel tried to turn @kanyewest against Trump. He keep bringing up family separations RETWEET if you don’t remember him bringing that up during the Obama Era . maybe he did ? He care about kids so much that never talk about the black kids that get shot up in Chicago pic.twitter.com/MB5vaRReNn — Terrence K. Williams (@w_terrence) August 10, 2018

A personal message from David…

”I’m so tired of all the lies and deceit continually being perpetuated upon the American people and especially the black community. When Jimmy Kimmel has the audacity on national television to lie to a prominent black man on his TV show, you know that they don’t care one iota, they don’t give one crap about the black community. All they care about is trying to make Donald Trump look bad and they’re willing to use our own ignorance against us. That is why it is so important that we know the facts, and that we get truths like this article out to as many people as possible…