Newly Released FBI Docs Seal Strzok & Hillary’s Fate, Proves Disgrace FBI Agent Deliberately Covered Up Hillary’s Illegal Sever
Elder Patriot – Yesterday’s FBI release from the their “vault” files on Hillary Clinton brings us one giant step closer to uncovering the massive systemic corruption that the Clinton’s and Obama seeded throughout our government.

The newly released documents discuss the contents of Anthony Weiner and Huma Abedin’s laptop. The laptop was seized, under court warrant on September 25, 2016, by the NYPD as part of their investigation into the Weiner sexting case.

While the NYPD was conducting a forensic analysis of the Weiner/Abedin laptop, it was discovered that the hard drive contained 350,000 of Hillary Clinton’s emails and 344,000 Blackberry communications. But, you already knew that.

Here’s what you were never told by the HRC-BHO protective media.

These were never reviewed by the FBI investigators assigned to help lead agent Peter Strzok. Nor, was any attempt made to analyze the newly discovered files until after the election was over. From the vault release:

Despite Strzok statements under oath to the contrary, this official filing shows he sat on the laptop for more than 6 weeks – until the election was over! Before anyone tries to tell you this was an application for a second or even third look at the evidence read on.

Boom!!! Strzok’s own words contradicts the sworn testimony he gave to both the Inspector General and to Congress. 4.4 – Strzok admits in writing that prior to November 9, 2016 – the day after the election – that this was his first request to the FBI Operational Technology Division (OTD) to perform forensic analysis on the laptop.

Suddenly, the more important point isn’t that strzok lied – he’s already been caught in dozens of lies – it’s that he deliberately buried evidence of HRC’s corruption because he was certain that an examination of the laptop would’ve revealed information that disqualified HRC from ever being president.

If Strzok believed the laptop had been clean of any incriminating evidence why wouldn’t he have undertaken an immediate review of the files contained on its hard drive?

No, he already knew what he was likely to find on the laptop because the DOJ – the FBI’s and Strzok’s ultimate boss – had already negotiated with Clinton’s attorneys over what evidence they would allow the FBI to see as far back as September 22, 2015.

So what was on the Weiner/Abedin laptop that Strzok wanted to keep hidden from the public?

Erik Prince who had knowledge of the NYPD investigation revealed this much:

“Because of Weinergate and the sexting scandal, the NYPD started investigating it. Through a subpoena, through a warrant, they searched his laptop, and sure enough, found those 650,000 emails [emails and messages]. They found way more stuff than just more information pertaining to the inappropriate sexting the guy was doing.

“They found State Department emails. They found a lot of other really damning criminal information, including money laundering, including the fact that Hillary went to this sex island with convicted pedophile Jeffrey Epstein. Bill Clinton went there more than 20 times. Hillary Clinton went there at least six times.”

“I know, and this is from a very well-placed source of mine at 1PP, One Police Plaza in New York – the NYPD wanted to do a press conference announcing the warrants and the additional arrests they were making in this investigation, and they’ve gotten huge pushback, to the point of coercion, from the Justice Department, with the Justice Department threatening to charge someone that had been unrelated in the accidental heart attack death of Eric Garner almost two years ago. That’s the level of pushback the Obama Justice Department is doing against actually seeking justice in the email and other related criminal matters.”

“NYPD was the first one to look at that laptop.” “Weiner and Huma Abedin, his wife – the closest adviser of Hillary Clinton for 20 years – have both flipped. They are cooperating with the government. They both have – they see potential jail time of many years for their crimes, for Huma Abedin sending and receiving and even storing hundreds of thousands of messages from the State Department server and from Hillary Clinton’s own homebrew server, which contained classified information. Weiner faces all kinds of exposure for the inappropriate sexting that was going on and for other information that they found.”

“There is all kinds of criminal culpability through all the emails they’ve seen of that 650,000, including money laundering, underage sex, pay-for-play, and, of course, plenty of proof of inappropriate handling, sending/receiving of classified information, up to SAP level Special Access Programs.

“So the plot thickens. NYPD was pushing because, as an article quoted one of the chiefs – that’s the level just below commissioner – he said as a parent, as a father with daughters, he could not let that level of evil continue.”

“From what I understand, up to the commissioner or at least the chief level in NYPD, they wanted to have a press conference, and DOJ, Washington people, political appointees have been exerting all kinds of undue pressure on them to back down.”

When it was suggested that some of those involved in keeping the details quiet might want to avoid accusations of politicizing the case and seeking to influence the presidential election Prince responded:

“Sure, that’s it. That’s the argument for it. But the fact is, you know that if the Left had emails pointing to Donald Trump visiting, multiple times, an island with underage sex slaves basically, emails, you know they’d be talking about it. They’d be shouting it from the rooftops.”

Now recall the effort to smear Prince over what the FBI claimed was a clandestine meeting in the Seychelles with a Russian fund manager.

The NYPD turned the laptop over to the FBI office in the Southern District of New York. FBI-SDNY had custody of the W/A laptop for a number of weeks. They have some explaining to do as well.

This is not the last you’ll hear of the level of corruption that pervades the Washington Swamp. It’s not even close. The corruption extends at least to the FBI-SDNY and probably to many other key bureaus. Something big, very big, is coming.