Wikileaks Huge Exposure: These Are The Six Republicans That Hillary Had Bribed To ‘Destroy Trump’!
More than a year has gone by now, and Hillary still can’t come to terms with the fact that she has lost the election to Donald Trump.

So ever since Trump became president, she has been trying to come up with the perfect plan to take him down. It looks like that plan needed some powerful Republicans to get involved.

According to WikiLeaks here are the names of those Republicans: Paul Ryan, Carly Fiorina, John Kasich, Jeb Bush, Lindsey Graham, and John McCain.

As reported by the Conservative Daily Post, Hillary bribed them during her campaign days, to make sure that Donald Trump looses the elections. And if he was to win by some chance, they were suppose to sabotage him and his presidency.

Unfortunately for Hillary, her vicious plan was revealed in an email which was sent from Clinton’s campaign manager Podesta to top aide Huma Abedin.

In the message, Podesta gave details about how the funds were being allocated from the Clinton campaign to the Super PACs of Carly Fiorina, John Kasich, and Jeb Bush

“JB, CF, and JK PACS will be silent for the rest of the campaign. Each will get a vital allowance from advertising budget. HRC is in the loop and has talked to all three personally. Eyes only.”

Reportedly, some of the emails have exposed that a couple of Republican Party members were bribed to enable the Clinton agenda to move forward.

As evidence of this there is an email that was sent to Paul Ryan right before he took back his invitation for Trump to speak at an event in Wisconsin.

The email read: “He is on board and will retract the invitation to speak.”

There were also other emails which suggested that money had been moved to Republican officials from the House and the Senate. For instance, FAC records show that just before McCain publicly criticized and attacked Trump, there were transactions for two giant donations from PACS and private sources which went straight to his bank account.