Letter to the Editor: Border must be closed tight
As the saying goes, people rob banks because that's where the money is. The unprecedented invasion of immigrants crossing the border illegally are robbing our country's wealth, pilfering taxpayer dollars as their own personal piggy bank to the tune of more than $116 billion a year.

Cross the border illegally and be rewarded with a low wage job, drivers license, health care, housing, food stamps, child benefits and a tax-free business for seven years.

The vast majority entering the country illegally then continue their lawbreaking by thumbing their nose at our system of laws by skipping a mandatory hearing at a rate of over 90 percent. What we are witnessing on the left in the immigration debate is unparalleled in American politics. A belief-driven ideology consumed by mass hysteria. The despicable virulent, vulgar, fervent hatred from the left toward Trump and "all that he represents" is an unhinged psychopathy that could lead to another shooting civil war. It differs little from the myriad of propaganda, rhetoric, sermon fueled hateful mob actions of the past. There is no civil discourse, objective analysis or attempt at reasonable respectful understanding. Twitter has immersed into a cesspool of high-tech lynchings and fanning flames of bodily harm from the rabid self righteous on the left (us ... the fun-loving, diversity-promoting, all inclusive open-minded vs. them ... the Fascists, Nazis, Hitler's, racists, misogynists, homophobes) and are everyday occurrences from the complicit media jackals on CNN, MSNBC, The View, New York Times, Kimmel, The Washington Post and all the other alphabet networks.

This is the same lunatic left that advocates taking guns away from average law-abiding Americans, while on the other hand, encourages domestic terrorism against these same Americans. These are the same secular progressives that boo God, want the Ten Commandments removed from the public square, take prayer out of school, but then whip out the Bible when immigration comes up.This is the same left that fervently opposes voter ID, as Chuck Schumer declares that "It's racist to only allow citizens to vote."

The left's recent mob harassment of conservatives follows the Alinsky rule of "organized chaos" to gin up the base in order to help voter turnout in the mid-terms. As for the border, I would put up a sign saying "Closed Until Further Notice" as was done from 1924 until 1965. And when dealing with the intellectually vacant on the left, Thomas Sowell sums it up best, quoting: "It is usually futile to try to talk facts and analysis to people who are enjoying a sense of moral superiority in their ignorance."

Perry LaGrange