Nancy Pelosi’s Days Are Numbered — Law Enforcement Seeking Her Removal
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) is still claiming victory after President Donald Trump decided to reopen the government on Friday. However, it now appears that her days in politics may be numbered. Law enforcement is actively seeking her removal for treasonous acts.

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) has made it painfully clear where her priorities lie; namely, with illegal immigrants instead of American citizens. She has denied President Donald Trump the $5.7 billion he needs to complete the border wall between the U.S. and Mexico, causing a record-long government shutdown which Trump ended Friday so that furloughed government workers would not have to go any longer without a paycheck.

So where does this leave us? According to some members of law enforcement, it is time to actively work toward impeaching Pelosi, as her deference toward dangerous and unvetted undocumented immigrants over American citizens essentially constitutes treason.

A petition has been started on WhiteHouse.gov titled “Impeach Nancy Pelosi for crimes of Treason!” It states:

Nancy Pelosi is a TRAITOR to the American People! The Constitution defines, “Treason against the US.. ..adhering to their Enemies, giving them Aid and Comfort.” Illegal aliens are enemies that invade our country with drugs, human trafficking, and terrorist causing death and crime to American citizens. Nancy Pelosi adheres to these enemies by voting for and providing them aid and comfort through Sanctuary policies funded by US citizen tax dollars, and refuses to protect American people by refusing to fund our border wall, leaving our borders open and unsafe. Pelosi refused to meet with Angel families, caused the government shut down then traveled on US dollars to Hawaii and Puerto Rico while 800,000 Fed workers don’t get paid, and uninvited Trump for SOTU. IMPEACH Pelosi for treason!

The petition’s author, Marjorie Greene, said, “America, we have a problem. There is someone who needs to be impeached, fired, and removed from office. There is a very particular leader in our country that is refusing to do the job that she was elected by the American people to do.”

“Not only is she refusing to do her job, her policies are dangerous for LEO’s and treasonous to America,” added Greene. “We can no longer sit idly by and be abused by this woman and her selfish ideas of how she thinks America should be.”

More than 41,000 federal law enforcement and correctional officers were not getting paid while Pelosi refused to negotiate with President Trump in order to end the partial government shutdown. Meanwhile, still collecting her own fat paycheck, the Speaker was jet-setting to luxury destinations up until Trump pulled the plug on her flights.

The U.S. Constitution tells us that treason is a serious crime, even punishable by death. And there are only three crimes that United States elected Representatives of the House or the Senate can be arrested for: treason, felony, and breach of peace.

Nancy Pelosi, upon taking her oath of office, swore to support and defend the U.S. against all enemies, yet she engaged in passing laws that provide sanctuary to illegals, and she continues to oppose funding for a border wall that would protect our national security.

“Nancy Pelosi is breaking her oath of office to protect and defend the U.S. against enemies,” said Greene. “Nancy Pelosi is giving aid and comfort to the millions of illegals who invade the U.S. by providing them with sanctuary and by refusing to fund the wall to protect our southern border from enemies who invade our lands.”

The petition to impeach Nancy Pelosi needs 100,000 signatures by February 15 in order to receive a response from the White House. Currently, there are nearly 85,000 patriots who have signed. If you, too, believe that the Speaker is committing treason by putting the interests of dangerous illegal immigrants before those of American citizens, click here to sign and share this with your friends.