Reason Why Democrats Don't Want Border Wall? The DNC and Clinton Foundation Both Reportedly Paid Off by Mexican Cartels
Reason Why Democrats Don’t Want Border Wall? The DNC and Clinton Foundation Both Reportedly Paid Off by Mexican Cartels

Guest post by Joe Hoft

We reported earlier that the former Mexican President has been aligned with Mexican cartels. He’s accused of taking millions from the cartels –

Former Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto accepted a $100m (£77m) bribe from drug cartel kingpin Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán, a witness has testified.

Alex Cifuentes, who says he was a close associate of Guzmán for years, told a New York City courtroom that he had told authorities of the bribe in 2016. Guzmán is accused of being behind the Sinaloa drug cartel, which prosecutors say was the largest US drug supplier. Mr Peña Nieto served as the president of Mexico from 2012 to 2018. Guzmán, 61, has been on trial in Brooklyn since November after he was extradited from Mexico to face charges of trafficking cocaine, heroin and other drugs as leader of what the US has called the world’s largest drug cartel.

The timing of the former Mexican President being connected with Mexican cartels is rather significant. A former Democrat believes the real reason Democrats don’t want a wall on the US – Mexican border is related to the story above.

Jeffrey Peterson says the real reason the Democrats will never support the border wall – is that they are being paid off by the Mexican cartels.

With as much influence running up in to their system now in the form of direct and indirect #Mexican billions, Patriots might start to understand the #TRUTH about why these two are feeling so much pressure recently. pic.twitter.com/VcOWXTMKjq — Jeffrey Peterson🇺🇸 (@realJeffreyP) January 24, 2019

Peterson may very well be right. We know that a big time lawyer for the Mexican cartels donated to Hillary Clinton. We also know that it was reported that Julian Assange reported that he had evidence that the Clinton Foundation received $15 million from the Mexican cartels. On 9 January 2017, the web site Times.com.mx published an article reporting that Mexican Drug kingpin Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán had donated millions of dollars to Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, claiming that WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange had broken the news.

Don’t forget el chapo donated 15 million ( that we know about) to the Clinton cartel foundation before his transfer to the US — rahm (@alongadingdong) January 27, 2019

No wonder the Democrats don’t want a wall. They reportedly are receiving money from the cartels to leave the border open!