Department of Justice Fact Sheet on MS-13
TTY (866) 544-5309

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FACT SHEET ON MS-13

While MS-13 is not the only transnational gang this administration will target, we believe the

following background information attributed as “information provided by the Justice

Department” will be helpful:

• MS-13, which is short for La Mara Salvatrucha, is a gang composed primarily of

immigrants or descendants of immigrants from El Salvador. In the United States, MS-13

has been functioning since at least the 1980s. The name “Mara Salvatrucha” is a

combination of several slang terms. The word “Mara” is the term used in El Salvador for

“gang.” The phrase “Salvatrucha” is a combination of the words “Salva,” which is an

abbreviation for “Salvadoran,” and “trucha,” which is a slang term for “alert,” “look out,”

or “cunning.” The “13” refers to the thirteenth letter of the alphabet, or “M,” which

denotes the gang’s allegiance to the Mexican Mafia, a prison gang. Their motto is “kill,

rape, control.”

• In the United States, the MS-13 gang originated in Los Angeles, California, where MS-13

members engaged in turf wars for the control of drug distribution locations. MS-13

quickly spread to states across the country, with a large presence in New York, Virginia,

and the Washington D.C. metropolitan area. According to the National Gang Intelligence

center, MS-13 is a national and international criminal organization with more than 30,000

members in the world, and more than 10,000 in the United States. They regularly

conduct gang activities in at least forty states and the District of Columbia. MS-13 is one

of the largest street gangs in the United States. Gang members actively recruit members,

including juveniles, from communities with a large number of immigrants from El

Salvador.

• Through the combined efforts of federal, state, and local law enforcement, great progress

was made diminishing or severely disrupted the gang within certain targeted areas of the

US by 2009 and 2010.

• Recent investigations in some regions of the country have revealed that major leaders of

MS-13 in El Salvador, many of whom are in prison there for murder, kidnapping or

extortion, have been sending representatives to cross into the U.S. illegally, to gain

control of local MS-13 cliques and reconstitute them. These emissaries then connect the

local MS-13 cliques to their jailed leaders in El Salvador by cell phone. The gang leaders