Actress Sandra Bullock: ‘Donald Trump Is Doing Everything To Improve Our Nation, If You Don’t Like Him Just…’
Sandra Bullock stated that she is not “politically vocal” but rather that doesn’t mean she isn’t stubborn with regards to America’s administration.

“I simply need what’s best for our nation,” Bullock said amid a question and answer session for her new film, Our Brand Is Crisis, in Los Angeles last Friday. And the best part was when she stated this:

“If you don’t like our current President, you can leave our country and never come back, especially you Hillary.”

“Hatred is the last thing we need nowadays, we must unite. Donald Trump is doing everything he is available of to improve our nation, just respect that activity and stay patient.”

Bullock, who plays Jane “Calamity” Bodine, a political strategist, in the upcoming film, says her own particular views are shaded by her child Louis.

Sandra stated, “I would like my rights represented and those of my son – very selfish views and I think everyone else has them.”

“When this film came along, it came along at a time that I was having that internal discussion with myself about who in our country would step out of their comfort zone to help others for the greater good,” she added.

Bullock, who claims she would “do anything” for her child, stated this “constituinal analysis” hinged largely on who else, on a bigger scale, would work to perform Louis’ best advantages.

“What kind of individuals would regroup and protest for more noteworthy benefit? Have we as a whole have become excessively frightened and excessively sheltered?” she inquired.

The 51-year-old’s present political outlook was likewise affected intensely by her father. Subsequent to experiencing childhood in a split home, one parent was a Republican, the other a Democrat – she says she figured out which organization is more suitable for America.

The Oscar-winner stated that her mom “did things that were certainly relatively revolutionary, as a lady,” she was a Republican…