KSA refraining so far from sending natl guard to fight Houthis
The Global Intelligence Files

On Monday February 27th, 2012, WikiLeaks began publishing The Global Intelligence Files, over five million e-mails from the Texas headquartered "global intelligence" company Stratfor. The e-mails date between July 2004 and late December 2011. They reveal the inner workings of a company that fronts as an intelligence publisher, but provides confidential intelligence services to large corporations, such as Bhopal's Dow Chemical Co., Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, Raytheon and government agencies, including the US Department of Homeland Security, the US Marines and the US Defence Intelligence Agency. The emails show Stratfor's web of informers, pay-off structure, payment laundering techniques and psychological methods.

RE: INSIGHT - KSA/YEMEN - KSA refraining so far from sending natl guard to fight Houthis

Released on 2013-09-30 00:00 GMT

Email-ID 1078645 Date 2009-11-12 15:23:34 From bokhari@stratfor.com To analysts@stratfor.com

RE: INSIGHT - KSA/YEMEN - KSA refraining so far from sending

natl guard to fight Houthis





Are these part of the SANG?







From: analysts-bounces@stratfor.com [mailto:analysts-bounces@stratfor.com]

On Behalf Of Aaron Colvin

Sent: November-12-09 9:11 AM

To: Analyst List

Cc: Analyst List

Subject: Re: INSIGHT - KSA/YEMEN - KSA refraining so far from sending natl

guard to fight Houthis







Remember they had deployed their elite paratrooper unit to the border as

backup.



Sent from my iPhone



On Nov 12, 2009, at 7:58 AM, "Kamran Bokhari" <bokhari@stratfor.com>

wrote:



More specifically, the Nat'l Guard is loyal to King Abdullah while the

regular armed forces are under the control of the CP. The Saudis while

clearly being unable to hide their concerns about a spillover of the

al-Houthi insurgency, are also trying to downplay the threat and would

not want to send their best and brightest forces to the theatre.







From: analysts-bounces@stratfor.com

[mailto:analysts-bounces@stratfor.com] On Behalf Of Antonia Colibasanu

Sent: November-12-09 8:36 AM

To: analysts@stratfor.com

Subject: INSIGHT - KSA/YEMEN - KSA refraining so far from sending natl

guard to fight Houthis







PUBLICATION: background/analysis



ATTRIBUTION: STRATFOR source



SOURCE DESCRIPTION: chief of al Jazeera office in Beirut



SOURCE RELIABILITY: C



ITEM CREDIBILITY: 3



SUGGESTED DISTRIBUTION: analysts



SOURCE HANDLER: Reva











heavy Saudi bombardment has not succeeded in flushing out the Huthis

from Jabal al-Hadid, despite inflicting heavy losses on them. The Saudis

are reluctant to commit their ground forces, even though they continue

to bring in reinforcements from Tabuk. My source says the Saudis seem to

suffice themselves with areal bombardment and artilley barrages. He says

the Huthis have been trying to lure the Saudis into a direct

confrontation, but the latter are not biting on the bait. The Saudi

command simply does not want to see more Saudi casualties. It is not

clear how many Saudis have perished so far, but my source says at least

200 Saudi soldiers have been wounded, which caused alarm for the Saudi

authorities.



The source notes that the Saudis have so far refused to commit the

better trained and better armed National Guard into the confrontation

against the Huthis. In fact, more Natioanl Guardsmen have been seen

heading towards Riyadh, Jedda and Dhammam. The Saudi royals consider the

National Guard as the defenders of the Saudi dynasty