Republican candidate for Georgia governor opposes bump stock ban. Announces bump stock giveaway. ⋆ Michael Williams for Georgia Governor 2018
Republican State Senator and candidate for governor, Michael Williams, announced his opposition to regulating or banning bump stocks. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms determined in a 2015 memo that bump stocks are not mechanical, therefore they do not fall under the machine gun weapons ban of 1986. An attack on bump stocks is an attack on the Second Amendment. In solidarity with gun owners across the nation, Michael Williams is giving away a free bump stock to one lucky winner.

Williams said, “The tragedy in Las Vegas broke my heart, but any talk of banning or regulating bump stocks is merely cheap political lip service from career politicians. In reality, the bump stock is the new, shiny object politicians are using to deceive voters into believing they are taking action against gun violence. Many firearms experts determined the Las Vegas shooter’s use of a bump stock actually prevented more casualties and injures due to its inconsistency, inaccuracy, and lack of control. There is zero evidence that banning bump stocks would prevent any gun violence deaths. Georgia’s gun owners deserve a governor who will stand with them when liberals and Hollywood elites attack our fundamental rights. That’s why I am standing for the second amendment and giving away a bump stock as a show of support.”



“If politicians wanted to have a real conversation on reducing gun violence, they would be discussing mental health awareness, and ways to reduce the weekly bloodbath in Chicago and other inner cities. You cannot regulate evil out of existence. Blaming guns or bump stocks for the actions of a lunatic, is the same as blaming McDonald’s for heart disease,” continued Williams. “I will stand up for the Second Amendment against liberals and weak Republicans who wish to limit our freedoms. Not only that, I will continue to call out Democrats and Republicans who provide cheap talk and excuses rather than solutions.”

###

BUMP STOCK GIVEAWAY LINK

https://williamsgeorgia.com/bump-stock-giveaway/