Romney Campaign Granted Special Privilege to Gather Voters’ Data by Lt. Gov. Cox

Legal Challenges May Complicate His Candidacy

Salt Lake City, UT – In an article published this afternoon by Utah Reports, it was revealed that Mitt Romney was given secret permission from the office of Lt. Gov. Spencer Cox (R-UT) to add two columns to the strict signature gathering template provided to all candidates and organizations looking to more forward ballot measures:

“It’s necessary to note that there are indeed legal restrictions on the format of voter signature forms, meaning the abnormality of the forms sent out by the Romney campaign may very well turn out to be much more than improper. Romney’s campaign inserted extra pages into their voter packets in-between the default voter signature sheets containing additional data columns for voter emails and phone numbers. As noted by GOP members statewide, this gave his campaign a distinct advantage over every other candidate.

The utilization of this template raises questions, one of which being the possibility that this is illegal under Utah law. If legal challenges are filed and upheld in court, Mr. Romney may lose his opportunity to be on the ballot for this election cycle, regardless of party affiliation.

Every single Utah politico interviewed for this story deemed the exception granted to Mr. Romney to be patently unfair, but a court of law may go even further, as questions regarding equal protection could arise.”

—-

U.S. Senate candidate Jenny Wilson’s statement in response to allegations that Mitt Romney’s campaign illegally altered signature gathering forms in order to collect phone numbers and email addresses from voters:

“It is almost unbelievable that the Romney campaign would seek to manipulate the system in such a patently illegal way,” said Wilson. “Romney has it all – money, power and up until lately, the support of Utahns. I can’t imagine why he feels he needs to cheat to win a U.S. Senate Seat. Sadly, this is a different Mitt Romney than the one I worked with at the Olympic Games in 2001.”

Wilson added, “Most seem to object to the unfairness of Romney’s actions yet there is another critical concern,” Wilson said. “It is a bait and switch to ask someone to sign a petition to support a candidate moving to a primary ballot but actually intend to spam them later for political purpose. Did these signers gave consent? If not, there is a hefty legal problem surrounding intended use and the misuse of personal information,” said Wilson.

Wilson said, “This is exactly the insider wheeling and dealing I am fighting against in this Senate race. It’s time we elect a new generation of Utah leaders who will put our interests ahead of their own ambition.”

Wilson’s campaign manager, Nickie Titus, commented, “The former Governor of Mass. is taking yet another short cut to the Utah Senate Seat. Mitt certainly does things his way – moves to UT from CA, uses a million of his presidential campaign dollars to finance his Utah senate race, and now blatantly disregards the law when putting himself on the ballot.”