Action on Global Warming: NYC's Green New Deal
Laws and actions will drive a nearly 30% additional reduction in greenhouse emissions by 2030 and spur tens of thousands of good jobs

NEW YORK—Mayor de Blasio today announced New York City's Green New Deal, a bold and audacious plan to attack global warming on all fronts. It is comprised of $14 billion in new and committed investments, legislation and concrete action at the City level that will ensure a nearly 30 percent additional reduction in emissions by 2030. The laws and investments of New York City's Green New Deal will directly confront income inequality, generating tens of thousands of good-paying jobs retrofitting buildings and expanding renewable energy.

You can read the full report here.

"Every day we wait is a day our planet gets closer to the point of no-return. New York City's Green New Deal meets that reality head on," said Mayor Bill de Blasio. "We are confronting the same interests that created the climate crisis and deepened inequality. There's no time to waste. We're taking action now, before it's too late."

New York City is not only taking steps to adhere to the Paris Climate pact, it is frontloading the most significant greenhouse gas reductions for the coming decade, before it's too late. The City is going after the largest source of emissions in New York by mandating that all large existing buildings cut their emissions - a global first. In addition, the Administration will convert government operations to 100 percent clean electricity, implement a plan to ban inefficient all-glass buildings that waste energy and reduce vehicle emissions.

The Green New Deal policies are laid out in "OneNYC 2050: Building a Strong and Fair City," a new, comprehensive plan to prepare our city for the future and leading the way for the nation on how to address the existential threats posed by climate change, economic insecurity, inequity, and rising global intolerance.

Combined with the de Blasio administrations previous actions, the actions announced today will lead to a nearly 30 percent reduction in emissions citywide. In combination with actions taken prior to this administration, New York City on track to achieve a 40 percent reduction in emissions from a 2005 baseline by 2030 -- the breaking point to turn back the most devastating and irreversible consequences of climate change.

The announcements today will reduce our emissions by the following percentages from a 2005 baseline:

10%: Mandating that all large, existing buildings implement retrofits to be more efficient and lower emissions – a global first.

6%: OneNYC initiatives to further reduce emissions including more renewable energy, expanded energy efficiency in buildings and reduced reliance on fossil fuel vehicles.

5%: Pursuing a deal to power 100% of City operations with clean electricity sources like Canadian hydropower.

2%: Cleaning up vehicle fleet and implementing congestion pricing.

The above actions will account for a 23 percent reduction in emissions. Previous actions taken by the de Blasio administration, such as phasing out dirtier heating oil, have already resulted in a 5 percent reduction. The total reduction secured through actions of the de Blasio administration will reach 28 percent. When added to reductions made under the prior administration, New York City will reach a total emissions reduction of 40 percent by 2030 and putting ourselves on track for full carbon neutrality by 2050.

New York City's Green New Deal

Committing to carbon neutrality by 2050, and 100% clean electricity. The City will pursue steep cuts in greenhouse gas emissions from buildings and source 100% clean electricity, while creating green jobs and holding polluters responsible for climate-related costs.

Requiring buildings cut their emissions – a global first. With the passage of the building mandates law, New York City is the first city in the world to require all large existing buildings of 25,000 square feet or more, of which there are 50,000 citywide, to make efficiency upgrades that lower their energy usage and emissions – or face steep penalties.

Banning new inefficient glass-walled buildings. The City will no longer allow all-glass facades in new construction unless they meet strict performance guidelines, making inefficient glass-heavy building designs a thing of the past.

Hydro-powered City government. The City, working with partners, will pursue 100 percent carbon-free electricity supply for City government operations with the building of a new connection linking New York City to zero-emission Canadian hydropower. Negotiations will begin right away, with the goal of striking a deal by the end of 2020 and powering city operations entirely with renewable sources of electricity within five years. This action is the equivalent of converting the entire state of Vermont to clean energy.

Mandatory organics recycling. The City will make organics collection mandatory citywide, expanding the country's largest organics management program, including curbside pickup, drop-off sites, and support for community composting opportunities.

Reducing waste and carbon-intensive consumption. The City will end unnecessary purchases of single-use plastic foodware, phase out the purchase of processed meat, reduce the purchase of beef by 50 percent and commit to a carbon neutral City fleet by 2040

Aligning with U.N.'s Sustainable Development Goals. With OneNYC, New York City was the first city to map our local strategy to the SDGs and to submit a Voluntary Local Review to the United Nations. The Voluntary Local Review monitors New York's advancement toward the goals, identifies areas where we can learn from others, and addresses remaining challenges. By demonstrating directly in our strategy how OneNYC aligns with the SDGs, we strengthen our efforts to build a strong and fair city and deepen the city diplomacy that makes New York City a leader on the world stage.

Preparing for the Effects of Climate Change

Comprehensive resilience planning. The City is executing our $20 billion resiliency plan to address the growing threats of coastal storms, sea-level rise, extreme heat, and increased precipitation with projects and programs across the city. These investments will save lives and people's homes as New York prepares for the effects of climate change that are already locked-in.

Solving our Transportation Challenges

Help New Yorkers get moving. The City will support the implementation of congestion pricing to reduce traffic in Manhattan and help fix our broken subway system, while also improving bus speeds 25 percent by the end of 2020. We will speed up our buses through expanded and improved bus lanes, stronger bus lane enforcement, and signal improvements that prioritize buses as they travel through city streets.

Reclaim city streets. The City will meet the needs of the public by ensuring better buses to increase efficiency in all five boroughs; increasing off-hour deliveries to help ease congestion; and creating People Priority Zones that restrict vehicular access, create public spaces, improve safety, reduce congestions, and improve air quality. We will start with a zone in Lower Manhattan to test a potential expansion citywide.

Ensuring Social Equity and Jobs

Promoting New Yorkers' health. The City will guarantee health care for every New Yorker, to create the most comprehensive, universal coverage in the nation for uninsured New Yorkers, regardless of ability to pay or immigration status. The City will focus on ending the opioid epidemic and deploy engagement teams alongside first responders to support people with mental health and substance misuse needs.

Building a fairer city for all. The City will explore expanding the IDNYC municipal ID card to enable banking access for the more than 1 million underbanked New Yorkers; and will continue protecting tenants from displacement and supporting working New Yorkers by aggressively enforcing fair wage and work regulations.

Since the launch of the original OneNYC strategy in 2015, New York City has been a global leader in progressive policies that serve all New Yorkers and secure a sustainable future. Amid this progress, our city and its residents continue to face numerous challenges today. These include pervasive social and economic inequities; at-risk infrastructure; and an exposed and endangered waterfront threatened by a climate change emergency. OneNYC is our blueprint to meet these challenges head-on.

OneNYC lays out our aspirations for the City we want to build by 2050. It contains eight goals that respond to core challenges facing New York City today; 30 initiatives the City and our partners need to undertake to meet those goals by 2050; and more than 80 specific new metrics and targets to guide City leaders and hold us accountable.

The OneNYC strategy was developed following months of engagement with a diverse cross-section of 16,000 New Yorkers from across the city. The City convened a 39-member Advisory Board of community leaders, advocates, elected officials, and policy experts, as well as 26 regional leaders to discuss shared challenges and opportunities to collaboratively address shared regional needs. In the coming months, the de Blasio administration will continue the conversation with residents, civic leaders, and elected officials to refine initiatives and encourage civic engagement.

"Here in New York City, we recognize our climate crisis for what it is - an emergency - and also that what matters most is not words, but action," said Daniel Zarrilli, NYC's Chief Climate Policy Advisor and OneNYC Director. "With today's release of OneNYC 2050, we are demonstrating to the world what a green new deal looks like in practice. Taking on the fossil fuel industry, getting our emissions to net zero, building greater resiliency citywide, and creating an inclusive economy - these may not be easy, but they are necessary if we are to secure a livable future for the next generation. And by taking action now, we are building a strong and fair city for all New Yorkers."

"If someone tells you the Green New Deal won't work, tell them to come to New York City," said Mark Chambers, Director of the Mayor's Office of Sustainability. "There are no sidelines in the fights against global warming and inequality – either we act or we forfeit our future."

"Our investments in resiliency are focused on ensuring New York City is prepared to withstand and emerge stronger from the impacts of climate change," said Jainey Bavishi, Director of the Mayor's Office of Resiliency. "Climate change presents an unprecedented threat, but with the Green New Deal we have the opportunity to address inequality, create thousands of new jobs, and build a stronger and more resilient city for generations of New Yorkers to come."

"From harnessing the power of our upstate water supply to phasing out the use of dirty heating oil in the five boroughs, New York City is leading the way in fighting climate change," said DEP Commissioner Vincent Sapienza. "Moving forward we will continue to transition our wastewater treatment facilities to resource recovery operations where we can harvest additional clean energy to help reduce our carbon footprint."

"The updated OneNYC plan sets the stage for a New York that is well prepared to address the realities of climate change and income inequality. It does so while recognizing the need to invest in and improve our mobility and quality of life infrastructure- both critical to the retention and growth of a workforce that serves as the underpinning for a resilient and growing economy," Larisa Ortiz, Principal, Larisa Ortiz Associates and New York City Planning Commissioner, OneNYC Advisory Board Member.

"Mayor Bill de Blasio's OneNYC 2050 is a breakthrough of historic proportions. The Mayor's goals for sustainable development ensure that NYC will be in the global forefront of the 21st century. One NYC 2050 gets it just right, putting vibrant democracy, an inclusive economy, excellence in education, health lives and a sustainable environment into a holistic plan, one that will benefit all New Yorkers and the world. With this launch, NYC will now move into high gear of leading the nation's Green New Deal," said Jeffrey D. Sachs, University Professor at Columbia University and Co-Chair of the OneNYC Advisory Board.

"The work we do to ensure that our City's parks and open spaces are equitable, sustainable and resilient is critical in advancing the goals of OneNYC. From neighborhood playgrounds and parks to our urban forests and natural areas, we strive to contribute to the health and wellbeing of New Yorkers, today and for decades to come, "said NYC Parks Deputy Commissioner, Chief Operating Officer Mark Focht.

"New York City takes a bold step on this Earth Day as we incorporate a commitment to global engagement into our local strategy of OneNYC," said Penny Abeywardena, Commissioner of the Mayor's Office for International Affairs. "As host city to the United Nations, New York City shares innovations with the world through our Global Vision|Urban Action program and the Voluntary Local Review tool to drive solutions to the most pressing challenges concentrated in cities including climate change, migration and inequality. The new OneNYC plan shows how our local efforts align with and advance the UN's Sustainable Development Goals, because the future of the world depends on city leadership today."

"New York City is a leader in fighting climate change, and the Department of Sanitation is proud to be part of this effort," said Acting Sanitation Commissioner Steven Costas. "Organic waste makes up more than one third of everything New Yorkers throw away, and when it breaks down it emits harmful methane gas. To address this issue, we will expand our organics management program, already the largest in the nation, to create citywide, mandatory organics recycling. We look forward to working with City Council and other stakeholders to take action, and we will continue to work toward our goal of sending zero waste to landfills."

"The City of New York is leading the way in addressing the climate crisis," said Lisette Camilo, Commissioner of the NYC Department of Citywide Administrative Services. "We are leading by example through better government operations. The City is improving energy efficiency in its government buildings, replacing gas-powered fleet vehicles with electric vehicles, and considering environmental impacts when we purchase the goods and services we use. This Earth Week we should all redouble our efforts to build a more sustainable future for New York City."

"Earth Day is about coming together as a planet and committing to protect our environment, which is why I am so proud this City Council last week took the ambitious step of passing the Climate Mobilization Act, one of the most aggressive legislative mandates any city has ever taken to combat global warming. The package requires that medium and large buildings dramatically cut their greenhouse gas emissions, among other measures. The Council has a long, proud history leading the fight against climate change, including requiring that the OneNYC sustainability report be submitted every four years, electric vehicle charging stations in parking lots and garages, and establishing the organic waste curbside collection program. I am pleased to see that, following last week's passage of the Climate Mobilization Act, the Administration is expanding these measures to further reduce the effects of climate change in the city. I look forward to working with the Mayor to implement these measures," said Council Speaker Corey Johnson.

"As an original cosponsor of the Green New Deal, I'm fighting for reductions in carbon emissions at the Federal level, but the Trump Administration and our colleagues across the aisle remain tethered to oil company interests and outdated energy policies that are killing our planet. The House Foreign Affairs Committee, which I now Chair, is pushing legislation to fight climate change, including H.R. 9, the Climate Action Now Act. But we cannot be sure the GOP controlled Senate will act on this critical issue. Therefore, it's more important than ever for state and local municipalities to take the lead in reducing harmful greenhouse gases. I applaud Mayor de Blasio, the City Council and City officials for once again making NYC a climate leader by committing to a 40 percent reduction in emissions by 2030. And I will continue to push for similar or greater emissions reductions at a national level," said Representative Eliot Engel.

"As the federal government fails to acknowledge the urgency of the climate crisis, New York City is leading the way by taking bold and decisive action for a clean energy future. An investment in our environment means not only cutting emissions and expanding renewable energy, but also creating good jobs and improving the quality of life of all New Yorkers as we move toward a greener, healthier city. I commend Mayor de Blasio for his leadership and commitment to resiliency and sustainability," said Representative Jose Serrano.

"New York can be a leader for the rest of the nation in combatting the growing threat of climate change. Addressing this pressing danger will require working federally, locally and internationally. I'm hopeful that by adopting a Green New Deal, New York City can help lead the way for other cities, states and localities in reducing carbon emissions and building a more sustainable economy that creates jobs and opportunity, while preserving our planet for future generations," said Representative Nydia M. Velázquez.

"Climate change is one of the most dangerous threats we currently face, and we need to get serious about combatting it now. I'm proud that New York City is taking this threat head on, and I will continue working down in Washington to ensure the rest of the country follows New York's lead," said Representative Carolyn Maloney.

"Investing in the protection of our environment means investing in the future of the next generation of New Yorkers. The OneNYC plan not only serves to shrink New York City's carbon footprint – it strives to reduce income inequality by providing thousands of job opportunities for city residents. I applaud Mayor de Blasio's leadership and look forward to working together to build a healthy, sustainable New York," said Senator Alessandra Biaggi.

"People around the world are already experiencing the devastating effects of climate change, but the worst is yet to come. With the federal government refusing to take serious action, cities like New York are rising up to the challenge of addressing the most pressing issue of our time," said Assembly Member Dan Quart. "OneNYC is exactly the kind of bold action we need."

"Once again, New York City is taking the lead," said Assembly Member Richard N. Gottfried. "We'll show America how to take strong action to protect our planet from the catastrophic effects of global warming."

"I'm truly excited about the progress of the program OneNYC. New York City has been leading the way in the climate change initiative and the OneNYC program helps us continue that development by cutting emissions from New York's largest source of emissions and creating 27,000 well-paying jobs to implement the retrofits. I commend Mayor Bill de Blasio for the OneNYC program and the chance to help ensure a 40 percent reduction in emissions by 2030," said Assembly Member Latrice Walker.

"Climate change is an existential threat, and I thank Mayor de Blasio for accelerating plans to reduce waste and carbon-intensive consumption," said Manhattan Borough President Gale A. Brewer. "The Manhattan Solid Waste Advisory Board, of which I appoint members to, is looking forward to working with the administration to reach these important goals."

"I'm in for a Green New Deal. From grassroots advocates, who have been sounding the environmental alarm for decades, to my fellow local elected colleagues, our shared mission is to make aggressive moves that combat the climate change crisis threatening the very existence of our planet. It's about readopting the goals of the Paris Agreement to reach 100 percent clean, renewable energy — including deeper exploration of generating solar, wind, and geothermal power in this region — as much as it is about accepting the personal challenge to reduce our carbon footprint in what have been more unsung ways. I am particularly thrilled that this City has taken up our mantle to reduce our overconsumption of meat through the phasing out of processed meat purchasing and the reduction of beef purchasing; make no mistake, addressing the carbon-intensive activity of meat production is a sustainable solution for the health of our bodies and our planet alike. This is a good next step, but is far from the full scope of what we must commit to as a society to reverse this ocean liner of bad decisions. We must be far more assertive in our investment to go green, from public transportation to building design. Nearly 50 years after the first Earth Day celebration, the clock is ticking on our ability to secure a sustainable future for our children and grandchildren," said Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams.

"So often it has been that when we build, we kill. I'm excited that we in city government have found direction to correct a vision of the past and move forward with a vision of sustainability and set benchmarks to save our planet. I applaud the Mayor and anyone in government who stood talk to make these regulatory changes," said Council Member Andy King.

"Intro. 1253, our Clean Tower Plan, will be the largest carbon emissions reduction ever mandated by any city, anywhere," said Council Member Costa Constantinides, Chair of the Committee on Environmental Protection. "This bill represents two years of hard work to ensure affordability and sustainability weren't pitted against each other. Thanks to the partnership between the City Council, led by Speaker Corey Johnson, and the Mayor's Office of Sustainability, we have a clear, fair path to shrink the carbon footprint of large buildings 40% by 2030 -- exactly the kind of action New York City needs to reduce the effects of climate change."

"Just as the Council did last week, the Mayor is laying out a bold strategy for tackling climate change, one of the most important challenges our species has ever faced," said Council Member Carlos Menchaca. "This is more than an environmental issue. It's a human rights issue of the highest order. And the City of New York is leading the way as it always does. The new OneNYC plan is hopefully the first domino in a series of bold climate action across the country."

"While Washington D.C. continues to ignore its responsibility to combat climate change, I am proud to be a part of a collaboration with the New York City Council and de Blasio administration that is doubling down on the need to drastically reduce greenhouse gas emissions, eliminate plastic waste and improve our mass transportation system to decrease our reliance on personal vehicles," said Council Member Donovan Richards. "Preserving our planet for future generations is the most important mission we have today and I am thankful to have so many dedicated fighters in this City pushing the difficult conversations so we can continue to show the world that we are up to the challenge. I'd like to thank Mayor de Blasio, Speaker Johnson, my City Council colleagues and all of the advocates that have put in so much work to guide us on this critical path that is OneNYC 2050."

"New York City's Green New Deal is the bold vision that we need to address our climate crisis. I am a proud co-sponsor of the City Council's Climate Mobilization package which passed last week. This legislation and policies implemented by the de Blasio administration will set world-wide standards for cutting emissions while creating good-paying jobs. These efforts are critical to achieving environmental, social, and economic sustainability. I commend the leadership of Speaker Corey Johnson, Environmental Committee Chair Costa Constantinides, and Mayor de Blasio for their work making New York City the leader in the fight against climate change," said Council Member Helen Rosenthal.

"Study after study by the scientific community has reinforced the impact humans have on climate change," stated Council Member Rafael Salamanca. "Around the globe, sea levels are rising and cities continue to register record-breaking temperatures. While others fail to act despite mountains of evidence, the New York City Council and the de Blasio administration are taking a leading role in implementing critical policy to reduce New York City's carbon footprint. The historic package of legislation approved by the City Council focusing on an array of environmental issues, including requiring large buildings to reduce their emissions, is model legislation that cities around the country are looking to emulate. The policy we implement today will have a lasting effect on the planet that we leave our children and their children. I look forward to working with my colleagues in the City Council, the administration and stakeholders across the city to further impact positive change on this very important issue."

"What better way to honor Earth Day than by standing with the Mayor and other elected officials who have worked so hard to make New York a greener, safer city? DC 37 is proud to be part of the effort to end dirty buildings, reduce carbon emissions, and create good jobs," said Henry Garrido, Executive Director, District Council 37.

"This Earth Day New Yorkers can be proud," said Bill Lipton, State Director of the NY Working Families Party. "Thanks to years of work by grassroots climate justice organizations, allies in the City Council, and Mayor de Blasio, New York City is showing that the Green New Deal isn't just an idea or a plan, it can be the reality in cities across the country."

"Climate change and inequality are two of the most pressing issues of our times. The RWDSU represents workers in retail, grocery stores, warehouses and more, all of whom are impacted by inequality and climate change. We applaud the Mayor for creating OneNYC 2050, which is a comprehensive vision for addressing these issues. Superstorm Sandy was a stark reminder of the reality of climate change and its relationship to inequality. All working people deserve to live on a healthy planet, free from poverty. If we do not follow through with the vision of OneNYC 2050, we do so at our own peril," said Stuart Appelbaum President of RWDSU.

"New York City is setting a new standard for U.S. cities by taking bold action to address the climate crisis. Buildings account for more than two-thirds of emissions in New York City and new efficiency standards will dramatically reduce our carbon footprint. We expect our state leaders to follow New York City's lead and adopt new climate mandates that strengthen our cities and towns through the passage of the Climate and Community Protection Act," said Stanley Fritz, Campaign Manager for Citizen Action of New York.

"The business community intends to be a full partner in achieving the climate, transit and social equity goals being announced today by Mayor de Blasio. New Yorkers are united in our commitment to confront these challenges," stated Kathryn Wylde, President & CEO, Partnership for New York City.

"I think the intersection of equity and climate readiness is the most important challenge for improving the resilience of cities. And this plan tackles both in bold and innovative ways," said Michael Berkowitz, President, 100 Resilient Cities.

"While cities occupy only two percent of the world's landmass, they have an enormous climate footprint with more than 70% of global CO2 emissions. With 90 percent of the world's urban areas situated on coastlines, cities are also at high risk from some of the devastating impacts of climate change, such as rising sea levels and powerful coastal storms. For millennia, cities have helped nurture some of mankind's greatest ideas, and it is no surprise that New York City is rolling out 'OneNYC2050: Building a Strong and Fair City.' I commend and welcome this paradigm shift that will not only result in emissions reduction of 40% by 2030 from a 2005 baseline - while generating tens of thousands of green new jobs, but also offer a scale model for other cities around the world to benefit from and emulate," said Satya S. Tripathi, United Nations Assistant Secretary General and Secretary of the UN Environment Management Group.

Julie Tighe, President of the New York League of Conservation Voters, said "While the federal government is denying climate change, New York City is taking action to reduce our carbon footprint and make our communities more sustainable. NYLCV applauds Mayor de Blasio for advancing the OneNYC 2050 plan to make New York City greener throughout our power, transportation, and buildings sectors. The city is setting bold goals of achieving carbon neutrality and drastically reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 that will require real actions and investments. Many of NYLCV's top priorities are included OneNYC 2050 - from cutting emissions from our buildings, to improving water and air quality, to making our streets safer, our transportation systems stronger, and our fleets greener, to expanding access to green spaces for all New Yorkers. We thank the Mayor for advancing this ambitious plan and look forward to working with the Administration to ensure we make meaningful progress to achieve these goals."

"OneNYC offers a vision for the future of New York City with climate solutions and clean air at its core," said Andy Darrell, Chief of Strategy, Global Energy & Finance at Environmental Defense Fund. "This Earth Day, New Yorkers can also be grateful for implementation underway on congestion pricing, pension fund investment in climate solutions and less pollution coming from buildings – all strong, practical steps to achieve environmental goals."

"I'm pleased to stand with the Mayor today to support NYC's new building emissions law, a landmark in urban environmental policy," said John Mandyck, CEO of Urban Green Council. "We look forward to rolling up our sleeves to assist with its implementation as well as innovations to accelerate the energy retrofit market."

"By coordinating and driving critical infrastructure investments under the guiding principles of sustainability and resiliency, New York City is making life better for current residents and future generations," said Carter Strickland, New York State Director for The Trust for Public Land. "We have to address the challenges of living in cities – where nearly 70% of people will live by 2050 – and New York City's policies on sustainable transportation, water systems, and efficient buildings are leading the way."

"The latest update to the City's OneNYC plan clearly demonstrates that we can tackle the climate crisis head-on and make a better city for all," said Tom Wright, President, Regional Plan Association and OneNYC Advisory Board Member. "Whether its congestion pricing that raises funds for better mass transit, a carbon-neutral city with cleaner air or commitments to invest in our residents and their neighborhoods, OneNYC meets the urgent need to act with a comprehensive vision for success."

"OneNYC 2019 is an innovative move towards ensuring an equitable and sustainable future for New York City. I appreciate its attention to our urban environment and encourage the development of strategies that will protect the most vulnerable communities in our City. We must continue to work together to ensure that its approach remains inclusive for all New Yorkers for generations to come," said Christine Appah, NY Lawyers for the Public Interest, OneNYC Advisory Board Member.

"New York City is creating a cleaner and more equitable future for all New Yorkers with OneNYC 2050 and the new initiatives that will reduce global warming emissions from buildings and cut waste and pollution from billions of single-use carryout bags," said Eric A. Goldstein, New York City Environment Director at the Natural Resources Defense Council. "We look forward to working with the Mayor and his team to advance the effective implementation of these and other programs that prioritize environmental protection and make the City a national leader on sustainability."

"Cities are key sites where innovation and experimentation will have to take place to meet the rapidly advancing climate change challenge," said William Solecki, Co-Chair of the New York City Panel on Climate Change and Professor of Geography at CUNY Hunter College. Actions proposed under OneNYC 2050 and associated Green New Deal for NYC will help keep New York at the cutting edge of what cities are doing by showing how transformative climate action can support the promise of climate resilience development pathways under conditions of equity."

"OneNYC 2050 showcases New York City as a global leader on climate change," said Emily Nobel Maxwell, New York City Program Director at The Nature Conservancy. "The Conservancy supports the strong commitments to carbon neutrality and 100 percent clean electricity, which will put New York City on a path to becoming stronger and more resilient. We applaud the emphasis on nature as a critical solution to pressing challenges facing our communities, including threats to public health, equity, and adapting to climate change. We look forward to working with the City to bring this vital plan to life."

"The OneNYC 2050 plan sets the vision for New York City to continue to exemplify a sustainable and resilient city for the world. With an eye on accountability and bringing the plan to life in every neighborhood, we can expect to see improvements in access to healthcare, increased participation in our democracy, and greater opportunity for our residents of all ages, to build skills for a modern workforce. We have the foundation for our children and their children to live their best lives in the best city for many years to come," said Francine Rosado-Cruz, Global Learning & Development Director, Diversity & Inclusion, Microsoft.

"Climate change isn't fair, and OneNYC 2050 lays out an equitable vision of a green new deal in action to ensure New York's world-leading climate action won't leave the city's most vulnerable behind," said David Miller, Director of International Diplomacy at C40. "Mayor de Blasio and his team boldly developed OneNYC 2050 in line with the city's ambitious target to be carbon neutral by 2050, championing the objectives of the Paris Agreement and positioning New York and Mayor de Blasio as global climate leaders."

"The U.N. report on climate change, whose co-authors included a member of the PSC, showed that the planet can still be saved from the worst effects of climate change if dramatic action is taken by 2030. There is no time to lose. We applaud the Mayor for refusing to wait for action on the federal level and announcing plans to take action in New York City. The members of the PSC are eager to support an initiative that couples good jobs with reduced emissions. Both are possible - and must be achieved. It would be immensely powerful to make that happen in New York City," said Dr. Barbara Bowen, president of the Professional Staff Congress/CUNY.

"OneNYC 2050 is a comprehensive and ambitious plan to make the biggest city in the United States the most vibrant, equitable, livable, and climate smart city in the world as well. The Science for Climate Action Network congratulates Mayor de Blasio and his administration for leading the way and offers its support in using climate science to build a clean and just energy economy," said Richard Moss, Founding Director, Science for Climate Action Network; Visiting Fellow, American Meteorological Society.

"With OneNYC and a host of other initiatives, our city has provided galvanizing global leadership on climate policy and politics—and climate culture too, consistently supporting work to spark the conversations we need across New York City's diverse communities. We're proud to have partnered with NYC on a citywide exhibition and more, and proud to be creating America's first climate museum right here in NYC where it belongs," said Miranda Massie, Director, The Climate Museum.

"The health of New Yorkers is vitally dependent on a wide range of physical, social, economic and environmental factors" said Dr. Anthony Shih, President of United Hospital Fund. "I commend the visionary OneNYC strategy to build a strong and fair city by addressing the critical challenges of our generation, paving the way for a better tomorrow."

Amy Davidsen, Executive Director of The Climate Group, North America said: "As one of the largest cities in the U.S, New York City is significantly upping its ambition on climate action through the introduction of its own Green New Deal. This ambitious policy will help to significantly accelerate the adoption of clean electricity and smart, efficient buildings, as well as driving more sustainable solutions for clean transport. By setting a target of going carbon neutral by 2050, we hope other cities in the US and globally are inspired to follow suit."

"A sustainable, resilient and equitable city is best achieved through partnership at all levels of government, the private sector and directly with communities. We applaud Mayor de Blasio and his staff, along with organizations like ours, for taking action to make our city a more livable, equitable and thriving place by 2050. Our parks and open spaces offer us the opportunity to mitigate against a changing climate while providing much-needed recreational amenities for residents and in the process create jobs, opportunities and a healthier city, and OneNYC 2050 is a strategy to achieve these goals," said Alex Zablocki, Executive Director, Jamaica Bay-Rockaway Parks Conservancy.

"One NYC 2050 is a transformative plan to improve the lives of all New Yorkers," said Jennifer Jones Austin, CEO & Executive Director, Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies. "The strong partnerships envisioned by this new strategic plan will ensure a more equitable and fair city with improved opportunities for civic participation, healthcare, and economic stability for all."

In the absence of Federal and regulatory support to help fight climate change, it's up to cities like New York to lead the charge. By weaving economic justice and environmental sustainability issues together into one comprehensive plan, OneNYC 2050 presents a roadmap for preparing citizens for the challenges and opportunities ahead," said Christine Arena, executive producer, Let Science Speak.

"New York City is the most dynamic city in the world, and we're thrilled to see a OneNYC 2050 plan that pushes the bounds of urban climate leadership, promising carbon neutrality, climate resiliency, and thousands of well-paying jobs. We look forward to the opportunity for all New Yorkers to participate in and benefit from the City's efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and work toward a livable climate for generations to come," said Amy Turner, Executive Director, NYC Climate Action Alliance.

"Climate change and inequality represent an existential threat and moral crisis for our city, which is now taking action at the scale of the challenge. We are so proud of mobilizing the activism and campaign to help achieve this world-first law requiring large polluting buildings like Trump Tower to clean up their act. It's the beginning of a Green New Deal for New York," said Rachel Rivera, a Sandy survivor and New York Communities for Change.

"OneNYC 2050 is an expansive vision for NYC today and tomorrow, covering all aspects of life in the Big Apple," said Fred "Doc" Beasley, Founder and Chapter President of NYC HIP HOP Is GREEN. "Designed to keep New Yorkers healthy, the economy robust and the environment safe. The Green Deal for NYC aligns perfectly with the six fundamental pillars of HIPHOP IS GREEN: plant based eating, urban farming, food justice, animal rights, exercise, and sobriety. We stand united with Mayor de Blasio as he introduces cutting edge concepts that continue to define New York City as the global prototype in solution based leadership."

"New York City Nature Goals 2050 is a coalition of over 70 organizations that have come together around the common belief that all New Yorkers have a right to healthy nature. The coalition has developed five goals for 2050: improved biodiversity and habitat; air and water quality; coastal protection and resilience; connectivity for plants and animals; and inspiration. The coalition has also developed a Declaration of Rights to New York City Nature. Inclusion of NYC Nature Goals 2050 in OneNYC is a testament to the city's commitment to prioritizing healthy and accessible nature. Not only is this a right of all citizens, it is a critical part of our city's infrastructure – as much as roadways, education and public safety. Our coalition looks forward to working with Mayor de Blasio to reach our goals," said Sarah Charlop-Powers, Executive Director of the Natural Areas Conservancy.

"We're proud to stand with the City as it announces OneNYC 2050 and the Green New Deal for NYC that promise to make our communities more resilient and sustainable in the face of climate change," said Christie Peale, CEO/Executive Director of the Center for NYC Neighborhoods. "We also applaud the City's recommendation for supporting retrofits in the Green New Deal for the thousands of homeowners, especially in coastal communities, who may bear the brunt of rising sea levels. Let's lay the groundwork together to ensure that residents aren't displaced by the high costs of adapting their homes."

"The CUNY Urban Food Policy Institute has been a strong advocate for leveraging the power of the 'public plate' to encourage healthier and more environmentally sound diets. New York's OneNYC 2050 plan commits the City to phase out purchasing processed meat and sets an ambitious target for reducing beef purchasing by 50%. These are just the sorts of policy actions we believe are necessary for improving public health and addressing the environmental challenges of the coming decades," said Craig Willingham, Deputy Director of the CUNY Urban Food Policy Institute.

"I want to extend my heartfelt thanks to Mayor de Blasio and everyone else in the NYC government for taking this important step to address climate change and economic inequality. If we want to prevent the worst from happening, then we need to act now, and in the absence of federal leadership, we need cities such as NYC to take the lead. I hope that every city will work with NYC to build a more sustainable and equitable economy, especially by reducing support for industrial animal agriculture and increasing support for food systems that are better for humans, animals, and the environment all at the same time," said Jeff Sebo, Director of the NYU Animal Studies MA Program.

"Once again Mayor de Blasio has demonstrated his vision for New York City as a national leader and role model with OneNYC 2050 and the plan's strategies designed to meet the formidable challenges facing our city and our planet. In particular, the phase-out of processed meat and significant reduction of the city's beef purchases create a triple win—for the environment, our children's health, and animal welfare," said Jane Hoffman, President, Mayor's Alliance for NYC's Animals.

"Mayor de Blasio's plan goes a long way to protect animals, our environment, and the well being of all New Yorkers. Eating one piece of processed meat a day increases one's chances of developing colorectal cancer and beef products are a climate catastrophe. New Yorkers can be proud their city continues to be a leader for animals and our environment," said Allie Feldman, Founder and President of Voters for Animal Rights.

"The Humane Society of the United States applauds Mayor de Blasio for tackling critical sustainability challenges in a most innovative way -- by committing to reduce the city's purchase of processed meat and beef products," said Brian Shapiro, New York State Director for the HSUS. "In addition to causing enormous suffering to animals, meat production generates a staggering amount of water and land degradation and greenhouse gas pollution. Reducing meat will dramatically shrink the city's footprint and has multiple environmental effects that will benefit communities far beyond NYC."

Amie Hamlin, Executive Director of Coalition for Healthy School Food said, "We are grateful to the Mayor for this progressive step. Eliminating processed meats and reducing all meats has been a priority of the Coalition for Healthy School Food, and this is something we have worked on tirelessly. Reducing meat is better for the planet, it will benefit children's health and it's kinder to animals. In 2012, we helped New York City create a vegetarian menu that schools can opt in to, and we will continue to help schools make the transition, furthering the healthy, planet-friendly, compassionate choices available to children and those who work in the schools."

"New York City took a historic step last week to becoming a global climate leader by passing Dirty Buildings legislation, and we are pleased that Mayor de Blasio is committing to further steps to reduce emissions across the five boroughs. With the Trump administration asleep at the wheel on the climate crisis, cities and states must continue to lead the way," said Gladys Puglla, Board Chair of Make the Road New York.

"The OneNYC 2050 plan strengthens the connection between the serious issues of equity and climate change. Connecting these two threads is a critical aspect of meeting an urgent challenge and New York City is taking the lead by addressing them together," said Adam Parris Executive Director, Science and Resilience Institute at Jamaica Bay.

Maritza Silva-Farrell, Executive Director of ALIGN "We have a historic opportunity to protect our communities and mitigate the devastating effects of climate change, the time to act is now! We applaud Mayor de Blasio's proposal for a Green New Deal for NYC, taking an important action to target the biggest sources of emissions while creating thousands of good union jobs and fighting inequality. This is a a critical step to building a green economy and a sustainable, just future for our city and a model for the country."

"On behalf of our members and their families, I applaud Mayor de Blasio for laying out a real vision for protecting New York City’s future," said Peter Ward, President of the New York Hotel Trades Council. "Global climate change is real, and the Mayor’s ONE NYC 2050 gives us a thoughtful and dynamic road map for driving investment into sustainable development and preserving our environment for future generations of New Yorkers. We are proud to back this plan."

﻿﻿