Reactions to June 28, 2007 U.S. Senate Vote On Immigration Reform Legislation
Reactions to the June 28, 2007 U.S. Senate Vote On Immigration Reform Legislation

Senate voted 46-53 against ending debate on immigration reform legislation, thereby killing the measure (60 votes required to achieve cloture and proceed to vote).

Brownback

Brownback Votes Against Senate Immigration Bill

WASHINGTON - U.S. Senator Sam Brownback today voted against the Senate immigration bill.

"I voted against the Senate immigration bill because I am not convinced it would fix our broken immigration system and it would most likely repeat the mistakes of the 1986 reform," said Brownback.

The immigration bill failed earlier today on a 46-53 procedural vote that required 60 votes for the bill to advance to a final vote.





Gilmore

Statement on today’s immigration vote from former Governor Jim Gilmore

The American people, who have a very strong sense of right and wrong, knew from day one this bill was not what its sponsors said it was -- and that it was the wrong solution for the immigration challenges facing our nation.

They understood the only compromising this legislation did was compromise their economic and national security. The American people stood up and made their voices heard.

We simply cannot afford to provide amnesty to millions of illegal immigrants while the American people struggle to make ends meat.





Giuliani

Statement from Rudy Giuliani Regarding Today’s Senate Immigration Vote

New York City – The Rudy Giuliani Presidential Committee released the following statement today regarding the U.S. Senate’s vote on immigration legislation:

“Today a majority in the Senate made clear this bill shortchanged the American people by failing to end illegal immigration and failing to secure our borders. The bill did not deserve to move forward.

“As I have said before, this bill – which I believed was based more on compromise than on principle – failed to do several basic things, including: securing our borders, creating a uniform tamper-proof ID card for all foreign workers and students, establishing a single nationwide database of foreigners, and mandating the full implementation of a biometric ‘check in-check out’ system.

“The legislation was a hodgepodge at best, and I believe it would have ultimately made our country less secure.

“I urge the President to use the authority and funds at his disposal to do everything possible to end illegal immigration and secure our borders.”