American National Red Cross
The American Red Cross exists to provide compassionate care to those in need. Our network of generous donors, volunteers and employees share a mission of preventing and relieving suffering, here at home and around the world, through five key service areas:



Disaster Relief

The Red Cross responds to an average of nearly 64,000 disasters in the United States every year, ranging from home fires that affect single families to hurricanes that affect tens of thousands, to earthquakes that impact millions. In these events, the Red Cross provides shelter, food, health and mental health services to help families and entire communities get back on their feet. Although the Red Cross is not a government agency, it is an essential part of the response when disaster strikes. But as no one organization can manage every aspect of disaster response, the Red Cross works in partnership with other agencies and organizations that provide services to disaster victims.



To learn more about the latest work of the American Red Cross, visit the Current News section of RedCross.org (http://www.redcross.org/about-us/news-and-events/latest-news).



Supporting America's Military Families

The Red Cross helps service members, veterans and their families prepare for, cope with, and respond to the challenges of military service. Emergency communications, training, support to wounded warriors and veterans, and access to community resources help nearly 391,000 military families and veterans annually.



Lifesaving Blood

Each year, the Red Cross supplies about 40% of the nation's blood, by collecting nearly 4.9 million units of blood from more than 2.8 million volunteer donors. These donations are then processed into approximately 6.75 million blood products for transfusions to meet the needs of patients at approximately 2,600 hospitals and transfusion centers across the country.



Health and Safety Services

Every community is safer thanks to nearly 5.9 million Americans who receive training and information every year through the Red Cross in first aid, water safety and other skills that help save lives.



International Services

The American Red Cross is part of the world's largest humanitarian network. Working together, we help our Red Cross/Red Crescent partners respond to international disasters, build safer communities, and teach the rules of war. Each year, we reach an average of more than 181 million people outside the U.S. through disaster management and disease prevention activities.

Each day, thousands of people – people just like you – provide compassionate care to those in need. Our network of generous donors, volunteers and employees share a mission of preventing and relieving suffering, here at home and around the world.



We roll up our sleeves and donate time, money and blood. We learn or teach life-saving skills so our communities can be better prepared when the need arises. We do this every day because the Red Cross is needed - every day.

The American Red Cross has numerous resources we rely on to deliver on our mission, including approximately 300,000 volunteers and 21,000 employees; through more than 250 local chapters across the U.S.; 36 blood services regions; and 36 stations around the world that support U.S. service members and their families. The Red Cross depends on the generosity of the American public to fulfill our mission. Central to meeting our goal and being able to deliver on our mission are those who support us with donations of their time, blood and money. This includes many financial supporters, as well as the more than 2.8 million people who donate blood to the Red Cross each year.



In addition, in fiscal year 2017, our chapters provided lifesaving training and information to over 2.25 million people to prepare for and respond to disasters within their communities, and nearly 5.9 million people downloaded our apps to have such information immediately available on their mobile devices. Through the Red Cross chapter network, we participate in federal, state and local government agency disaster planning exercises and response efforts. The Red Cross works closely with FEMA as co-leaders of the mass care portion of Emergency Support Function #6 of the National Response Framework. We also partner with community organizations and corporate supporters to provide emergency shelter, food and health and mental health services as well as resources and referrals to aid in recovery. The Red Cross is seeking to make its health and safety course offerings even more accessible to the public, with more courses and materials available online. We are working to strengthen the Red Cross brand, especially with younger people. We are implementing nationwide marketing and brand standards to ensure the Red Cross has a consistent voice, sound and look across the country, which will increase the public's understanding of what we do. In addition, we are using a variety of platforms (e.g., www.redcross.org, our blog, Facebook, Twitter and Instagram, as well as more traditional media such as newspapers, radio and TV) to communicate with the public, illustrate our services and garner support in the form of additional volunteers, blood donors and financial donations.



Our reputation as one of the oldest, and most trusted, nonprofit organizations in the country also helps us as we work to become a stronger Red Cross. The progress that we make is also due in great part to the strength of our partnerships—from those we collaborate with and the thousands of volunteers who deliver our services, to those whose financial investment puts our mission into action.

Our progress is indicated in multiple ways: continue to avoid an operating deficit; our year-round fundraising results; the results of individual marketing campaigns; the number of positive media impressions we make around the country; measures of public trust; the number of enrollees in health and safety courses; and the amount of regulatory issues in our blood services regions. Progress on diversity can be assessed by the percentage of women- or minority-owned suppliers, greater diversity among employees and volunteers, and an increase in partnerships with diverse organizations. Numbers of meals served or shelter stays provided can vary significantly year to year because they are dependent on outside factors such as the number and severity of hurricanes, floods, wildfires, tornadoes and other disasters. We also measure our employee satisfaction annually through a third-party organization-wide survey, and take meaningful steps from metrics and outcomes of that input, and we also can assess progress through client and volunteer satisfaction levels.

While significant strides have been made in many areas, more work remains in the following areas:

Financial Stability – We have made and continue to make changes to improve efficiencies across the organization to support financial stability.

Fundraising – We have expanded several successful fundraising campaigns through both person-to-person and online outreach, including our Home Fire Campaign, which highlights work we do every day to provide support to people impacted by fire. We continue to strive to find improved ways to articulate the range of our mission and disaster work in the U.S. and internationally, lifesaving courses, support for military members and their families and blood services - to show the breadth of our work and how contributions from donors really make a difference.

Blood Services – The Red Cross is fully committed to meeting all FDA standards for our blood services program. We have made significant progress in improving our regulatory compliance by implementing system-wide changes to our operations. We are proud of our progress, but are continuing to do even more to improve compliance and protect the safety of the blood supply.

IT – Making sure the Red Cross has up-to-date computer infrastructure and technology is critical for our operations. We have made huge strides in consolidating and replacing our outdated systems and intend to complete this overhaul as quickly as possible.