Graduate Medical Education (GME)

DGME | IME | CHGME | Resident Caps | Workforce

Resident physicians have graduated from medical school and typically spend three to seven years in graduate medical education (GME) training at teaching hospitals and their associated ambulatory settings. AAMC member teaching hospitals educate the next generation of physicians through excellent and essential clinical training.

The Medicare program is committed to paying its share of the costs of educating residents and provides special payments, called direct graduate medical education (DGME) payments, to hospitals to cover costs directly related to educating residents.

The Medicare program also provides special patient care payments to teaching hospitals, referred to as indirect medical education (IME) payments, to account for the higher costs of the complex patients teaching hospitals treat and the highly specialized care they provide.

Cuts to GME funding would jeopardize the ability of medical schools and teaching hospitals to train physicians, nurses, and other health care providers, as well as limit critical services to the community.

Federal Court Grants Provisional Relief for Current DACA Awardees January 12, 2018 In a case brought by the Regents of the University of California against the Department of Homeland Security challenging the Trump Administration’s decision to end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program, the Northern District of California Jan. 9 granted Plaintiffs’ motion for provisional relief, ordering the federal government to maintain DACA on a nationwide basis as it operated on Sept. 5, 2017 (the date of its rescission), with several exceptions. Federal Court Grants Provisional Relief for Current DACA Awardees

AAMC Submits Comment Letter to HRSA on CHGME Quality Bonus System December 15, 2017 he AAMC submitted a Dec.15 comment letter to the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) in response to a request for comment on the proposed establishment of a quality bonus system within the Children’s Hospital GME Program (CHGME). AAMC Submits Comment Letter to HRSA on CHGME Quality Bonus System

Senate VA Committee Approves VA Choice Reform Bill, Preserves Academic Affiliations December 7, 2017 The Senate Committee on Veterans Affairs Sept. 29 approved the Caring for Our Veterans Act of 2017 (S. 2193), sending the measure to the full Senate for consideration. Senate VA Committee Approves VA Choice Reform Bill, Preserves Academic Affiliations

More news and updates