About the AAMC
AAMC Leadership Team

Darrell G. Kirch, MD

President and Chief Executive Officer

President and chief executive officer of the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), Darrell G. Kirch, MD, speaks and publishes widely on the need for transformation in the nation’s health care system and how academic medicine can lead that change across medical education, medical research, and patient care.

Dr. Kirch became AAMC president in July 2006, following six years as senior vice president for health affairs, dean of the college of medicine, and CEO of the Milton S. Hershey Medical Center at The Pennsylvania State University. Prior to Hershey, he served at the Medical College of Georgia from 1994 to 2000, lastly as senior vice president and dean of the school of medicine.

Dr. Kirch received his BA and MD degrees from the University of Colorado, and completed his residency training in psychiatry at the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center. He was elected to the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies in 2007.

David A. Acosta, MD

Chief Diversity and Inclusion Officer

As chief diversity and inclusion officer, David A. Acosta, MD, provides strategic vision and leadership for the AAMC’s diversity and inclusion activities across the medical education community, and leads the association’s Diversity Policy and Programs unit.

A physician of family medicine, Dr. Acosta joined the AAMC from the University of California (UC), Davis School of Medicine where he served as senior associate dean for equity, diversity, and inclusion and associate vice chancellor for diversity and inclusion and chief diversity officer for UC Davis Health System. He previously served as the inaugural chief diversity officer at the University of Washington (UW) School of Medicine (SoM), where he established the Center for Equity, Diversity and Inclusion, and was the founder of the UW SoM Center for Cultural Proficiency in Medical Education.

Dr. Acosta received his bachelor’s degree in biology from Loyola University and earned his medical degree from the UC, Irvine, School of Medicine. He completed his residency training at Community Hospital of Sonoma County in Santa Rosa, Calif., an affiliate of UC San Francisco School of Medicine, and a faculty development fellowship at the UW Department of Family Medicine.

Diana Bourke

Chief Operating Officer

Diana Bourke became the AAMC’s chief operating officer in 2016 after serving as chief information officer since 2013.

She joined the AAMC in 2013 to lead the association’s information technology operations following more than 30 years of IT leadership with public and private companies in financial services, data collection, and health care services.

Prior to joining the AAMC, she was senior vice president service operations and technology for LifeCare, Inc. She graduated summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa from the University of Notre Dame.

Gabrielle V. Campbell, MBA, LLM

Chief Services Officer

In her role as chief services officer, Gabrielle V. Campbell oversees the AAMC service programs, including the American Medical College Application Service® (AMCAS®), the Electronic Residency Application Service (ERAS®), the Visiting Student Application Service® (VSAS®), and the Medical College Admission Test® (MCAT®) exam. She also leads the association’s business strategy to drive strategic innovation of the service programs in alignment with the AAMC’s mission.

Ms. Campbell joined the AAMC in 2005 to lead the Association's business development. Previously, she held positions in university technology transfer, a start-up biotechnology firm and laboratories in the Unites States and Hungary. Ms. Campbell holds a BA in biology from the University of Pennsylvania, an MBA from the University of Washington, and an LLM from the University of Edinburgh. She was a Robert Bosch Foundation Fellow in Germany from 2000-2001.

Constance M. Filling, EdD

Chief Learning Officer

Constance M. Filling, EdD, leads the AAMC’s Member Learning & Engagement cluster, which provides AAMC members and affinity groups the education, training, research, and clinical care models to succeed in the newly emerging health care environment. This cluster combines the knowledge and expertise of three units (Member Engagement and Member Services, Constituent Engagement, and Learning and Leadership) to support our constituents by promoting, managing, and supporting member services; improving and enhancing the experience of our affinity groups; and delivering high quality resources and learning opportunities. She also oversees the team responsible for Learn Serve Lead, the AAMC Annual Meeting.

Dr. Filling has more than 20 years’ experience in leading professional educational activities, including all facets of performance consulting in both commercial and not-for-profit organizations. Prior to joining the AAMC, Dr. Filling served as chief education officer for the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons and the College of American Pathologists. She earned her BA from Cornell College, her MA from the University of Chicago, and her EdD from the University of Pennsylvania Graduate School of Education.

Karen Fisher, JD

Chief Public Policy Officer

Karen Fisher, J.D., is the AAMC’s Chief Public Policy Officer. In that role she is responsible for ensuring the association fulfills its responsibility to be the “voice of academic medicine” to federal policymakers. She leads the AAMC policy and advocacy efforts on federal policies affecting academic medicine, which encompass issues involving member medical school and teaching hospitals’ abilities to fulfill their missions of patient care, education and research.

An expert on health care policy analysis, development, and implementation, Ms. Fisher has more than 25 years of legislative and regulatory expertise gained in both the public and private sectors. From 2011-2016, Ms. Fisher served as senior health counsel for the U.S. Senate Finance Committee, where she played a key role in the drafting and passage of the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, including its creation of a new Medicare physician payment system. She also served as lead advisor to committee members on a broad range of issues affecting health care financing, delivery, and quality.

Before moving to the Senate in 2011, Ms. Fisher served as AAMC senior director in the association’s Health Care Affairs cluster where she focused on Medicare graduate medical education payment policy and other regulatory issues. Previously, Ms. Fisher was a senior health policy analyst and general counsel of the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission (PROPAC) – the predecessor of today’s Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC).

Ms. Fisher earned her bachelor’s degree in pharmacy and her law degree from the University of Pittsburgh. She served as a member of the Board of Trustees of the University of Pittsburgh twice, for a total of eight years, including chairing the Board’s Health Sciences Committee.

Atul Grover, MD, PhD

Executive Vice President

In his role as executive vice president, Atul Grover, MD, PhD, provides strategic leadership in the areas of medical education, academic affairs, health care affairs, scientific affairs, learning and leadership programming, diversity and inclusion, public policy, and communications.

Dr. Grover joined the AAMC as associate director for the Center for Workforce Studies in 2005, where he managed research activity and directed externally funded workforce studies. He became a director of government relations and health care affairs in 2007, and served as the association’s chief public policy officer from 2011-2016.

Previously, Dr. Grover held positions in health care finance and applied economics consulting as well as in the U.S. Public Health Service, Health Resources and Service Administration National Center for Health Workforce Analysis.

Dr. Grover received his MD from George Washington University (GWU) School of Medicine and his PhD in health and public policy from Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health. Dr. Grover holds faculty appointments at GWU School of Medicine, and JHU Bloomberg School of Public Health.

Bernard K. Jarvis, MBA, CPA

Chief Financial and Administrative Officer

In his capacity as chief financial and administrative officer, Bernard K. Jarvis, MBA, CPA, oversees all financial operations of the association, which include the accounting, business services, financial systems, procurement and budget functions. As the association's financial steward, Mr. Jarvis ensures that the association has adequate resources with which to carry out its mission. He also is responsible for the AAMC operating and capital budgets, the investment portfolio, and real estate and facilities.

Mr. Jarvis brings experience with local government, university administration, nonprofit organizations, and private banking to his role at the association. Previously, he held executive positions the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, U.S. Trust Company, NA, The Summit Charitable Foundation, Howard University, the District of Columbia's Department of Human Services, and Ernst & Young. He earned his MBA from The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and his BA from Morehouse College. Mr. Jarvis is a certified public accountant.

Marc Levy

Chief Information Officer

Marc Levy leads the AAMC’s IT unit in executing long-term IT strategic plans in support of the AAMC and its member institutions. In this role, he enhances and implements IT governance processes to ensure timely, cost-effective, and high-quality IT applications and infrastructure.

Mr. Levy joined the AAMC in 2016 after a long career with Marriott International, where he served in various positions of leadership, including chief architect, vice president of enterprise transformation programs, and vice president of application development and support. Prior to Marriott, he was IT director of corporate systems at Bell Atlantic (now Verizon) and led research and development and systems integration efforts for several government agencies and commercial clients at Booz Allen Hamilton and TRW (now Northrop Grumman).

Mr. Levy earned his BS in computer science with honors from the University of Maryland, his MS in computer science from the Johns Hopkins University, and his MBA from the University of Maryland Robert H. Smith School of Business.

Yvonne Massenburg, MBA

Chief Human Resources Officer

As chief human resources officer, Yvonne Massenburg leads human resources for the AAMC’s more than 600 employees, overseeing talent management, leadership development, compensation and benefits, employee relations, and other HR functions. She rejoined the AAMC in 2015 after previously serving as director of talent management from 2012 to 2013.

Ms. Massenburg has more than 20 years of professional experience. For most of her career, she has worked in human resources management, leading HR functions and strategic organizational initiatives such as employee engagement and organizational redesign, specializing in organizational development and talent management. She has also worked in consulting, marketing and sales. Before rejoining the AAMC, Ms. Massenburg served as head of human resources for Bates White LLC, and previously held leadership positions at Abbott Laboratories, Eli Lilly & Company, PricewaterhouseCoopers, and TRW Inc. She earned her BA from Hampton University and her MBA from Purdue University.

Ross McKinney Jr., MD

Chief Scientific Officer

In his role as chief scientific officer, Ross McKinney Jr., MD leads an array of AAMC programs that support all aspects of medical research and training. He also represents the AAMC nationally on issues related to research and science policy, administration, and workforce development, and education and training.

Dr. McKinney joined the AAMC in 2016 after serving as a member of the Duke faculty since 1985. During his time at Duke, he was director of the Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, vice dean for research at Duke University School of Medicine, and director of the Trent Center for Bioethics, Humanities, and History of Medicine. Among his career highlights, Dr. McKinney was first author of the key Phase I and II studies on Zidovudine (AZT) use in children, and he conducted research on the natural history, prevention, and treatment of pediatric HIV disease.

Dr. McKinney received his bachelor’s degree from Dartmouth College in 1975. He earned his medical degree from the University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry and completed his internship and residency in Pediatrics, and fellowship in Pediatric Infectious Diseases, at Duke University Medical Center.

Janis M. Orlowski, MD, MACP

Chief Health Care Officer

As chief health care officer, Janis M. Orlowski, MD, MACP, focuses on the interface between the health care delivery system and academic medicine, especially how academic medical centers can leverage their expertise in research and innovation to support emerging reforms. She leads several AAMC groups, including the Council of Teaching Hospitals and Health Systems, which represents the interests of approximately 400 major teaching hospitals and health systems, including 64 Veterans Affairs medical centers.

Dr. Orlowski joined the AAMC after serving as the chief operating officer and chief medical officer of MedStar Washington Hospital Center, Washington, D.C. From 2004-2013, Dr. Orlowski oversaw the medical staff, clinical care, quality, patient safety, medical risk, perioperative services, ambulatory care, and medical education programs.

Prior to MedStar Washington, she served as associate vice president and executive dean of the Rush University Medical School in Chicago. Dr. Orlowski earned her B.S. degree in biomedical engineering from Marquette University and her MD from the Medical College of Wisconsin.

John E. Prescott, MD

Chief Academic Officer

As chief academic officer, John E. Prescott, MD, oversees AAMC efforts that prepare and assist deans, faculty leaders, and future physicians for the challenges of 21st century academic medicine. He leads a staff that addresses critical medical school data, administrative, and operational issues; explores new models of successful mission alignment; focuses on key student and faculty issues, and supports medical school accreditation activities.

Prior to joining the AAMC in 2008, Dr. Prescott served as dean of the West Virginia University (WVU) School of Medicine, president and CEO of its faculty practice plan and founding chair of its Department of Emergency Medicine. Before WVU, he was a military physician in the Army for eight years. Dr. Prescott earned his medical and bachelor’s degrees from Georgetown University.

Jennifer M. Schlener

Chief of Staff

As chief of staff at the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), Jennifer M. Schlener works as a member of the executive committee to enhance the AAMC’s strategic focus to align the AAMC’s work across the organization.

She is responsible for the work of the AAMC Board of Directors, including its Executive Compensation committee and Governance, Nominating, and Leadership Development committee, as well as its annual Leadership Forum. She has spoken nationally on governance matters, including the imperative for board assessment and continuous board improvement.

In her executive role, she oversees the functioning of the office of the president, which includes the AAMC’s strategy and innovation development function and internal audit function. She coordinates the work of the executive Leadership Team, and facilitates and provides leadership to internal organizational development activities. Additionally, she is accountable for the development of the Medical Center Leaders Caucus and continued growth of the association’s annual awards program.

She is a highly rated speaker nationally, an expert facilitator of strategic and organizational development retreats, is a certified trainer of Crucial Conversations, and a provisionally certified trainer of Crucial Accountability.

Prior to joining the AAMC in 2007, Ms. Schlener worked at Penn State University for seven years, last serving as the Director of Development & Alumni Relations for Health Affairs at Penn State Hershey Medical Center and College of Medicine. She began her career as a development and alumni relations professional at her alma mater, Franklin & Marshall College, in Lancaster, PA. Ms. Schlener is a member of the Board of Directors of Physicians for Peace; is a member of Franklin & Marshall College’s Leadership Council; and she served as a past board member of the American Heart Association – Lancaster Division, Ephrata Performing Arts Center, and Hershey Area Playhouse.

Elisa K. Siegel

Chief Communications and Marketing Officer

As chief communications and marketing officer, Elisa K. Siegel leads the AAMC’s efforts to advance public understanding and support of medical schools and teaching hospitals and their contributions to the nation's health. Her team manages the association's earned, paid and social media; strategic and advocacy communications campaigns, public opinion research, marketing strategy, brand and reputation management, digital and print publishing, and institutional advancement programming. Ms. Siegel also serves as the national communications co-chair of the Coalition to Protect America's Health Care, a national coalition of hospitals and health care providers that educates policymakers and the public about financial challenges facing the nation's hospitals. In addition, she serves on the board of directors of the Public Affairs Council.

Prior to joining the AAMC in 2003, Ms. Siegel was a senior vice president of the public relations and advertising agency Goddard Claussen Porter Novelli, director of public affairs for the American Insurance Association, and government affairs manager for Diamond Shamrock Corporation. She graduated magna cum laude with a BA degree from Duke University.

Frank R. Trinity, JD

Chief Legal Officer

Chief Legal Officer Frank R. Trinity, JD, provides guidance and counsel to the AAMC Leadership Team, Board of Directors, and staff in support of association activities and long-term strategy. He manages the association’s legal function, oversees its intellectual property portfolio, and coordinates its litigation and risk-management activities. Mr. Trinity also serves as the association’s Chief Privacy Officer.

Before joining the association in 2010, Mr. Trinity was general counsel for the Corporation for National and Community Service, where he received the Harris Wofford Award for Outstanding Public Service. Prior to that position, he was a senior staff attorney for the Washington Legal Clinic for the Homeless, as well as an adjunct professor of law at Georgetown University Law Center.

Mr. Trinity received his law degree from Yale Law School and is a magna cum laude graduate of Princeton University.

Alison J. Whelan, MD

Chief Medical Education Officer

As chief medical education officer, Alison J. Whelan, MD, leads AAMC initiatives to transform the current models of education and workforce preparation across the full continuum of medical education. She also directs AAMC efforts that support medical education officers, regional campuses, education researchers, students, and residents.

Prior to joining the association in 2016, Dr. Whelan had been a member of the faculty at Washington University School of Medicine since 1994. In 1997, she was appointed associate dean for medical student education and in 2009 was appointed senior associate dean for education. During her tenure, Dr. Whelan coordinated the creation of the Practice of Medicine curriculum and led the planning for the school’s new education building and the creation of the Center for Interprofessional Education.

Dr. Whelan received her bachelor’s degree from Carleton College in 1981. She earned her medical degree from Washington University in 1986 and completed her postgraduate work and residency at the former Barnes Hospital, now Barnes-Jewish Hospital.