Know Your Rights: California AB 60 Driver's Licenses
You may legally drive in California and use your AB 60 driver's license as legal identification in certain situations.

Applying for an AB 60 driver's license »

Know your rights: Before you apply »

Use caution

If you present your AB 60 license in a state other than California, you may be at risk depending on the laws and policies of that state.

Do not attempt to use your AB 60 license to enter restricted areas of federal facilities, pass through TSA screening, or verify your identity to federal law enforcement officers, including Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and Customs and Border Patrol (CBP).

When talking to or in front of law enforcement, anything you say can be used against you - don't talk about your immigration status, citizenship, or when you came to the US, or where you're from.

Federal limits apply

The AB 60 license looks different than a regular California driver's license:

On the front, it says, "federal limits apply." On the back, it says, "not acceptable for official federal purposes." What does this mean?

It means federal officials and out of state local law enforcement agencies are not obligated to accept your driver’s license as a form of identification.

Inside of California, your AB 60 license should be accepted by state and local law enforcement in the same way any other California ID or driver's license would be accepted (including for citations or arrests) whether you are driving or not. Also, it's illegal for state or local agencies or officials, or any program that receives state funds, to discriminate against you because of your AB 60 license.

Your immigration status is your business

State and local law enforcement officers can't use the fact that you have an AB 60 license to consider your citizenship or immigration status as the basis for criminal investigation, arrest or detention.

If you think you have been discriminated against by law enforcement because of your AB 60 license, please call (415) 621-2488 or click here to report it.

Interacting with police

Practical tips in English and Spanish on your rights with the police.

Consumer rights

Essential tips about owning a car in California and keeping your AB 60 driver’s license. Did you know that your license can be suspended and your car can be towed if you have too many parking tickets? Get the facts.

Your voice matters!

To get involved, email us and join the Drive California Coalition.

Disclaimer: This information is NOT intended as legal advice. If you need legal advice regarding a specific situation, you should consult with a licensed and trusted attorney.