Transgender People and the Law
When talking about transgender people, we sometimes use words that are unfamiliar or mean different things to different people. Here’s what we mean by these terms:

Gender Identity

Gender identity is a person’s internal sense of being a man or a woman (or both or neither).

Gender Expression

The way a person reveals their gender identity to the rest of the world is gender expression. A person’s clothing, mannerisms, voice, hairstyle, etc. can all be a part of the person’s gender expression.

Transgender

Transgender is frequently used to describe a broad range of identities and experiences that fall outside of the traditional understanding of gender. Some of those identities and experiences include people whose gender identity is different from the sex they were assigned at birth, people who transition from living as one gender to another or wish to do so (often described by the clinical term “transsexual”), people who “cross-dress” part of the time, and people who identify outside the traditional gender binary (meaning they identify as something other than male or female). Some transgender people describe themselves as gender variant or gender nonconforming.

Not everyone who doesn’t conform to gender stereotypes, however, identifies as transgender. Many people don’t conform to gender stereotypes but also continue to identify with the gender assigned to them at birth, like butch women or femme men.

(Gender) Transition

Transition or gender transition describes the social and sometimes medical process a transgender person goes through to bring their lived experience into line with their gender identity. Steps in the transition process can include changing the name and pronouns one goes by, updating formal documents to reflect a different gender marker and name from the ones assigned at birth, changing one’s style of dress and other aspects of gender expression, and, in some but not all cases, pursuing medical treatments such as hormone therapy and/ or gender confirmation surgery that help make one’s body look and feel more feminine or more masculine.

Some transgender people don’t feel that the concept of transition fits their experience, either because they feel they were always transgender and “transition” steps aren’t necessary to validate their true identity, and/or because they identify as neither male nor female and feel that transition doesn’t accurately describe their process of coming out as agender, bigender, gender fluid, or another nonbinary identity.

Gender Dysphoria (Formerly Known as "Gender Identity Disorder")

“Gender Identity Disorder” was for many years the medical diagnosis given to people who experience a disconnect between the sex they were assigned at birth and their gender identity.

However, the American Psychiatric Association replaced the term “Gender Identity Disorder” with “Gender Dysphoria” in the 2013 5th edition of its widely used Diagnostic and Statistical Manual. This change was made in part because labeling a disconnect between one’s gender identity and one’s body a “disorder” stigmatizes transgender people. The criteria for diagnosing this condition have also been updated to clarify that gender nonconformity is not a mental illness, although some transgender people suffer negative mental health consequences from the disconnect between their bodies and identities and/or as a result of widespread discrimination and stereotyping.

Gender Confirmation Surgery

This term can refer to any of the surgical procedures that may be part of gender transition. Depending on a person’s specific needs, gender confirmation surgery might involve several different types of genital reconstruction procedures, breast augmentation or reduction, removal of the uterus and ovaries (for transgender men) or the testes (for transgender women), and/or surgery to change the shape of the face and throat.

This term works better than the commonly used phrase “sex reassignment surgery” because that wording suggests that all transgender people need surgery to “reassign” their sex before their gender identity can be respected, when in fact individual needs vary and not all transgender people need, want, or are able to access surgery. In addition, people and courts have often used the term “sex reassignment surgery” erroneously thinking that it refers to one specific genital surgery that completes a person’s gender transition or “sex reassignment.”

Public Accommodations

A public accommodation is an establishment that makes its premises, goods, and/or services available to the public. It may be publicly or privately owned. Legal definitions of public accommodations vary from state to state, but typical examples include restaurants, retail stores, hotels, places of entertainment like sports arenas or movie theaters, hospitals and medical offices, public parks, and public transportation. A private club is NOT a public accommodation, nor is a church.

If you feel you’ve been discriminated against on the basis of your gender identity or sexual orientation, we may be able to help. You can click here to fill out our confidential online form.