American White Supremacists Embrace South Africa…Sort Of
Monica Stone speaking at 2011 Aryan Nations World Congress

A coterie of American white supremacists is working to organize “nationwide” protests for February 27, 2012, as part of an effort dubbed the South Africa Project (SAP). This “project” has as its stated goal stopping the alleged “genocide of Whites” in South Africa. Participants and organizers include representatives from all five of the major white supremacist movements in the United States (neo-Nazis, racist skinheads, “traditional” white supremacists, Christian Identity adherents, and racist prison gangs). In particular, adherents of the racist and anti-Semitic religious sect Christian



Identity are involved with the protests. According to SAP organizers, events are planned at or near 13 state capitols around the country. Several organizers have already obtained permits to rally or completed notices of public assembly as required by local ordinances; others plan to hold sidewalk protests and demonstrations. Targeted states include Alabama, Arkansas, California, Connecticut, Florida, Idaho, Maryland, New Hampshire, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, and Texas.



The protests got their start in 2011 thanks to Monica Stone, a long-time member of the Louisiana-based white supremacist Christian Defense League and immigrant from South Africa. In September 2011, she spoke of the alleged plight of white South Africans at Morris Gulett’s Aryan Nations World Congress event in Louisiana. In fact, SAP uses Gulett’s Louisiana mailing address, while several protests are being organized by members of Gulett's Aryan Nations. For example, Robert Radyn is organizing the Albany, New York, protest, and Ryan Mullins, the “Imperial Wizard” of the Gulett-associated Aryan Nation Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, is organizing the Nashville, Tennessee, event.



White supremacists from other groups are also involved with SAP events. California-based Mike Myers, SAP's “Chief Coordinator,” is organizing the rally at Sacramento. Myers is a racist skinhead who claims membership in the Golden State Skinheads and the white supremacist American Third Position.

The Austin, Texas, march is being organized by David McGlumphy of Dallas. McGlumphy, a member of the Texas-based street/prison gang White Knights of America (WKOA), was released from prison in early 2010. His wife, Anna, is the Texas contact person for SAP.



Billy Roper, the former leader of the Arkansas-based White Revolution, is organizing the rally scheduled in Little Rock. In September 2011, Roper joined Thomas Robb's Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. Robb and his daughter, Rachel Pendergraft, are scheduled to attend the rally. Also attending is Allen Truitt of Missouri, the leader of the Aryan Nations Prison Ministry.



Ronnie Carr, a member of the neo-Nazi group Volksfront, is organizing a SAP event in Greenville, Tennessee, “for the people in East TN, West NC, and Southwest VA who can't make it to their respective state capital protests.” Donald Palmer, also affiliated with Volksfront, is organizing the Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, event.



In an effort to disguise themselves as civil rights activists, SAP organizers have attempted to discourage would-be attendees from wearing white supremacist shirts, Klan robes, or neo-Nazi uniforms. Billy Roper directed one racist skinhead to cover his white supremacist cranial tattoos with a hat during the protest. Though attendance overall is expected to be low, some of the events are better organized than others.