Prospects dim for Canalside train station site
The prospects of Canalside as the site of Buffalo's new train station have considerably dimmed.

That possibility was just one of several major developments Thursday in the increasingly intense public debate over where Buffalo's new train station should go.

No decision has been made yet in the matter, but one is expected in late April.

In addition:

Rep. Brian Higgins, D-Buffalo, charged that cost estimates for locating the facility at Central Terminal are grossly inflated.

Mayor Byron W. Brown defended the consultant that Higgins criticized, as well as the site selection process that Higgins derided as "a trainwreck."

A member of the committee studying the location options cast doubt on whether Central Terminal, an East Side architectural landmark that once served 200 trains daily, is an an appropriate place for a modern, intermodal transportation center.

The debate is about a facility that will accommodate about 200 rail passengers daily, but it's also about a lot more: the final shape of the fast-growing and hugely popular Canalside area, the future of one of Buffalo's architectural marvels and the needs not only of Amtrak, but also local and intercity bus services.

[Gallery: Inside Buffalo's Central Terminal, an art deco marvel in decay]

A site on the north end of Canalside, off Lower Terrace where Memorial Auditorium once stood, had been seen as a potential train station site since last fall. That's when the roof collapsed on the current Amtrak station on Exchange Street, igniting a debate about a new station.

But Higgins and several other major political figures objected to the Canalside location, and its prospects seemed to dim earlier this week when it was left out of a consultant's report detailing the costs of building the station at various sites.

A letter from Robert Gioia, chairman of the Erie Canal Harbor Development Corp., to Assemblyman Sean Ryan, D-Buffalo, said:

"The option involving the Canalside location site appears to have serious challenges because the goal is to create a truly intermodal station and, I am told, inter-city bus service cannot be adequately accommodated at that location," Gioia wrote. "While ECHCD was prepared to work with all involved if the Canalside site was selected, we will accept the decision if the parcel that we control is no longer being considered."

That came as good news to Ryan – who is, like Higgins, a strong advocate of relocating train service to Central Terminal.

"We have spent a significant amount of time and money planning for the future of Canalside," Ryan said. "A train station at Canalside would throw a wrench into many years of expensive planning."

The Canalside site had also spawned considerable confusion.

"We have been trying to clarify all along that the sites we are looking at now are not at Canalside," Brown said. "They are all downtown."

Yet as late as Thursday morning, Higgins was angrily insisting that Canalside was the downtown site being considered.

Told that other committee members were insisting that the three downtown sites being considered were all near the current Exchange Street facility, Higgins said: "Somebody is taking you for a ride."

And in the memo and news release spelling out his objections to the consultant's cost estimates for a Central Terminal station, Higgins repeatedly referred to "Canalside options" rather than downtown options.

The consultant's report indicated that returning passenger rail service to Central Terminal would cost anywhere from $68 million to $149 million, depending on how much train service is provided and whether the station would also serve local and intercity buses.

But Higgins said he could knock $6 million off the price tag by abandoning unnecessary improvements to the terminal concourse. Another $1.4 million could be saved by eliminating unnecessary elevators.

Most importantly, Higgins said the project could be eligible for upward of $11.8 million in tax credits under state and federal programs that offer benefits for the renovation of historic properties. The report, by the consulting firm WSP Parsons Brinckerhoff, did not mention that tax benefit.

Higgins derided the process of choosing a new site, led by a 17-member committee including Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, Erie County Executive Mark C. Poloncarz and a host of other officials, as one that's biased against Central Terminal.

"They're trying to price Central Terminal out of contention because they don't like the neighborhood," Higgins said. "I think that's totally unacceptable."

Higgins, Ryan and Buffalo Common Council members strongly favor returning trains to Central Terminal, saying it would revitalize the downtrodden Broadway-Fillmore area.

But other members of the committee, including the mayor, said they were by no means picking and choosing a favored site before the final committee meeting late next month. They also defended the work the consultants did, which showed that a downtown station might cost only about half as much as renovating Central Terminal.

"WSP Parsons Brinckerhoff is one of the most respected engineering and planning firms," Brown said. "They do work nationally and internationally."

Moreover, Brown stressed that the planning committee's meetings have been open to the public, and that the committee has considered every bit of feedback that it has received. The committee will review Higgins' memo, too, to see what can be gleaned from it, the mayor added.

Brown stressed that he respected Higgins' opinions, but several other committee members and government officials who asked not to be cited by name were furious at the congressman.

Several said Higgins was trying to commandeer the site selection process even though committee members vowed from the start to remain objective. Several sources pointed out that Higgins had not attended any of the committee's meetings and had instead sent a staff member to them.

Asked about this, Higgins said he made clear from the start that he favored a Central Terminal train station. As for missing the committee's meetings, Higgins said: "They scheduled all the meetings when I was in Washington."

Committee members also criticized Higgins' Central Terminal cost estimates, which focused only on design and construction costs for a facility that would only offer train service.

Several committee members are pushing for an intermodal transportation facility that would serve local and intercity bus traffic as well as trains.

Eugene Berardi Jr., president of Adirondack Trailways, noted that while a train station would serve only 200 passengers daily, an intermodal facility would get a huge boost from the 1,300 passengers who take Trailways and Greyhound buses in Buffalo every day.

It would be difficult to add bus service at Central Terminal, Berardi said, because of all the low underpasses on the streets near the station. In addition, he said intercity bus passengers want to be dropped off downtown to access Metro Rail and other public transportation.

"It could probably negatively affect ridership if we lose that downtown central location," Berardi said.

Other sources involved in the train station issue noted that as an intermodal facility near Metro Rail, a new downtown station would be eligible for Federal Transit Administration funds as well as Federal Railroad Administration funding. A rail-only facility far from Metro Rail would only be eligible for federal railroad funding.

The consultant's report lists three possible downtown sites for the new station: