Children’s Book “I’m Not Scared… I’m Prepared“
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

(May 19, 2014 – Medina, Ohio).

The ALICE Training Institute announces the release of, “I’m Not Scared… I’m Prepared,” by national award winning author, Julia Cook, a parenting expert with almost 60 children’s books to her credit.

Author Julia Cook collaborated with ALICE founders Greg and Lisa Crane to create an age-appropriate, instructional storybook that teachers and parents can use as a tool to teach the ALICE concepts to elementary aged school children. Greg Crane, founder of the ALICE training program stated, “Julia Cook has managed to create a child-friendly, non-threatening way to instruct young children in preparing for the unimaginable event of an active shooter.”

Julia’s experience as a guidance counselor (where she often used children’s books to enhance her classroom lessons) and Master’s in Elementary School Counseling gives her a unique ability to translate difficult topics into kid-friendly language. Cook’s books have been featured on the national news and referenced in such publications as Parent’s Magazine, The New Yorker, The Chicago Tribune, Yahoo.com, dr.laura.com and babyzone.com.

About Julia Cook

For more information on Julia Cook and her series of children’s books go to www.juliacookonline.com.

About the National Center for Youth Issues

The National Center for Youth Issues aspires to be America’s premier clearinghouse for resource materials, training and support services to advance the psychosocial, emotional, physical, character, and life-skill capacities of today’s children and youth. For more information go to www.NCYI.org.

About ALICE Training Institute

The ALICE Training Institute is changing how schools, universities and businesses respond to armed intruders. ALICE (Alert, Lock-down, Inform, Counter, and Evacuate), developed after Columbine, teaches strategies to survive a life-threatening event. Supported by educators and law enforcement organizations, ALICE is quickly becoming the new standard of care across the nation. For more information about ALICE Training Institute, visit www.alicetraining.com.

For More Information Contact:

Name: Victoria Shaw

Email: [email protected]

URL: www.AliceTraining.com