LGBTQ group raises red flags - but not for its politics
A little lost in this week's she-said-she-said drama between Rep. Patricia Todd and Gov. Kay Ivey is the revelation that started it all.

A grant. To an LGBTQ advocacy group.

Republican gubernatorial candidate Scott Dawson traveled the state Tuesday, decrying the money the Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs passed in grants to Free2Be, a Huntsville organization that was set up to prevent bullying and domestic violence against gay and lesbian students and adults.

It was a worthy sounding organization that checked all the boxes needed to receive government grants, and between 2014 and today - starting under Gov. Robert Bentley and escalating under Ivey - the group received $1.7 million in federal money before shutting its doors Friday.

The group became known in Huntsville as a go-to point for information and comment on gay and lesbian issues. It was the public flag-bearer for the defense of young people who felt persecuted because of their sexual orientation. It was the lead organization in Huntsville's major gay pride celebration, the Rocket City Pride Parade.

But public records and interviews with people close to the organization raise different kinds of flags. Red ones.

The group had struggled in recent months to figure out what to do with executive director James A. Robinson since he began to go through personal problems last year. The board, looking at a group in shambles, in January replaced Robinson with Mario Burton.

A statement from the board of directors said it found "alarming financial issues" after Robinson's departure, and "determined that Free2Be did not have the financial stability to continue."

The move disappointed those who believed the program Robinson began and incorporated in 2009 had gone astray.

It was, perhaps, not that surprising, if court records are a consideration. When he set up the operation in September 2009, he was fresh off his second of three personal bankruptcies and an arrest in Alpharetta, Ga., six months earlier, on charges of possession of methamphetamine and public indecency.

The final outcome of the charges is unclear. Fulton County court records list the disposition only as "conversion." Attempts to reach court officials were unsuccessful.

When reached by AL.com, Robinson declined to answer questions.

Still, Robinson was able to right his life in Huntsville for a while. In 2010, he went to an Alabama AIDS advocacy group and pitched his plan for helping LGBTQ teens. He was given office space and began to solicit grants.

There are many in Huntsville who argue the organization has done a lot of good, that it provided a voice for young people who desperately needed one. Free2Be's federal tax records -- also filed under the name GLBT Advocacy & Youth Services, Inc. -- indicated the group served hundreds of victims of domestic violence and bullying each year.

The group last year was sued by the Alabama Department of Labor for failure to provide worker's compensation insurance to employees, but later provided proof of insurance and the suit was dropped. According to Gov. Ivey's office, Free2Be was flagged in March after it was learned that it had outstanding federal debt with the IRS for payroll taxes.

"The agency was placed on high risk status on March 29, 2018, and the agency's ability to draw grant funds was suspended. ADECA continues to monitor the agency and will be making a monitoring and financial audit visit on May 21, 2018."

Questions still remain. How did Free2Be become the go-to agency for Alabama bullying grants? Was its money spent properly and its services performed? Was Robinson a good steward of the money, and was the board paying close enough attention?

If not, there will and should be consequences.

It is in ways sad that Free2Be was thrust on the state stage in recent days largely because it was an LGBTQ group, a "fringe" group as Dawson put it.

But what matters is not its name or its intent. We've seen groups with worthy sounding names - Birmingham Health Care and Computer Help for Kids come to mind - that went terribly, criminally wrong.

The question is not this group's politics. The question is what it did with public money.

John Archibald's column appears in The Birmingham News, the Huntsville Times, the Mobile Register and AL.com. Write him at jarchibald@al.com.