The Billion Dollar Spy: A True Story of Cold War Espionage and Betrayal: David E. Hoffman: 9780345805973: Amazon.com: Books
Spoiler Alert – this review, like all my reviews – presumes you have already read the book!



Original research makes "The Billion Dollar Spy" much more than just a rehash of the known facts of a decades-old case. Former Washington Post investigative reporter David E. Hoffman has unearthed a trove of documents and interviewed dozens of sources. The result is an authentic contribution to our knowledge of Cold War history. While he might not have spoken the last word, this outstanding book is likely to be as close as any Western journalist is able to come for the foreseeable future. One wonders if it has been optioned for a movie, perhaps something along the lines of Billy Ray's "Breach."



One problem with a film version is that the story of Adolf Tolkachev, of course, lacks a Hollywood happy ending. From early on, Washington wrestled with the dilemma that, although we knew this Soviet scientist was putting his life in danger, his information was so valuable that we were reluctant to exfiltrate him. The Agency was the addict, and he was for a time virtually the only supplier. To be fair, ultimately it was Tolkachev himself who insisted on continuing his work, thus placing both himself and his unwitting family at risk. Still, we never put our foot down.



When it comes to how the case was handled, Hoffman's bias – understandable, in light of the evidence he presents – is in favor of the locals, the hands-on operatives stationed in Moscow, and against their superiors in DC, who often come off as out of touch with the reality on the ground. Looking at the degree of incompetence they displayed, it is hard to dispute this assessment. For instance, when Soviet sources started to disappear, Washington reflexively reacted by suspecting the Marines and low-level Russian help in the US embassy, launching an extended and mostly fruitless witch-hunt.



Though some leaks were found (remember Clayton Lonetree?), only belatedly did the real traitors come to light. Without exception, they turned out to be red-blooded Americans in the homeland, including Aldrich Ames and the deeply religious Bob Hansson. It seems, though, that the first to betray Tolkachev was Edward Lee Howard. Portrayed here as a loser – utterly devoid of any motive beyond anger, spite and greed – Howard should never have been recruited at all, but the Agency failed to figure this out until the eve of his deployment, having already put him through rigorous training. Only at the last minute, when he failed one lie detector test after another, did they unceremoniously cut him loose and cast him back into civilian life, without bothering to provide effective counseling or later checking up on him regularly. Tolkachev betrayed his country because it had unjustly imprisoned and executed close family relatives; Howard because he felt disrespected.



Hoffman asserts that Tolkachev was the victim of "betrayal from within [the CIA]." (pg. 218) While this is correct as far as it goes, based on his own evidence there is plenty of blame to go around. Take the FBI. On the one hand, he argues that if the bureau's surveillance of Howard had been minimally competent, he would never have gotten out of Albuquerque. The rookie agent the FBI assigned to watch him was, according to their own internal review, "less than adequate," a bureaucratic euphemism for "totally incompetent." On the other hand, Hoffman also implies – somewhat inconsistently – that the CIA had trained Howard so well that the FBI was simply no match for him.



To provide background on Tolkachev's family, Hoffman draws on both unpublished archival material and personal contacts in Russia, though to a far lesser extent than in the chapters that focus on America. His – or more likely the Agency's – translations into English come across as correct if occasionally stilted: "I consider that I have the normal attachment to the family that exists in mankind." The index is frequently inaccurate when it comes to names mentioned in the footnotes.



Readers have compared "The Million Dollar Spy" to John le Carré's novels, and there may be something to this beyond just atmospherics. Personally, I find intriguing similarities between Tolkachev and Goethe, the scientist who passed on valuable information in le Carré's "The Russia House." If Goethe's message was, "Our stuff doesn't work," Tolkachev's was, "We are years behind; Soviet air defense systems are weak." Similarly on the issue of how to respond to the US cruise missile threat: "We have just started to study the problem." Assuming for the moment le Carré did base his hero in part on Tolkachev, it comes as little surprise that he dropped the character's first name, discarding the unfortunate "Adolf" in favor of the much better – but still German – cover name "Goethe." One major difference, of course, is that Tolkachev spied for the US, whereas le Carré's hero contacts the British.