DK Biography: Harriet Tubman: Kem Knapp Sawyer: 9780756658069: Amazon.com: Books
From School Library Journal

Grade 6–9—Sawyer follows Tubman from a humble enslaved childhood to her adult life as a free woman and as a guide to lead others to freedom. Along the way, readers gain an appreciation for her brave and extraordinary actions as an abolitionist. In an age when many of her compatriots were treated as chattel, Tubman owned land, rubbed shoulders with the rich and powerful, and openly challenged the institution of slavery. Containing a wealth of photographs and illustrations, this attractive biography provides good general background information, helpful definitions, engaging sidebars, and a visual time line.—Tracy H. Chrenka, Forest Hills Public Schools, Grand Rapids, MI

(c) Copyright 2010. Library Journals LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Media Source, Inc. No redistribution permitted. --This text refers to an out of print or unavailable edition of this title.

Review

Author Kem Knapp Sawyer brings Tubman's legacy up to date, including new scholarly studies that "give a fair representation" to Harriet Tubman. Kids will appreciate the pictures, drawings, reproductions of letters and handbills, and the wealth of sidebars that serve to explain details in the main story. If your child wants a good biography for fun or for class assignment, look for this one. Perfect for 9- to 12-year-olds, "DK Biography: Harriet Tubman" is a book to seek out. --Cape Cod Times, January 31, 2010(syndicated regionally)



"The titles in the DK Biography series set a detailed personal life story within the context of history. The story told in Harriet Tubman begins with her life under slavery. Meticulous about what is known and what is not confirmed, the simple prose is eloquent in describing how Tubman started as a passenger on the Underground Railroad and went on to become one of its most famous conductors, with examples of her amazing physical stamina, courage, and cunning. Highly readable, the series design, with highly legible type on thick paper, includes color photographs and prints on every spread; sidebars that detail the political history and important leaders; and spacious back matter with a comprehensive time line, bibliography, and fully documented chapter notes." --Booklist, May 1, 2010 --This text refers to an out of print or unavailable edition of this title.