Amazon.com: Decision Points (9780307590619): George W. Bush: Books
I am usually very skeptical about reading memoirs written by former Presidents, world leaders, and business executives. They seem to spend most of their time trying to press their particular points of view on their readers in an effort to bend facts to their own political or personal agenda.



It was in this frame of mind that I recently picked up “Decision Points,” former President George W. Bush’s memoirs of his eight years in office (2001-2009). After I finished reading it, I found myself very pleasantly surprised. “Decision Points” is unlike most other presidential memoirs I have ever read.



“Decision Points” is a very personal book by a very controversial president. Bush spends very little time on policy discussions or historical narratives in this book. Rather, he attempts to give the reader an idea of what he was thinking and feeling when he made some of his most important decisions. To be sure, some of his conservative ideology creeps into his prose, and some of what he writes sounds as if he is making excuses for the decisions he made, but by and large, his writing is free from the harsh partisan rhetoric so common in political memoirs today.



I was also quite pleasantly surprised at the excellent quality of the writing in “Decision Points.” George W. Bush employed Christopher Michel, one of his former speechwriters, to ghostwrite the book, and I think Michel largely got it right. As I read “Decision Points,” I could hear echoes and cadences of Bush’s best speeches. Bush/Michel’s prose is simple, straightforward, easy to read, and quite enjoyable.



You may notice that I have very little to say in this review about George W. Bush the president. That is by design. I have my own opinions about the man and his presidency, and I intend to keep them to myself. However, I will say that in “Decision Points,” Bush made it easy for me to set aside whatever preconceptions I may (or may not) have had, and come away with an appreciation for who he was and what he did during his eight years as President. “Decision Points” is one of the better presidential memoirs I have read in recent years. Highly recommended.