Amazon.com: Faith Ed: Teaching About Religion in an Age of Intolerance eBook: Linda K. Wertheimer: Kindle Store
Faith Ed, Teaching About Religion in an Age of Intolerance, is one of those amazing lifechanging books that I think every American should read. It was written by Linda Wertheimer, a follower of the Jewish Faith, and it shines a light on American public schools and their view of teaching religions in schools, and frankly, a lack thereof.



What is particularly compelling about this book is that it is written by a practicing Jew, and her perspectives from childhood not only broke my heart, but made me realize what children who belong to minority religions must face daily.



The author of the book discusses the fact that as a child, and practicing Jew, she was often uncomfortable during classtime because, incredibly, they actually had Christians come in and talk about Jesus during class time. As a resident of a “liberal” state I was, quite frankly, completely shocked to hear about it. But, what was really shocking was the fact that this kind of thing still goes on in schools across the nation! And, local pastors are actually permitted to roam around talking to students about religion during lunch times and so forth. As a Christian, I was completely shocked and appalled by these practices. I am a Christian by choice now, but it’s not like children have a choice. You are raised how you are raised. We don’t get to “pick” our religion until we are adults and subjecting children to outright proselytizing is appalling and insulting. I can’t imagine if this sort of thing happened on the opposite side. In other words, imagine the outrage communities would experience if the local Imam showed up during lunchtime at your local school.



I highly recommend this book, particularly because it will open your eyes to faith discussions in the public. Just as an example, I had absolutely no idea that a Jew would be uncomfortable with the fact that Christians view them as “chosen” people and almost revere them. I was raised on this kind of rhetoric, and I was stunned that a Jew would find that view offensive and irritating.