The Field of Fight: How We Can Win the Global War Against Radical Islam and Its Allies: Lieutenant General (Ret.) Michael T. Flynn, Michael Ledeen: 9781250106223: Amazon.com: Books
Lt. Michael Flynn has worked at the highest levels of the military-intelligence field. He served as the eighteenth director of the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) for President Obama from July 2012 to August 2014.



He was fired as DIA Director in 2014 over what US officials cited as clashes over his leadership style; however, he claims it was because he took a stand about "radical Islam." “The Field of Flight: How We Can Win the Global War Against Radical Islam and Its Allies” is his response. It outlines his not so “politically-correct” stand on “radical Islam.”



Controversy continued to shadow Flynn. He was named by President Trump in late 2016 as the twenty-fifth National Security Advisor. He was forced to resign after information surfaced he had misled Vice President Mike Pence about the nature and content of his communications with the Russian ambassador to the U.S., Sergey Kislyak, during the presidential transition. These communications and his role as a foreign agent have engulfed him and the Trump administration in on-going investigations of Russian collusion and tampering in US elections.



In “The Field of Fight”, Flynn, acknowledged as a brilliant tactician and a top intelligence officer, provides deep insights into our fight against “radical Islam” and how we should deal with this global threat. He believes that very few people and understand that a global war is being waged against us by “a messianic mass movement of evil people,” most of them inspired by a totalitarian ideology: radical Islam.



This book stands on its own and is an excellent resource for those interested in an expert’s view of the global fight facing us.



Flynn knows the enemy better than most. He felt we were losing the battle when he wrote this book (2015). He wrote “The Field of Fight” to raise awareness of the global war being waged against us and to outline a winning strategy for the United States. Simply put, our enemies, ISIS and its allies - North Korea, Russia, China, Cuba, and Venezuela – hate the West and want to see our society destroyed.



Information in this book came from those who trained, worked and fought alongside Flynn and from American military and defense agencies. Dozens of interviews were conducted with the promise of anonymity. Sources were top officials, junior officers, noncommissioned officers and intelligence analysts.



He has much to say about Iran, information suppressed by two consecutive administrations, ISIS and Al Qaeda. “ISIS and Al Qaeda are driven by a systematic vision of how to conquer the world and impose their religious ideology on all of us. Did you know that ISIS has a detailed written timetable global victory?”



Flynn argues against ‘political correctness’ and for the need of an Islamic Reformation. He does not pull any punches nor does he suggest that we rely on military power to win. To destroy them, we need:

 A clarity of purpose by facing reality and defining the enemy clearly; a new strategy driven by “true,” not falsified, intelligence; and a resolve to win.

 A holistic approach, integrating our economic, political and military strengths.

 A new set of 21st Century Alliances.

 Ample, not token, resources.

 Rules of engagement which do not restrict our soldiers from doing what they are supposed to be doing.

 To attack the radicals everywhere in every way and to deny the enemy safe havens in countries that shelter them (reinvigorate the Bush Doctrine).

 To discredit their ideology.



Flynn notes that we have defeated the radical Islamists every time we have fought them seriously. We lost our resolve over the past eight years (the Obama years) allowing them grow into a global threat. Our leaders took them for granted and told us we were doing fine. Flynn says we need our leaders to tell the truth.



He goes on to remind us that “Radical Islamists” represent a failed civilization. The Muslim world today is a spectacular failure. They are an illiterate society with 20% unable to read. They are afraid that if the Islamic people were free to choose a winner, they would choose us.