Gangster Warlords: Drug Dollars, Killing Fields, and the New Politics of Latin America: Ioan Grillo, James Cameron Stewart: 0889290936301: Amazon.com: Books
"A vitally important book." ―starred review, Library Journal

"A striking exploration of the horrors of mass violence in the Western Hemisphere, with the author offering hope that radical policies could provide positive change." ―Kirkus Reviews

"Grillo's diligently researched story has as many colorful characters and as much dramatic plot as any good piece of fiction might, but his is the real deal . . . Gangster Warlords is journalism at its finest." ―Shelf Awareness

"There has quite simply never been a book like this before . . . Taut and endlessly revelatory, Gangster Warlords is required reading for anyone who seeks to understand the drug wars taking place in Latin America today--and especially for any Americans who might imagine it’s just 'their' problem." ―Scott Anderson, bestselling author of LAWRENCE IN ARABIA

"Grillo's new book is steely-eyed and sensitive reporting on the criminal kings at the front-lines of the continental catastrophe called the war on drugs." ―Daniel Hernandez, author of DOWN & DELIRIOUS IN MEXICO CITY

"With El Narco, Mr. Grillo gave us an unprecedented glimpse into the vicious world of Mexican drug cartels. In Gangster Warlords, he masterfully expands the criminal landscape to include villains across Latin America and the Caribbean. The depth and detail he provides on fearsome organizations like the Red Commando in Brazil and the Shower Posse in Jamaica cast a much-needed spotlight on groups not regularly featured in US media. A sobering and fascinating look at deadly gangsters in often-neglected corners of our own hemisphere." ―Sylvia Longmire, author of CARTEL and BORDER INSECURITY

"Something new and terrible is happening in the Americas. It has murdered a million people in ten years, and yet we don’t fully understand it. Until now. Combining hair-raising reporting with erudite analysis, Grillo has written an indispensable guide to the new world disorder." ―Richard Grant, author of GOD'S MIDDLE FINGER

"The stories in Gangster Warlords offer a dramatic portrait of a region torn by poverty, dysfunctional politics and the bloody allure of crime. Grillo has written a riveting Latin American tragedy. If only it were fiction." ―León Krauze, Univision

"Ioan Grillo captures the power and the horror of the Latin American drug cartels with unrivaled reporting and riveting writing. With Gangster Warlords, he once again proves his mastery of interweaving the broader context with vivid, on-the-ground journalism to provide readers with a street level view of a complex war fought without clear front lines." ―Matthew Heineman, director of CARTEL LAND

--This text refers to an out of print or unavailable edition of this title.