Going Critical: The First North Korean Nuclear Crisis: Joel S. Wit, Daniel B. Poneman, Robert L. Gallucci: 9780815793861: Amazon.com: Books
"GOING CRITICAL: THE FIRST NORTH KOREAN NUCLEAR CRISIS presents an authoritative account of the 1994 deal with North Korea.... The new book also provides a lively and engaging look into the inner workings of United States foreign policy making that is sure to captivate North Korea specialists and general readers alike." —Graham Allison, International Herald Tribune, 7/24/2004

"Reading Going Critical brought back the tensions and concerns of the earlier nuclear crisis of the 1990s. Of the three books under reivew, this is the most scholarly and the one most likely to have lasting value." —James Hoare, Times Higher Education Supplement, 9/24/2004

"From cabinet meetings is Washington to Geneva talks and North Korean associations with China, GOING CRITICAL is a 'must' for any who would understand the latest issues and their ongoing implications for a nuclear crisis." — The Bookwatch, 9/4/2004

"... a comprehensive insider's guide to the first North Korean nuclear standoff and an essential tool for comparing today's events to the last round...[The authors] argue convincingly that Washington cannot contract out its foreign policy on an interest as vital as assuring nuclear nonproliferation." —Scott Snyder, Asia Foundation, Foreign Affairs, 7/1/2004

"GOING CRITICAL: THE FIRST NORTH KOREAN NUCLEAR CRISIS presents an authoritative account of the 1994 deal with North Korea.... The new book also provides a lively and engaging look into the inner workings of United States foreign policy making that is sure to captivate North Korea specialists and general readers alike." —Graham Allison, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, The New York Times, 7/20/2004

"Written with the rare benefit of special access to US government documents and incorporating the personal experiences of its three authors, all of whom played significant roles in the events of 1993-94, Going Critical recounts in detail the options that the Clinton administration considered at every stage of the story - and thus should prove invaluable to the Bush administration today." —Scott Snyder, Financial Review, 8/27/2004

"Going Critical represents the collective reconstruction of events by three US officials intimately involved in negotiating with North Korea in 1994 leading to the dismantling of plutonium production facilities under international inspection....[It] is definitely the most factual account of the 'first North Korean Nuclear crisis' lent authority by the key negotiators from the American side." —Geoffrey C. Gunn, Faculty of Economics, Nagasaki University, Journal of Contemporary Asia

"a 'how to' read for walking the minefield that constitutes relations and dealings with North Korea" —Chris Price, JoongAng Daily, 10/1/2005

"Going Critical is and should remain valuable reading for those interested not only in the North Korean crises of past and present, but in government decision-making, the practice of diplomacy, and non-proliferation more generally." —Sheena E. Chestnut, St. Antony's College, Oxford, Millennium, 11/1/2007

"Far beyond simply providing prelude and understanding to current events, Wit, Poneman, and Gallucci have given us a fascinating, blow-by-blow account of the stark nuclear crisis of 1994. This is a valuable book." —Brent Scowcroft, former National Security Adviser

"GOING CRITICAL is the definitive account of the first North Korean nuclear crisis. The authors were at the center of this crisis, and thus speak with a unique authority. Their account is comprehensive, objective, and exceptionally well written. I highly recommend this book to Korean scholars and to nuclear policy scholars. It is an indispensable resource to those who are involved with the ongoing negotiations with North Korea." —William J. Perry, former Secretary of Defense

"The nightmare of a nuclear North Korea continues to plague American policymakers. Anyone interested in how to handle this fraught problem should consult this definitive account of the first Korean nuclear crisis." —Joseph S. Nye, former Assistant Secretary of Defense and author of Soft Power

"This book has convinced me of the wisdom of discussing nuclear weapons with the Pyongyang regime. The authors have done a brilliant job of describing the complex discussions that took place over a number of years, and mirabile dictu, they have kept it interesting throughout. And they have convinced me that there was legitimate purpose to the conversations." —Lawrence Eagleburger, former Secretary of State

"In the 90s, North Korea's nuclear ambitions brought the world close to war. Today, those same ambitions have created the most serious crisis facing the United States. For all who want to understand how we got to where we are today, GOING CRITICAL is a must read. It is the very best accounting of the struggle ten years ago to fashion a diplomatic alternative to a potentially catastrophic war." —General John Shalikashvili, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

"GOING CRITICAL is an indispensable and fascinating study of high stakes negotiations, national security, and diplomacy. Wit, Poneman, and Gallucci have masterfully collaborated, telling a gripping tale of the first North Korean nuclear crisis and prescribing recommendations that bear on today's similar crisis." —Samuel R. Berger, former U.S. National Security Adviser