Trump Revealed: The Definitive Biography of the 45th President: Michael Kranish, Marc Fisher: 9781501156526: Amazon.com: Books
*****

This book is almost 450 dense pages and came out yesterday; understand that many of the early reviews will be written by people who already have an agenda regarding Donald Trump and who are not actually reviewing this book, but are delivering their opinion of him as a man and as a political candidate. In making your buying decision, look at the substantive reviews that actually tell you what the book is about--those that help you to decide if you should buy it or not.



I am like many people--wanting a good alternative to Hillary Clinton, yet horrified by many of the things I hear and see about Donald Trump. I feel trapped between two intolerable choices. So I thought I'd read a fact-based biography of Donald Trump. This book IS fact-based. It was written by 20 reporters, 2 fact-checkers, and 3 editors from the Washington Post. It is not a biased screed or someone's opinion or sensationalistic. You, the reader, decides what the facts mean to you and how important various incidents are to you--pro or con for Donald Trump. The reviewers who say it is trash or slapped together or like many of the other biographies are wrong. I've spent 20 hours reading it to tell you that. And I am still thinking about my vote. I am undecided whether or not to vote at all. Even if you think the Washington Post reporters are biased, this book is clearly a presentation of innumerable facts, ones that can easily be checked by the ambitious reader with time on their hands.



Donald Trump did participate in the book for 20 hours of interviews, but much of what is in the book is taken from others' testimonies and historical records. In addition, many previous biographers participated and opened their archives.



The book covers Trump's family background, his early school life, his college years, and his early business ventures. There is a chapter on his marriage and his relationships with women. A chapter covers his involvement with sports teams and team ownership; another chapter goes into his involvement with casinos and Atlantic City. Did you know that Trump owned at one point an airline--the Trump Shuttle? Each chapter gives the reader more insight into how Donald Trump operates and makes decisions and is helpful in determining what kind of president he could make; I have to say that for me, there were pros and cons--for you it might be different, which is the beauty of a factual account. The book covers his bankruptcies and how well he recovered from any "failures". It covers his reality show, "The Apprentice". The book follows his thinking in his own words. The book covers Trump-branded products (menswear, bottled water, fragrance, home furnishings, eyeglasses, wallets, mattresses and more), Trump University, and each of his real estate deals in great detail.



Donald Trump clearly knows how to make great deals for himself. It is up to the readers to decide if he will be able to do the same for his country. But again, YOU decide. No conclusions are drawn!



Trump explains what he means by his speaking style--"truthful hyperbole"--and why he uses it. The book includes transcripts of some of Trump's more interesting comments on Howard Stern's show, revealing more of his feelings about women; I like that these are transcripts and not someone telling me what Trump thinks. The book explores facts about Trump's net worth and leaves the reader to deduce why Trump might be so protective of his tax returns. It covers his involvement with Wrestlemania. It covers why he switched political parties 7 times from 1999-2012. Donald Trump even had a network marketing company (MLM) at one point. I learned a great deal from reading this that now that I've binge-read, I'll have to process and decide.



If you do get this in Kindle, be aware that you have no way of linking up the footnotes/references with the text as there are no numbers to link to as is typical in a Kindle book. I would strongly advocate buying the book in hardcopy. This is the only negative I've found with the book. The writing style could be more entertaining as well, but it is journalism, not entertaining writing filled with judgements and opinions and conclusions--which I appreciated.



There is an index, always a plus in any non-fiction book.



Highly recommended.

*****