The Great War of Our Time: The CIA's Fight Against Terrorism--From al Qa'ida to ISIS: Michael Morell, Bill Harlow: Amazon.com: Books
This was a very even handed book full of valuable insights on the war on terror. Mr Morell comes across as an even handed proffessional CIA officer, utterly dedicated to our country and a first hand witness to many important events, decisions and programs which have shaped the war on terror. He was President Bush's daily briefer for the first year of his term, and was in fact the briefer on Aug 6 date of the famous PDB that democrats want you to believe should have prevented 9-11 if only Bush would have taken it seriously. In point of fact the memo on that day had almost zero intelligence value in regards to what , when and where and was instead a general declaration that AQ wanted to attack us. Yeah no s*** Sherlock.



Morell addresses the failure of the intell community to understand the nature of the WMD situation in the run up to the Iraq war. He has a great chapter on how the intelligence which help locate OBL was developed and how President Obama managed the process which lead to the decision to conduct the Abottobad raid.



He also has a chapter on the Senate report about the CIA detention and interrogation program. He really rips the report for inaccuracies, leaps of logic, not well thought out conclusions, and bias. He believes the staffers who wrote the report , wrote what they thought their bosses (democrat Senators) wanted to conclude rather than where the evidence should have lead them. He enumerates many errors of fact, errors of logic and errors of context rife througout the report. He asks and attempts to answer 4 questions about the Enhanced Interrogation Tactics (EITs ) used by the CIA on a limited number of prisoners. Was it legal or was it torture? Was it necessary or not? Was it effective? Was it the right thing to do or not? Reading this chapter gives the reader a better understanding of the whole issue than the deeply flawed Senate report ever could.



In a chapter that liberals will run with , he recounts the history of the Benghazi attack and lays to rest in my mind the idea that the CIA colluded with the political side of the Obama operation to make it seem like the video was the cause of the attack when at the time of the attack the CIA believed differently. In point of fact the CIA initially believed that the series of attacks in Benghazi that night (there were 3) were not heavily preplanned and that the intitial demonstration was influenced by earlier embassy breach in Cairo which was a result of the video. Although the CIA now believes that elements of the Benghazi attack was a planned terror event, it's probably time for republicans to stop the investigations of Benghazi - there is no there there.



I like this book and I like the author. He's no idealogue, I would have no idea whether he is a democrat or republican. He admired both Bush and Obama. In short he's dedicated public service that the country was lucky to have working for us keeping us safe.