The Loneliness of the Black Republican: Pragmatic Politics and the Pursuit of Power (Politics and Society in Modern America): Leah Wright Rigueur: 9780691173641: Amazon.com: Books
Not long ago Donald Trump speaking to a nearly all white audience, asked American blacks “What do you have got to lose?” While he typically is bloviating about something or another he actually had a point. Sort of that is. Democrats have not exactly changed the lives of the poor and working class (regardless of race or ethnicity) during the last 80 years. It is also true as the author pointed out many times in the book, that it is central to all people to have a two party system and that Black America is not one big monolith that can be counted on to act in certain expected political ways. The author deftly answered the question in this book published a year prior to Trump asking it.



The Republican Party at its best has made some gesture toward the black middle class but as the author showed us, those actions have all too often been for display value. During the last three primaries the Republican Party has paraded black candidates that no intelligent person could take seriously. Alan Keyes, Herman Cain and Ben Carson have all been unelectable even in this 2016 circus of an election year. The Republican Party put them on display as if to show America that they are an inclusive party. No one was fooled by those candidates except perhaps themselves.



So while there was no suggestion on the author’s part that the Democratic Party was much different, her focus was on how black Republicans fared during a forty four year period from 1936 until 1980. It was enlightening but surely not uplifting. The book is surfeit with footnotes and appendices as a reader would expect from a professor as the author is. Her notions about this history are difficult to dispute for that reason.



It seems that in 1932, black voters were very much for Herbert Hoover, who many historians have cast as one of our nation’s most ineffectual presidents. In that year many voters were still voting for the “Party of Lincoln” so it was not surprising. However during the four years of pitiful efforts to get the country out of the Depression, black voters were eager for the Democrat Franklin Roosevelt to take the helm. His New Deal efforts at least offered some solace from the conditions that prevailed. His First Lady Eleanor, was outspoken about racial equality so certainly this played well with the black electorate.



The author did not dwell significantly on the presidency of Dwight Eisenhower or John Kennedy, both heavily revered in this country, one for his war time work and the other for being assassinated. She did go into full swing when in 1964 Barry Goldwater ran his disastrous campaign.



Black Republicans could stand behind Eisenhower and unfortunately take whatever leavings he would provide. They were meager but he gained some measure of respect by sending troops to counter Orval Faubus in Little Rock when in 1954 Brown v. Board of Education occurred.



When Goldwater ran his vote against the Civil Rights Act and his super hawk mentality, these decisions outweighed his NACCP membership and very few black Republicans stood by him. They got Lyndon Johnson instead and not only did he preside while civil rights and voting acts were signed into legislation but he also had the civil rights movement and the Viet Nam War to deal with. The Civil Rights movement demanded faster action than he and his administration felt they could provide.



When Johnson decided not to run for election it opened the door for Richard Nixon who courted the black vote and gained many adherents from that constituency in the early stages. He made a large number of black appointments to high level government positions. As time went on he also dismissed a large number of them, adopted the “Southern Strategy” and presented both Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell as potential Supreme Court members. Each had a solid record of white supremacy. Black Republicans who imagined an economic alternative to the civil rights movement were again thwarted and depressed.



The Ford administration with all of the president’s warm smiles and affable personality was nearly despicable based on the author’s description. Ford’s agenda like most Republicans was less to get the black vote than to prevent the Democrats from getting it. Once he was defeated in 1976 by Jimmy Carter, black voters could tell themselves “Starting tomorrow, everything will be the same.” It was and Wright-Rigueur made this poignant by describing and incident in Brooklyn where Jimmy Carter made a speech in the midst of squalor where he described what his administration would do to amend the local blight. Ronald Reagan went to the same location four years later where the conditions had only worsened to point out ironically how the Democratic administration essentially lied.



Reagan had been considered as a far right and bigoted man and this got to him emotionally. The author described his strident outbursts defending himself against charges of racism. Then he did what everyone in the Republican Party who was not black pretty much did, and that was to ensure that “Starting tomorrow, everything will be the same.”



Wright-Rigueur describes the American black community as largely falling in step with the ideology of the Republican Party at the personal level. They are mainly religious, family oriented and economically motivated by capitalism. The black ministry was amongst the most vocal against Proposition 8 in California a few years ago. But there is a difference between black Republicans and all Republicans. Black ones want to improve the lot of the entire race using entrepreneurialism like their confederates but they want regulations prohibiting discrimination against those efforts. Their Republican bedfellows want no regulating restrictions at all. The author used the political biography of Edward Brooke to make her case.



This is quite a dilemma and exists today as it did during the period that the author selected for her book. While reading it I came to understand the thoughts of black Republicans which on the surface seems a paradox. It really is not as she informed us. Yet in the view of this reader there is not much different today from what she described in 1936. Yeah, incrementally so but that was eighty years ago.



The black Republican has been very much for civil rights but felt that the cause is best served by entrepreneurialism unfettered by black codes or the “Southern Strategy”. They are for the much mocked notion of “pulling yourself up by your bootstraps”. The conditions have not allowed one to do so. Many of those who have become wealthy have also shunned controversy. Michael Jordan and Michael Jackson had little to say about “bootstraps”.



When Trump bellows, “What have you got to lose?” the better question might be “What have you got to gain?” The near future does not appear to be any shinier than the past.