No Higher Honor: A Memoir of My Years in Washington: Condoleezza Rice: 2300185595161: Amazon.com: Books
I was in 6th grade when 9/11 happened. There was a flurry of students who were getting pulled out of school because of concerned parents. A classmate told me that a country from the Middle East had bombed the US. As a sixth grader, I didn't even know what "Middle East" actually was. Through most of the Bush Administration, I was in middle school, junior high, high school, and then a freshman in college. I'm now close to my 30s and I never truly understood what happened politically post 9/11.



I had always respected Dr. Rice because of her credentials but I didn't really know what she actually did during the Bush Administration and how those years guided American foreign policy. In light of the 2016 elections and the current geopolitics playing out in the Middle East, I wanted to essentially trace our foreign policy "lineage" if you will. I suppose it's in vogue now to criticize American foreign policy with regard to fighting terrorism, going into Afghanistan and Iraq, etc. But how quickly Americans forget their history and the public (and international) mood in the months following 9/11. Dr. Rice does a phenomenal job describing not only the internal tension between the White House and Cabinet members, but also with our allies in Europe.



This memoir provides you with a glimpse of how much pressure and stress the Secretary of State has to endure. Dr. Rice also describes the dizzying amount of work her department was responsible for and the multitude of foreign service workers she was responsible for. These individuals are also the unsung heroes of American foreign policy. This is a hard job but someone has to do it. It's not an "easy" read because she goes into detail the history behind the politics. It's worth it though to better understand why conflicts continually arise despite our best efforts. I highly recommend this book for anyone who's interested in foreign policy, the give-and-take that occurs in the decision-making process, and ultimately to have a greater understanding of the decisions our government makes.