My Brother Ron: A Personal and Social History of the Deinstitutionalization of the Mentally Ill
I was a medical student in 1962 when I got a summer job working in a VA psychiatric hospital doing routine physicals on the inmates. They were all men and some had been there for years. They were all "chronic hospital cases," as described in this excellent history. Mr. Cramer gives a very thorough history of psychiatry leading up to the introduction of psychiatric drugs that actually worked and the social upheavals of the 60s that led to the emptying of the state mental hospitals. At the time I had my personal experience with the chronic schizophrenic, the deinstitutionalization movement was just getting started. My own days with these patients were similar in many respects to Mr Cramer's experiences with his brother, Ron. Fortunately, none were my relatives and I could go home every night and leave their troubles behind. Still, the experience of talking to them all day was exhausting. My job was to do annual physicals since the psychiatry residents did not want to do so.This was the height of the psychoanalysis influence on psychiatry. Fortunately, the chief of the service where I was working was a former analyst who realized that Freud had nothing to offer the psychotic patient. He taught me to talk to the sane part of the patient and ignore the "crazy" part. The early drugs, like chlorpromazine (Thorazine), allowed much better interaction with these chronic schizophrenics. Some of them explained what it was like to be "crazy," their preferred term. I witnessed Electroconvulsive treatment (ECT) and saw the "lucid interval" that often followed the session. The patients usually lapsed into psychosis again after a few hours but the desire was to try to prolong the effect and this led to repeat sessions.The author does a great job with the history and goes into far more detail on the legal aspects than I did in the chapter on psychiatry in my own book, A Brief History of Disease, Science and Medicine . He writes about "The fever treatment" that won a Nobel Prize for Wagner-Jauregg, the advocate, in the 1920s. This was a result of success with syphilis using fever when the drugs were inadequate and toxic. The legal history is important as the legal maneuvers of anti-psychiatry forces were the proximate cause of the disaster that followed. The homeless problem appeared in the 70s as the mental hospitals emptied and the former patients found nothing to replace them. The Community Mental Health Centers, as the author so well describes, were intended to take the place of the state hospitals but were never adequate, especially in the era of "talk therapy," where a single psychiatrist could only see eight to ten patients a day.I teach medical students and take them to the homeless shelters in Los Angeles every year so they can see where their County Hospital patients come from, and return to after hospitalization. They are able to see the futility of prescribing medicines when the patient has no clock or refrigerator to time the dose or preserve the drug between doses. The author relates the incidence of mental illness among the street population. The managers of the shelters tell me and my students that 60% of the homeless are psychotic and 60% are drug and alcohol addicts. Half of each group is both. For the first few years, we had an amazing guide, a former homeless man now working for the city. He would regale us with stories of his ten years on the street addicted to crack cocaine. He took us to shelters and to homeless hideouts where he warned us not to go there without him.This book is a source for anyone who wants to know how things got so bad and why the families of psychotic patients are so frustrated with the "advocates" who block treatment or commitment of those unable to care for themselves. One of my students' patients was a man with a severe leg infection that threatened amputation. He lived on the sidewalk in front of a Pasadena church. He refused parishioners' offers of housing, telling them he was waiting for the perfect apartment. He barely kept his leg with intense treatment. After treatment, he returned to the street. This is a national tragedy and the reasons are well explained in this book. I can't recommend it highly enough.