Rampage Nation: Securing America from Mass Shootings: Louis Klarevas: 9781633880665: Amazon.com: Books
“Rampage Nation: Securing America From Mass Shootings” by Louis Klarevas is a book that will get many one star reviews from those who are pro guns and many five star reviews from those who are anti-guns. I'm giving it three because I don't believe either of the extremes is 100 percent correct. And I don't like the divisiveness that the issue brings out in people.



This book will be hated and criticized by those who believe strongly in the 2nd Amendment and believe that arming more people is the way to handled mass shootings. As someone who also believes in the 2nd Amendment and believes in the responsible ownership and use of firearms, why am I giving it a couple more stars than most in this camp? Because I understand where Klarevas is coming from, and I think his intentions are good. He wants to stop mass shootings. I just don't believe all of his proposed gun laws are the way to do it.



Those that want to do away with firearms and have much stricter gun laws will use this book to argue their cause. They are the ones who will give this 5 stars and hold it up as an authority on gun violence and mass shootings.



Klarevas does a very good job of describing certain mass shootings in a way that the reader's emotions are brought into his position. Who isn't saddened and angered when thinking about young children killed at Sandy Hook, or other innocent lives shattered and taken by the crazy killers such as Cho at Virginia Tech. He does this well to anger the reader to get on his side of extremely strict gun bans and laws.



He describes a model that he calls the trinity of violence, and says that every act of violence requires three components: a perpetrator, a target, and a weapon. His conclusions are revolve around removing weapons.



Klarevas points out flaws in the works of others regarding research and statistics involving mass shootings and gun violence, and provides quite a bit of his own. However, because of his very anti-gun stance, I will double check things before blindly following. Just as he points out agendas of those who's statistics he disagrees with, we must remember that he is presenting his research with an agenda too.



I teach people what they can do in active shooter situations to save their lives. Because of this, I study just about everything I can find on the topic. There were things in this book that I will look at further that could help me in my writing and teaching on the topic, so for that it was worth reading for me and my field of instruction.



For others, it will be like I said earlier. Those who want to ban firearms and have strict gun control laws will like this book and hold it up as their “proof.” Even though it didn't “prove” to me that his conclusions and remedies are the appropriate and correct ones. Those who are pro firearms will criticize it heavily as an argument for strict gun control (which it is). Make a purchase choice knowing this about the book.