FDR, Dewey, and the Election of 1944: David M. Jordan: 9780253009708: Amazon.com: Books
I found this book a very enligthening introduction to the development of modern American Presidential politics. I learned many things that shed much light on the American political system that are still relevant today, almost 70 years after the election that the writer tells us about. The Depression and World War II were the seminal events that shaped the United States from the middle of the 20th century and this election brought to the fore the main issues that continued to define this era.



Among the most important things that are brought to light is the importance of Tom Dewey in the fashioning of the modern Republican Party. Although he himself was personally rejected twice by the American voters for the Presidency, he had major influence in the party and helped bring it out of the doldrums the Depression and the view held by many that they were responsible for it. Many of his top advisors went to work for Eisenhower when he was elected and even Richard Nixon, as President, offered to appoint Dewey to be a Justice in the US Supreme Court, although he turned it down. He offered the voters the view that the Republicans had learned from the mistakes of the Harding-Coolidge-Hoover era and that they accepted many of the reforms of the New Deal, but they would be in a position to run it more efficiently and would put the brakes on the most intrusive and undemocratic aspects of it. Whereas FDR and the Democrats benefitted from the view of many soldiers and their families that it was not a good idea to change the national leadership during a major war, which could end up prolonging it, the Republicans convinced a lot of people that it was not good to have someone in the White House who viewed himself as "President for Life" and that the New Deal had gotten out of control with the slogan that the Democrats had supposedly coined that their policy was "tax, tax, spend, spend, elect, elect" - in other words, that government should take everyone's money away in taxation, then hand some of it back to favored groups who then would feel that they have to keep voting the same people back into power in order to keep the handouts coming. This argument is in full force today, as well.



One thing I was not aware of was the strong feeling of anti-Communism that the conservatives in the US were feeling at the time, and Dewey and the Republicans tried to capitalize on it. I had thought that since the USSR was such an important ally of the US and Britain that anti-Communist feeling would have been subdued, but this was not the case, but it wasn't enough to get the voters to reject FDR and the Democrats. Another important but little known fact was that although on a nation-wide basis, the turnout for the election was over 60%, in the poll-tax states of the South, it was less than 20%. This was a real blot on American democracy in that not only was the poll-tax used to keep blacks in the South from voting, but it also served as a deterrent for

poor whites from going to the polls. I later found out that the US Supreme Court ruled in the 1930's that the tax WAS "constitutional" which was truly shocking for a country that prided itself on

being the first modern democracy. It wasn't until the Civil Rights movement of the 1960's that this stain on America was finally removed, once and for all, and that poor Southern whites benefitted from it as well, whether they realized it or not.



Another important thing I learned here is related to the famous question Americans and others ask regarding Winston Churchill's surprising (to them) defeat in the British Election of 1945 coming in spite of the fact that he was the revered and beloved war-time leader of Britain. The explanation is that while the majority of British voters respected him and even would have wanted him to

continue running the country's foreign affairs, he was viewed as being out of touch with the country's desires in the realm of post-war reconstruction and social reform and that was more important to them. Jordan, in this book, says that there was actually as similar view in the United States regarding FDR and his New Deal team and that had the war ended before the election,

Dewey would have had a significantly better chance of winning. Since people now had money in their pockets and wanted to enjoy themselves after years of austerity due to the Depression and the war, there was a desire to get away from the heavy governmental regulation and control the New Deal and the War brought with them. While, in the end, the Democratic cry to not "change horses in the middle of the stream" did swing most voters, the desire for change and relaxation of governmental control did finally express itself in the Republicans taking control of both the House of

Representatives and the Senate in the next mid-term elections which were held in 1946.



Although other reviewers have pointed out that the author is clearly sympathetic to Roosevelt, he does not hide FDR's dissembling and his making contradictory promises to people. FDR's message that "were he a delegate to the Democratic convention, he would support Henry Wallace for another term as Vice President" while at the same time working to get rid of him brings no credit to his reputation, yet Wallace himself seems to have been naively unaware of how much opposition there was to him. Bob Hanigan, the Democratic Party boss who worked to replace Wallace with Harry Truman on the ticket once joked that he wanted written on his grave stone "here lies the man who prevented Henry Wallace from becoming President of the United States!".



I also have to agree that the book seems to mostly ignore the effect that developments on the battle front and other international affairs had on public opinion. The writer does point out that Dewey put a pro-Zionist plank in the Republican platform which then seems to have pushed the Democrats to do the same but I think such a momentous act should have been described in greater detail, seeing as how this lead directly to United States support for the creation of the state of Israel during the next Presidential term in addition to the fact that FDR completely repudiated it secretly in a meeting with Saudi King Abdel-Aziz ibn Saud shortly after FDR started his fourth term, but which President Truman rescusitated later on.



All-in-all, this is a very informative and easy-to-read book. I recommend it to anyone interested in 20th century American history.