The Skeptical Environmentalist: Measuring the Real State of the World: Bjorn Lomborg: 9780521010689: Amazon.com: Books
The subtitle is "Measuring the Real State of the World" and this is what this statistician/author did. The author states that there are only a few sources accepted for worldwide statistics, mainly UN, USGS or Nasal studies. Using these studies the author shows how some studies are misused, and misquoted to portend impending environmental doom.

I read this book because as one who lived through the sixties, I have not seen the environmental disasters that were predicted, come true. The world population did not outrun the food supply of the green revolution by the mid- seventies; basic foodstuffs are not even on a rising price trend. I have not seen it with our basic metals or oil for that matter. The costs of these have not kept pace with inflation. The author attempts to show where the error lies in these environmental dire predictions. One is inclined to believe this book, the original source is cited, numerous graphs are used and the historical results seem to jive with reality. Many of the past-predicted environmental scares did not pan out.

One example would be the scarcity of oil in the seventies and the beginning of a continuous oil scarcity. In reality, oil prices have not kept pace with inflation.

One main point of the book is that as a country becomes richer it puts less pressure on the environment and its population levels off. The author puts much faith in this because statistics show that the percentage of the world's population considered poor is steadily diminishing. The author's research seems to be immense, and his reasoning very well thought out. He leads you through the main points of environmental crisis's, scarcity of resources, energy, food, the rainforest, global warming, etc. This book puts many things in perspective. One wants to believe this book, because it offers a future that is not going to be one of stark choices, but reasonable choices and trade-offs. The conclusions are based on the data given and seem very logical. I recommend this book as an eye-opener. The author's explanation of what is happening environmentally, certainly bears more resemblance to reality than can be shown throughout the history of the environmentalist scares of the recent past. One can only hope the future is also as consistent.