What Happened: Inside the Bush White House and Washington's Culture of Deception: Scott McClellan: 9781586485566: Amazon.com: Books
First, I must reveal contextual background information about myself. Number one, I am not a political junkie, nor do I devour political books hot off the press. I usually manage about one political top seller per year. Number two, for nearly eight years, I have watched in horror and disbelief as the Bush administration has waddled through the job of leading our country. I am not a fan of G.W. Bush. In my opinion, he has surpassed all my worst expectations as President. However, I remembered feeling a strange affinity for his press secretary, Scott McClellan. When I heard about McClellan's book I was curious. I was eager to understand the other side of Bush. Surely, redeemable qualities would emerge, if I just understood Bush's long-term goals and philosophies better.



McClellan, young, loyal, and slightly naïve, was the point man during Bush's bid for re-election and the downward spiraling events that followed the campaign, including Plamegate, endless war, and the Katrina debacle.



I was pleasantly surprised to discover that McClellan provides a clear-eyed view of all-around failures of the Bush administration, the Democratic opposition, and the press. He asserts that systemic problems in Washington transcend personal flaws of any single politician. The book is interesting and easy to read from start to finish. The tone is hopeful, rather than accusatory. The most valuable lessons that I got from reading this book are verification and articulation of aspects of our political system that I have often pondered.



McClellan spends considerable time explaining his belief that inside Washington politics have become mired in an irreparable "campaign syndrome." He asserts that this decline began many years and administrations ago and has carried forward with momentum for both parties. He quotes Professor Hugh Heclo in describing the permanent campaign syndrome as a "nonstop process seeking to manipulate sources of public approval to engage in the act of governing itself (62)." Intense campaigns work and strategize to deal with incoming bombs, always seeking to put the best spin on each event while failing to look ahead at the larger picture or admitting to and learning from failures when they exist. He goes on to cite examples of the propaganda machine and spin doctors in both the Clinton and Bush administrations (62).



The "perpetual scandal culture" is another force shaping today's politics, a legacy of the Nixon administration (65). Rather than blaming the "liberal left media," he claims the problem is that the media, in general, overemphasizes controversy and focuses attention on winners versus losers rather than on results (158). The inclination is for critics to exploit trivia for political advantage while failing to address the really important issues.



A third force in politics today is the "scorched earth politics" of presidential campaigns that seek not just to defeat but to destroy the opposition, resulting in a winner-take-all attitude that spills over into Congress. The philosophy of politics-as-war leads to a culture of deception (70).



Throughout the book I sensed the conflict and irony of a man who suffered the loss of his own public and professional credibility as a cog in the political wheel yet still believes in Bush's innate goodness and special type of intelligence. McClellan wants to believe in his man and frequently explains to the reader his own thought processes when confronted with Bush's seemingly dishonest behavior. He lays much of the blame for Bush's less than bright reputation on the failure of his top advisors to push and question his ideas. McClellan is unabashedly forthright in acknowledging administrative mistakes like the disconnect between what the administration said was being done for victims of Katrina and what was in fact happening on the ground. He is also generous to the Washington machine, believing that most politicians are inherently good but trapped in an endless effort to manipulate public opinion.



"Every president wants to achieve greatness but few do, (131)" claims McClellan. Unfortunately President Bush may fail to achieve greatness not because of his intelligence, intentions, or character but because "he and his advisors confused the propaganda campaign with the high level of candor and honesty so fundamentally needed to build and then sustain public support during a time of war." I'm not sure that I understand Bush or his policies better for having read this book. But at least I understand his failings and expect other, more capable individuals will get caught in many of the same political traps that ensnared Bush.