Unintimidated: A Governor's Story and a Nation's Challenge: Scott Walker, Marc Thiessen: 9781595231116: Amazon.com: Books
Hmpf. Unintimidated? This is a governor who is afraid to show his face in Wisconsin's state house. He enters and departs through underground tunnels. In 2011 he posted private guards (who impersonated police officers) in the parking garages surrounding the Capitol at the other end of the tunnels. He only appears in the Capitol Rotunda to light the Christmas tree (then he dashes off, leaving his wife alone to finish the event), and to attend the Reverend Doctor Martin Luther King, Jr. memorial (where he is shamed by keynote speakers).Unintimidated? This is the governor who lined up the National Guard to protect him, and exempted the police from his heinous "Budget Repair Bill" before announcing it, because he was so afraid of the potential reaction. This is the governor who spread lies about the crowds inside and outside of the Capitol during The Uprising, characterizing them as unruly thugs -- he of course wouldn't know, because he was too afraid to face them and never saw the crowds first hand (except from behind 2nd story windows). Those of us in the midst of the throng, and those police officers on duty to monitor the situation, know that it was an incredible gathering of 100,000+ angry but peaceful citizens (yes, contrary to the lies, Wisconsinites made up the bulk of the crowd).Unintimidated? This is the governor who had Administrative rules rewritten because of the "emergency" of peaceful citizens gathering during the non-business noon hour to sing. He has these singers arrested, and instructs the Department of Justice to prosecute these cases because he is afraid of the District Attorney (who threw out many of these frivolous cases previously). He is afraid of singers. Unintimidated?Unintimidated? He spends much of his time (and our tax dollars) traveling outside of Wisconsin fund raising because he knows that destroying Wisconsin is in the interest of his fascist corporate backers from around the country. He attacks state workers but is himself the worst example of a shirking state worker in dereliction of duty, surrounding himself with an inner circle of lawbreakers (6 of his former aides are in jail and many others are still under investigation for embezzling money from veteran's funds and breaking campaign laws). He appoints unqualified children of major donors to high-level state positions. He is beholden to the big money backers who intimidate him into slavishly following their will at every turn.Unintimidated? He holds most major press conferences about Wisconsin out of state. He even attempted to hold State of the State addresses at a private firm so he could exclude his detractors. When forced to hold them at the Capitol, he stacks the gallery with his invitees and allows less than 10 seats for the general public. He had his book release in New York because he was too afraid to have it in Wisconsin.Unintimidated? Laughable title. As fictional as the rest of this book.If you want to know what "Unintimidated" means in Wisconsin, seek out this book instead: Unintimidated: Wisconsin Sings Truth to Power which highlights a few of the people of Wisconsin who have been unintimidated by the governor's bully tactics. It does not pretend to be unbiased, but at least it shows some on-the-ground truth that you won't find on the myopic Fox News, or in the governor's disconnected promotion piece.