Robert Book
Dr. Robert A. Book is a health economist, and Senior Research Director at Health Systems Innovation Network, LLC, where he works primarily on economic and statistical modeling of the effects of health care reform, primarily through the lens of the effects of changes in the law on the incentives faced by individuals, employers, providers, and insurers.

His expertise extends to a wide variety of issues related to health economics and health care policy, including insurance coverage, provider incentives, employer-sponsored insurance, administrative costs, medical costs, Medicare fee-for-service pricing policies (Part A and Part B), Medicare Advantage, comparisons with health care systems in other countries, pharmaceutical R&D, drug regulation, and the economics of medical research. He has written on the impact of the individual and employer mandates, subsidies and regulatory changes, as well as on changes made to the Medicare program. Previously, he conducted a detailed study of the cost structure of the specialty pharmacy industry in the wake of the 2003 Medicare Modernization Act; analyzed the growth of diagnostic imaging and cost changes resulting from improved technology; forecasted effects of Medicare payment changes on the long-term, acute care, and rehabilitation hospital industries; analyzed costs in pharmacy and physician practices; studied the impact of medication therapy management by pharmacists and the impact of government-sponsored medical research on the pharmaceutical industry.

Dr. Book earned a Ph.D. in economics and an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, an M.A. in computational and applied mathematics from Rice University, and a B.S. in mathematics and history from Duke University. He has also served as Senior Research Fellow in Health Economics at the Heritage Foundation, on the faculty of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces, as a Senior Associate for The Lewin Group, and as a Research Economist at the Center for Naval Analyses.