National Variation in Opioid Prescribing and Risk of Prolonged Use for Opioid-Naive Patients Treated in the Emergency Department for Ankle Sprains
Jump to Section Introduction Background Importance Goals of This Investigation Materials and Methods Selection of Participants Outcome Measures Primary Data Analysis Results Characteristics of Study Subjects Main Results Limitations Discussion Supplementary Data References

In this national study of 30,832 commercially insured, opioid-naive patients treated in the ED for ankle sprains in 2011 to 2015, we found that opioid prescribing was common and that there was significant patient- and state-level variation in prescribing patterns. Although prescribing is declining, 20% of opioid-naive ankle sprain patients were prescribed opioids in 2015, and the prescribing rate was greater than 10 times higher in some states versus others. This is concerning because ankle sprains are a minor, self-limited condition for which there is likely to be little clinical benefit from opioids.10x10Chang, A.K., Bijur, P.E., Esses, D. et al. Effect of a single dose of oral opioid and nonopioid analgesics on acute extremity pain in the emergency department: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. ; 318: 1661–1667

Google ScholarSee all References

Although there was significant variation in the intensity of prescriptions written, less than 5% of them were written above a clinically significant threshold of more than 225 MMEs. We found that prescriptions above this threshold were associated with nearly a 5-fold increased probability of transition to prolonged use. The interpretation of this finding is that for approximately every 26 patients exposed to greater than 225 MMEs (the equivalent of more than 30 tablets of oxycodone 5 mg) instead of 75 MMEs or less (equivalent to 10 tablets of oxycodone 5 mg), one additional patient transitioned to prolonged use. Although there is room for improvement in promoting opioid stewardship for this minor condition in the ED, the majority of prescriptions written were concordant with guidelines for a 3-day supply12x12Jeffery, M.M., Hooten, W.M., Hess, E.P. et al. Opioid prescribing for opioid-naive patients in emergency departments and other settings: characteristics of prescriptions and association with long-term use. Ann Emerg Med. ; 71: 326–336

Google ScholarSee all References, 13x13Hoppe, J.A., Nelson, L.S., Perrone, J. et al. Opioid prescribing in a cross section of US emergency departments. Ann Emerg Med. ; 66: 253–259.e251

Google ScholarSee all References, 30x30Weiner, S.G., Baker, O., Poon, S.J. et al. The effect of opioid prescribing guidelines on prescriptions by emergency physicians in Ohio. Ann Emerg Med. ; 70: 799–808

Google ScholarSee all References and had a low total MME of 100 or less. Therefore, more research is urgently needed to examine the relationship between total MMEs, prolonged use, and adverse events in other contexts, such as for postoperative pain, in which prescriptions are much larger.12x12Jeffery, M.M., Hooten, W.M., Hess, E.P. et al. Opioid prescribing for opioid-naive patients in emergency departments and other settings: characteristics of prescriptions and association with long-term use. Ann Emerg Med. ; 71: 326–336

Google ScholarSee all References

Our findings make several novel contributions to the increasing understanding of opioid prescribing and downstream risks. First, this analysis addresses limitations of previous analyses,5x5Shah, A. Characteristics of initial prescription episodes and likelihood of long-term opioid use—United States, 2006–2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. ; 66: 265–269

Google ScholarSee all References, 7x7Deyo, R.A., Hallvik, S.E., Hildebran, C. et al. Association between initial opioid prescribing patterns and subsequent long-term use among opioid-naïve patients: a statewide retrospective cohort study. J Gen Intern Med. ; 32: 21–27

Google ScholarSee all References in which prolonged opioid use could be caused by the development of a new chronic pain condition at the index prescription. By focusing on ankle sprains, an isolated acute injury that is readily apparent on examination and that rapidly improves within 2 weeks,9x9van Rijn, R.M., Van Os, A.G., Bernsen, R.M. et al. What is the clinical course of acute ankle sprains? a systematic literature review. Am J Med. ; 121: 324–331.e327

Google ScholarSee all References we decreased the likelihood that future opioid prescriptions beginning 1 month after injury were related to the index condition for which the original opioid was prescribed. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs rather than opioids are first-line treatment for ankle sprains37x37Ivins, D. Acute ankle sprain: an update. Am Fam Physician. ; 74: 1714–1720

Google ScholarSee all References, 38x38Ogilvie-Harris, D. and Gilbart, M. Treatment modalities for soft tissue injuries of the ankle: a critical review. Clin J Sport Med. ; 5: 175–186

Google ScholarSee all References and are just as effective as opioids for pain reduction.10x10Chang, A.K., Bijur, P.E., Esses, D. et al. Effect of a single dose of oral opioid and nonopioid analgesics on acute extremity pain in the emergency department: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. ; 318: 1661–1667

Google ScholarSee all References We confirmed that the majority of subsequent prescriptions were unlikely to be related to the initial ankle sprain or chronic ankle pain. This suggests that association between larger prescriptions and increased likelihood of prolonged use could be due to other factors such as patients requesting opioids as default pain control, or the development of dependence or misuse. More research is needed to better understand the underlying mechanisms between exposure to larger prescriptions and increased downstream prescription fills. Furthermore, our study population, with a median age of 39 years, was younger than previous populations that have been studied.5x5Shah, A. Characteristics of initial prescription episodes and likelihood of long-term opioid use—United States, 2006–2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. ; 66: 265–269

Google ScholarSee all References, 7x7Deyo, R.A., Hallvik, S.E., Hildebran, C. et al. Association between initial opioid prescribing patterns and subsequent long-term use among opioid-naïve patients: a statewide retrospective cohort study. J Gen Intern Med. ; 32: 21–27

Google ScholarSee all References For example, a previous rigorously conducted study using Medicare data6x6Barnett, M.L., Olenksi, A.R., and Jena, A.B. Opioid prescribing by emergency physicians and risk of long-term use. N Engl J Med. ; 376: 663–673

Google ScholarSee all References may have underestimated the relationship between initial prescription and long-term use because opioid prescriptions carry increased acute adverse effects for elderly patients and are generally prescribed with more caution in this population.39x39Chau, D.L., Walker, V., Pai, L. et al. Opiates and elderly: use and side effects. Clin Interv Aging. ; 3: 273–278

Google ScholarSee all References Additionally, younger and middle-aged populations are at highest risk of developing a new opioid use disorder after exposure to opioid prescriptions,40x40Edlund, M.J., Steffick, D., Hudson, T. et al. Risk factors for clinically recognized opioid abuse and dependence among veterans using opioids for chronic non-cancer pain. Pain. ; 129: 355–362

Google ScholarSee all References, 41x41Edlund, M.J., Martin, B.C., Russo, J.E. et al. The role of opioid prescription in incident opioid abuse and dependence among individuals with chronic non-cancer pain: the role of opioid prescription. Clin J Pain. ; 30: 557–564

Google ScholarSee all References and of diverting unused tablets.42x42Hall, A.J., Logan, J.E., Toblin, R.L. et al. Patterns of abuse among unintentional pharmaceutical overdose fatalities. JAMA. ; 300: 2613–2620

Google ScholarSee all References

Although our study was not designed to evaluate the association between being prescribed any opioid and prolonged use, our findings that patients prescribed opioids were more likely to go on to prolonged use compared with those who did not fill opioids are consistent with those of previous research6x6Barnett, M.L., Olenksi, A.R., and Jena, A.B. Opioid prescribing by emergency physicians and risk of long-term use. N Engl J Med. ; 376: 663–673

Google ScholarSee all References, 7x7Deyo, R.A., Hallvik, S.E., Hildebran, C. et al. Association between initial opioid prescribing patterns and subsequent long-term use among opioid-naïve patients: a statewide retrospective cohort study. J Gen Intern Med. ; 32: 21–27

Google ScholarSee all References, 43x43Hoppe, J.A., Kim, H., and Heard, K. Association of emergency department opioid initiation with recurrent opioid use. Ann Emerg Med. ; 65: 493–499.e494

Google ScholarSee all References, 44x44Alam, A., Gomes, T., Zheng, H. et al. Long-term analgesic use after low-risk surgery: a retrospective cohort study. Arch Intern Med. ; 172: 425–430

Google ScholarSee all References and support the importance of keeping opioid-naive patients opioid naive.

Second, our study contributes actionable evidence for policymakers, health systems, and clinicians. The significant statewide variation in ED ankle sprain opioid prescribing rates, with a concentration of higher prescribing in the southern United States, is consistent with geographic variation in prescribing for all indications.45x45Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. US prescrbing rate maps. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/maps/rxrate-maps.html. Accessed April 28, 2018.

Google ScholarSee all References By limiting this analysis to a single minor condition for which opioids are not first-line treatment, and adjusting for case mix, our study suggests ample opportunity to reduce excessive prescribing. More than 140,000 opioid tablets could have been prevented from entering the community if opioids had not been prescribed for our study sample. Substantial reductions in tablets being prescribed could be accomplished with efforts aimed at decreasing excessive variation in the prescribing rate and quantity supplied. This study demonstrates how well-defined prescribing indications can be used to promote benchmarks for opioid stewardship efforts. More research is needed to understand the patient, clinician, and environmental causes of this geographic variation and its contributions to the opioid epidemic.

Despite the fact that most current guidelines and prescription limit policies are written in regard to days supplied, there is a lack of specificity about how many tablets and MMEs of common opioid prescriptions such as hydrocodone or oxycodone constitute a day’s supply. This is problematic because we demonstrated that higher-risk prescriptions of greater than 225 MMEs could still fall within 5- or 7-day supply-limit policies aimed at promoting safer opioid prescribing. The days supplied can be specified by the prescriber according to the start and end date of the prescription, or, if this information is not provided, the pharmacist can calculate this before claim submission according to the brand label dosing instructions. Therefore, the number of tablets dispensed per prescription is subject to manipulation and can be quite variable for the same number of days supplied. Furthermore, the number of tablets is more clinically relevant. Large numbers of tablets are commonly left over after prescriptions for acute pain and surgical procedures and are poorly secured.46x46Hill, M.V., McMahon, M.L., Stucke, R.S. et al. Wide variation and excessive dosage of opioid prescriptions for common general surgical procedures. Ann Surg. ; 265: 709–714

Google ScholarSee all References, 47x47Bicket, M.C., Long, J.J., Pronovost, P.J. et al. Prescription opioid analgesics commonly unused after surgery: a systematic review. JAMA Surg. ; 152: 1066–1071

Google ScholarSee all References, 48x48Maughan, B.C., Hersh, E.V., Shofer, F.S. et al. Unused opioid analgesics and drug disposal following outpatient dental surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Drug Alcohol Depend. ; 168: 328–334

Google ScholarSee all References Decreasing the number of leftover tablets is critical to reducing diversion and overdoses.42x42Hall, A.J., Logan, J.E., Toblin, R.L. et al. Patterns of abuse among unintentional pharmaceutical overdose fatalities. JAMA. ; 300: 2613–2620

Google ScholarSee all References A promising approach is implementing lower electronic medical record order default opioid quantities (eg, 10 tablets), which was recently shown to significantly shift ED discharge prescribing patterns toward the default quantity.49x49Delgado, M., Shofer, F.S., Pate, M.S. et al. Association between electronic medical record implementation of default opioid prescription quantities on prescribing behavior in two emergency departments. J Gen Intern Med. ; 33: 409–411

Google ScholarSee all References More research is needed to investigate whether prescribing limit policies should incorporate total MMEs or quantity limits.

In summary, our findings continue to support efforts to keep opioid-naive patients opioid naive and to use the smallest quantities of opioid possible when clinically indicated for treatment of acute pain. Prescriptions exceeding 30 tablets of oxycodone 5 mg, or a total of 225 MMEs, were associated with transition to prolonged use 30 to 180 days after an initial encounter for ankle sprain among patients who had not previously filled an opioid prescription. Opioid prescribing for ankle sprains remains common and is highly variable at the state and patient level even though opioids are not first-line treatments for this condition. Given that the number of deaths from prescription and illicit opioids continues to increase, there are multiple opportunities for clinical, health system, and state-level interventions.