News Briefs – 01/03/2018
I always see lots of r/K related stories I think might interest the readers here, but I only have time to blog about a few, so here are some additional news stories that might be of interest. You can skim the titles and summaries, and click the links if they are of interest.

Harry Reid is dying of pancreatic cancer, “does not have long to live.” Is this coincidence? Has he been given a McCain sentence by Q’s forces? Is Cabal a cult which elicits such loyalty the followers can be ordered to sacrifice themselves to further Cabal control? Will Harry die at just the right moment to have his funeral stall some big event? Such weird times.

Illegal who killed Cpl. Ronil Singh has case suspended because the judge is not sure he is mentally competent.

A rumor floating around that supposedly will come out soon:

🚨BREAKING: According to sources Senator Elizabeth Warren has been on Risperdal since first being prescribed the drug in 2011. Risperdal is used to treat schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and irritability caused by autism…..developing pic.twitter.com/Lm2o5jLFck — Anonamis (@Anonamis6) January 1, 2019

NY's Black Caucus Got $500,000 To Give Scholarships To Underprivileged Youth. Instead, They Blew It On Limos, Luxury, And One Giant Partyhttps://t.co/2ncaW0DjhI 'I just sign the checks they give me' — Luke Rosiak (@lukerosiak) January 1, 2019

Following tweet reads, “Antifa protest in Paris. Not a single cop, no riot police, no tear gas, not a police stick, no armored vehicle, no flashball. What different treatment. It is revealing.”

Antifa protest in Paris. Not a single cop, no riot police, no tear gas, not a police stick, no armored vehicle, no flashball. What different treatment. It is revealing. #MacronDemission #GiletsJaunes pic.twitter.com/wBRHSmWsAD — Kali Mucho (@farming_trader) December 31, 2018

Russian Bomber flight may have disabled US Warship’s anti-missile defense system.

Many surveillance cameras watching sensitive government facilities in Australia are made in China. The deadly thing is these surveillance systems today are all internet enabled recording systems, or actual internet protocol cameras that could be auto-detectable on the internet the instant they are installed.

Sanders apologizes for women being sexually harassed in his campaign. And just like that people feel as if he has done something wrong, and he has shown why he will not pose a credible threat to Trump.

Dreamers in California were involved in Ballot Harvesting, affecting the election even though they are not citizens.

Islamic Party of Ontario about to become an official political party in Canada.

One analyst says Brexit deal is so damaged that he doesn’t think it is going to happen.

Yellow Vest organizer arrested for preparing a protest without properly informing the government.

Central American countries are helping Middle Easterners enter the US illegally.

Student uniforms in China come with a tracking device. It sounds like an RFID chip, designed to help an AI facial recognition at the entrance to a school, repeatedly, each day, teach itself to recognize students every time they enter and leave the school. But don’t be surprised if RFID readers begin getting covertly installed all over the city, in subways, in cabs, and on highways and roads, and these RFIDs begin getting put in regular clothes and shoes.

How California’s sanctuary laws protected two illegals, each named Gustavo, as they inflicted terror over a 200 mile span. Why is it if I announced I would thwart DEA investigations by breaking the law I would get charged with obstruction, but State officials endure no consequence?

One Russian GPS satellite went offline for an unexpected maintenance issue, leaving the Russian GPS system with only 23 of the 24 satellites needed for global coverage. Might Cabal use Russian GPS to avoid western tech for some reason?

Lindsey Graham says Obama used a “bullshit” excuse to pull us out of Iraq, and that created ISIS. Was Obama doing that a mistake, or part of a plan?

Ex-US Attorney finds it odd FBI is investigating Trump’s golf course green card situation and not ICE. We cannot know much at this point due to the nature of this game, but the big puzzle which haunts is, does Trump have control over the government, CIA, FBI, Intel, LE, etc? Either these anomalies are happening because Trump does control the machine, and they are an indication something big will happen at some point, or they are happening because Trump has not yet taken control of the machine, in which case they are a sign something big will happen at some point.

A clever AI was caught hiding data it used to cheat at a task, in a nearly imperceptible high frequency signal. What will be scary is when what is highly creative to us is common sense to AIs. It will be like the difference between a normal human and a psychopath, only exponentially more. They will not think like us.

CenturyLink outage supposedly tracked back to a single bad networking card. Seems strange a single component failure could cause such a massive prolonged outage.

Net Neutrality was repealed, Internet is now 40% faster.

Since Dr Who went SJW, it has hemorrhaged almost a quarter of its viewers.

Ultra liberals are already rebelling against House leadership.

Off Duty Georgia Officer shoots liquor store robber:

Good to examine and process, as the customer near the robber ran into the line of fire, as anybody would naturally. In reality once shots start, you should be conditioned to drop to the floor and crawl, but that only happens if you consciously train yourself to think that way, and drop at the sounds of the shots. All’s well that ends well.

Ex -NY Times Editor admits the paper’s unmistakably anti-Trump stance risks damaging its credibility.

Senate confirms more than 60 of Trump’s nominees.

The Dutch say they are done fighting ISIS, will pull out of Syrian engagement.

Brazil’s Bolsonaro vows to fight “Marxist Garbage,” and the “Climate Change Hoax.” Unrecognized is that the brainwashing requires people to only hear the narrative. Seeing a President espouse common sense can spontaneously deprogram a lot of society.

Along those lines, Hungarian Prime Minister says, “We don’t want to mix Islam with our culture, it’s not good.”

Kanye says he will perform in a MAGA hat from now on, just so everybody knows where he stands.

Papadopoulos says Cabal is hanging on by one small thread:

One question that congress has failed to force those responsible to answer:

Which western intelligence agency was Joseph Mifsud working for? That answer will force a halt to this entire dark chapter in American history. — George Papadopoulos (@GeorgePapa19) December 30, 2018

An interesting Archived Free Republic post that appears to be wiped from FR and the internet wayback machine, on Stefan Halper, and his work in Iran Contra, with the Bushes, setting up a dodgy bank in DC, and other things which tie him to Cabal in the 80’s. Also has the little nugget that his father in law was Deputy Director of Intelligence for the CIA, and his bank handled the loan on a political power-player’s San Diego house, where prostitute parties were thrown, around the time 41 prostitutes, at least one of them hired there for political bigwigs, were found dead in the area. A Task Force says many of the prostitutes were killed by two common criminals, but they lack the evidence to prove it and the cases are closed.

Anderson Cooper in 2011 on a massive investigation into Child Porn consumption in the Pentagon that wasn’t investigated:

Some declassified documents on the child porn investigation are here. 5200 names found with kiddie porn, only 3500 cross checked, 1700 not checked, and of it all, only 2 known arrests. Cooper was born into Cabal and put there as a controlled mouthpiece. The only reason he would do this piece was somebody on that list was causing a problem and needed to be reminded he/she could be destroyed utterly in a moment.

Trump rejects Democrat measure to reopen the government, says the border must be fixed. Democrat measure would have specifically refunded Homeland Security. If Trump is specifically using the shutdown to shutdown Homeland Security’s ability to provide intelligence to Cabal on Trump and Q’s activities to take them down, it would not be unreasonable to expect something to happen before the shutdown ends.

Trump emphasizes the Wall will help shutdown the flow of Heroin into the country. The most winning argument – he is doing this to protect Americans who are addicted and dying from overdosing on heroin. It uses mortal salience, as well as the amygdala connected to the crime and suffering associated with the word ‘heroin,” as well as the frustration with all previous leader’s failures to deal with the issue, and connects all of that negativity to whoever opposes Trump.

Just for kicks, google (Trump border heroin), and look at how at all the articles that come up list why the wall will not affect heroin distribution.

Trump placed a “Sanctions are Coming” poster on the table in front of him during his cabinet meeting Clearly intended as a message to somebody.

Curious tweet from the Navy:

#HealthyHolidays: Take care of each other, keep an eye on one another, and lean on friends and shipmates. If needed, don’t be afraid to turn to (or urge a friend to do so) our more robust professional services. https://t.co/RBe9MAwwQq — U.S. Navy (@USNavy) December 30, 2018

Note that Aircraft Carriers are designed to maintain operational security for intelligence operations on board while deployed in hostile territories rife with enemy intelligence forces trying to steal their secrets. Might that be why all our carriers were brought back home?

While Trump was visiting troops in Iraq, an Iranian delegation was striking a deal with Russia to help secure Iranian borders. I have very good reasons based on firsthand knowledge that Cabal does not own Russia, they are at least competitors if not in conflict, and Cabal fears letting Russia gain any insight into Cabal denied-areas. If Iran was owned by Cabal, the last nation they would go to for tech and assistance in securing Iranian borders would be Russia. They would fear Russia using the opportunity to gather intel within the denied area. This might increase the probability that Iran has been dealt with, and the Storm will now proceed. Add it to the pull out from Syria, the death of an anti-American Mullah, and Trump swinging by the region on a mysterious trip which might have allowed a stopover in Iran.

Trump says Kim Jong Un sent him another great letter, and he looks forward to them meeting.

POTUS tweets:

President and Mrs. Obama built/has a ten foot Wall around their D.C. mansion/compound. I agree, totally necessary for their safety and security. The U.S. needs the same thing, slightly larger version! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 30, 2018

People noticed the timestamp was 1 minute to 17:00

There was a lot of exculpatory evidence that Flynn had kept his former employers abreast of everything he was doing vis-a-vis Russia, which the Cabal intel leadership left over from Obama kept secret. He was attending briefings on what he should do before he met with anyone Russian, and he attended debriefings to inform US intel of what he had gotten out of the Russians. More evidence Flynn might actually have been working as an agent.

Tell others about r/K Theory, because it is always darkest before the dawn