Truth behind the Donald Trump quote from 1998 that's rapidly going viral
Before you go, we thought you'd like these...

On Tuesday, Donald Trump was elected the next president. Soon after, an apparent quote from a 1998 issue of People Magazine went viral on the Internet:

Credit: The Other 98%

In the quote, Trump calls voters the "dumbest group of voters in the country." He continued, saying that they'd believe anything Fox broadcasts.

Trump's alleged words began circulating the online sphere in October 2015, when Trump's campaign was beginning to be taken seriously. It has a watermark for The Other 98%, a popular left-leaning Facebook page, though New York Magazine reports that the above photo has now been removed from the page.

RELATED: See Trump elected president

22 PHOTOS Donald Trump becomes president-elect of the United States See Gallery Donald Trump becomes president-elect of the United States U.S. President-elect Donald Trump speaks at his election night rally in Manhattan, New York, U.S., November 9, 2016. (REUTERS/Carlo Allegri) Donald Trump supporters cheer as U.S. presidential election results are announced during a Republican watch party in Phoenix, Arizona, November 8, 2016. (REUTERS/Nancy Wiechec) Republican president-elect Donald Trump delivers his acceptance speech during his election night event at the New York Hilton Midtown in the early morning hours of November 9, 2016 in New York City. Donald Trump defeated Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton to become the 45th president of the United States. (Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images) Republican presidential elect Donald Trump (L) arrives to speak during election night at the New York Hilton Midtown in New York on November 9, 2016. / AFP / JIM WATSON (Photo credit should read JIM WATSON/AFP/Getty Images) U.S. President-elect Donald Trump and his campaign manager Kellyanne Conway greet supporters during his election night rally in Manhattan, New York, U.S., November 9, 2016. (REUTERS/Mike Segar/TPX IMAGES OF THE DAY) Eric Trump and Donald Trump Jr. look on as Republican presidential elect Donald Trump speaks during election night at the New York Hilton Midtown in New York on November 9, 2016. (JIM WATSON/AFP/Getty Images) US President-elect Donald Trump arrives at the New York Hilton Midtown in New York on November 8, 2016. Trump stunned America and the world Wednesday, riding a wave of populist resentment to defeat Hillary Clinton in the race to become the 45th president of the United States. (SAUL LOEB/AFP/Getty Images) Republican U.S. presidential nominee Donald Trump greets supporters at his election night rally in Manhattan, New York, U.S., November 9, 2016. (REUTERS/Carlo Allegri) Vice president-elect Mike Pence speaks to supporters at Republican president-elect Donald Trump's election night event at the New York Hilton Midtown in the early morning hours of November 9, 2016 in New York City. Donald Trump defeated Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton to become the 45th president of the United States. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images) Republican president-elect Donald Trump walks on stage with his son Barron Trump, wife Melania Trump and Ivanka Trump during his election night event at the New York Hilton Midtown in the early morning hours of November 9, 2016 in New York City. Donald Trump defeated Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton to become the 45th president of the United States. (Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images) A supporter celebrates as returns come in for Republican U.S. presidential nominee Donald Trump during an election night rally in Manhattan, New York, U.S., November 8, 2016. (REUTERS/Mike Segar) Chairman of the Republican National Committee (RNC) Reince Priebus hugs Republican presidential elect Donald Trump during election night at the New York Hilton Midtown in New York on November 9, 2016. (JIM WATSON/AFP/Getty Images) Former New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani arrives on stage with his wife Judith Nathan as U.S. President-elect Donald Trump addressed supporters at his election night rally in Manhattan, New York, U.S., November 9, 2016. (REUTERS/Brendan McDermid) US President-elect Donald Trump greets son Eric after speaking at the New York Hilton Midtown in New York on November 8, 2016. Trump stunned America and the world Wednesday, riding a wave of populist resentment to defeat Hillary Clinton in the race to become the 45th president of the United States. (SAUL LOEB/AFP/Getty Images) Vice president-elect Mike Pence walks on stage with his wife Karen Pence at Republican president-elect Donald Trump election night event at the New York Hilton Midtown in the early morning hours of November 9, 2016 in New York City. Americans went to the polls yesterday to choose between Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump and Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton as they go to the polls to vote for the next president of the United States. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images) US President-elect Donald Trump arrives with his son Baron and wife Melania at the New York Hilton Midtown in New York on November 8, 2016. Trump stunned America and the world Wednesday, riding a wave of populist resentment to defeat Hillary Clinton in the race to become the 45th president of the United States. (SAUL LOEB/AFP/Getty Images) U.S. President-elect Donald Trump, speaks an election night party at the Hilton Midtown hotel in New York, U.S., on Wednesday, Nov. 9, 2016. Trump was elected the 45th president of the United States in a repudiation of the political establishment that jolted financial markets and likely will reorder the nation's priorities and fundamentally alter America's relationship with the world. (Photographer: Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg via Getty Images) Melania Trump and Ivanka Trump look on as Republican presidential elect Donald Trump speaks during election night at the New York Hilton Midtown in New York on November 9, 2016. (JIM WATSON/AFP/Getty Images) U.S. President-elect Donald Trump arrives to speak during an election night party at the Hilton Midtown hotel in New York, U.S., on Wednesday, Nov. 9, 2016. Trump racked up victory after victory in key states Tuesday to put himself in position to threaten Hillary Clinton for the White House, with the results in three Rust-Belt states likely to determine the next U.S. president. (Photographer: Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg via Getty Images) Republican president-elect Donald Trump delivers his acceptance speech during his election night event at the New York Hilton Midtown in the early morning hours of November 9, 2016 in New York City. Donald Trump defeated Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton to become the 45th president of the United States. (Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images) Attendees cheer during an election night party for U.S. President-elect Donald Trump at the Hilton Midtown hotel in New York, U.S., on Wednesday, Nov. 9, 2016. Trump was elected the 45th president of the United States in a repudiation of the political establishment that jolted financial markets and likely will reorder the nation's priorities and fundamentally alter America's relationship with the world. (Photographer: Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg via Getty Images) Up Next See Gallery Discover More Like This HIDE CAPTION SHOW CAPTION of SEE ALL BACK TO SLIDE

As it turns out, though, the lines have been proven fake.

According to fact-checking site Snopes, they found no record of Trump saying this in 1998 or any other time according to their research.

In the 1980s and 1990s, Trump had talked about politics and the Republican party. For example, in 1988 he told Oprah he "probably" would never run for office. Eleven years later, he told Larry King that he was considering a political run, and that he was a registered Republican.

He has not, however, said those particular words bashing the party.

The image on the photo was from the 1988 Oprah interview:

Snopes also pointed out that in 1998, Fox News was not prominently watched. It was not known as the network it is today.

More from :

Donald Trump rape accuser cancels news conference over 'terrible threats'

Trump supporter Mike Huckabee calls GOP nominee a 'car wreck'

Melania Trump vows to combat cyberbullies