Hillary Clinton blames gutting of Voting Rights Act for her 2016 loss
SELMA, Ala. — Speaking Sunday at the historic Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church, former Secretary of State, First Lady, and 2016 Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton suggested a key Supreme Court decision may have cost her the White House.

Clinton was participating in an annual commemoration of the 1965 Selma to Montgomery marches that included the infamous “Bloody Sunday” where Civil Rights activists were viciously beaten by white police and protesters. The church where she spoke was the starting point for the marches, which were organized by a group that was pushing for voting rights and included Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Rep. John Lewis (D-Ala.). Clinton connected the push for voting rights to her 2016 presidential campaign.

“I was the first person who ran for president without the protection of the Voting Rights Act and I will tell you, it makes a really big difference,” Clinton said.

Clinton prefaced her comments by discussing the history of the Voting Rights Act, which was passed in 1965. The law required federal oversight of voting in nine southern states and an array of other jurisdictions that were found to have engaged in discriminatory practices. Clinton noted the law was reauthorized by Congress in 2006 while she was in the Senate.

“It was based on thousands and thousands of pages of testimony as to why we ... needed the Voting Rights Act. I thought it was a done deal, passed out of the Congress, signed by a Republican president, and then it found its way to the Supreme Court,” Clinton recounted.

23 PHOTOS Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump's final campaign days See Gallery Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump's final campaign days U.S. Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton acknowledges the crowd at a campaign rally in Cleveland, Ohio, U.S. November 6, 2016. REUTERS/Brian Snyder Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump speaks during a campaign rally in Leesburg, Virginia, U.S. November 7, 2016. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri U.S. Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump attends a campaign event in Wilmington, Ohio, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri U.S. Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton speaks at a campaign rally in Detroit, Michigan, U.S., November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Lucas Jackson Protest signs urging more civility in American politics flank a long row of signs supporting Republican President candidate Donald Trump in Hillsborough, North Carolina, U.S., November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Jonathan Drake A child dressed up as Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump waits at a campaign event in Hershey, Pennsylvania, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump attends a campaign event in Hershey, Pennsylvania, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri Jay Z and Beyonce share a kiss before Democratic U.S. presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speaks during a free campaign concert in Cleveland, Ohio, U.S., November 4 , 2016. REUTERS/Aaron Josefczyk Campaign Manager Kellyanne Conway speaks before Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump attends a campaign event in Hershey, Pennsylvania, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri A cardboard cutout of Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump is pictured on a the media charter plane with a countdown clock to the election while sitting on the tarmac at the airport in Tampa, Florida, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri U.S. President Barack Obama takes the stage to deliver remarks at a Hillary for America campaign event in support of Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton in Charlotte, North Carolina, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Jonathan Ernst U.S. President Barack Obama puffs out his cheeks at a baby as he greets people in the crowd after his remarks at a Hillary for America campaign event at the Fayetteville State University in Fayetteville, North Carolina, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Jonathan Ernst U.S. Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton and businessman/NBA Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban talk on her campaign plane in Moon, Pennsylvania, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Brian Snyder People listen as U.S. President Barack Obama delivers remarks at a Hillary for America campaign event at the Fayetteville State University in Fayetteville, North Carolina, U.S., November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Jonathan Ernst Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump attends a campaign event in Atkinson, New Hampshire, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri Ground crew wait with a set of bunting wrapped stairs for Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump to attend a campaign event in Wilmington, Ohio, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri U.S. President Barack Obama greets people before delivering remarks at a Hillary for America campaign event at the Fayetteville State University in Fayetteville, North Carolina, U.S., November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Jonathan Ernst Supporters pose with a large effigy of U.S. Republican presidential nominee, Donald Trump, while waiting to attend a campaign event with U.S. Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton in Detroit, Michigan, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Lucas Jackson A Donald Trump supporter disrupts remarks by U.S. President Barack Obama at a Hillary for America campaign event at the Fayetteville State University in Fayetteville, North Carolina, U.S., November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Jonathan Ernst U.S. Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton greets audience members at a campaign rally at Heinz Field in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Brian Snyder U.S. President Barack Obama takes the stage to deliver remarks at a Hillary for America campaign event at Fayetteville State University in Fayetteville, North Carolina, U.S., November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Jonathan Ernst Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump attends a campaign event in Wilmington, Ohio, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Carlo Allegri U.S. Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton walks through Heinz Field, home of the NFL's Pittsburgh Steelers, after a campaign rally in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, U.S. November 4, 2016. REUTERS/Brian Snyder Up Next See Gallery Discover More Like This HIDE CAPTION SHOW CAPTION of SEE ALL BACK TO SLIDE

Clinton said Republicans who wanted to “pull back rights” were behind the legal challenge that brought the 2013 Supreme Court decision, in which conservative justices struck down the core of the law.

“They found a receptive Supreme Court who came up with the most absurd decision,” said Clinton, adding, “They gutted the Voting Rights Act.”

Clinton, who won the popular vote in 2016 but lost the electoral college, specifically pointed to Wisconsin, one of three states where President Donlad Trunp won just over 75,000 more votes, a slim edge that was crucial to his electoral college victory.

“It doesn’t just make a difference in Alabama and Georgia. It made a difference in Wisconsin where the best studies that have been done said somewhere between 40,000 and 80,00” thousand people were turned away from the polls because of the color of their skin, because of their age, because of whatever excuse could be made up to stop a fellow American citizen from voting,” Clinton said.

Trump defeated Clinton by a little over 22,000 votes in Wisconsin and secured 10 electoral votes with the narrow win. Voters were turned away due to the state’s voter ID law, but estimates vary about the precise number of those affected.

Clinton concluded by turning to 2020 and arguing Democrats need to make it their “mission” to fight for voting rights.

“So, we’re looking towards a new presidential election — thank goodness — but it’s not going to make a difference if we don’t bring the lawsuits and win them ... if we don’t register everybody,” said Clinton.

However, one figure cited by Clinton to back up her argument does not appear to matching voting records.

“Just think about it, between 2012 — the prior presidential election where we still had the Voting Rights Act and 2016 … there were fewer voters registered in Georgia than there had been those prior four years,” Clinton said.

While Republicans in Georgia purged huge numbers of voters from the rolls following the Supreme Court decision, state records show there were more registered voters in 2016 than in 2012.

The church service was also attended by Sen. Cory Booker (D-NJ), who is running for president in 2020, and Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-OH), who said he will make a decision by the end of this month about whether to enter the race. Rev. Jesse Jackson, a close ally of Dr. King’s who ran for president as a Democrat in 1988 was also at the event.

Following the church service, Clinton, Booker, Brown, and Jackson all participated in a march to the Edmund Pettus Bridge where the “Bloody Sunday” attacks took place. All of the Democratic leaders at the ceremonies stressed the need to push for voting rights throughout the day.

More from :

Rudy Giuliani: Talks of Trump Tower Moscow may have continued throughout 2016 election

Mark Warner: 'It is a very real question' whether Trump acted as a Russian agent

Mueller report may be on the horizon after tumultuous year, with potentially huge consequences for the president