Archived Presidential White House Websites

White House websites are Presidential records. The files that make up a Presidential administration's website are preserved in our Executive Office of the President Electronic Records Archive, however, the user interface is not. The National Archives has taken an additional step to "freeze" White House websites for access purposes. These "frozen in time" sites are representations of the original websites and approximate the interface and functionality for easy access by the public. These websites are no longer updated so links to external websites and some internal pages will not work.

Barack Obama In January 2017, the White House websites were archived as a way to preserve the online presence of the administration of President Barack Obama. The website interfaces and functionality are preserved for use by the public through this portal and the official files making up the websites are archived in our Electronic Records Archives (ERA). Archived Obama White House Website

The archived White House website is a useful resource for photographs, speeches, press releases, and other public domain records of the Obama Presidency from 2009-2017.

The archived White House website is a useful resource for photographs, speeches, press releases, and other public domain records of the Obama Presidency from 2009-2017. Archived Obama White House "We the People" Website

The "We the People" site was a platform that allowed the public to create a petition online, share it, and collect signatures. If a petition gathered 100,000 signature in 30 days, the White House reviewed the petition and issued an official response.

The "We the People" site was a platform that allowed the public to create a petition online, share it, and collect signatures. If a petition gathered 100,000 signature in 30 days, the White House reviewed the petition and issued an official response. Archived Obama White House Open Website

The Open White House website provided access to a collection of open datasets.

The Open White House website provided access to a collection of open datasets. Archived Obama White House Let's Move Website

The "Let's Move" program was developed by First Lady Michelle Obama to solve the epidemic of childhood obesity within a generation.

George W. Bush In January 2009, the White House archived its website as a way to preserve the online presence of the Administration of President George W. Bush. Archived George W. Bush White House Website

This archived website provides access to content that is no longer available on the web and it is a useful resource for photographs, speeches, press releases, and other public records of the Bush Presidency from 2001-2009. Since the Archived White House Website is no longer updated, some links and other features may not work properly.