Paul J. Fishman
Mr. Fishman brings a wealth of experience from his public service and private practice. As the United States Attorney for the District of New Jersey from 2009 through 2017, he was the state's chief federal law enforcement officer. He supervised the work of approximately 150 attorneys and was responsible for all criminal and civil matters in which the federal government was involved. Those matters included healthcare fraud; cybercrime; national security; political corruption; securities, corporate, and bank fraud; the FCPA; defense contracting; environmental crimes; tax evasion; civil rights; money laundering; and gang violence and narcotics distribution.

Paul Fishman heads Arnold & Porter's Crisis Management and Strategic Response team and is a member of the firm's White Collar Defense, Commercial Litigation, Securities Enforcement, and Appellate practices. He focuses on counseling executives and boards of directors on complex and sensitive issues, and handles internal and government investigations, white collar criminal defense, commercial litigation, corporate compliance and governance, and appellate advocacy.

As United States Attorney, Mr. Fishman served in national level leadership positions with the Department of Justice. Appointed by both Attorneys General Eric Holder and Loretta Lynch to the Attorney General's Advisory Committee (AGAC) of US Attorneys, Mr. Fishman served as the Chair of that committee from 2011 to 2013. The AGAC provides advice and counsel to the Attorney General on policy, management, and operational issues affecting the Department of Justice and US Attorneys across the country.

Immediately prior to serving as US Attorney, Mr. Fishman was in private practice for 12 years where he handled a broad array of white collar and civil litigation matters, representing institutions and individuals and serving as a corporate monitor. In government service and in private practice, he gained wide-ranging experience across a number of diverse industries such as financial services; healthcare, pharmaceuticals, and life sciences; consumer products; manufacturing; transportation; energy; and defense and government contracting.

Mr. Fishman also is an accomplished trial and appellate lawyer with extensive experience in federal and state courts, as well as before arbitration panels.