Trump declares national emergency to access $3.6B for border wall
From Congress: $1.375 billion will come from the budget deal that both chambers of Congress passed on Thursday and Trump signed on Friday afternoon.

$1.375 billion will come from the budget deal that both chambers of Congress passed on Thursday and Trump signed on Friday afternoon. Through executive action: Roughly $600 million will be pulled from the Treasury's drug forfeiture fund, and $2.5 billion from the Department of Defense's drug interdiction program.

Roughly $600 million will be pulled from the Treasury's drug forfeiture fund, and $2.5 billion from the Department of Defense's drug interdiction program. From a national emergency declaration: Trump will declare a national emergency to free up about $3.6 billion from the DoD's military construction fund.

Mulvaney noted that no money is being pulled from the Texas disaster relief fund to build the wall.

Worth noting: $8 billion is more than the $5.7 billion Trump initially demanded from Democrats. A senior administration official said that they are freeing up an extra $2.3 billion to ensure that they have enough money to build the wall.

How it's playing: Trump's decision to invoke his emergency powers has drawn backlash from both Democrats and some Republicans who are concerned about the precedent it could set for future administrations.

What's next: The $3.6 billion being accessed through the emergency declaration will likely be challenged by the courts.

How it's playing: Trump's decision to invoke his emergency powers has drawn backlash from both Democrats and some Republicans who are concerned about the precedent it could set for future administrations.

Democratic leaders Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer said in a statement: "This is plainly a power grab by a disappointed President, who has gone outside the bounds of the law to try to get what he failed to achieve in the constitutional legislative process."

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, meanwhile, said: "President Trump’s decision to announce emergency action is the predictable and understandable consequence of Democrats’ decision to put partisan obstruction ahead of the national interest."

Go deeper: Why Trump is declaring an emergency