National Right to Life
This February 2, 2011 roll call dealt with an amendment offered by Senate Republican Leader Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) to completely repeal the “Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" (PPACA), the massive health care restructuring law that was enacted in March, 2010 (Public Law 111-148), sometimes referred to as "ObamaCare." As enacted, the PPACA contains multiple provisions that will, if fully implemented, result in government-imposed rationing of lifesaving medical care, which are documented here . In addition, the PPACA also contains multiple provisions authorizing federal subsidies for abortion, and additional provisions on which future abortion-expanding regulatory mandates may be based. The abortion-subsidizing and abortion-expanding provisions of the PPACA are thoroughly documented in materials posted on the NRLC website here . For these reasons, the National Right to Life Committee (NRLC) strongly supports repeal of the PPACA, as explained in a letter sent to U.S. House members, posted here , endorsing a similar repealer bill that passed the House on January 19, 2011. Unfortunately, the McConnell motion failed, 47 to 51 (60 votes were required to prevail), on a straight party-line vote. Roll call no. 9, February 2, 2011.

ent Protection and Affordable Care Act" or PPACA or "ObamaCare") for the remainder of Fiscal Year 2011. As enacted, the PPACA contains multiple provisions that will, if fully implemented, result in government-imposed rationing of lifesaving medical care, which are documented here . In addition, the PPACA also contains multiple provisions authorizing federal subsidies for abortion, and additional provisions on which future abortion-expanding regulatory mandates may be based. The abortion-subsidizing and abortion-expanding provisions of the health care law are thoroughly documented in materials posted on the NRLC website here . NRLC strongly supported H. Con. Res. 35, but it failed in the Senate on this roll call on April 14, 2011. The bill was supported by 47 senators, all Republicans, and opposed by 53 senators (51 Democrats and two independents who caucus with the Democrats). (60 votes were required for approval.) Roll call no. 59.

When President Obama's health care legislation ("ObamaCare") was under consideration in the Senate in 2009, NRLC warned that a provision dealing with “preventive health services” would empower the Secretary of Health and Human Services to mandate that most health plans cover any medical service, including abortion, merely by adding the service to an expandable list. Unfortunately, the ObamaCare law was enacted in 2010, containing the "preventive services" provision and many other objectionable provisions. The Administration issued a decree in August, 2011, mandating coverage of all FDA-approved birth control methods – a move that engendered vigorous protests from many religious bodies. NRLC again warned that the Administration could employ the same legal authority to issue a future mandate that would require most health plans to cover all abortions. An NRLC-endorsed bill, the Respect for Rights of Conscience Act (H.R. 1179, S. 1467), would go to the heart of the problem by amending the ObamaCare law itself to allow employers and insurers to decline to cover "items or services" to which they have a religious or moral objection, as long as other anti-discrimination laws are observed. In February, 2012, pro-life Senator Roy Blunt (R-Mo.) offered S. 1467 in the form of an amendment to a pending highway bill. On March 1, 2012, the Senate tabled (killed) the Blunt Amendment, by a vote of 51 to 48 (Senate Roll Call No. 24). Fifty Democrats and one Republican voted to kill the pro-life amendment. Forty-five Republicans and three Democrats voted to advance the amendment.

On July 17, 2012, the U.S. Senate conducted a vote on whether to take up S. 3369, a bill strongly opposed by NRLC. S. 3369, which carries the misleading label of the "DISCLOSE Act," is one of a long series of bills that are intended to reduce the amount of independent political speech about members of Congress, candidates for Congress, and ongoing developments in Congress. In a July 13, 2012 letter to senators opposing S. 3369, NRLC said, "Enactment of the DISCLOSE Act would not be a curb on corruption, but itself a type of corruption – an abuse of the lawmaking power, by which incumbent lawmakers employ the threat of criminal sanctions, among other deterrents, to reduce the amount of private speech regarding the actions of the lawmakers themselves. . . [it is a] blatant political attack on the First Amendment rights of NRLC, our state affiliates, and our members and donors." The entire letter is posted here. This was a procedural motion (cloture motion) on which 60 votes were required, and the NRLC-supported vote was "no." The tally was 53 in favor and 45 opposed, which was 7 short of the 60 votes required, so further action on the bill was blocked. The vote was strictly along party lines, with Democrats voting to advance the bill and Republicans to block it. Roll call no. 180.