McCain, Obama get closer on Afghanistan

CLOSE Instead of lowering the number of troops to 5,500 by the end of the year, President Obama will keep 8,400 troops there until the end of his administration. He hopes this will lay a solid foundation for his successor. USA TODAY

After celebrating the Fourth of July with U.S. troops in Afghanistan, U.S. Sen. John McCain called on President Barack Obama to back off a plan to reduce troop numbers from more than 9,000 to 5,500 by the end of the year.

Two days later, Obama largely complied.

On Wednesday, Obama announced that even though the official combat mission ended in December 2014, and despite progress made in the ongoing fight against the Taliban, "the security situation in Afghanistan remains precarious."

The president scrapped the idea of reducing the level to 5,500 troops by 2017 and instead has decided to leave approximately 8,400 troops in Afghanistan for the remainder of his administration.

"All the military leaders had recommended 9,800, so it is hard to understand why he would cut to 8,400," McCain, the U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee chairman and an Arizona Republican, told The Arizona Republic. "But having 8,400 is better than what he had planned on, which was way down around 5,500.

"So this is the right thing to do. It's just not enough. When you have a number lower than that recommended by our leaders, you put our men and women who are fighting there at greater risk."

McCain said Obama's decision is a signal to the enemies of the U.S.-backed Afghan government that the U.S. is sticking around for a while. It also sends a signal to the Pakistani leaders who McCain has been trying to persuade to crack down on the terrorist Haqqani network, which crosses the border into Afghanistan to stage attacks in support of the Taliban.

Eliminating the Haqqani network and its sanctuary in Pakistan is crucial to the ultimate defeat of the Taliban in Afghanistan, he said.

"I think this sends a message to them that we're going to be there in fairly significant force at least until some time in the next presidency," McCain said. "That will have a beneficial effect on the Afghans, and it also could have an effect on the possibility that Pakistan may act against the Haqqani network. The next president will have to make decisions after the next election."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

In his Wednesday announcement, Obama said his troop decision "ensures that my successor has a solid foundation for continued progress in Afghanistan as well as the flexibility to address the threat of terrorism as it evolves."

"The narrow missions assigned to our forces will not change. They remain focused on supporting Afghan forces and going after terrorists," Obama said from the White House's Roosevelt Room. "But maintaining our forces at this specific level — based on our assessment of the security conditions and the strength of Afghan forces — will allow us to continue to provide tailored support to help Afghan forces continue to improve."

In other developments:

• Meanwhile, McCain's rivalry with former state Sen. Kelli Ward of Lake Havasu City, one of his three opponents in Arizona's Aug. 30 GOP primary, continues to play out in online videos.

The latest McCain video mocks Ward for telling a radio interviewer on June 28 that her response to the terrorist Islamic State, or ISIS, would be "restraint and realism in the foreign policy arena."

Stephen Sebastian, a Ward campaign spokesman, responded that the McCain campaign is taking her words out of context.

"Senator Ward believes in Reagan’s 'Peace Through Strength' as well as 'realism and restraint,' " Sebastian said in an emailed statement. "As a military wife whose husband has served in Iraq, Dr. Ward said she will support military engagement 'only as a last resort when national security is clearly at stake, only when Constitutionally approved by Congress, and only when there is a real strategy for victory, not expensive occupations and endless nation-building.'"

Sebastian added: "Senator McCain has proposed bombing, invading, or attacking at least 13 countries in recent years."

The Ward campaign also pointed to its June video in which Ward accuses McCain of being "directly responsible" for ISIS.

"You see, John McCain, Barack Obama and (former Secretary of State) Hillary Clinton have been partners in creating and arming ISIS," Ward says in the video.

Lorna Romero, McCain's campaign communications director, dismissed Ward's claims as conspiratorial nonsense.

“These allegations come from a person who spent Arizona taxpayer dollars to discuss the ‘chemtrails’ conspiracy theory and publicly entertained actual 'black helicopters' circling Phoenix," Romero said in an emailed statement to The Republic.

• Alex Meluskey, another of McCain's Republican challenger, printed 1 million copies of a newspaper called "The Arizona Statesmen" that was inserted into The Republic and other papers around the state, his campaign said.

Subtitled "The Last Word in Arizona Politics," the 12-page publication features stories detailing the Scottsdale "tea party" activist's family history and marriage and highlights his conservative positions on issues such as border security and immigration, the Second Amendment, abortion rights, veterans and the war on terrorism. One half page is devoted to his "Contract with America's Veterans and their Families."

There also are jabs at McCain and Ward throughout the issue.

The Meluskey campaign says it is pleased with the response and plans to print another 1 million copies.

"We've seen bumps in fundraising, volunteer sign-ups, vote pledges and social media activity," said Joel Andres Frewa, Meluskey's communications director.

Nowicki is The Republic's national political reporter. Follow him on Twitter at @dannowicki and on his official Facebook page.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/29Eeh3V