Tempe ban on smoking with kids in the car takes effect
CLOSE City of Tempe bans smoking in car with kids Phoenix

In October, the city implemented a distracted-driving ordinance. The ordinance doesn't mean that drivers can't text, talk or check Facebook with their cellphones while cruising around the city. But if an officer witnesses them swerve or drive erratically while holding a phone, they could get a ticket. Tempe also became one of the first municipalities in the state to adopt a law banning drivers from smoking with a child in the car. (Photo: Getty Images) Story Highlights Tempe's law against smoking with kids in the car took effect over the weekend

Drivers could be fined $50 for a first offense and $100 for subsequent violations

Police can only ticket a driver for smoking if they pull them over first for another offense

Drivers who smoke with kids in the car now risk a fine when driving around Tempe.

A new law designed to encourage drivers to refrain from smoking when they have children in the backseat took effect on Saturday.

Last month, Tempe City Council passed an ordinance to fine drivers $50 for a first offense and $100 for subsequent violations if they smoke while a child is in the car.

RELATED: Tempe approves fines for smoking in cars with kids

MORE: Tempe council divided over fining drivers for cellphones

The ordinance applies to smokers of all types, including e-cigarette smokers.

However, police cannot pull over a driver solely for smoking with a child in the car.

Police can issue a ticket only if drivers are stopped for another infraction, such as speeding, and have a lit cigarette with a minor present. Officers could cite drivers for each child in the vehicle.

A judge could waive the fine for first-time offenders if they enroll in a smoking-cessation program.

PREVIOUSLY: Tempe bans e-cigarette use in public

Councilman David Schapira, who pushed for the ordinance as one of his first priorities when he took office in January, tried and failed each year he proposed a similar law during his tenure in the state Legislature.

"Six years at the Legislature, and I never even got a hearing," Schapira said. "In six months on the council, it's already a law."

Critics had argued the law would have little effect on protecting a child's health since a person who smokes in the car likely smokes at home.

Tempe was poised to become the first city in Arizona to pass such an ordinance.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

But Kingman's City Council passed a nearly identical law two days before Tempe.

Several states, including California, Utah and Oregon, have laws that prohibit smoking with kids in cars. Various cities and counties in at least five other states also have similar laws on the books.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1N1uzvN