How many MS-13 gang members are in the United States?
CLOSE Arizona Congresswoman Martha McSally said 10,000 MS-13 members are in the U.S. Is she right?

U.S. Rep. Martha McSally, who is running in the Republican primary for the U.S. Senate seat held by Jeff Flake, has called to boost border security. (Photo: U.S. House of Representatives)

THE MEDIA: Radio.

WHO SAID IT: Martha McSally.

OFFICE: Representative, Arizona’s 2nd Congressional District.

PARTY: Republican.

THE COMMENT: “I’m one of the few that represent a border district and so we’re talking about 10,000 MS-13 gang members throughout our country in 40 states and Washington, D.C. area.”

THE FORUM: A KTAR News (92.3 FM) Arizona Morning News radio show interview on Feb. 7.

WHAT WE'RE LOOKING AT: If there are 10,000 MS-13 gang members in 40 states and Washington, D.C.

ANALYSIS: Rep. Martha McSally, who is running in the Republican primary for the U.S. Senate seat now held by Jeff Flake, spoke about a meeting with President Donald Trump to talk about border security on a KTAR News (92.3 FM) Arizona Morning News radio show.

CLOSE President Trump railed against MS-13 in his 2018 State of the Union address, but what is MS-13? Wochit

As part of that, McSally — who has called to increase border security — said there are 10,000 MS-13 gang members in 40 states and Washington, D.C.

Mara Salvatrucha, also known as MS-13, is one of the world's largest street gangs.

The transnational gang first formed in the 1980s in Los Angeles and is known internationally for acts of extreme violence — drive-by shootings, murders and smuggling drugs into the United States.

However, the gang's presence is more of a force in Central America — mainly Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador.

McSally isn't the only person who has used this number to highlight the importance of border security — U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Trump himself have used it.

McSally’s office said the congresswoman was referring to an April 2017 Justice Department fact sheet on MS-13.

The 2009 National Gang Threat Assessment states there were an estimated 8,000-10,000 MS-13 gang members nationally. (Photo: THe Republic)

The number on the fact sheet came from the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s National Gang Threat Assessment, a report compiled by the National Gang Intelligence Center that details the threat of gangs in the United States.

However, the FBI's most recent report, from 2015, does not state that there are 10,000 MS-13 gang members, nor does it include the agency's methodology for tracking gang members across the country.

The report is an "an overview of current gang activities and trends in the United States," put together by the National Alliance of Gang Investigators' Associations (NAGI) and the FBI Safe Streets and Gang Unit.

The 68-page document provides an overview of street gangs, prison gangs and outlaw motorcycle groups and the role technology plays in gang activities.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-332-6733. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Although the figure isn't in the FBI's latest report, it is in a gang assessment from eight years ago.

The 2009 National Gang Threat Assessment states there were an estimated 8,000-10,000 MS-13 gang members nationally. The main sources of that information, according to the assessment, were 3,052 responding law enforcement agencies, other federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies and gang-related federal criminal investigative information.

The definition of "gang" varied by geographic area. The FBI's definition is "three or more persons with a common identifying sign, symbol, or name, who individually or collectively engage in criminal activity that creates an atmosphere of fear and intimidation."

But in Arizona, for example, a criminal street gang is defined as an "ongoing formal or informal association of persons in which members or associates individually or collectively engage in the commission, attempted commission, facilitation or solicitation of any felony act and that has at least one individual who is a criminal street gang member."

Some states, like Texas, define a criminal street gang as a group that "continuously or regularly associate(s) in the commission of criminal activities.”

The FBI declined to comment beyond the number listed in the 2009 report.

A study by InSight Crime, an organization that researches organized crime in the Caribbean and Latin America, reported the number of MS-13 members in the United States has fluctuated between 8,000 and 10,000 for years, citing the FBI's 2009 data.

“Estimates of the size and scope of the gang vary widely,” the report states. “For many reasons, those variations are impossible to reconcile, but the wildly divergent estimates have helped transform the gang into a political football to be used by law enforcement agencies and politicians alike for their own ends.”

The InSight Crime report highlights issues in tracking MS-13 membership nationally and internationally, and emphasizes that the root of the problem is based on law enforcement agencies' different definitions of the word “gang."

One researcher said she has looked into how the figure was calculated, but hasn’t found a concrete answer.

If the figure is correct, “that doesn’t necessarily mean that these 10,000 individuals are murdering people each day,” said Lidia E. Nuño, an assistant criminal justice professor at California State University at Fullerton.

But in reality, she said it could be more than 10,000 or less than 10,000.

Nuño added that in addition to jurisdictions in the country counting gang members differently, there's a potential of double-counting gang members or counting ones who are no longer active in the gang.

“(Jurisdictions are) not measuring these with the same standards of measurement,” Nuño said.

BOTTOM LINE: Because there are varying factors when tracking gang members across the country and because the FBI hasn't updated the figure since 2009, McSally's claim could be true, but it could also be vastly off the mark.

THE FINDING: No stars — Inconclusive.

SOURCES: Interview with Lidia E. Nuño, an assistant criminal justice professor at California State University, Fullerton; Correspondence with representatives of InSight Crime and Arizona State University's Criminology and Criminal Justice; The National Gang Intelligence Center. "2015 National Gang Threat Assessment." https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/national-gang-report-2015.pdf/view. The National Gang Intelligence Center. "2009 National Gang Threat Assessment." https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/stats-services-publications-national-gang-threat-assessment-2009-pdf/view. April 2017 Department of Justice, "DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE FACT SHEET ON MS-13." https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/file/958481/download.

READ MORE:

For more stories that matter, subscribe to azcentral.com.

Read or Share this story: https://azc.cc/2GFJoeZ