Migrant caravan tracker: Group finds food, shelter, support from Mexico’s political left
CLOSE Thousands of Central American migrants traveling in a caravan that Trump wants to stop at the U.S. border begin arriving in Juchitan de Zaragoza, Mexico. Nick Oza, The Republic | azcentral.com

Central American migrants traveling in a caravan headed for the U.S. reached the town of Santiago Niltepec in the state of Oaxaca, Oct. 30, 2018. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

The thousands of Central American migrants traveling in a caravan that President Donald Trump wants stopped before it reaches the U.S. border began arriving in the city of Juchitán de Zaragoza before dawn Tuesday, in the state of Oaxaca in southern Mexico.

They arrived from the town of Santiago Niltepec about 30 miles to the south. For the first time, buses were used to transport women and children.

The president of the local municipality converted a vacant bus station into a temporary shelter for the migrants, providing the best accommodations the migrants have had so far.

Volunteers set up huge tanks to provide water for drinking, teeth brushing and bathing. They set up tarps to provide shade and hauled in banks of portable toilets.

A truck arrived packed with bags of snacks, water, juice, and candy. People on the truck passed out cups of coffee and bread.

The municipal president belongs to the left-leaning Morena party, the same political party as Andrés Manuel Lópes Obrador, who was elected president of Mexico in July. He takes office in December.

The way the municipal president has used her government's resources to help the migrants is at odds with outgoing President Enrique Peña Nieto, who has been criticized for doing Trump's bidding by trying to stop the caravan from reaching the United States.

The municipal president’s offer of assistance may also offer a window into the way Lopez Obrador will view future caravans.

Pueblo Sin Fronteras, the group supporting the caravan, has said it hopes to hold meetings in the Mexican capital with federal lawmakers and authorities as well as representatives of the incoming government that takes office Dec. 1 to discuss migrants’ rights and the caravan’s future.

But Mexican officials seem intent only on seeing the caravan melt away as it moves through the country. The government regularly reports the number of migrants who have applied for refugee status or agreed for assisted bus trips back to their home countries.

Meanwhile, more than 1,000 migrants in a second caravan that forged its way across the river from Guatemala began walking through southern Mexico on Tuesday and reached the city of Tapachula – some 250 miles behind the larger group and more than 1,000 miles from the closest U.S.-Mexico border, the AP reported Tuesday.

Trump has kept up a drumbeat of tweets in warning the caravan not to approach the U.S.-Mexico border.

Wrote Trump on Monday: “Please go back, you will not be admitted into the United States unless you go through the legal process. This is an invasion of our Country and our Military is waiting for you!”

Trump has turned the migrant caravan into a midterm elections campaign issue.

On Monday, the Pentagon said it was going to deploy at least 5,200 active-duty troops to the U.S.-Mexico border to prevent caravan migrants from illegally entering the country.

The Associated Press contributed

READ MORE:

For more stories that matter, subscribe to azcentral.com.

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2018/10/30/migrant-caravan-tracker-mexico-political-left-lends-support-immigration-trump-us-mexico-border/1824015002/