HUD approves Puerto Rico hurricane recovery plan, allows $8.2 billion to aid rebuilding effort
HUD Secretary Ben Carson announced the approval Thursday evening of the latest Puerto Rico recovery plan, allowing the island devastated by Hurricane Maria in 2017 to start drawing on $8.2 billion for housing, economic revitalization and infrastructure.

“I think this is a real opportunity for Puerto Rico to rebuild in a way that will really [allow it to] be the crown jewel of the Caribbean,” Carson said in an interview.

The money — which will likely take several years to spend — had been previously approved by Congress, but the plan itself still needed approval by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, which was slowed by the 35-day partial federal government shutdown.

The announcement came one week after U.S. Rep. Darren Soto, D-Kissimmee, demanded to know why the recovery funds were taking so long to reach the island.

“Finally, we see some real investment coming a year and a half after Hurricane Maria with this $8.2 billion HUD disbursement,” he said late Thursday. “It’s a shame that it took months of pressure for the Trump administration to show some urgency in deploying reconstruction dollars to Puerto Rico as they desperately struggle to recover from the deadliest natural disaster in modern history.”

HUD said the funds will continue progress made by an initial $1.5 billion approved last summer, which started to flow to the island just within the past month. But Carson cautioned that the spending will come with “heightened scrutiny” on its use.

“We have recognized that there have been some financial irregularities over the history of Puerto Rico and have put some unprecedented financial controls in place to make sure that taxpayer funds are protected, while at the same time providing Puerto Rico with the necessary funding in order to rebuild,” he said.

Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico in September 2017 as a Category 4 storm, with recorded winds up to 155 miles an hour, river surges up to 47 feet, massive mudslides, and localized catastrophic flooding reaching up to 38 inches. Sixty-four people died during the storm itself and some 2,900 more perished due to the resulting lack of power, contaminated water sources and limited access to medical care.

Total damage from the storm throughout the Caribbean was estimated at more than $91 billion, most of it in Puerto Rico.

The Puerto Rican government submitted a detailed plan to HUD on how it will use the money.

Carlos Mercader, executive director of the Puerto Rico Federal Affairs Administration, said the island’s government was thankful that the funds are being disbursed, despite it being over a year after they had been appropriated.

“This is a home run because what it demonstrates is the collaboration we’ve had between the federal government and the government of Puerto Rico,” Mercader said. “And we’re thankful to Secretary Carson for his diligent work.”

Puerto Rico Gov. Ricardo Rosselló is determined to meet the financial controls set by HUD, Mercader added — a position the governor himself addressed in a tweet Thursday evening:

“We are committed to have the most transparent recovery process in the history of the United States,” Rosselló wrote. “As we keep moving forward, our teams will make sure all controls are in place and we protect the American taxpayer while #PuertoRico rebuilds stronger than ever.”

Mercader said the funds would help boost Puerto Rico’s low-income housing programs, move homes away from flood-prone areas and make land titles available for residents.

HUD is still reviewing plans for additional recovery aid that will target the island’s vulnerable electrical grid — the source of prolonged power outages after the hurricane.

ksantich@orlandosentinel.com or bpadro@orlandosentinel.com. Please consider supporting local journalism by purchasing a digital subscription to the Orlando Sentinel.