Who was Winston Churchill and why was he important?
Image copyright PA Image caption Winston Churchill giving a speech in 1945

Special events are taking place on Friday to mark the 50th anniversary of Winston Churchill's state funeral. But who was he and why was he important?

Why was Churchill so important?

Winston Churchill was British prime minister from 1940-1945 and again between 1951 and 1955.

He is best remembered for successfully leading Britain through World War Two.

He was famous for his inspiring speeches, and for his refusal to give in, even when things were going badly.

Many people consider him the greatest Briton of all time and he's almost certainly the most famous British prime minister.

Image copyright AP Image caption Winston Churchill gives his famous V for Victory salute

Taken prisoner in Africa

Churchill was born in 1874. He became a Member of Parliament (MP) in 1900.

Before that, he spent time in the army and also as a war reporter.

In 1899, he travelled to South Africa to report on the Boer War.

He was captured and made a prisoner-of-war, but he managed to escape - his adventure made him famous back home in Britain.

Image copyright AP Image caption Winston Churchill loved to paint - he created more than 500 paintings

Fighting the Nazis

Before World War Two started in 1939, he had warned about the rise of Hitler and the Nazis in Germany.

He became British prime minister in 1940 after then-leader Neville Chamberlain resigned.

Churchill's refusal to surrender to Nazi Germany inspired the country.

Image copyright PA Image caption Winston Churchill's state funeral in 1965

Churchill lost power after World War Two ended in 1945.

But he became prime minister again in 1951, before resigning four years later.

Churchill died on 24 January 1965 and was given a state funeral, an honour saved only for kings and queens, and sometimes other people of the highest national importance.

Churchill's funeral was the last state funeral held in Britain.