Kim Kardashian West is a model, actress, entrepreneur, socialite and star of the reality show 'Keeping Up with the Kardashians.' She is married to rapper Kanye West.

Who Is Kim Kardashian West? Kim Kardashian West was born on October 21, 1980, in Beverly Hills, California. She was catapulted into fame when a scandalous video showcasing her sexual exploits with former boyfriend, rapper Ray J., was leaked online. Since then she has been able to capitalize on her fame with her curvaceous style, a hit reality TV show, and a string of workout DVDs. In 2006, she opened the boutique D-A-S-H with her sisters, Kourtney and Khloé. In 2014 she famously married rapper Kanye West.

Growing Up in Beverly Hills Born on October 21, 1980, in Beverly Hills, California, Kim Noel Kardashian West is a model, reality television star, entrepreneur and socialite. She is the second of four children born to the late Robert Kardashian and his first wife, Kris. She was catapulted into fame when a scandalous video showcasing her sexual exploits with former boyfriend, rapper Ray J., was leaked online. Since then she has been able to capitalize on her fame with her curvaceous style, a hit reality TV show, and a string of workout DVDs. In 2006, she opened the boutique D-A-S-H with her sisters, Kourtney and Khloé. ADVERTISEMENT Thanks for watching! Visit Website ADVERTISEMENT Thanks for watching! Visit Website ADVERTISEMENT Thanks for watching! Visit Website Kardashian, it seems, is almost wired for fame. A preschool classmate of Paris Hilton, she grew up under the glare and privilege of Beverly Hills, getting an up-close view of Hollywood's pleasures and pitfalls. Her father, the founder of Movie Tunes, Inc., a music and marketing company, was a prominent attorney. A close friend for many years of O.J. Simpson, Robert was one of the football star's defense lawyers during his murder trial. In fact, it was the attorney's home that Simpson left during the famous Ford Bronco police chase shortly before his arrest. Robert Kardashian died from cancer of the esophagus in October 2003. Kardashian's mother, Kris, a socialite and former children's boutique shop owner, now manages her daughter's career, and is also involved in business management deals with the rest of her other famous children. She and Robert divorced in 1989. According to Kardashian, her childhood was hardly the stuff of stardom. Sunday church was regular part of family life. So was the expectation among the Kardashian children that, once they each reached the age of 18, living off the family dime was no longer an option. While attending an exclusive Catholic girls' high school, Kim Kardashian worked for her father's company. When he died, the corporation was left to her and her siblings. They've since sold it. "We grew up with privilege so we knew our standards were high ... [and] if we wanted to keep it, we had to work hard," she once said. For Kim Kardashian, that has translated into a number of different things, from wardrobe stylist to actress. She's even stepped into the business world herself, forming Kimsaprincess Productions, LLC., which has seen the release of three successful workout videos starring—you guessed it—Kim Kardashian. In 2006, Kardashian went back into business with her family when she and her two sisters opened the boutique shop D-A-S-H (derived from the family's last name) in Calabasas, California. A showcase of the owners' own personal styles, the store featured some of the sisters' favorite American designers. The boutique later expanded its business with shop openings in Miami, New York City, and a pop up in Southampton in 2014. However, the NYC locale closed in December 2016, and in April 2018 the sisters announced they were shuttering the business altogether.

Infamous Sex Video Despite her business endeavors, it was her infamous sex video she made with R&B singer Ray J. that catapulted her to superstardom. In early 2007, a video of Kardashian and the rapper in bed made it into the hands of Vivid Entertainment, a large adult film company. Vivid, which paid $1 million for rights to the 30-minute tape, widely promoted the release of the video, which it called Kim Kardashian Superstar. Kardashian quickly countered with legal action, suing for invasion of privacy. But in May 2007, three months after the video's debut, she agreed to a $5 million settlement. "It definitely puts you in a category that I would wish upon no one," Kim Kardashian later said on The Tyra Banks Show. "Your reputation is all that you have, and if people prejudge you over something that you did, than that kind of sticks with you a long time." Photo: Michael Loccisano_Getty Images

Reality TV Star: 'Keeping Up with the Kardashians' Around the time of the video's release, Kardashian started making her way onto the television screen for something completely different, when the E! Network debuted a new reality TV series called Keeping up with the Kardashians. Produced by American Idol host Ryan Seacrest, the show follows the lives of Kim; her sisters, Kourtney and Khloé; brother Robert Jr.; mother Kris Jenner; stepfather Bruce Jenner (now referred to as Caitlyn); and the two young daughters of Kris and Bruce, Kendall and Kylie. In one memorable episode from the first season, Kim discusses with her family an offer from Playboy to appear nude in the magazine. Kardashian eventually agreed to do it and bared it all for the publication in the December 2007 issue. Her decision to appear in the magazine represents just how far Kardashian has come in terms of confidence about her own body. A big part of her brand is her curves, something she wasn't always so enamored with, she admits. "I used to say my prayers before bed, and pray I would stop developing," she told Playboy. That's apparently changed. "You always see the typical skinny models and I'm not that and I'm proud not to be that," she stated following the shoot. Since then, Kim Kardashian's celebrity status has only grown. The woman who became the most Googled celebrity in 2008, ending Britney Spears's four-year-run, signed on to become the face of Bongo Jeans in 2008. In March 2009, Kardashian helped launch a shoe shopping service, ShoeDazzle, that taps into the expertise of Hollywood's most revered stylists. In addition she's launched her own perfume line, a Sears fashion collection with Kourtney and Khloe, Kardashian-branded tanning products, and more. With millions of followers on social media, she receives between $10,000 to $20,000 per post when promoting products for various brands.