Maryland Judiciary Case Search Disclaimer
In Maryland, laws exist to ensure that state government is open and that the public has access to appropriate records and information in its possession. At the same time, both state and federal laws provide exceptions that serve various needs, including the privacy of individuals. While much information is made available to the public through this site, some information may be restricted or require registration to obtain. All of the information collected at this site becomes a public record that may be subject to inspection and copying by members of the public, unless an exemption in law exists. The information available through the Maryland Judiciary Case Search (MDJCS) database may be limited in SCOPE (extent of information available), HISTORY (years of available information), TIME (how quickly information is updated), and RELIABILITY (general accuracy of information). I. Scope of Information Information is available on all civil, traffic, and criminal cases in the state. This information includes defendant name, city and state, case number, date of birth, plaintiff name (civil cases only), trial date, charge, and case disposition. II. Historical Information All information contained in the MDJCS database originates in the individual counties where the case is filed, and is available for the period that each county has maintained an automated case management system. The amount of historical information may vary by county based on when an automated case management system was deployed in that county and how the system has evolved. III. Timeliness of Information MDJCS case data is updated regularly, with these limitations: i. Information originating or maintained within the Circuit Courts and District Courts of all Maryland counties, is available at the approximate time that it is entered in the records of the court. IV. Reliability of Information This site reflects electronic data of the cases presented and may not always reflect the information maintained within the official case file. Further action may occur in the case that would affect the record. If you believe information provided is inaccurate, please send written notice to the court where the original record was created or filed. For courthouse locations and contact information, please visit: Circuit Court Locations: http://mdcourts.gov/circuit/directory.html District Court Locations: http://mdcourts.gov/district/directories/courtmap.html Note: Requests for corrections will not be accepted by telephone. The Maryland Judiciary, its agencies, officers, or employees do not guarantee the accuracy, reliability or timeliness of any information contained in this system. Users rely on this information at their own risk.