Catherine Cortez Masto for Senate — New Ad Features a Republican Doctor Slamming...
For Immediate Release

August 29, 2016

Las Vegas, NV – Catherine Cortez Masto for Senate released a new ad today that further exposes Congressman Heck’s dangerous record on women’s health. The ad, called “Doctor,” features a Republican doctor saying she won’t be voting for Congressman Heck because of his votes in Washington to defund Planned Parenthood and his opposition to a woman’s right to choose even when her health is at risk. Congressman Heck has voted to defund Planned Parenthood ten times. Thousands of Nevada women rely on Planned Parenthood for critical preventative healthcare services like cancer screenings.

“Republicans and Democrats agree that Congressman Heck’s votes in Washington to defund Planned Parenthood would have devastating consequences for Nevada women,” said Zach Hudson, spokesperson for Catherine Cortez Masto for Senate. “Defunding Planned Parenthood could deny thousands of Nevada women access to services like cancer screenings, but Congressman Heck still voted ten times to do it. He even opposes a woman’s right to choose when her health is in jeopardy. Congressman Heck is a risk Nevada women can’t afford.”

View the backup for “Doctor” below:

CATHERINE CORTEZ MASTO FOR SENATE “DOCTOR” – AD BACKUP 8/29/16

Voiceover: I’m Catherine Cortez Masto and I Approved This Message



FACT: CORTEZ MASTO SUPPORTS A WOMAN’S RIGHT TO CHOOSE AND OPPOSES ATTEMPTS TO DEFUND PLANNED PARENTHOOD

Cortez Masto Supports A Women’s Right To Choose. In July 2015, columnist Steve Sebelius wrote, “But a statewide Senate race is a completely different campaign than Heck has ever waged before. Masto has the full backing of Reid and some of the Democratic operatives who have helped propel the Senate majority leader to victory in past races against the political odds. She’s a Latina in a year when immigration reform is a front-burner issue, and the percentage of the Nevada electorate that his Latino is on the rise. She’s pro-choice, he’s pro-life. She embraces gay marriage, he does not.” [Las Vegas Review-Journal, Steve Sebelius Column,7/6/15]

Cortez Masto: Planned Parenthood Provides Health Care To Women Of Low Income And I Don’t Think We Should Completely Defund It. In September 2015, Catherine Cortez Masto stated: “I have, and I think like many people, I was disgusted by them, absolutely. I think there should be an investigation done and they should be held accountable, but at the same time I also know the comprehensive health care that Planned Parenthood provides to women of low income and I don’t think we should completely defund it.” [Ralston Live, Catherine Cortez Masto interview, 9/14/15]

Pro-Choice Group NARAL Endorsed Cortez Masto For U.S. Senate In Nevada. “NARAL Pro-Choice America PAC today announced its endorsement of former Nevada Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto for election to the U.S. Senate. Cortez Masto has always stood up for Nevada families and for the 7-in-10 Americans who support safe and legal access to abortion. Recently, a controversial Super PAC supporting Cortez Masto’s opponent began airing ads attacking her for supporting pro-choice policies. NARAL strongly condemns these attacks and is building an on-the-ground organizing infrastructure to turn out pro-choice voters this November.” [NARAL Pro-Choice America, 6/9/16]

FACT: CORTEZ MASTO IS A BIPARTISAN PROBLEM SOLVER WITH A RECORD OF ADVOCACY AND FIGHTING FOR WOMEN’S RIGHTS

GOP Gov. Sandoval Praised Cortez Masto For Bills Toughening Laws On Sex Trafficking And Giving Resources To Victims. “Gov. Brian Sandoval said Thursday that staff in the Legislature and in the state Taxation Department are looking at the bill to determine if there could be unexpected hit. […] In a ceremony attended by about 30 peopleThursday, the governor signed two bills toughening the laws on sex trafficking. He praised Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto for leading the efforts to get this legislation passed. Sandoval said these bills will protect many people now and in generations to come. Cortez Masto said this was one of the most important laws approved in her two terms in office. This legislation, she said is about young people and saving lives. It gives her office the authority to prosecute these cases and she will be working with police. One bill, Assembly Bill 67 provides that a judge may not place a person convicted of pandering or sex trafficking on probation. And an offender living off the earnings of the prostitute will be required to pay restitution to the victim. The second bill, AB-311 creates a contingency account for the victims of these crimes. Masto said there is federal money and other sources of funds to help these women.” [Las Vegas Sun, 6/6/13]

DEM Rep. Steven Horsford Praised Cortez Masto Bill For Taking Proactive Steps To End Human Trafficking. “‘Assembly Bill 67, championed by Nevada Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto and passed unanimously by the Nevada Legislature in 2013, ensures Nevada is taking proactive steps to end human trafficking of young people,’ Horsford concluded. ‘The package of bills just passed by Congress will assist states like Nevada that have established task forces to work toward ending human trafficking. I look forward to working with the Nevada Attorney General and leaders from our state on how we can pursue these much-needed resources to fight the scourge of human trafficking.’” [Steven Horsford press release, 5/20/14]

GOP Attorney General Adam Laxalt: Cortez Masto Is A “Role Model” In How She Has Run The Office. “He said he wants to continue many of the programs started by current Attorney General Catherine Cortez Masto, a Democrat who fought domestic violence and human trafficking. Cortez Masto has been helpful during the transition, he said, calling her ‘a role model’ in how she has run the office during the past eight years.” [Las Vegas Review-Journal, 12/7/14]

DEM Ross Miller Said Cortez Masto Did A “Commendable Job” As Attorney General.“If elected to attorney general, Ross Miller said he would prioritize protecting Nevada’s most vulnerable residents: children and the elderly. The Democratic candidate said during a stop in Elko that scam artists who prey upon senior citizens have become a growing concern, as well as criminals who target children through the Internet. […] Miller said Catherine Cortez Masto, who is terming out as attorney general, has done a commendable job.” [Elko Daily Free Press, 9/1/14]

Headline: Las Vegas Review-Journal: “Cortez Masto’s Senate Hopes Mirror Her AG Track Record.” [Las Vegas Review-Journal, 4/30/15]

Cortez Masto Spent Eight Years As Attorney General Working In A Bipartisan Manner To Fight Sex Trafficking, Sex Offenders, And Protect Seniors. “After five terms in the U.S. Senate, Harry Reid is leaving behind some pretty big shoes to fill. And so far there are three candidates hoping to do that. Of course the Democratic Party wants to see that seat stay blue. The Reid Machine is fully behind Catherine Cortez Masto, who spent 8 years as our Attorney General. There she fought sex trafficking, sex offenders and to protect senior citizens. She says bipartisanship politics is the key. ‘These are all areas I have a proven record of working on in a bipartisan manner. It is about building partnerships and coalitions. That’s what we need in Washington and I have a proven record to show I can do it,’ Cortez Masto said during a recent interview.” [KTVN, 2/1/16]

Women’s Advocacy Group EMILY’s List Endorsed Cortez Masto Citing Her Record Of Making Communities Safer, Preventing Violence Against Women, And Increasing Educational Opportunities. “Catherine Cortez Masto, seeking to become the first Latina elected to the Senate, has won the endorsement of EMILY’s List. The group that supports Democratic women who back abortion rights hailed the former Nevada attorney general as a champion of women and families. Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid tapped Cortez Masto as his preferred successor when he announced his retirement less than three weeks ago. ’Catherine is a dedicated public servant with a record of working to make communities safer, prevent violence against women and increase educational opportunities so that all Nevadans have a fair shot,’ said EMILY’s List President Stephanie Schriock, in a statement released Thursday.” [USA Today, 4/16/15]

Cortez Masto Focused On Domestic Violence Prevention In Nevada For Years And Fought For More State & Federal Funding For Victims. “‘People should understand that domestic violence crosses socioeconomic backgrounds, it could happen in any family and it could happen to anyone,’ explains Catherine Cortez Masto, former Nevada Attorney General. Cortez Masto focused on domestic violence prevention in Nevada for years and she says it comes down to educating the community in order to gain more support, ‘It is a lack of resources, not only do we have a lack of state funding we have a lack of federal funding. There is only so much that goes around to help individuals who are dealing with a domestic violence situation.’” [KRNV, 10/29/15]

DR. KUSHNIR: As a doctor, I see how decisions in Washington impact my patients here in Nevada. So even though, I’m a Republican, I won’t be voting for Joe Heck.

Text: Dr. Christina Kushnir

Gynecologic Oncologist

FACT: CONGRESSMAN HECK CO-SPONSORED BILL ALLOWING EMPLOYERS TO DENY COVERAGE FOR BIRTH CONTROL…

Heck Co-Sponsored Bill To Amend Affordable Care Act To “Protect Rights Of Conscience With Regard To Requirements For Coverage Of Specific Items And Services.” In October 2011, Heck co-sponsored, “A bill to amend the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act to protect rights of conscience with regard to requirements for coverage of specific items and services.” [CQ,3/28/12, H.R. 1179, Introduced 3/17/11, Co-Sponsored, 10/4/11]

Respect For Rights Of Conscience Act Was Put Forth By “Rank-And-File House Republicans Still Want A Vote On Their Own Version Of The Blunt Amendment.”“Following the Senate’s narrow defeat of the Blunt Amendment last week, coupled with the public revulsion towards Rush Limbaugh’s misogyny, Republican leaders in Congress had just about had enough with the fight over contraception. But as the GOP is finding, sometimes it’s tough for a party to pick a fight, then walk away from it. Rank-and-file House Republicans still want a vote on their own version of the Blunt Amendment, called the ‘Respect for Rights of Conscience Act,’ championed by Rep. Jeff Fortenberry ® of Nebraska.” [MSNBC,3/8/12]

Blunt Amendment Would Have Allowed Any Employer With Moral Objections To Opt Out Of Birth Control Coverage Requirement For Insurance. “The SenateThursday rejected an effort to vastly expand conscience exemptions to the Obama administration’s new birth control coverage rule, even as Republican presidential contenders continued to tussle over the issue. The measure, an amendment proposed by Sen. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.) to a highway funding bill, would have allowed not only religious groups but any employer with moral objections to opt out of the coverage requirement. And it would have allowed such employers to do so in the case of not only contraception but any health service required by the 2010 health-care law.” [Washington Post, 3/1/12]

…AND SUPPORTED THE HOBBY LOBBY DECISION THAT ALLOWED EMPLOYERS TO EXEMPT BIRTH CONTROL COVERAGE FROM EMPLOYEE HEALTH PLANS

Heck Said The Hobby Lobby Ruling Was “A Reasonable Decision By The Supreme Court.”“On another topic, Heck said he agreed with the U.S. Supreme Court decision Monday in the Hobby Lobby case. The high court said businesses that are family owned or closely held don’t have to provide health care coverage for birth control because the companies have religious objections. […] ‘I think it’s a reasonable decision by the Supreme Court,’ said Heck, who is an emergency room physician.” [Las Vegas Review-Journal, 7/2/14]

Heck Said He Was “Certainly Concerned” About Issue Of Church-Affiliated Groups Being Required To Offer Birth Control Coverage. “After the Catholic Church in Nevada spoke out over the weekend, an Obama administration decision to require church-affiliated groups to offer birth control coverage became a sudden political issue that has split the state’s delegation in Congress. […] Republican Rep. Joe Heck , a Catholic, ‘is certainly concerned about this issue,’ according to chief of staff Greg Facchiano, but he said the lawmaker could not be reached Tuesday evening.” [Las Vegas Review-Journal, 2/8/12]

Heck Supported Allowing Companies To Exempt Birth Control From Health Care Plans, Adding “There Are Plenty Of Places Women Can Obtain Birth Control.” AUDIENCE: “Recently you supported a position that religious institutions do not have to mandatorily provide birth control or contraception to their employees. And you were quoted as saying this is not a women’s health issue. As a physician, there’s so much studies that show that contraception, especially birth control pills, prevent [inaudible]. How can you deny any woman this right [inaudible]?” HECK: “For me it’s an issue of how intrusive do you want federal government to be and what’s the role of federal government? It’s a rights of conscious issue under the First Amendment for the separation of church and state and religious protection. And the right to practice your religion unencumbered from governmental interference. As a physician I know there’s medical reasons and medical benefits for being on birth control. The issue is that there are plenty of places where women can obtain birth control.” [YouTube, Heck at Whitney Town Hall, 2/21/12]

FACT: HECK HAS VOTED REPEATEDLY TO REPEAL THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT AND WANTS TO “START OVER” ON HEALTH CARE REFORM…

Heck Voted To Repeal The Affordable Care Act At Least 37 Times. “With health care, Heck has voted at least 37 times to repeal the Affordable Care Act. He’s been an outspoken critic of the employer mandate requiring companies offer insurance if they have more than 50 employees, saying that it will kill jobs.” [Las Vegas Sun, 6/12/15]

Heck Wants To “Fully Repeal” The Affordable Care Act And “Start Over” On Health Care Reform. “‘As an emergency room physician who treated Nevadans from all walks of life, I’ve seen what works and what doesn’t,’ said Dr. Heck. ‘Premium increases on top of exorbitant deductibles make the ‘Affordable Care Act’ anything but affordable. That is why I introduced and cosponsored legislation with the GOP Doctors Caucus to fully repeal the unsustainable ACA and start over with patient-centered solutions including the interstate purchase of insurance, individual health pools, expanded health savings accounts, tax credits for the purchase of coverage, and lawsuit abuse reforms to reduce the costly practice of defensive medicine. By defending the status quo and offering no solutions, my opponent Ms. Cortez Masto puts Washington ahead of Nevadans and their doctors.’” [Heck Senate Campaign, Press Release, 4/28/16]

Heck Said That Until Repeal Action Went Through There Was “No Urgency For The Replace.” “As House Republicans have targeted the health care law for repeal, they also promised to replace it with what they say will be less-intrusive alternatives. Heck, an emergency room physician who is studying various plans as part of a GOP doctors caucus, indicated Wednesday that the party feels no rush to come up with replacements as long as full health care repeal remains out of reach in the Senate. ’The fact is, until the repeal action goes through, there is no urgency for the replace,’ Heck said. ‘Our approach is going to take this in small bite-sized chunks, not a 2,700-page goliath that contains everything and the kitchen sink. You can’t do this in a rushed manner.’” [Las Vegas Review-Journal, 7/12/12]

…EVEN THOUGH THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT HAS INCREASED ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE AND LOWERED THE UNINSURED RATE…

The Uninsured Rate In Nevada Dropped From 20 Percent In 2013 To 15.7 Percent In 2014.“Reducing the number of uninsured Americans: Nationwide, since the Affordable Care Act’s coverage expansion began, about 16.4 million uninsured people have gained health insurance coverage - the largest reduction in the uninsured in four decades. And Gallup recently announced that the uninsured rate in Nevada in 2014 was 15.7 percent, down from 20.0 percent in 2013.” [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care – Nevada, 11/2/15]

208,774 Nevadans Have Gained Medicaid Or CHIP Coverage Because Of Medicaid Expansion. “Thirty states plus DC have expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, including Nevada. And as of January 2015, 208,774 Nevadans have gained Medicaid or CHIP coverage since the beginning of the Health Insurance Marketplace first open enrollment period. Across the nation, approximately 11.2 million more Americans are now enrolled in Medicaid and CHIP.” [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care – Nevada, 11/2/15]

More Than 73,000 Nevadans Were Enrolled In Health Insurance Through The Exchange. In Nevada, 73,596 consumers selected or were automatically re-enrolled in quality, affordable health insurance coverage through the Marketplace as of Feb. 22. Nationwide, nearly 11.7 million consumers selected a plan or were automatically enrolled in Marketplace coverage.” [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care – Nevada, 11/2/15]

89 Percent of Nevadans Who Enrolled In Health Insurance Through The Exchange Qualified For A Tax Credit Of $242 Per Month. “Marketplace Signups and Tax Credits in Nevada: 89 percent of Nevada consumers who were signed up qualified for an average tax credit of $242 per month through the Marketplace.” [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care – Nevada, 11/2/15]

53 Percent Of Nevadans Obtained Coverage For $100 Or Less Per Month After Any Applicable Tax Credits,“Marketplace Signups and Tax Credits in Nevada: […] 53 percent of Nevada Marketplace enrollees obtained coverage for $100 or less after any applicable tax credits in 2015, and 100 percent had the option of doing so.” [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care – Nevada, 11/2/15]

…REQUIRES INSURANCE COMPANIES TO PAY FOR PREVENTIVE HEALTH SERVICES…

Under The Affordable Care Act, 633,000 Nevadans, Including 222,000 Women, Gained Preventive Service Coverage With No Cost-Sharing. Because of the Affordable Care Act, 76 million Americans with private health insurance gained preventive service coverage with no cost-sharing, including 633,000 in Nevada. And women can now get coverage without cost-sharing of even more preventive services they need. Of the 76 million Americans with expanded access to free preventive services, 29.7 million are women, including 222,000 in Nevada receiving expanded preventive services without cost-sharing.” [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care – Nevada, 3/23/15]

Health Insurance Plans Provide Preventive Health Services Without Co-Pays, Including Things Like Cancer Screenings And Flu Shots. “The health care law requires many insurance plans to provide coverage without cost sharing to enrollees for a variety of preventive health services, such as colonoscopy screening for colon cancer, Pap smears and mammograms for women, well-child visits, and flu shots for all children and adults. Because of the Affordable Care Act, 76 million Americans with private health insurance gained preventive service coverage with no cost-sharing, including 633,000 in Nevada. And women can now get coverage without cost-sharing of even more preventive services they need. Of the 76 million Americans with expanded access to free preventive services, 29.7 million are women, including 222,000 in Nevada receiving expanded preventive services without cost-sharing.” [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care – Nevada,3/23/15]

ACA’s Expanded Preventative Health Services Without Cost-Sharing Included Contraception And Mammograms. “Under the preventive services provisions in the Affordable Care Act, non-grandfathered health insurance plans and policies are required to cover 100 percent of the costs of certain recommended preventive services for women—that is, without charging a co-pay, co-insurance, deductible, or other cost sharing. […] The Guidelines include annual well-woman visits; screening for gestational diabetes; human papillomavirus DNA testing; counseling for sexually transmitted infections; HIV counseling and screening; FDA-approved contraceptive methods and counseling; breastfeeding support, supplies, and counseling; and screening and counseling for interpersonal and domestic violence.” [Department of Health & Human Services,1/27/14]

…ALLOWS YOUNG AMERICANS TO STAY ON THEIR PARENTS HEALTH CARE PLANS…

Under The Affordable Care Act, Young People Can Stay On Their Parents’ Health Insurance Until Age 26, Which Has Benefitted More Than 2.6 Million Who Would Otherwise Have Been Uninsured. “New coverage options for young adults: Under the health care law, if your plan covers children, you can now add or keep your children on your health insurance policy until they turn 26 years old. Thanks to this provision, over 2.3 million young people who would otherwise have been uninsured have gained coverage nationwide.” [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care – Nevada, 11/2/15]

…STOPS INSURANCE COMPANIES FROM CHARGING WOMEN MORE THAN MEN…

Under Health Care Reform, Insurance Companies Cannot Charge Women More Than Men. “So, there is evidence that some women buying health insurance in the individual market, a key target of Obamacare, are charged 50 percent more than men for the same coverage. Such gender rating is made illegal under the health reform law.” [PolitiFact, 10/6/13]

Starting In 2014, Insurance Companies In The Individual And Small Group Markets Were No Longer Be Permitted To Charge Women Higher Rates Because Of The ACA. “Currently, 37 states allow gender rating in the individual market, which means insurers can charge women and men different premiums for identical coverage.4 In the capital cities of these states, 92 percent of bestselling plans charged 40-year-old women more than they charged 40-year-old men for the same plan.5 Maternity coverage cannot explain the difference in premiums because only 3 percent of these plans included maternity services.6 Under the Affordable Care Act, beginning in 2014, this unfair practice will no longer be permitted and the costs of coverage for men and women are required to be equal.” [Families USA, 5/13]

…AND PREVENTS DISCRIMINATION AGAINST NEVADANS WITH PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS

Under The Affordable Care Act, Health Insurance Companies Are Banned From Discriminating Against People With Pre-Existing Conditions – As Many As 1,157,045 Non-Elderly Nevadans Have Some Type Of Pre-Existing Health Condition, Including 162,452 Children.“Ending discrimination for pre-existing conditions: As many as 1,157,045 non-elderly Nevadans have some type of pre-existing health condition, including 162,452 children. Today, health insurers can no longer deny coverage to anyone because of a pre-existing condition, like asthma or diabetes, under the health care law. And they can no longer charge women more because of their gender.” [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Care – Nevada, 11/2/15]

DR. KUSHNIR: Joe Heck’s voted 10 times to defund Planned Parenthood, which thousands of women depend on for cancer screenings.

Text:Congressman Joe Heck Voted 10 Times To Defund Planned Parenthood

Text:H.Con.Res. 36, Vote 21, 4/14/11; H.R. 1 Amdt No. 11, Vote 93, 2/18/11; H.Res.421, Vote 502, 9/17/15; H.Res.421 Vote 503, 9/17/15; H.R. 3134 Vote 505, 9/18/15; H.Res. 448, Vote 525, 9/30/15, H.Con.Res. 79, Vote 527, 9/30/15; H.R. 3762, Vote 568, 10/23/15; H.R. 3762, Vote 6, 6/6/16; H.R. 3762, Vote 53, 2/2/16

FACT: CONGRESSMAN HECK VOTED 10 TIMES TO DEFUND PLANNED PARENTHOOD…

February 2016: Heck Voted To Override Obama’s Veto Of The Bill That Would Block Federal Funding For Planned Parenthood For One Year. [CQ, 2/2/16; H.R. 3762, Vote 53, 2/2/16]

January 2016: Heck Voted To Block Funding For Planned Parenthood [CQ, 1/6/16; H.R. 3762, Vote 6, 1/6/16]

October 2015: Heck Voted For A Bill That Would Block Funding For Planned Parenthood. [CQ, 10/23/15; H.R. 3762, Vote 568, 10/23/15]

September 2015: Heck Voted Five Times To Shut Down The Government Over Planned Parenthood:

Heck Voted To Advance Bill To Bar Use Of Funds For Planned Parenthood. [CQ, 9/17/15; H.Res.421, Vote 502, 9/17/15]

Heck Voted To Advance Bill To Bar Use Of Funds For Planned Parenthood.[CQ, 9/17/15; H.Res.421, Vote 503, 9/17/15]

Heck Voted To Bar Use Of Funds For Planned Parenthood. [CQ, 9/18/15; H.R. 3134, Vote 505, 9/18/15]

· Heck Voted To Advance Concurrent Resolution That Would Bar Use Of Funds For Planned Parenthood. [CQ, 9/30/15; H.Res. 448, Vote 525, 9/30/15]

Heck Voted For Concurrent Resolution To Bar Use Of Funds For Planned Parenthood. [CQ, 9/30/15; H.Con.Res. 79, Vote 527, 9/30/15]

April 2011: Heck Voted To Bar Use Of Funds For Planned Parenthood. [CQ, 4/14/11; H.Con.Res. 36, Vote 271, 4/14/11]

February 2011: Heck Voted To Bar Use Of Funds For Planned Parenthood. [CQ, 2/18/11; H.R. 1, Amdt No. 11, Vote 93, 2/18/11]

…EVEN THOUGH PLANNED PARENTHOOD PROVIDES ESSENTIAL HEALTH SERVICES TO 22,000 NEVADANS EVERY YEAR, INCLUDING OVER 4,000 CANCER SCREENINGS

Planned Parenthood Served 21,910 Patients In Nevada. [Planned Parenthood Nevada website, accessed 8/16/16]

· Planned Parenthood Provided Cancer Screenings To 4,444 Nevadans. [Planned Parenthood Nevada website, accessed 8/16/16]

Planned Parenthood Offered Preventive Care, Pregnancy Testing, Abortions And Cancer Screening To 22,000 Annual Patients In Nevada.“Planned Parenthood, which offers preventive care, pregnancy testing, abortions and cancer screenings, has about 22,000 annual patients in Nevada. Most Planned Parenthood patients are women earning less than 150 percent of the federal government’s poverty threshold.” [Las Vegas Sun, 10/23/15]

President Of The American Congress Of Obstetricians And Gynecologists: Cutting Off Planned Parenthood From Government Funding That Millions Rely On For Health Services Would Be “Irresponsible.” In September 2015, President of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Mark DeFrancesco wrote, “Cutting off Planned Parenthood’s health centers from government funding, including Medicaid and the Title X family-planning program, would also cut off many of the 2.7 million women, men and teenagers who rely on Planned Parenthood every year for needed health services. This would be irresponsible. As an OB-GYN, I know that women need access to quality care, and the care patients receive from Planned Parenthood goes beyond family planning. Planned Parenthood-affiliated clinics screen women for cervical cancer and breast cancer. About 245,000 American women are diagnosed with these diseases each year. The clinics test and treat patients for sexually transmitted infections, in many cases preventing further infections in the community. These are essential health services.” [Las Vegas Sun, Mark DeFrancesco op-ed, 9/8/15]

DR. KUSHNIR:And Heck opposes a women’s right to choose, even when her health is at risk.

Text: Opposes Right To Choose Even When Health Is At Risk

CQ, 5/13/15; H.R. 36, Vote 222, 5/13/15

FACT: CONGRESSMAN HECK OPPOSES A WOMAN’S RIGHT TO CHOOSE AND VOTED FOR ANTI-CHOICE BILLS DESIGNED TO CHALLENGE AND OVERTURN ROE V. WADE

Las Vegas Review-Journal’s Steve Sebelius: Heck Insisted His Position Is Clear: “He’s A Pro-Life Guy.” In a column for the Las Vegas Review-Journal, Steve Sebelius wrote, “The last time Rep. Joe Heck was accused of being uncaring toward rape victims, there wasn’t any proof to back up the charge. It was 2012, and former Assembly Speaker John Oceguera was airing an ad in which a rape-victim advocate accused Heck of voting to restrict victims’ access to abortion. But the bill in question had a specific exception for rape and incest. Heck insisted, then and now, that his position is clear: He’s a pro-life guy who thinks federal funds shouldn’t pay for abortions, except in cases of rape, incest or to save the life of a pregnant woman.” [Las Vegas Review-Journal, Steve Sebelius, 8/28/13]

In 2015, Heck Voted For 20-Week Abortion Ban Called “An Attack On Roe v. Wade,” With Anti-Abortion Group SBA List Making It “Litmus Test” For Republicans In 2016. In May 2015, Heck voted for: “Passage of the bill that would prohibit abortions in cases where the probable age of the fetus is 20 weeks or later and would impose criminal penalties on doctors who violate the ban.” The Hill reported, “Republicans are ramping up their attack on Roe v. Wade with a House voteWednesday on a bill banning late-term abortions. […] Susan B. Anthony List launched a campaign earlier this year to make the 20-week ban into a litmus test for Republican hopefuls.” [CQ, 5/13/15; H.R. 36, Vote 223, 5/13/15; The Hill, 5/13/15]

Heck Voted For Bill That Was A Direct Challenge To Roe v. Wade. “The House approved a bill that would prohibit most abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy except in cases of rape, incest or a threat to the mother’s life. […] Opponents said the bill was a direct challenge to the Supreme Court’s 1973 Roe v. Wade decision that made abortions legal before viability, which is generally considered around 24 weeks of pregnancy. They also argued that the bill imposed new limits on the rape exemption by requiring that any woman seeking an abortion after 20 weeks prove that she either reported the rape to the authorities or sought counseling services. […] The bill passed 242-184. Amodei, Hardy and Heck voted for it. Titus opposed it.” [Las Vegas Review-Journal, 5/16/15]

In 2013, Heck Voted For 20-Week Abortion Ban In Effort To Challenge And Eventually Overturn Roe v. Wade. In June 2013, Heck voted for “Passage of the bill that would create a nationwide ban on abortions performed at 20 weeks or later, except in cases where the life of the woman is in danger.” Time Magazine reported, “The House effort is meant to add federal firepower to the slow and steady quest to challenge and eventually overturn the 40-year-old Roe v. Wade Supreme Court ruling, which held that abortion should be legal until a fetus is viable, generally understood to be around 24 weeks. […] Not all Republicans endorsed the idea of bringing the 20-week abortion ban to a floor vote. Rep. Charlie Dent of Pennsylvania, told the New York Times that doing so was a ‘stupid idea’ that risks alienating voters with more moderate views on abortion at a time of economic uncertainty. The measure attracted six Democratic votes; six Republicans voted against the bill.” [CQ, 6/18/13; H.R. 1797, Vote 251, 6/18/13; Time, 6/18/13]

Anti-Abortion Group SBA List Endorsed Heck For Congress Calling Him A “Consistent Pro-Life Advocate.” In July 2010, SBA List press release stated: “Today the Susan B. Anthony List Candidate Fund, a national pro-life political action committee, announced its endorsement of Joe Heck, candidate for U.S. Representative in Nevada’s 3rd congressional district. ‘SBA List is proud to support Joe Heck for Nevada’s 3rd District. Heck has expressed a strong commitment to representing a physician’s voice in Congress and to rescinding taxpayer-funded abortion in the federal health care legislation. Ironically, he represents women’s real views and needs on the issue of abortion far better than does his female opponent,’ said Marjorie Dannenfelser, president of SBA List Candidate Fund. […] Also a consistent pro-life advocate, Heck served as State Senator for Nevada’s 5th District from 2004 to 2008.” [SBA List press release,7/21/10]

SBA List Endgame Is To Dismantle Roe v. Wade Entirely With Laws Undercutting The Supreme Court’s Decision’s Premise That A Women’s Right To Choose Should Be Protected Before 24 Weeks. “Even if the Susan B. Anthony List hopes its current campaign will be viewed by voters to be moderate, it’s endgame – to dismantle Roe v. Wade entirely with test laws like the 20-week ban, which undercuts the Supreme Court decision’s premise that abortion rights should be protected before the point of viability at 24 weeks – is much more ambitious. ‘For the first time since Roe v. Wade, we are very close to protecting even just one class of children before they are born,’ Dannenfelser said. ‘Not because we are regulating around the child – but because the fact that the child is a child.” [U.S. News, 4/17/15]

FACT: CONGRESSMAN HECK VOTED AGAINST ADDING EXCEPTION TO SAVE THE HEALTH OF THE MOTHER TO ANTI-CHOICE BILL…

In 2015, Heck Voted Against Adding An Exception To Save The Health Of The Pregnant Woman From Bill To Ban On Abortions After 20 Weeks. May 2015, Heck voted against: “Brownley, D-Calif., motion to recommit the bill to the House Judiciary Committee with instructions to report back immediately with an amendment that would add an exception to the 20-week abortion ban for abortions necessary to save the health of the pregnant woman.” The motion was rejected by a vote of 181-246. [CQ, 5/13/15; H.R. 36, Vote 222,5/13/15]

… AND HECK HAS VOTED REPEATEDLY FOR ANTI-CHOICE BILLS THAT DO NOT INCLUDE AN EXCEPTION FOR THE HEALTH OF THE MOTHER

Heck Voted For Passage Of 20-Week Abortion Ban. In May 2015, Heck voted for: “Passage of the bill that would prohibit abortions in cases where the probable age of the fetus is 20 weeks or later and would impose criminal penalties on doctors who violate the ban. It would provide exceptions for cases in which the woman’s life is in danger as well as for pregnancies that are a result of rape if, as amended, for pregnancies that are a result of rape against an adult woman, the woman received counseling or medical treatment for the rape at least 48 hours prior to the abortion. An exception would be provided for pregnancies resulting from rape or incest against a minor if the rape or incest had been previously reported to law enforcement or another government agency authorized to act on reports of child abuse. As amended, the bill would require a second doctor trained in neonatal resuscitation to be present for abortions where the fetus has the ‘potential’ to survive outside the womb, and, if the fetus is born alive, the bill would require that the infant be provided medical care and immediately be transported and admitted to a hospital. As amended, women wishing to have abortions under the bill’s exceptions would need to sign (along with the doctor and a witness) an informed consent authorization form detailing the age of the fetus and stating that, if born alive, would be given medical assistance and transported to a hospital.” The bill passed 242-184 with 238 GOP voting for it. [CQ,5/13/15; HR 36, Vote 223, 5/13/15]

The Bill Did Not Include An Exception For The Health Of The Mother. “Although the 20-week abortion ban makes an exemption to prevent the death of the mother, it’s unclear how the provision would affect women who need to terminate a pregnancy because of a medical condition or complication that could harm the woman’s health. At this time, there’s no exemption in the bill for fetuses that are non-viable or may be born with a severe defect.” [Bustle, 5/13/15]

Heck Voted To Create A Nationwide Ban On Abortions Performed After 20 Weeks. In June 2013, Heck voted for: “Passage of the bill that would create a nationwide ban on abortions performed at 20 weeks or later, except in cases where the life of the woman is in danger. It would provide exceptions to the ban in cases of pregnancy resulting from rape or incest against a minor, if it has been reported to law enforcement or a government agency authorized to act on reports of child abuse. It also would impose criminal penalties on physicians who violate the ban and subject violators to a maximum five-year jail sentence, fines or both.” The bill passed by a 228-196 vote. [CQ,6/18/13; H.R. 1797, Vote 251, 6/18/13]

The Bill Contained No Exceptions For Situations When The Woman’s Health Is Threatened. “The Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, authored by Rep. Trent Franks (R-Ariz.), bans abortions after 20 weeks, based on the medically disputed theory that fetuses can feel pain at that point. It contains exceptions for women whose lives are in danger as well as some rape and incest victims who can prove that they reported their assaults to criminal authorities, but it contains no exceptions for severe fetal anomalies or situations in which the woman’s health is threatened by her pregnancy.” [Huffington Post, 6/18/13]

Heck Voted For 20-Week Abortion Ban In The District Of Columbia That Included Exception For The Life Of The Mother. In July 2012, Heck for voted: “Franks, R-Ariz., motion to suspend the rules and pass the bill that would prohibit abortions in the District of Columbia after 20 weeks of pregnancy, except when the woman’s life is endangered. The bill would impose reporting requirements for any abortions performed prior to the 20-week threshold. Violators would be subject to fines or imprisonment, with a maximum two-year sentence. The measure would prohibit the prosecution of the woman obtaining the abortion.” The bill failed 220 to 154 (needed two-thirds majority to pass). [CQ, 3/31/12; H.R. 3803, Vote 539, 7/31/12]

The Bill Did Not Include Exception For The Health Of The Mother – Or Cases Of Rape Or Incest. “A bill that would ban abortions in the District of Columbia after 20 weeks of pregnancy failed to pass the Houseon Tuesday, but anti-abortion activists hailed the vote as a sign that their efforts ultimately would succeed. […] The bill included an exception to protect the life of the mother but no exceptions to account for fetal abnormalities, the health of the mother or cases of rape or incest.” [Associated Press,7/31/12]

DR. KUSHNIR: For me and my patients, Joe Heck makes no sense.

Text: Approved By Catherine Cortez Masto. Paid For By Catherine Cortez Masto For Senate.

FACT: CONGRESSMAN HECK IS A LOYAL SUPPORTER OF DONALD TRUMP, WHOSE CAMPAIGN HAS PLEDGED TO OVERTURN ROE V. WADE…

Heck Backed GOP Presidential Nominee Trump, Whose Campaign Vowed To Overturn Roe V. Wade And Make It “An Ash Heap Of History.”The Pahrump Valley Times reported, “Additionally, Heck is throwing his support to presidential candidate Donald Trump. ‘I have high hopes that we will see Donald Trump become the next president,’ he said.’” The Los Angeles Times reported, “GOP vice presidential nominee Mike Pence on Thursday predicted Roe vs. Wade, the landmark Supreme Court ruling that legalized abortion, would be overturned if Donald Trump is elected president. ‘I’m pro-life and I don’t apologize for it,’ he said during a town hall meeting here. ‘We’ll see Roe vs. Wade consigned to the ash heap of history where it belongs.’’ [Pahrump Valley Times, 6/1/16; Los Angeles Times, 7/29/16]

Heck: “I Have High Hopes That We Will See Donald Trump Become The Next President.” “‘I have high hopes that we will see Donald Trump become the next president,’ he said. ‘Though I don’t necessarily agree with how he talks about women and minorities and all of his policy positions, but if he wants to make America great again by bringing jobs back to America, then I am willing to help him achieve those goals and hold him accountable. And as the next U.S. senator from Nevada, I will make sure I stand as a check against anything that is not in our best interest.’” [Pahrump Valley Times, 6/1/16]

Heck Criticized Republicans For Publicly Denouncing Trump, Saying It “Only Comes Back To Look Bad On The Party As A Whole.” “With the current presidential election, many Republicans are coming forward to say that they will not be voting for the Republican nominee, Donald Trump, in November. Heck said that Republicans publicly denouncing Donald Trump only comes back to look bad on the party as a whole.” [The Record Courier, 8/12/16]

Heck Refused To Denounce Trump: “You’re Entitled To Vote For Whoever You Want, But You Don’t Have To Add Gasoline To The Fire.” “‘You’re entitled to vote for whoever you want, but you don’t have to add gasoline to the fire,’ said Heck. Heck said that the important thing would be for the party to come together in November to defeat the Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton.” [The Record Courier, 8/12/16]

Life News: “Trump Said He Would Appoint ‘Very Good Judges’ Who Would Ultimately ‘Change’” Roe v. Wade. “In the second part of an interview with David Brody of CBN, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump said he thinks the Roe v. Wade Supreme Court case that ushered in an era of 48 million abortions was ‘wrongly decided.’ Trump said he would appoint ‘very good judges’ who would ultimately ‘change it’ but he opposed Roe without specifically saying it should be overturned.” [Life News, 2/18/16]

Trump: Roe v. Wade Was “Very Wrongly Decided But It Can Be Changed.” David Brody: “But beyond judges, do you believe Roe V. Wade was wrongly decided back in the day, back in 1973?” Donald Trump: ‘Well I do. It’s been very strongly decided but it can be changed. Things are put there and they’re passed but they can be unpassed with time but it’s going to take time because you have a lot of judges to go.” [Life News, 2/18/16]

Trump Said He Would Appoint Supreme Court Justice To Replace Scalia Who Would “Be A Person Of Similar Views And Principles.” “Full text: Donald Trump 2016 RNC draft speech transcript […] The politicians have talked about it, I’m going to do it. We are also going to appoint justices to the United States Supreme Court who will uphold our laws and our Constitution. The replacement for Justice Scalia will be a person of similar views and principles. This will be one of the most important issues decided by this election.” [Politico, 7/21/16]

Anti-Abortion Group Said Scalia “Was One Of The Strongest Critics On The Court Of The 1973 Decision In Roe v. Wade, As Unconstitutional And Illegitimate.” “Anti-abortion groups know they are going to miss Justice Antonin Scalia’s strong voice as the Supreme Court hears arguments on March 2 about what is expected to be a landmark abortion case, and they issued statements lamenting his death. […] Americans United for Life, another anti-abortion group, also issued a statement praising Justice Scalia’s support for the decisions of state governments, not the assessments of courts, in adopting stringent abortion regulations. ‘Justice Antonin Scalia was a longstanding and consistent voice on the court for allowing the American people, through the democratic process, to protect human beings from abortion or assisted suicide,’ the statement said. ‘He was one of the strongest critics on the court of the 1973 decision in Roe v. Wade, as unconstitutional and illegitimate.’” [New York Times,2/13/16]

… AND CONGRESSMAN HECK HAS A RECORD OF PUTTING HIS PARTY AHEAD OF NEVADANS, VOTING WITH WASHINGTON REPUBLICANS NINE OUT OF TEN TIMES

Heck Has Voted With His Party 90 Percent Of The Time. According to CQ, Heck voted with his party 87% of the time in 2014, 93% of the time in 2013, 89% of the time in 2012, and 90% of the time in 2011. [CQ Vote Studies, Accessed 5/18/16]

Roll Call: Heck Was On The “Good Side” Of The More Conservative Wing Of The Republican Party. “Heck has managed to stay on the good side of the more conservative wing of the Republican Party, which could help him fend off a serious primary challenge from the right. Republicans hope to avoid the situation they faced in 2010, when a crowded, messy primary resulted in the nomination of Sharron Angle, a flawed and gaffe-prone candidate who lost what was seen as a winnable race against Reid.” [Roll Call, 5/11/15]

MSNBC: Heck Voted For A “Far Right” Budget Scraping Medicare, Opposed Minimum Wage Increases, Was A Staunch Opponent Of Reproductive Rights, And Called Social Security A Pyramid Scheme.“Republican Rep. Joe Heck is a prominent U.S. Senate candidate in Nevada, and at first blush, the conservative congressman, running for an open seat, appears to be well positioned. Nevada is a fast-growing swing state with a diverse population, and Heck has previously won with fairly broad support. But it won’t be easy. Heck voted for a far-right budget plan that tried to scrap Medicare; he’s opposed minimum-wage increases; the GOP candidate is a staunch opponent of reproductive rights; and he’s even condemned Social Security as a pyramid scheme.” [MSNBC, 9/2/15]

###