Catherine Cortez Masto for Senate — Professor Featured in Mitch McConnell’s Attack Ad...
For Immediate Release

September 14, 2016

Contact: Press@CatherineCortezMasto.com

Dr. Richard Siegel, Law Enforcement Official, Women’s Advocates Call for Congressman Joe Heck to Condemn Misleading Ads on Cortez Masto’s Work for Sexual Assault Victims

Reno, NV – Today, joined by former Washoe County Sheriff Michael Haley and women’s health advocates, Dr. Richard Siegel condemned the shameful ad featuring him funded by Republican Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s Super PAC and called for it to be taken down. The outrageous ad misleads viewers on Cortez Masto’s strong record of helping victims of sexual assault and takes out of context an exchange between Siegel and Cortez Masto. At the press conference, former Washoe County Sheriff Michael Haley and women’s advocate Marlene Lockard also highlighted Cortez Masto’s long record of working to combat sex trafficking and providing more support to victims of sexual assault.

“It is reprehensible that Joe Heck’s Washington backers think it is okay to use me as a political prop to attack Catherine – on an issue as serious as rape and sexual assault, nonetheless,” said Dr. Richard Siegel. “I demand that the ad be taken down immediately, and I call on Joe Heck to do the same.”

“Rape and sexual assault are not political issues – they affect people every day, regardless of their political party. I worked with Catherine day in and day out to help victims of sexual assault. Shame on the Republicans who back this ad for turning support for victims of these horrific acts – the victims that both Catherine and I worked to help – into a partisan matter,” Siegel continued.

“As someone who has spent over 40 years working in or with Nevada government, I have a firsthand account of which elected officials are true advocates for women and families – and there is no doubt Catherine is one of the best,” said women’s advocate Marlene Lockard. “As Attorney General, Catherine was a voice for those who are too often left voiceless. She fought not only for victims of rape and assault, but those who suffered from domestic abuse and violence – and who fell victim to the horrific crime of sex trafficking – and ensured that they could seek the justice and support they deserved.”

“I turned to private companies because politicians in Washington – like Joe Heck – voted against more funding to process these kits in our lab; funding we needed.

As Attorney General, Catherine worked hand and hand with law enforcement to protect our state’s most vulnerable citizens. She strengthened laws to get predators off our streets and ensure that victims of horrific crimes had the tools and support necessary to start on a pathway to justice,” said Michael Haley, former Washoe County Sheriff. “Joe Heck spent over half a decade in Washington working for his Republican backers, not Nevada law enforcement. Shame on Joe Heck and Washington Republican for their continued lies and pathetic smear campaign against Catherine. Heck does not represent or stand up for Nevada values and we cannot afford to have him in Washington.”

“Millions of dollars in attack ads by Mitch McConnell and Washington Republicans will not change the fact that Catherine Cortez Masto has a proven record of fighting for and securing more funding to help victims of sexual assault,” said Kristen Orthman, senior advisor to the Nevada State Democratic Party. “In contrast, Congressman Heck voted three times against more funding to help sexual assault victims and to address the rape kit backlog. Unlike Congressman Heck, as Nevada’s next Senator Catherine Cortez Masto will fight for more funding to help victims of sexual assault.”

###