Bobby Jindal is a leader in the Republican Party and an outspoken voice for integrity and conservatism in American politics. Currently in his second term, the Louisiana Governor has enacted comprehensive conservative reforms, reining in the reach of state government, and making the taxpayers’ dollar go further than it ever has. While only 44 years old, Bobby has the résumé and accomplishments to rival the most elder statesmen.

Bobby was born and raised in Baton Rouge, in the middle-class Kenilworth neighborhood. After graduating from Baton Rouge High School in 1988, he attended Brown University where he graduated with Biology and Public Policy degrees, part of his Pre-Med program.

While at Brown, Bobby felt less passionate about medicine, and more intrigued with healthcare policy and went on to study at Oxford University as a Rhodes scholar, graduating in 1994 with a Masters Degree in literature with a concentration in healthcare policy.

He met Supriya Jolly in high school, and married her in 1997. They live in Baton Rouge with their three children; Selia (13), Shaan, (11) and Slade (9).

Immediately following his graduation from Oxford, he began work at the strategic consulting firm McKinsey and Company where he worked until 1996, when new Louisiana Governor Mike Foster called and asked Bobby to serve as head of the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals. At just 24 years old, Bobby Jindal was running a major state government agency. His wunderkind status was justified by the results of a Jindal led department. Jindal turned the mounting deficit in Louisiana’s Medicaid program into a surplus, rescuing it from bankruptcy. Childhood healthcare screenings skyrocketed to 3rd in the nation, and child immunizations increased as well as new and expanded services for the elderly and the disabled.

His statewide success did not go unnoticed, and in 1998, Jindal was tapped as Executive Director of the National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicare. The valuable work the commission accomplished is still utilized today.

In 2001, President Bush was keen to bring Bobby into the administration, appointing him Assistant Secretary for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services where Bobby served as a healthcare policy expert in the administration.

Jindal resigned from the Bush Administration in 2003 to return home to Louisiana and run for governor. Having witnessed the culture of corruption, the outmigration of citizens and the lack of opportunities for current Louisianians, Bobby felt compelled to be part of the solution. He narrowly lost that campaign, but the detailed solutions and ideas he presented laid the groundwork for a successful campaign 4 years later.

After his narrow defeat, Bobby was elected to Congress in 2004 where he was elected GOP freshman class president. He was reelected again in 2006 before being elected Governor of Louisiana in November of 2007.

Jindal’s first order of business as governor was to implement comprehensive ethics reform, resulting in some of the toughest ethics laws in the nation. His administration also took on education reform and implemented one of the nation’s largest school choice systems. Children can now move from failing schools to schools that provide them with a better education for their individual needs. As a result of the governor’s education reform efforts, the number of failing schools in Louisiana has been cut in half and Louisiana’s high school graduation rate has reached an all-time high.

The Governor chose not to expand Medicaid under Obamacare, instead implementing transformational reforms in the state’s Medicaid and public safety-net health care system through a network of public-private partnership hospitals. The hospitals are transforming access to services, lowering costs and providing better educational experiences for future doctors — all without federal expansion and bureaucracy.

Under his administration, economic development wins have resulted in more than 91,000 new jobs and more than $62 billion in private capital investment. Louisiana now ranks higher in every national business-climate ranking than it ever did prior to January 2008. Today in Louisiana, more than 2 million people are working — the highest number in Louisiana history.

Jindal is also credited with orchestrating the largest evacuation of citizens in U.S. history — successfully moving 1.9 million civilians out of the path of Hurricane Gustav in 2008. He led the state through the recovery of several other natural and manmade disasters, including the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Hurricane Isaac.

Jindal is a brilliant mind with a consistent record of conservative leadership.