Perry defends gay marriage as states’ choice; Santorum takes a swipe
Texas’s Republican Gov. Rick Perry on Friday said he’s “fine” with New York’s approval of gay marriage because such decisions should be left up to states.

That prompted a response from Republican presidential candidate Rick Santorum, who tweeted overnight: “So Gov Perry, if a state wanted to allow polygamy or if they chose to deny heterosexuals the right to marry, would that be OK too?”

Santorum followed that post with the hashtag #tcot, which stands for “top conservatives on Twitter.”

Perry, who is considering running for president, at a forum in Colorado on Friday called himself an “unapologetic social conservative” and said he opposes gay marriage — but that he’s also a firm believer in the 10th Amendment, the Associated Press reported.

“Our friends in New York six weeks ago passed a statute that said marriage can be between two people of the same sex. And you know what? That’s New York, and that’s their business, and that’s fine with me,” he said to applause from several hundred GOP donors in Aspen, the AP reported.

“That is their call. If you believe in the 10th Amendment, stay out of their business.”

The forum was held by the Aspen Institute as the Republican Governors Association held a fundraiser and convention in Aspen, a resort town with heated sidewalks about four hours southwest of Denver.

Santorum, a former U.S. senator from Pennsylvania, has been vocal on the campaign trail in Iowa about his staunch opposition to gay marriage and civil unions.

Iowans have been deeply divided over rights for same-sex couples since a unanimous 2009 Iowa Supreme Court decision legalized same-sex marriage.

But for likely Republican caucusgoers, the topic is a minefield. When it comes to civil unions, The Des Moines Register’s June Iowa Poll showed 58 percent would outright reject a candidate who favors them.

Thirteen percent would consider a candidate who supports civil unions, and 27 percent say it’s no real problem. Two percent aren’t sure.

Recommended Photos