Protective Measures
Protection of marine mammals is a high priority for BOEM and our federal partners. Federal law allows specific surveys to be permitted only if experts determine that there is negligible impact and no adverse effects on recruitment or survival of marine mammal species or stocks. Therefore no permits will be issued unless government experts with BOEM and NOAA find that there is negligible impact. The purpose of the PEIS and the Record of Decision is to adopt mitigation strategies that offer the strongest environmental alternatives to protect marine animal populations

Mitigation measures in the PEIS, and required in BOEM’s decision document issued in July 2014, include vessel strike avoidance measures, special closure areas to protect the main migratory route for the highly endangered North Atlantic Right Whale, consideration of geographic separation of simultaneous seismic airgun surveys, and Passive Acoustic Monitoring to supplement visual observers and improve detection of marine mammals prior to and during seismic surveys.

Ramping-up airguns.

Ramping-up airguns. Airgun arrays will be required to ramp-up incrementally for at least 20 minutes before reaching maximum level. This incremental activity allows marine life to clear the area.

Passive acoustic monitoring (PAM).

Passive acoustic monitoring (PAM). PAM refers to the use of microphones in the water to listen for marine mammal vocalizations. PAM will be required during all air gun surveys and will use towed or stationary hydrophones that will monitor marine mammal vocalizations.

Limits on the peak and cumulative sound pressure levels or sound intensity levels that acoustic devices may produce.

Limits on the peak and cumulative sound pressure levels or sound intensity levels that acoustic devices may produce. Sound limits for airgun surveys outside of time-area closures. Survey operators will also be required to ensure that sound from surveys outside of NARW critical habitat, the all-coast seasonal management area (SMA), or dynamic management areas (DMAs) does not exceed 160 decibels at the boundaries of these areas- the limit currently advanced by NOAA’s National Marine Fisheries Service (NOAA Fisheries) as the threshold for assuring no disruption of marine mammal behavior.

Exclusion zones around vessels conducting acoustic surveys whose dimensions are established to avoid harm to animals from sound.

Exclusion zones around vessels conducting acoustic surveys whose dimensions are established to avoid harm to animals from sound. Acoustic exclusion zone around vessels. All airgun seismic activities will be subject to an acoustic exclusion zone around vessels that will not allow those activities if marine mammals and sea turtles are present within the zone. This ensures that those animals are not exposed to sound pressure levels of 180 decibels or more -- the level that NOAA Fisheries has concluded may damage marine mammal hearing. The size of the zone may vary with the source level of airguns used, but in any event t he zone's boundary cannot be less than 500 meters from the source. Acoustic exclusion zone size. A 200-meter minimum exclusion zone for marine mammals and sea turtles will be required for HRG surveys operating at 200 kHz or lower frequencies. Larger zones will be required if field observations or modeling indicate that sound pressure levels may exceed 180 decibels beyond 200 meters from the HRG survey activities.

Time and area closures for conduct of acoustic surveys to avoid injury to animals from sound when breeding, migrating, or otherwise congregating.

Time and area closures for conduct of acoustic surveys to avoid injury to animals from sound when breeding, migrating, or otherwise congregating. The alternative adopted by BOEM in the decision would: expand the time-area closure for North Atlantic Right Whales (NARW) add a time-area closure offshore Brevard County, Florida in order to protect nesting sea turtles consider a 40-k m (25-mile) separation between concurrent seismic airgun surveys;

Visual, acoustic, or other monitoring for the presence of animals in order to avoid harm.

Visual, acoustic, or other monitoring for the presence of animals in order to avoid harm. require passive acoustic monitoring (PAM) in seismic airgun surveys; and,

require the use of PAM or similar equipment in some high resolution geophysical (HRG) surveys. Visual monitoring by trained protected species observers (PSOs) on vessels is one of the requirements in the decision issued by BOEM. Visual monitoring will be required by PSOs during daylight hours before and during seismic surveys. Acoustic exclusion zone monitoring. Exclusion zones must be monitored by trained PSOs. If BOEM authorizes nighttime operations or if operations continue during periods of reduced visibility, then shipboard lighting and equipment must be used to enhance the PSO’s ability to visually monitor the exclusion zones, and PAM might also be required.

Requirements for starting up and shutting down use of acoustic devices and for geographic separation of simultaneous surveys whose impacts may be cumulative.

Requirements for starting up and shutting down use of acoustic devices and for geographic separation of simultaneous surveys whose impacts may be cumulative. Halting airgun use when animals get too close is one of the mitigations listed in the full decision document issued by BOEM. Airgun seismic survey activities must be shut down if a marine mammal or sea turtle enters the exclusion zone. The equipment may not be re-started until the zone has been clear for at least 60 minutes. An exception will be made for dolphins voluntarily approaching the vessel or the equipment that is being towed. This happens frequently without apparent harm to the dolphins.

Requirements to prevent vessels from striking animals.