Trump’s Cabinet picks so far are worth a combined $13b
President-elect Donald Trump boasted about his wealth during his campaign. Now he’s surrounding himself with people who have similarly unimaginable riches.

Collectively, the wealth of his Cabinet choices so far is about five times greater than President Obama’s Cabinet and about 34 times greater than the one George W. Bush led at the end of his presidency.

And Trump still has four more key advisory spots left to fill.

Advertisement

The net worth of the Cabinet Trump had selected as of Monday was at least $13.1 billion, based on available estimates, or more than the annual gross domestic product of about 70 small countries.

Get Fast Forward in your inbox: Forget yesterday's news. Get what you need today in this early-morning email. Sign Up Thank you for signing up! Sign up for more newsletters here

That included the $3.7 billion Trump is estimated to be worth, according to Forbes. (Trump has claimed to be worth much more — around $10 billion.)

It also included the $5.1 billion in net worth that Forbes estimated belongs to the family of Betsy DeVos, the former Michigan Republican Party chair and education activist selected to be education secretary.

Investor Wilbur Ross, picked to become commerce secretary, is estimated to be worth $2.5 billion, according to Forbes.

Linda McMahon, a former WWE executive and U.S. Senate candidate, has been picked to serve as small business administrator. She and her husband Vincent McMahon are worth at least an estimated $1.35 billion, according to Bloomberg.

Advertisement

Exxon Mobile CEO Rex Tillerson, nominated to become secretary of state, is estimated to be worth $365 million, according to Bloomberg.

Steven Mnuchin, the former Goldman Sachs executive in line to become Treasury secretary, is worth at least $46 million, according to Politico.

Retired neurosurgeon and former presidential candidate Ben Carson, who is in line to become the housing and urban development secretary, was worth $26 million, according to a Forbes estimate from 2015.

The pick for transportation secretary, Elaine Chao, the former labor secretary, was worth an estimated $16.9 million as of 2008, when she last held public office, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, a Washington-based nonprofit that tracks campaign finance data.

Two other Cabinet picks — Alabama Senator Jeff Sessions for attorney general and Georgia Representative Tom Price for health and human services secretary — were estimated to be worth about $7.5 million and $13.6 million, respectively, as of 2014, according to the center.

Advertisement

Former Texas governor and presidential candidate Rick Perry, selected to be energy secretary, is estimated to be worth about $3 million, according to the Associated Press.

U.S. Representative from South Carolina Mick Mulvaney, picked to become director of the Office of Management and Budget, was worth an estimated $2.6 million as of 2014, according to the center.

Fast-food executive Andrew Puzder, picked to fill the role of labor secretary, is also a multi-millionaire, according to Politico.

U.S. Representative from Montana Ryan Zinke, picked to become interior secretary, was worth an estimated $675,000 as of 2014, according to the center.

One of the least wealthy members of the Cabinet was actually Trump’s running mate. Vice President-elect Mike Pence was worth about $211,000 as of 2012, data from the center show.

A wealthy bunch | Trump's cabinet picks so far Beyond what's listed below, the president-elect still has to fill two more official cabinet positions and two more "cabinet-rank" spots. Cabinet position Name Estimated net worth Education Secretary Betsy DeVos $5.1 billion President Donald Trump $3.7 billion Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross $2.5 billion *Small Business Administrator Linda McMahon $1.35 billion Secretary of State Rex Tillerson $365 million Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin $46 million Housing and Urban Development Secretary Ben Carson $26 million Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao $16.9 million Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price $13.6 million Attorney General Jeff Sessions $7.5 million Energy Secretary Rick Perry $3 million *Office of Management and Budget Director Mick Mulvaney $2.6 million Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke $675,500 Vice President Mike Pence $211,000 Labor Secretary Andrew Puzder NA (multi-millionaire) Secretary of Defense James Mattis NA Homeland Security Secretary John F. Kelly NA *Chief of Staff Reince Priebus NA *EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt NA *U.N. Ambassador Nikki R. Haley NA * = "cabinet-rank" positionsNote: All are current estimates, except for Carson (2015); Sessions, Zinke, Price, and Mulvaney (2014); Pence (2012); and Chao (2008). Trump has said he is worth about $10 billion. DeVos' estimate is her family's net worth. Mnuchin's is described as "at least." SOURCES: Forbes; Center for Responsive Politics; Politico; Bloomberg; Associated Press

Trump still has to fill the following spots: agriculture secretary, veterans affairs secretary, US trade representative, and chairperson of the Council of Economic Advisers.

By comparison, the collective estimated net worth of Obama’s entire current Cabinet is less than $3 billion, according to available estimates. And the vast majority of that wealth is held by just one member, Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker, who is worth $2.4 billion, according to Forbes.

The Cabinet that served Bush at the end of his presidency was worth about $390 million collectively.

The figures above consider only the presidents and their official Cabinet members and officials holding “cabinet-rank” positions.

The calculations do not consider other important presidential appointments.

If they did, the collective net worth of Trump’s Cabinet would grow by at least $7 billion.

Chicago Cubs co-owner Todd Ricketts has been picked to serve as deputy commerce secretary. Forbes estimates Todd Ricketts and his family are worth $5.3 billion.

Vincent Viola, an Army veteran, Wall Street executive, and Florida Panthers owner, has been selected to become Army secretary. He is estimated to be worth $1.79 billion, according to Forbes.

Two other key appointments: Gary Cohn, the Goldman Sachs president who is in line to become director of the National Economic Council, and former Breitbart executive Steve Bannon, who will be Trump’s chief strategist, are also multimillionaires, according to Bloomberg and Politico.

Trump’s affluent Cabinet picks are, in some ways, not surprising. He touted his own wealth and business experience as being key attributes that qualified him to be president and would help him boost the country’s economy. He also regularly stressed that he wanted to upend the existing political establishment.

But Trump’s critics have said that the picks represent a departure from his anti-Wall Street rhetoric during the campaign, and that they are out of touch with the working-class Americans whom he vowed to champion during the campaign.

Matt Rocheleau can be reached at matthew.rocheleau@globe.com . Follow him on Twitter @mrochele