Border Patrol Agent Assaulted During Arrest of Illegal Alien
A U.S. Border Patrol agent was assaulted by an illegal alien he was attempting an arrest in southern California. The assault on the agent assigned to the Calexico Station caused an injury to his eye socket.

The Border Patrol agent observed a man illegally crossing the International Boundary fence at about 8:40 on Sunday night. After the illegal alien climbed over the fence, the agent made contact and attempted to arrest him, according to information obtained by Breitbart Texas from U.S. Customs and Border Protection officials.

The illegal alien struck the agent in the face with his elbow, officials stated. He reportedly struck the agent in the left orbital eye socket with his elbow and fled to avoid arrest. Despite being injured, the agent pursued the man and caught up with him again.

The illegal alien continued to fight, but the agent was able to subdue the man and place him in custody.

In addition to the contusion to his left eye socket, the agent also suffered a laceration to his left elbow and a possible shoulder injury.

The illegal alien was arrested and turned over for possible prosecution for assault on a federal agent, a felony.

Just one week earlier, another Border Patrol agent was assaulted in the same area of Calexico, Breitbart Texas reported. The Border Patrol agent, assigned to the Calexico Station (El Centro Sector) in southern California, responded to an alarm of an illegal border crossing near downtown Calexico. The illegal border crossing was detected by the Remove Video Surveillance System operators who monitor the border fence. The agent responded to the alarm and was attacked by the illegal alien, according to information obtained from U.S. Customs and Border Protection officials by Breitbart Texas. The agent was also struck by a concrete block thrown over the fence by others attempting to distract the agent. He was not seriously injured in the assault.

“Our agent thankfully only suffered minor injuries from this assault and was able to gain control of his attacker and make the arrest,” Assistant Chief Patrol Agent David S. Kim said in a written statement about this week’s attack. “We will not tolerate assaults on our agents by criminals, and will vigorously pursue Assault on a Federal Officer prosecution against anyone who perpetrates such violence.”

Border Patrol agents have told Breitbart Texas this is not necessarily true. Agents have said that unless an agent is severely injured, charges of assaulting the officer are often not prosecuted.

Even when prosecuted and convicted, sentences handed down on these cases tends to be less severe than similar assaults on other law enforcement officers. Breitbart Texas reported in June about two Salvadoran illegal immigrants who were sentenced to 27 months and 63 months in prison for assaulting a Border Patrol agent in Texas.

During the struggle the two illegal aliens attempted to choke the agent. They then reached for his sidearm and baton. Either of those weapons could have been used to take the agents life. Fearing for his life, the agent drew his pistol and fired at the illegal aliens. One was shot and the other fled.

Border Patrol agents are frequently assaulted by rock throwers from Mexico. This is the eighth attack on agents in the El Centro Sector since the new fiscal year began October 1. Breitbart Texas has reported extensively on the frequent attacks on these agents.

Bob Price serves as associate editor and senior political news contributor for Breitbart Texas. He is a founding member of the Breitbart Texas team. Follow him on Twitter @BobPriceBBTX.