Nancy Pelosi | Biography & Facts
Nancy Pelosi, née Nancy Patricia D’Alesandro, (born March 26, 1940, Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.), American Democratic politician who was a congresswoman from California in the U.S. House of Representatives (1987– ), where she served as the first female speaker (2007–11; 2019– ). Her other notable posts included House minority leader (2003–07; 2011–19).

D’Alesandro—whose father, Thomas D’Alesandro, Jr., was a politician and New Deal Democrat—studied political science at Trinity College in Washington, D.C., graduating with a bachelor’s degree in 1962. The following year she married Paul Pelosi, and the couple moved to New York. Five children and six years later, the family settled in San Francisco, where Pelosi worked as a volunteer Democratic organizer. Earning a reputation as a highly effective fund-raiser, she rose through the ranks, serving on the Democratic National Committee and as chair of both the California Democratic Party (1981–83) and the host committee for the 1984 Democratic National Convention in San Francisco. Along the way, Pelosi befriended longtime U.S. Rep. Phil Burton. Burton died in 1983 and was succeeded by his wife, Sala, who, shortly before her death in 1987, urged Pelosi to run for the seat. She narrowly won a special election and was reelected in 1988 to a full term. Pelosi easily won subsequent elections in her overwhelmingly Democratic district.

Pelosi developed a reputation as a shrewd politician, and she steadily rose within the party, becoming minority whip in 2002. Later that year she was elected minority leader, and, when she took office in 2003, she became the first woman to lead a party in Congress. Using what she referred to as her “mother of five” voice, Pelosi began pushing for unity among the diverse factions within her party by embracing conservatives and moderates. Still, Pelosi continued to vote consistently in favour of such liberal causes as gun control and abortion rights, opposed welfare reform, and cast a vote against the Iraq War. Her criticism of Pres. George W. Bush could be harsh; she once characterized him as an “incompetent leader.” Her critics in turn claimed that her “left coast,” left-wing politics put her out of touch with most of the country.

Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi congratulating new U.S. citizens. Office of U.S. House of Representative Speaker Nancy Pelosi

Following the midterm elections in November 2006, the Democrats gained a majority in the House of Representatives. On January 4, 2007, Pelosi was elected speaker of the House of the 110th Congress. After Democrat Barack Obama assumed the presidency in 2009, Pelosi was a vocal supporter of many of his policies, helping to shepherd through his $787 billion stimulus package in February 2009 and playing an instrumental role in the more-than-yearlong effort to secure health care reform, which ultimately passed in March 2010. The historic bill extended health care to some 30 million previously uninsured Americans and prohibited insurers from denying coverage to those with preexisting conditions.

(From left to right) U.S. Pres. Barack Obama, Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer, and House Education and Labor Committee Chairman George Miller, in the Oval Office, 2009. Pete Souza—Official White House Photo

Nancy Pelosi, c. 2006. Office of U.S. House of Representative Speaker Nancy Pelosi

Facts Matter. Support the truth and unlock all of Britannica’s content. Start Your Free Trial Today

Pelosi’s popularity declined, however, as the economy continued to struggle and as opposition to legislation she had championed—notably health care reform and the stimulus package—increased. In the lead-up to the 2010 midterm elections, she became a target of Republican attacks and a rallying point for Tea Partiers, who were keen to turn the elections into a referendum on the Democratic agenda. The Democrats fared poorly in the November elections and lost control of the House. Despite calls for new party leadership, Pelosi was elected to serve as minority leader in the next Congress. She continued in that post as Democrats failed to regain control of the House in several subsequent elections. Their lackluster electoral performance, especially with working-class voters, lead to unrest among House Democrats, and, after Republican Donald Trump was elected president in 2016, Tim Ryan from Ohio challenged Pelosi for minority leader. Pelosi ultimately prevailed.

The 2018 midterm elections saw a massive resurgence for the Democrats as they regained control of the House. As calls continued for leadership changes, Pelosi made various concessions, notably accepting term limits, and in January 2019 she was officially elected speaker, becoming the first person in more than 60 years to serve nonconsecutive terms in the post. Pelosi’s political skills were also on display as she dealt with a government shutdown that had begun in late December. At issue was funding for a border wall, one of Trump’s key campaign pledges. Pelosi united her party in opposition to the president, who vowed to keep the government closed until he received billions for the proposed wall. Citing security concerns, Pelosi refused to allow Trump to hold the annual State of the Union in the House chambers while the government was closed. In late January Trump finally agreed to end the shutdown, which was the longest to date, even though he had failed to secure the necessary funding. Pelosi drew particular praise for her handling of the situation.