Global warming - Feedback mechanisms and climate sensitivity
Feedback mechanisms and climate sensitivity

There are a number of feedback processes important to Earth’s climate system and, in particular, its response to external radiative forcing. The most fundamental of these feedback mechanisms involves the loss of longwave radiation to space from the surface. Since this radiative loss increases with increasing surface temperatures according to the Stefan-Boltzmann law, it represents a stabilizing factor (that is, a negative feedback) with respect to near-surface air temperature.

Climate sensitivity can be defined as the amount of surface warming resulting from each additional watt per square metre of radiative forcing. Alternatively, it is sometimes defined as the warming that would result from a doubling of CO 2 concentrations and the associated addition of 4 watts per square metre of radiative forcing. In the absence of any additional feedbacks, climate sensitivity would be approximately 0.25 °C (0.45 °F) for each additional watt per square metre of radiative forcing. Stated alternatively, if the CO 2 concentration of the atmosphere present at the start of the industrial age (280 ppm) were doubled (to 560 ppm), the resulting additional 4 watts per square metre of radiative forcing would translate into a 1 °C (1.8 °F) increase in air temperature. However, there are additional feedbacks that exert a destabilizing, rather than stabilizing, influence (see below), and these feedbacks tend to increase the sensitivity of climate to somewhere between 0.5 and 1.0 °C (0.9 and 1.8 °F) for each additional watt per square metre of radiative forcing.

Water vapour feedback Unlike concentrations of other greenhouse gases, the concentration of water vapour in the atmosphere cannot freely vary. Instead, it is determined by the temperature of the lower atmosphere and surface through a physical relationship known as the Clausius-Clapeyron equation, named for 19th-century German physicist Rudolf Clausius and 19th-century French engineer Émile Clapeyron. Under the assumption that there is a liquid water surface in equilibrium with the atmosphere, this relationship indicates that an increase in the capacity of air to hold water vapour is a function of increasing temperature of that volume of air. This assumption is relatively good over the oceans, where water is plentiful, but not over the continents. For this reason the relative humidity (the percent of water vapour the air contains relative to its capacity) is approximately 100 percent over ocean regions and much lower over continental regions (approaching 0 percent in arid regions). Not surprisingly, the average relative humidity of Earth’s lower atmosphere is similar to the fraction of Earth’s surface covered by the oceans (that is, roughly 70 percent). This quantity is expected to remain approximately constant as Earth warms or cools. Slight changes to global relative humidity may result from human land-use modification, such as tropical deforestation and irrigation, which can affect the relative humidity over land areas up to regional scales. The amount of water vapour in the atmosphere will rise as the temperature of the atmosphere rises. Since water vapour is a very potent greenhouse gas, even more potent than CO 2 , the net greenhouse effect actually becomes stronger as the surface warms, which leads to even greater warming. This positive feedback is known as the “water vapour feedback.” It is the primary reason that climate sensitivity is substantially greater than the previously stated theoretical value of 0.25 °C (0.45 °F) for each increase of 1 watt per square metre of radiative forcing.

Cloud feedbacks It is generally believed that as Earth’s surface warms and the atmosphere’s water vapour content increases, global cloud cover increases. However, the effects on near-surface air temperatures are complicated. In the case of low clouds, such as marine stratus clouds, the dominant radiative feature of the cloud is its albedo. Here any increase in low cloud cover acts in much the same way as an increase in surface ice cover: more incoming solar radiation is reflected and Earth’s surface cools. On the other hand, high clouds, such as the towering cumulus clouds that extend up to the boundary between the troposphere and stratosphere, have a quite different impact on the surface radiation balance. The tops of cumulus clouds are considerably higher in the atmosphere and colder than their undersides. Cumulus cloud tops emit less longwave radiation out to space than the warmer cloud bottoms emit downward toward the surface. The end result of the formation of high cumulus clouds is greater warming at the surface. Different types of clouds form at different heights. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. The net feedback of clouds on rising surface temperatures is therefore somewhat uncertain. It represents a competition between the impacts of high and low clouds, and the balance is difficult to determine. Nonetheless, most estimates indicate that clouds on the whole represent a positive feedback and thus additional warming.

Ice albedo feedback Another important positive climate feedback is the so-called ice albedo feedback. This feedback arises from the simple fact that ice is more reflective (that is, has a higher albedo) than land or water surfaces. Therefore, as global ice cover decreases, the reflectivity of Earth’s surface decreases, more incoming solar radiation is absorbed by the surface, and the surface warms. This feedback is considerably more important when there is relatively extensive global ice cover, such as during the height of the last ice age, roughly 25,000 years ago. On a global scale the importance of ice albedo feedback decreases as Earth’s surface warms and there is relatively less ice available to be melted.