numerals and numeral systems | Examples & Symbols
Just as the first attempts at writing came long after the development of speech, so the first efforts at the graphical representation of numbers came long after people had learned how to count . Probably the earliest way of keeping record of a count was by some tally system involving physical objects such as pebbles or sticks. Judging by the habits of indigenous peoples today as well as by the oldest remaining traces of written or sculptured records, the earliest numerals were simple notches in a stick, scratches on a stone, marks on a piece of pottery , and the like. Having no fixed units of measure, no coins, no commerce beyond the rudest barter, no system of taxation, and no needs beyond those to sustain life, people had no necessity for written numerals until the beginning of what are called historical times. Vocal sounds were probably used to designate the number of objects in a small group long before there were separate symbols for the small numbers, and it seems likely that the sounds differed according to the kind of object being counted. The abstract notion of two, signified orally by a sound independent of any particular objects, probably appeared very late.

In the course of history, the decimal system finally overshadowed all others. Nevertheless, there are still many vestiges of other systems, chiefly in commercial and domestic units, where change always meets the resistance of tradition. Thus, 12 occurs as the number of inches in a foot, months in a year, ounces in a pound ( troy weight or apothecaries’ weight ), and twice 12 hours in a day, and both the dozen and the gross measure by twelves. In English the base 20 occurs chiefly in the score (“Four score and seven years ago…”); in French it survives in the word quatre-vingts (“four twenties”), for 80; other traces are found in ancient Celtic, Gaelic, Danish, and Welsh. The base 60 still occurs in measurement of time and angles.

It should not be inferred, however, that 10 is either the only possible base or the only one actually used. The pair system, in which the counting goes “one, two, two and one, two twos, two and two and one,” and so on, is found among the ethnologically oldest tribes of Australia , in many Papuan languages of the Torres Strait and the adjacent coast of New Guinea , among some African Pygmies , and in various South American tribes. The indigenous peoples of Tierra del Fuego and the South American continent use number systems with bases three and four. The quinary scale, or number system with base five, is very old, but in pure form it seems to be used at present only by speakers of Saraveca, a South American Arawakan language; elsewhere it is combined with the decimal or the vigesimal system , where the base is 20. Similarly, the pure base six scale seems to occur only sparsely in northwest Africa and is otherwise combined with the duodecimal, or base 12, system.

The special position occupied by 10 stems from the number of human fingers, of course, and it is still evident in modern usage not only in the logical structure of the decimal number system but in the English names for the numbers. Thus, eleven comes from Old English endleofan, literally meaning “[ten and] one left [over],” and twelve from twelf, meaning “two left”; the endings -teen and -ty both refer to ten, and hundred comes originally from a pre-Greek term meaning “ten times [ten].”

When it became necessary to count frequently to numbers larger than 10 or so, the numeration had to be systematized and simplified; this was commonly done through use of a group unit or base , just as might be done today counting 43 eggs as three dozen and seven. In fact, the earliest numerals of which there is a definite record were simple straight marks for the small numbers with some special form for 10. These symbols appeared in Egypt as early as 3400 bce and in Mesopotamia as early as 3000 bce, long preceding the first known inscriptions containing numerals in China (c. 1600 bce), Crete (c. 1200 bce), and India (c. 300 bce). Some ancient symbols for 1 and 10 are given in the figure.

Numeral systems

It appears that the primitive numerals were |, ||, |||, and so on, as found in Egypt and the Grecian lands, or ―, =, ≡, and so on, as found in early records in East Asia, each going as far as the simple needs of people required. As life became more complicated, the need for group numbers became apparent, and it was only a small step from the simple system with names only for one and ten to the further naming of other special numbers. Sometimes this happened in a very unsystematic fashion; for example, the Yukaghirs of Siberia counted, “one, two, three, three and one, five, two threes, two threes and one, two fours, ten with one missing, ten.” Usually, however, a more regular system resulted, and most of these systems can be classified, at least roughly, according to the logical principles underlying them.

Simple grouping systems In its pure form a simple grouping system is an assignment of special names to the small numbers, the base b, and its powers b2, b3, and so on, up to a power bk large enough to represent all numbers actually required in use. The intermediate numbers are then formed by addition, each symbol being repeated the required number of times, just as 23 is written XXIII in Roman numerals. The earliest example of this kind of system is the scheme encountered in hieroglyphs, which the Egyptians used for writing on stone. (Two later Egyptian systems, the hieratic and demotic, which were used for writing on clay or papyrus, will be considered below; they are not simple grouping systems.) The number 258,458 written in hieroglyphics appears in the figure. Numbers of this size actually occur in extant records concerning royal estates and may have been commonplace in the logistics and engineering of the great pyramids. Ancient Egyptians customarily wrote from right to left. Because they did not have a positional system, they needed separate symbols for each power of 10. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Cuneiform numerals Around Babylon, clay was abundant, and the people impressed their symbols in damp clay tablets before drying them in the sun or in a kiln, thus forming documents that were practically as permanent as stone. Because the pressure of the stylus gave a wedge-shaped symbol, the inscriptions are known as cuneiform, from the Latin cuneus (“wedge”) and forma (“shape”). The symbols could be made either with the pointed or the circular end (hence curvilinear writing) of the stylus, and for numbers up to 60 these symbols were used in the same way as the hieroglyphs, except that a subtractive symbol was also used. The figure shows the number 258,458 in cuneiform. The number 258,458 expressed in the sexagesimal (base 60) system of the Babylonians and in cuneiform. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. The cuneiform and the curvilinear numerals occur together in some documents from about 3000 bce. There seem to have been some conventions regarding their use: cuneiform was always used for the number of the year or the age of an animal, while wages already paid were written in curvilinear and wages due in cuneiform. For numbers larger than 60, the Babylonians used a mixed system, described below. Greek numerals The Greeks had two important systems of numerals, besides the primitive plan of repeating single strokes, as in ||| ||| for six, and one of these was again a simple grouping system. Their predecessors in culture—the Babylonians, Egyptians, and Phoenicians—had generally repeated the units up to 9, with a special symbol for 10, and so on. The early Greeks also repeated the units to 9 and probably had various symbols for 10. In Crete, where the early civilization was so much influenced by those of Phoenicia and Egypt, the symbol for 10 was ―, a circle was used for 100, and a rhombus for 1,000. Cyprus also used the horizontal bar for 10, but the precise forms are of less importance than the fact that the grouping by tens, with special symbols for certain powers of 10, was characteristic of the early number systems of the Middle East. The Greeks, who entered the field much later and were influenced in their alphabet by the Phoenicians, based their first elaborate system chiefly on the initial letters of the numeral names. This was a natural thing for all early civilizations, since the custom of writing out the names for large numbers was at first quite general, and the use of an initial by way of abbreviation of a word is universal. The Greek system of abbreviations, known today as Attic numerals, appears in the records of the 5th century bce but was probably used much earlier. Roman numerals The direct influence of Rome for such a long period, the superiority of its numeral system over any other simple one that had been known in Europe before about the 10th century, and the compelling force of tradition explain the strong position that the system maintained for nearly 2,000 years in commerce, in scientific and theological literature, and in belles lettres. It had the great advantage that, for the mass of users, memorizing the values of only four letters was necessary—V, X, L, and C. Moreover, it was easier to see three in III than in 3 and to see nine in VIIII than in 9, and it was correspondingly easier to add numbers—the most basic arithmetic operation. As in all such matters, the origin of these numerals is obscure, although the changes in their forms since the 3rd century bce are well known. The theory of German historian Theodor Mommsen (1850) had wide acceptance. He argued that the V for five represented the open hand. Two of these gave the X for 10, and the L, C, and M were modifications of Greek letters. However, study of inscriptions left by the Etruscans, who ruled Italy before the Romans, show that the Romans adopted the Etruscan numerical system beginning in the 5th century bce but with the distinct difference that the Etruscans read their numbers from right to left while the Romans read theirs from left to right. L and D for 50 and 500, respectively, emerged in the Late Roman Republic, and M did not come to mean 1,000 until the Middle Ages. The oldest noteworthy inscription containing numerals representing very large numbers is on the Columna Rostrata, a monument erected in the Roman Forum to commemorate a victory in 260 bce over Carthage during the First Punic War. In this column a symbol for 100,000, which was an early form of (((I))), was repeated 23 times, making 2,300,000. This illustrates not only the early Roman use of repeated symbols but also a custom that extended to modern times—that of using (I) for 1,000, ((I)) for 10,000, (((I))) for 100,000, and ((((I)))) for 1,000,000. The symbol (I) for 1,000 frequently appears in various other forms, including the cursive ∞. Toward the end of the Roman Republic, a bar (known as the vinculum or virgula) was placed over a number to multiply it by 1,000. This bar also came to represent ordinal numbers. In the early Roman Empire, bars enclosing a number around the top and sides came to mean multiplication by 100,000. The use of the single bar on top lasted into the Middle Ages, but the three bars did not. Of the later use of the numerals, a few of the special types are as follows: c ∙ lxiiij ∙ccc∙l∙i for 164,351, ∙ccc∙l∙i for 164,351, Adelard of Bath (c. 1120) II.DCCC.XIIII for 2,814, Jordanus Nemorarius (c. 1125) M⫏CLVI for 1,656, in San Marco, Venice cIɔ.Iɔ.Ic for 1,599, Leiden edition of the work of Martianus Capella (1599) IIIIxx et huit for 88, a Paris treaty of 1388 four Cli.M for 451,000, Humphrey Baker’s The Well Spryng of Sciences Whiche Teacheth the Perfecte Woorke and Practise of Arithmeticke (1568) vj.C for 600 and CCC.M for 300,000, Robert Recorde (c. 1542) Item (1) represents the use of the vinculum; (2) represents the place value as it occasionally appears in Roman numerals (D represents 500); (3) illustrates the not infrequent use of ⫏, like D, originally half of (I), the symbol for 1,000; (4) illustrates the persistence of the old Roman form for 1,000 and 500 and the subtractive principle so rarely used by the Romans for a number like 99; (5) shows the use of quatre-vingts for 80, commonly found in French manuscripts until the 17th century and occasionally later, the numbers often being written like iiijxx, vijxx, and so on; and (6) represents the coefficient method, “four C” meaning 400, a method often leading to forms like ijM or IIM for 2,000, as shown in (7). The subtractive principle is seen in Hebrew number names, as well as in the occasional use of IV for 4 and IX for 9 in Roman inscriptions. The Romans also used unus de viginti (“one from twenty”) for 19 and duo de viginti (“two from twenty”) for 18, occasionally writing these numbers as XIX (or IXX) and IIXX, respectively. On the whole, however, the subtractive principle was little used in the numerals of the Classical period.

Multiplicative grouping systems In multiplicative systems, special names are given not only to 1, b, b2, and so on but also to the numbers 2, 3, …, b − 1; the symbols of this second set are then used in place of repetitions of the first set. Thus, if 1, 2, 3, …, 9 are designated in the usual way but 10, 100, and 1,000 are replaced by X, C, and M, respectively, then in a multiplicative grouping system one should write 7,392 as 7M3C9X2. The principal example of this kind of notation is the Chinese numeral system, three variants of which are shown in the figure. The modern national and mercantile systems are positional systems, as described below, and use a circle for zero. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

Ciphered numeral systems In ciphered systems, names are given not only to 1 and the powers of the base b but also to the multiples of these powers. Thus, starting from the artificial example given above for a multiplicative grouping system, one can obtain a ciphered system if unrelated names are given to the numbers 1, 2, …, 9; X, 2X, …, 9X; C, 2C, …, 9C; M, 2M, …, 9M. This requires memorizing many different symbols, but it results in a very compact notation. The first ciphered system seems to have been the Egyptian hieratic (literally “priestly”) numerals, so called because the priests were presumably the ones who had the time and learning required to develop this shorthand outgrowth of the earlier hieroglyphic numerals. An Egyptian arithmetical work on papyrus, employing hieratic numerals, was found in Egypt about 1855; known after the name of its purchaser as the Rhind papyrus, it provides the chief source of information about this numeral system. There was a still later Egyptian system, the demotic, which was also a ciphered system. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. As early as the 3rd century bce, a second system of numerals, paralleling the Attic numerals, came into use in Greece that was better adapted to the theory of numbers, though it was more difficult for the trading classes to comprehend. These Ionic, or alphabetical, numerals, were simply a cipher system in which nine Greek letters were assigned to the numbers 1–9, nine more to the numbers 10, …, 90, and nine more to 100, …, 900. Thousands were often indicated by placing a bar at the left of the corresponding numeral. Such numeral forms were not particularly difficult for computing purposes once the operator was able automatically to recall the meaning of each. Only the capital letters were used in this ancient numeral system, the lowercase letters being a relatively modern invention. Other ciphered numeral systems include Coptic, Hindu Brahmin, Hebrew, Syrian, and early Arabic. The last three, like the Ionic, are alphabetic ciphered numeral systems. The Hebrew system is shown in the figure.