Creating a “Brain Gain” for U.S. Employers: The Role of Immigration
Policy Brief #178

One of the strongest narratives in U.S. history has been the contribution made by talented, hard-working and entrepreneurial immigrants whose skills and knowledge created a prosperous new country. Yet today, the nation’s immigration priorities and outmoded visa system discourage skilled immigrants and hobble the technology-intensive employers who would hire them. These policies work against urgent national economic priorities, such as boosting economic vitality, achieving greater competitiveness in the global marketplace and renewing our innovation leadership.

In the long term, the nation needs comprehensive immigration reform. In the short term, policymakers should focus on reforms that are directly related to increasing the “brain gain” for the nation—creating new jobs and producing economic benefits—to produce tangible and achievable improvements in our immigration system.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Rebalance U.S. immigration policies to produce

a “brain gain,” with changes to visas that will allow employers to access workers with the scientific and technological skills they need to improve economic competitiveness, employment and innovation

a “brain gain,” with changes to visas that will allow employers to access workers with the scientific and technological skills they need to improve economic competitiveness, employment and innovation Tie immigration levels to national economic cycles to meet changing levels of need

Use digital technologies to modernize the

current visa system

Background

Immigrants are now one-tenth of the overall U.S. population—a situation that defies facile stereotyping. Immigrants have made significant contributions to American science and economic enterprise, most notably in the areas of high-tech and biotech.

Immigrants’ productivity raises the U.S. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by an estimated $37 billion per year



More than a quarter of U.S. technology and engineering businesses launched between 1995 and 2005 had a foreign-born founder



In Silicon Valley, more than half of new tech start-up companies were founded by foreignborn owners



In 2005, companies founded by immigrants produced $52 billion in sales and employed 450,000 workers



Nearly a quarter of the international patents filed from the United States in 2006 were based on the work of foreign-born individuals (more than half of whom received their highest degree from an American university)



Economists calculate that, as a result of immigration, 90 percent of native-born Americans with at least a high-school diploma have seen wage gains



Historically, immigrants have made outsize contributions to American science and technology, with Albert Einstein perhaps the leading example. One-third of all U.S. winners of Nobel prizes in medicine and physiology were born in other countries

Far from “crowding out” native-born workers and depressing their wages, well-educated, entrepreneurial

immigrants do much to create and support employment for Americans.

In order to fully reap the benefits of the worldwide talent market, U.S. immigration policy must be reoriented. Current policy is significantly—and negatively—affected by the unintended consequences of the 1965 Immigration and Nationality Act that made family unification its overarching

goal. Although the law may have contributed to the high-tech boom by removing long-standing, country-specific quotas and expanding immigration from places with strong science and engineering education programs, its main effect was to enable immigrants to bring in family members, without regard for the new immigrants’ education, skill status or potential contributions to the economy.

Thus, in 2008, almost two-thirds of new legal permanent residents were family-sponsored and, over the past few years, the educational attainment of new immigrants has declined.

U.S. employers have a large, unmet demand for knowledge workers. They are eager to fill jobs with well-trained foreign workers and foreign graduates of U.S. universities—particularly those with degrees in the sciences, technology, engineering and mathematics—the “STEM” fields that continue

to attract too few U.S.-born students. In 2008, the “Tapping America’s Potential” business coalition reported that the number of U.S. graduates in STEM had been stagnant for five years, and that number would have to nearly double by 2015 to meet demands.

Meanwhile, the United States is falling behind in the pace of innovation and international competitiveness. Evidence for the decline in innovation is the decreasing U.S. share of international patents. In 2009, for the first time in recent years, non-U.S. innovators earned more patents (around 96,000) than did Americans (93,000). Only a decade earlier, U.S. innovators were awarded almost 57 percent of all patents.

To date, Congress—for a variety of reasons, including partisanship—has stalled in addressing the problems of immigration and immigration policy. Unfortunately, this inaction extends to problems

hampering the nation’s economy that, if remedied,

could help the United States grow employment,

pull out of the current recession more quickly and

improve its position in the global economy.

Game-Changing Policy Reforms

Rebalance Fundamental Goals

The goals of U.S. immigration policy should be

rebalanced to give priority to immigrants who have

the education and talent to enhance America’s

economic vitality, by stimulating innovation, job

creation and global competitiveness. At the same

time, it should decrease emphasis on family reunification

(other than parents and children of U.S.

citizens). Changing the composition of the immigration

stream, even without increasing its size,

would result in a “brain gain” for the United States.

Other countries, such as Canada, the United Kingdom

and Australia, strategically craft immigration

policy to attract skilled and unskilled workers,

making the benefits easy to see and strengthening

public support for immigration in the process. Canada,

for example, explicitly targets foreign workers

to fill positions for which there are not enough

skilled Canadians. Applicants for admission to the

country accumulate points based on their field of

study, educational attainment and employment

experience. Upon reaching the requisite number

of points, the applicant is granted a visa. Some 36

percent of all Canadian immigrant visas are in the

“skilled-worker” category, as opposed to only 6.5

percent in the United States.

An interesting by-product of this strategy—which

is both clearly articulated and of obvious benefit to

the national economy—is that Canadians see the

benefits of the policy and, as a result, immigration

is far less controversial than in the United States.

In 2005 polling by The Gallup Organization, only

27 percent of Canadians wanted to decrease immigration,

whereas 52 percent of U.S. citizens did.

And, three times as many Canadians (20 percent)

as Americans (seven percent) actually wanted to

increase it.

An obvious place to begin the rebalancing process

would be with the many foreign students who

come to the United States for education in scientific

and technology fields. They are familiar with

our culture and speak English. Many would like to

stay and build careers here. But, under current

visa rules, most are sent home as soon as they

graduate. A complete policy reversal is needed,

with automatic green cards for foreign graduates

of U.S. science and technology programs.

In fact, the United States should make it as easy

as possible for these highly trained students to

stay, since the expansion of job opportunities in

India, China and other growth-oriented countries

now offers them attractive options. Our current

counterproductive policy, quite simply, puts

the United States in the position of training our

global competitors.

New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg, in a

December 2009 Meet the Press interview, said

about immigration: “We’re committing what I call

national suicide. Somehow or other, after 9/11 we

went from reaching out and trying to get the best

and the brightest to come here, to trying to keep

them out. In fact, we do the stupidest thing, we

give them educations and then don’t give them

green cards.”

Universities collectively invest huge sums in

the development of these students. In addition,

research suggests that increasing the number of

foreign graduate students would increase U.S. patent

applications by an estimated 4.7 percent and

grants of university patents by 5.3 percent.

Another strategic policy change would be for the federal

government to take U.S. workforce and economic

conditions into account when setting immigration

levels and annual H-1B visa numbers for scientists

and engineers. Such a flexible approach would reflect

labor market needs, protect American workers’

jobs and wages, and dampen public concerns about

employment losses during lean economic times.

Revamp the Antiquated Visa System

Increase the Number of Visas for

Highly-skilled Workers

Today’s visa programs for high-skilled workers

are not large enough to fill the numerical demand

for such employees and are too short in duration.

For example, H-1B visas for workers in “specialty

occupations” are valid for a maximum of six years.

Between fiscal years 2001 and 2004, the federal

government increased the annual allocation of

H-1B visas for scientists and engineers to 195,000.

The rationale was that scientific innovators were

so important for the country’s long-term economic

development that the number set aside for those

specialty professions needed to be high. Since

2004, that number has returned to its former level,

65,000—only a third of the peak, despite rapid

technologic change in almost every field, such as

information, medicine, energy and logistics.

Most of these visas are allocated within a few

months of becoming available. Even in recessionplagued

2009, applications exceeded the supply

of visas within three months. Almost half of the

visa requests came from U.S. employers, most of

them in high-tech industries. Clearly the demand

for visas is greater than the supply, and a minimal

step would be to raise the set-aside for high-skilled

workers to the previous, 195,000 level.

Only a small percentage of aliens with student

visas and aliens with H-1B visas are able to change

directly to legal permanent resident status—about

seven percent of each category, according to a

study published in 2005—although about half

of H-1B visa-holders eventually become legal permanent

residents. Such an uncertain path is not

conducive to career (or employment) planning in

a competitive environment.

Several additional small programs support talented

scientists and entrepreneurs. These, too, could be

aligned with economic goals, expanded or more

effectively promoted:

The O-1 “genius” visa program allows the government to authorize visas for people with “extraordinary

abilities in the arts, science, education, business, and sports.” In 2008, around 45,000 genius visas were granted. The clear intent is to encourage talented people to migrate to America. However, the current program is too diffuse to have much impact on the level of scientific and technological innovation talent in the

United States.



abilities in the arts, science, education, business, and sports.” In 2008, around 45,000 genius visas were granted. The clear intent is to encourage talented people to migrate to America. However, the current program is too diffuse to have much impact on the level of scientific and technological innovation talent in the United States. The EB-5 visa program offers temporary visas to foreigners who invest at least $500,000 in the nation’s rural or “targeted employment areas” or at least $1,000,000 in other areas. If the investment creates at least ten jobs, the visa automatically becomes a permanent green card. The program is authorized by Congress to offer approximately 10,000 visas per year, but it is significantly underutilized—about 500 EB-5 visas a year were granted between 1992 and 2004. In 2009, 3,688 people did become legal permanent residents under the “employment creation (investors)” category, a number that includes spouses and children.

According to a March 2009 report from the

Department of Homeland Security, the causes of

the persistent underutilization of this program

include “program instability, the changing economic

environment, and more inviting immigrant

investor programs offered by other countries.”

The report makes a number of recommendations

designed to streamline program administration

and encourages greater efforts to promote the

program overseas.

Update the Visa System Infrastructure

Aside from questions about the number of

visas allowed, the infrastructure for considering

and granting visas needs a major upgrade.

Currently, the U.S. visa process requires people

seeking entry to provide paper copies of

sometimes hard-to-obtain documents. Often

these are lost in the system and must be submitted

repeatedly. Obtaining a visa can take

months and, in some cases, years. Implementation

of the USA PATRIOT Act has slowed the

process even further.

The visa system should adopt digital technology

to reduce both errors and delays. Further,

if the nation’s immigration policy moves toward

a more credential-based approach, any new

electronic processes should be designed to

minimize the potential that false documents

regarding an individual’s education and experience

will be accepted.

Tie Immigration Levels to National

Economic Indicators

To ease U.S.-born workers’ understandable worries

about job competition from immigrants,

Congress should tie overall annual levels of

immigration to the unemployment rate and

growth in the Gross Domestic Product. Immigration

levels can be adjusted up or down depending

on the level of economic conditions. These fluctuations

should occur automatically, triggered

by authoritative statistical reports.

Political Hurdles to

Immigration Reform

U.S. news reporting on immigration focuses heavily

on illegality and largely ignores the benefits of

immigration. Sadly, important news organizations

follow the tradition set in the 19th century, when

many journalists railed against groups of newcomers,

such as immigrants from Ireland and China.

Immigration opponents’ unfavorable media narratives,

often widely publicized, have a discernible

impact on public opinion and affect policymaking.

The economic, social, and cultural benefits of immigration

are rarely reported.

The State of Public Opinion

Immigration does not rank high on Americans’ lists

of the country’s most important problems. In 2008,

only four percent of Americans (mostly people

from Southwestern border states concerned about

illegal entry) thought immigration was the country’s

most important problem. Even during 2007’s

acrimonious national debate about comprehensive

reform, 60 percent of Americans believed new

arrivals benefit the country. But public opinion

can shift quickly, which makes politicians wary.

Fifty-seven percent of voters in the November 2010

mid-term election considered immigration a “very

important” issue, ranking it 7th and on a par with

taxes and national security/war on terror, according

to the Rasmussen report.

The Need for Reform Follow-Through

Administration and enforcement of immigration

laws and visa programs are complex, in

part because federal, state and local officials are

involved in various aspects and are overseen by

multiple federal agencies. Aligning the goals of

these different entities to put an emphasis on

the brain gain can help build support for policy

improvements.

As the report of a 2009 Brookings Forum on

Growth Through Innovation pointed out with

regard to promoting innovation more broadly,

“while the actions we need to take are clear and

reasonably simple to outline, our political culture

erects insurmountable barriers to long-term planning,

funding and implementation.”

Achieving an Improved

Immigration Policy

It will be difficult to achieve comprehensive, coherent

policy reform in the face of many competing

goals and interest groups and in the current polarized

political environment. The task is made more

difficult by the divided authority over immigration

matters within Congress, involving several committees

and subcommittees with competing interests

and different political dynamics. Individual members

of Congress tend to focus on local concerns,

forestalling consideration of broad, long-term

national interests.

In the past, elected officials have overreacted to

specific episodes of problems related to immigrants

or anti-immigrant sentiments in developing

policy, rather than taking into account

long-term national economic priorities. Just as

deleterious, stalemate and inaction have prevented

needed reforms, despite a frustrating

status quo for employers who need talented

scientists and engineers, and who could hire

many more Americans if they could fill key slots

with skilled workers they cannot find in their

local workforce.

A spectrum of experts has suggested creation

of a broadly representative, independent federal

immigration commission that could develop specific

policies under parameters set by Congress.

Proposals for such a body have the common

themes of depoliticization, insulating members

from parochial political pressures and relying

on technical experts. Given past missteps and

the current policy stalemate, it makes sense to

consider such proposals seriously, in the hope

that all aspects of immigration—especially those

that affect U.S. economic vitality—receive the

thoughtful attention they need.

Conclusion

The immigration policy reforms in this paper

focus on those that would have swift and direct

positive impact on the nation’s economy. Clearly,

these are not the only reforms the system needs.

A fairer, more comprehensive immigration policy

also would:

Develop more effective and cost-effective

border control strategies



border control strategies Strengthen the electronic employment-eligibility

(“e-verify”) system and add an appeals process



(“e-verify”) system and add an appeals process Improve the immigration courts system and the

administration of immigration law



administration of immigration law Work harder to integrate immigrants into

American life and teach them English and



American life and teach them English and Create a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants

with requirements that applicants learn

English, pay back taxes, and pay fines.

Meanwhile, a number of the needed corrections to

the system as it affects national economic goals,

employment, innovation, and global competitiveness

can be addressed, including: