1865 House Journal, Adjourned Session, Volume 3 and Index :: Missouri State Archives
HOUSE JOURNAL. 895 Mr. Moss, of St. Louis, moved to dispense with the regular order to allow him to introduce a report from a select committee; Which was agreed to by the following vote, a division of the House having been called for—ayes, 35 ; noes, 33. Mr. Johnson, of St. Louis, moved a call of the House; Which was seconded by ten members. Mr. Johnson, of St. Louis, by leave, withdrew his motion for a call of the House. A recount of the vote on the motion of Mr. Moss, of St. Louis, to dispense with the regular order having been demanded, it was had with the following result—ayes, 41; noes, 34. So the motion was declared agreed to. Mr. Moss, of St. Louis, from the select committee tp investigate charges _against the Hon. Aaron Van Wormer, submitted the following report: Mr. Speaker : The select committee, to whom was referred the charges against the Hon. Aaron Van Wormer, Judge of the 18th Judicial Circuit, have examined the same, and have instructed me to report that they deem that there are good grounds for impeachment, and would respectfully recommend that the House take such further action as it may deem proper ; Which was read. Mr. Moss, of St. Louis, offered the following resolution : Resolved, That Hon. Aaron Van Wormer, Judge of the 18th Judicial Circuit, be impeached for misdemeanors in office. Resolved, further, That a committee of three be appointed as managers to conduct and try said impeachment before the Senate ; . Which was read. Mr. Clarke, of St. Louis, moved to postpone further consideration of the resolution and report until two o'clock on Thursday next, and make the whole matter the special order for that hour'. Mr. Johnson, of St. Louis, moved to lay the resolution and report on the table; Which was agreed to by the following vote, Messrs. Johnson, of St. Louis, and Simpson having demanded the ayes and noes: AYES—Messrs. Applegate, Bailey of Callaway, Bailey of St. Charles, Baldwin, Barlow, Beal, Black, Bodenhamer, Bricker, Brierly, Brown, Bumpass, Burnes, Clarke of St. Louis, Comstock, Cooper, Coulter, Cundiff, Currier, Deatherage, Dry, Finkelnburg, Fox, Gordon, Harris, Headlee, Holland, Howell, Hunter, Johnson of St. Louis, Jones of Dade, King of Cole, King of Mercer, Lane, Lawson, Lloyd, McGoldrick, Minor, Moss of Clay, Moreland, Morrisson, Preston, Ray, Simpson, Sitton, Smith of St. Louis, Spratt, Stockton, Swasey and Thompson—50. NOES—Messrs. Adams, Atterberry, Babcoke, Buckham, Clark of Crawford, Crow, Dallmeyer, Dana, Devinney, Downey, Dugge, Eagle, Foster, Gill, Goodson, Hackleman, Harper, Hewitt, Hollister, Howe, Isaminger, Jameson,'. Johnson of Scott, Jones of Laclede, Kellerman, Lee, Legg, Logan, Matthews, McFarland, McMillen, McMurtry, Meloy, Monks, Moss of St. Louis, Myers, Newcomb, Proctor, Pruitt, Reynolds, Roberts, Simms,