Brown Applauds Senate Passage of Landmark Comprehensive Immigration Reform Bill Congressional Budget Office Reports Immigration Reform Bill Would Cut Federal Deficit by $175 Billion Over First 10 Years, $700 Billion Over Next 20 Years

WASHINGTON, D.C. — Today, U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-OH) applauded the Senate’s passage of the landmark, comprehensive immigration reform bill that would fix our country’s broken immigration system by creating jobs, helping to grow the economy, and creating a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants living in the United States who are willing to meet strict but fair requirements. According to a recent report by the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office (CBO), the immigration reform bill would cut the federal deficit by $175 billion over the first 10 years of its enactment and by $700 billion over the next 20 years. The bill will also increase GDP by 3.3 percent in 2023, and by between 5.1 percent and 5.7 percent in 2033. The bill passed by a vote of 68 to 32.

“This historic bill is about fixing a broken immigration system so that everyone plays by the same rules,” Brown said. “This bill would strengthen our borders, put American workers and businesses first, and create jobs right here at home.”

Brown has traveled across the state to discuss Ohioans’ priorities for immigration reform, and has held immigration roundtables in Cleveland, Columbus, Toledo, and Dayton. Brown joined a bipartisan group of senators – and a resounding majority of Americans – in supporting a four-pillar approach to comprehensive immigration reform that, through the passage of this bill, would:

1. Allow undocumented immigrants to earn a path to citizenship by requiring them to go to the back of the line, register for legal status, pass a background check, learn English, pay taxes, and work towards citizenship over time;

2. Establish an effective employment verification system to crack down on the hiring of unauthorized workers, prevent identity theft, and deter illegal immigration.

3. Secure our border by deploying better technology and focusing enforcement resources on the most serious security threats; and

4. Create a rational approach to future legal immigration that promotes American economic prosperity and strong families.

Mirroring the 68 out of 100 Senators who voted for this immigration reform plan, a strong majority of Ohioans, nearly 62 percent, also support this plan. [Harper Polling, June 3-4, 2013]

###