1842 House Journal, First Session :: Missouri State Archives
140 JOURNAL OF THE So the motion to disagree was lost, and the .report agreed to. Mr. Snyder from the committee on claims, to which was referred the peti- tion of Joseph D. Grafton, submitted a report^ which Was agreed to. Also introduced a bill for the relief of Jason Zfarrisori.' Which was read a first time and ordered to a. second reading. ' ■ Mr. Andrews from the select committee to which was referred the petition of the Sisters of Charity/of St. Louis, reported A bill to incorporate the St. Louis .Hospital, which-was read a first time and ordered to a second reading.: -. , Mr..Shields from the select committee instructed to prepare a rhemorial to Congress, respecting the improvement of the western rivers*, subrnitted a report which was agreed to- Also, , , '. . A memorial to Congress asking an,appropriation for the improvement.of of the western rivers. Which was read a first time and ordered to a'second .reading. Mr..Sheely offered the following: ■ ' Whereas, it having been represented that the Hon, John D. Leland, Judge ofthe second judicial circuit, in the State of Missouri, is wholly unqualified for the office which he • fills; that in consequence of the want of the necessary legal learning, he is entirely incapable of discharging, promptly and satisfactorily, the duties devolving upon him, as judge; that he is neg^ Jigent and inattentive in the .performance of his official duties;'that his 'manner of conducting business; in court, instead of promoting the ends of justice, tends rather to bring it into contehipt and ridicule; that the people Of the circuit over whom fie presides, are dissatisfied with him as their judge, and that a majority o.f-them are opposed to him holding the office longer; and that, in consequence of the facts above stated the cause of jus- > tice, the correct and promptadministration of law,, (essential alike to the well-being and happiness of every community,) and the rights and interests of the people of the second -judicial circuit, are endangered.' Therefore, -..',' . ' - Be it resolved; That the matters and things, above set forth be referred to the committee on the judiciary; that they may enquire into'the-same; that they have full power .to send for persons and papers touching the premises, arid report thereon to this House', with as little delay as practicable. Resolved further, That, if in the opinion ofsaid committee, there is probable cause for proceeding against said Judge, for any matter; for which he may be removed from office, by address of two-thirds, of each House, to the Governor, said committee shall accompany their report with formal charges and specifications against said John 1). Leland, Judge as aforesaid. Mr. Alexander moved to amend the foregoing as follows: Strike out "judicial" and insert "a select committee of sevem" Mr. Shields, moved to lay theresolution and-a'rnendment on the table, Mr. Slack moved the previous'q'ue's'tion, which was sustained. ' The question was on Mr. Shields'motion to Jay on the table,.determined in the negative. . ; The question recurred oh the amendment offered by'Mr. Alexander, which was determined in the affirmative. The question now recurred on the adoption of the preamble and resolutions, as amended, and they were adopted. On motion, The House adjourned till 3 o'clock, P. M.