Brown Votes Against Fast Track Bill in Committee Brown Trade Enforcement and Currency Manipulation Bills Passed as Part of the Package. Brown Also Passed Amendment to End Loophole Allowing Certain Imports to be Made with Forced or Child Labor

WASHINGTON, D.C. – U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-OH) issued the following statement after voting against giving the Administration renewed Trade Promotion Authority (TPA), known as “fast track,” during a U.S. Senate Finance Committee markup. Brown filed a total of 88 amendments to the trade package in an effort to stand up for American workers, increase transparency, and improve trade enforcement.

“We shouldn’t give fast track authority if we can’t guarantee a level playing field for American workers and manufacturers, or if we can’t prevent communist China from joining the pact at a later date,” Brown said. “We must prevent more NAFTA-style deals from giving corporations handouts while workers get sold out.”

Brown’s Leveling the Playing Field Act, which would increase the ability of U.S. industries to fight back against unfair trade, was included in the bill. In addition to Leveling the Playing Field, Brown helped pass several amendments, including an amendment to crack down on currency manipulation and an amendment that would eliminate an exemption in current law that allows the U.S. to import certain products produced with forced or child labor. Brown also introduced critical amendments to the fast track bill. More information can be found here.

In the past, fast track authority has resulted in NAFTA-style trade deals that have shipped jobs overseas, shuttered Ohio manufacturing facilities, and given handouts to the biggest multinational corporations. Under #NotAnotherNAFTA, Brown has led opposition to fast track and TPP in the Senate, and demanded trade policy that puts American jobs first. He toured Ohio to warn against the impact of fast tracking NAFTA-style trade deals and to hear from workers who’ve been impacted by trade, including stops at:

###