1842 House Journal, First Session, Appendix and Index :: Missouri State Archives
APPENDIX. •. 647 Your committee feeling the utmost confidence in the justice of this Legislature, believe that the prayer of the petitioners will be granted, by the passage of the accompanying bill. '• All of which is respectfully submitted. D. H. DONOVAN, Chairman. REPORT Ofthe Select Committee on the subject of general Relief. The select committee charged with the duty of reporting by bill, without delay, some constitutional relief for the debtor portion of community, and to which was referred the several bills before this House appertaining to the same, have had the matter under consideration, and ascertaining that the same subject is now before the Senate, and made the special order of the day in that House for Monday next, have unanimously agreed that it would be unparliamentary, and a useless consumption of time by this House, to take any further steps in the matter until it is. disposed of in the Senate, and ask to be excused from further action on tile subject till such time. W. J. HOWELL, Chairman. REPORT Ofthe select Committee on the preamble and resolutions concerning Judge Leland. The select committee to which were referred a preamble and series of resolutions relating to the Hon. J. D. Leland, Judge of the second judicial circuit in the State of Missouri, have had the same under consideration, and after a careful and minute examination of witnesses touching the matter embodied in said preamble and resolutions, have come to the conclusion that there is probable cause for proceedings against said Leland, for matter for which he may be removed from office, by address of two- thirds of each House to the Governor; which matter is fully set forth in the accompanying charges and specifications, which said committee have instructed me to report. Accompanying this report will also be found the testimony adduced before said committee. All of which is respectfully submitted. C. W. FLANAGAN, Chairman. January 2, 1843.