Lt. Gov. Sanguinetti Discusses Taxes and Toilets With Marc Cox on KFTK
Cox: I watch these commercials for your and Governor Rauner’s opponent J.B. Pritzker and I shake my head. I’m not I’m not sure how somebody like that can run campaign ads basically promising that if he gets elected he’s going to raise more taxes in the state of Illinois.

Sanguinetti: Yes. He’ll stick you with that progressive income tax which is surely to be an increase. Not to mention the fact that it is wholly regressive. Not at all what Illinois needs at this time. And then you take a look at his history and it should really really concern everybody and this is why it’s so important to get out there and vote in this coming election. It is the most important election in Illinois history. We have the choice between the present governor Bruce Rauner, who doesn’t take a salary, believes in the greatness of our state, believes in bringing businesses back to grow here and families back too. And then we have JB Pritzker who tears toilets out of his mansion so that he can evade taxes. This goes to his core. And then he’s talking about us all paying more taxes. Yet he’s doing that. You know he puts away money in the Bahamas in order to avoid taxes. So this guy is certainly not a leader and surely a reason why we should get out and Reelect Bruce Rauner.

Cox: Well you know I’ve been watching the some of the campaign ads that the Governor Rauner’s campaign has been running, particularly the ones that highlight some of the conversations that the FBI wiretap picked up with former Governor Blagojevich and I’m thinking to myself certainly the people of Illinois would listen to that and realize that J.B. Pritzker was kind of there from the beginning of the whole sell the Senate seat approach to government in Illinois. And yet, you know, here he is. He he got the nomination and he’s running for governor of that state. That amazes me.

Sanguinetti: Yeah. Pay to play at its best is what you’re seeing in those recordings. And there’s no way to get around it. I mean it’s almost funny if it weren’t so serious. He wants to be governor. You know the whole thing about talking about Emil Jones not be refined enough, another potential African-American candidate. You know this should get everyone concern about what this guy’s all about. You know he said you remember Rauner has a scholarship program in order to help kids in very under-served communities be able to go to a private school and get a scholarship. You know what? JB Pritzker said that on the first day as governor, he said he going to get rid of that scholarship program. Could you believe that? These kids in under-served communities with parents that don’t have the resources unlike JB Pritzker who’s a billionaire. Those parents don’t have the resources yet JB Pritzker wants to punish those children. These are examples that people should know about. Not to mention the fact that he’s going to bring us more taxes to pay.