1867 House Journal, Regular Session :: Missouri State Archives
.- t'i HOUSE JOURNAL. N AVhile none of them Avere made and filed in compliance with the plain requirements of the law, many of them Avere so ridiculous and absurd and so manifestly in the nature of a farce, that they of themselves afford the strongest proof of an unlawful and corrupt design on the part, of Judge King to make good his avowed purpose to have every man in the county registered as a legal voter. In no instance did the petitioners produce a discharge from a United States officer, or give in evidence that they voluntarily entered the military service of the United States, as required by the Constitution of the State, or even so much as that they were even in the United States service. The evidence, in short, is conclusive that Judge King proceeded in this matter contrary to laAV, and in treasonable defiance of the Constitution, thus sinking the dignity of his high office for the successful enactment of partisan measures which he knew to be unlawful; for it is not conceivable that Judge King acted ignorantly and unknowingly while thus proceeding in direct violation of the very letter and spirit of the Constitution. That a judge could be so ignorant of the laAV Avhich it is his high calling to expound and to enforce, is a proposition which does not admit of argument. That Judge King has willfully, corruptly and maliciously violated the Constitution, the guardian of our liberties, cannot be denied; and in so acting your committee hold that he has rendered himself amenable to justice, and should be held to a strict account for his conduct at the hands of an outraged people. Had he acted in accordance with laAV, and as an impartial judge, free from the tyranny of partisan feelings, he would have saved himself and the loyal people of his circuit a world of trouble and unhappy strife. His actions as a judge, and the effects of those actions, in the language of the Avitnesses, "had a direct tendency to encourage that portion of the community known as bushwhackers and ex-rebels in perpetrating crimes, laAvlessness and insult upon loyal men." That such is the fact is apparent to every one, from the disturbed condition of affairs in that section of the country, and from the fact that the military have had to be called out to enforce the laAV against the class of persons above referred to Avhose crimes were sought to be covered up and shielded by a partisan judge from the punishment which eA7en-handed justice would otherwise have dealt to theni. Loyal men have there been murdered in cold blood for no other crime than a true and loyal devotion to their country and her liberties, and the loyal grand juries, regularly and legally summoned, Avho should have been permitted to take cognizance of these most foul and most unnatural murders, have been dismissed by the arbitrary authority, if not by the bold connivance of Judge King, and conser- Amative juries, as he Avas pleased to term them, haAre been summoned for the purpose, as your committee believe, of permitting the perpetrators of these outrages to go free. Humanity shudders at such a course, and justice trembles on her throne for safety. The blood of our heroes Avho fell in defense of the rights and privileges Ave now enjoy, and Avhose bones lie bleaching on Southern soil, demand that such outrages should be stopped and the perpetrators thereof held to a strict account at the bar ot a great and prosperous peopfe. Upon a careful examination of the testimony, as given in before us, your committee—a large majority, five out of seven—are of opinion that Judge King has been guilty of high misdemeanors in office, and of gross abuse of authority, and that he should be held to a strict account for this abuse. They, therefore, recommend the adoption of the following resolution and articles of impeachment against the said