He's BAAACK!: Anti-gun Mike DeWine seeks Ohio AG slot three years after Ohio voters send him packing
"Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it."

- George Santayana, The Life of Reason, Volume 1, 1905

By Chad D. Baus

Montgomery County Republican Party Chair Greg Gantt is circulating an email to "Republican insiders" that Mike DeWine will announce his candidacy for Ohio Attorney General on Wednesday, July 22nd at 9:45am at the Greene County Courthouse.

That's right, Mike DeWine.

The same Mike DeWine who was thrown out of his U.S. Senate seat by voters in 2006, after running around sporting a Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence (formerly Handgun Control Inc.) endorsement because "his record really wowed the group."

The same Mike DeWine who Human Events Online named among the Top 10 anti-gun U.S. Senators, noting that he was "consistently the only Republican to speak in favor of anti-2nd Amendment legislation on the Senate floor."

The same Mike DeWine who, shortly before his defeat in 2006, took a position in opposition to legislation which barred gun manufacturers, distributors, dealers or importers from frivolous lawsuits designed to put them out of business.

The same Mike DeWine who consistently cast his votes on the side of the most rabid anti-gun Democrats in the Senate.

The same Mike DeWine who, as Buckeye Firearms Association Legislative Chair Ken Hanson points out, is so hated by grassroots Republicans that GOP Voter Vault started keeping a separate data field for registered Republicans who indicated they would never support Mike DeWine.

The same Mike DeWine whose second cousin Kevin, in his position as Chairman of the Ohio GOP, is busy trying to reconstruct a party in shambles thanks to damage done by liberals like Mike.

So I'll ask the question once again: Will the Ohio Republican Party cement their minority status by backing anti-gun Mike DeWine for Attorney General?

A separate email from the Green County Republican Party indicates the campaign announcement will be held on the second floor of the Green County Courthouse, and says "PLEASE COME AND INVITE YOUR FRIENDS!"

Here's hoping some pro-gun voters accept their invitation. Come and invite your friends. And bring your "Anybody but Mike" signs. Bring your "Mike go home" signs. Bring your "Vote Freedom First" signs. Bring your "What part of 'shall not be infringed' don't you understand?" signs. "PLEASE COME AND INVITE YOUR FRIENDS!"

Related Stories:

Delaware Co. Prosecutor Dave Yost Announces Bid for Attorney General in 2010

Republicans' attempt to remake party must include focus on Second Amendment

Senator DeWine proud to be anti-gun