Primary polling indicates potential DeWine-Cordray general election rematch
A poll released last week by Fallon Research shows gubernatorial candidates Mike DeWine (R) and Richard Cordray (D) both leading their respective party's races for governor, with DeWine also having a big lead over Cordray in a head-to-head matchup.

From the Dayton Daily News:

Here are the poll results released by Fallon’s firm Thursday: In the Republican primary, DeWine has 54 percent support compared with 14 percent for Taylor. In the crowded Democratic Party field, Cordray has support from 23 percent, followed by Dennis Kucinich, 16 percent; Joe Schiavoni, 4 percent; Bill O’Neill, 3 percent; and Connie Pillich, 2 percent.

The poll also found that DeWine leads Cordray in a head-to-head matchup, 49 percent to 28 percent.

In 2010, when the two faced off in a statewide race for Attorney General, DeWine defeated incumbent Cordray 48% - 46%.

Since that time, DeWine has done just about everything a person in the position of Attorney General can do to convince gun owners that his anti-gun record in the U.S. Senate should be forgiven.

In the past seven years, Dewine has:

Late last year, DeWine's campaign got a huge boost when Secretary of State Jon Husted announced that he was ending his own gubernatorial run, and would instead join forces with DeWine as a candidate for Lieutenant Governor.

Jon Husted has a flawless record in supporting Second Amendment rights. Under Husted’s Speakership, the state legislature took huge strides toward making Ohio a more friendly state to Second Amendment rights by loosening restrictions on lawful gun ownership. When Governor Bob Taft (R) vetoed common-sense legislation to ease restrictions on concealed-carry license holders, Husted worked with members of his caucus to return to the House Floor. On December 7, 2006, Jon Husted’s House of Representatives stood with Buckeye Firearms Association and other Second Amendment supporters when they overrode that veto and put House Bill 347 into state law.

Chad D. Baus is the Buckeye Firearms Association Secretary and an NRA-certified firearms instructor. He is co-founder of BFA-PAC, and served as its Vice Chairman for 15 years. He is the editor of BuckeyeFirearms.org, which received the Outdoor Writers of Ohio 2013 Supporting Member Award for Best Website.