1832 Senate Journal, First Session :: Missouri State Archives
I 187 ] The following charge and specifications against William C. Carr, hate been concurred in by the Senate and House of Representatives. The committee, on the judiciary to whom was re-committed, the evidence accompanying the report on an investigation of the official conduct of William C. Carr, Judge of the third judicial circuit, with a request that they prefer charges and specifications against the said Judge, founded upon such facts, as,in their opinion do exist, herewith prefer a charge with its spec'fications against William C. Carr, Judge as aforesaid on the part of the House of Representatives, and of the people of the State of Missouri. CHARGE:—William C. Carr, is wholly unquallified for the judicial station,- and ought not to hold the office of Judge in the third judicial circuit of the State of Missouri. Specif cation 1st. He wants the natural capacity and legal attainments necessary to qualify him for the office. Specification 2d. Some Attornies who practise in his court are favored, others are oppressed. Specification 3d. He is ignorant, petulent fnd oppressive as a Judge. Specification 4th. He is inattentive and negligent in discharging his duties as a Judge. Specification 5th. As a man his integrity and fair dealing are impeached. Specification 6th. The penalties ofthe law have been inflicted on the innocent, by want of legal information or prejudice against certain Attornies. Specification 7th. His favoritism towards some Attornies, and his antipathies evinced towards others, are so glaring as to prevent those against whom he exercises such antipathies from obtaining that share of business that they otherwise would, to the injury of private families, and the public. Specification 8th. In. the exercise of his judicial functions, he favors the wealthy, and oppresses the indigent—he shews partiality towards his particular friends. Specification 9th. Public sentiment is against him as a Judge. Specification 10th. The administration of public, justice on account of his strong prejudices and partialities js unsafe in his hands. Specification 11th. His constitution and physical ability are not adequate to his duties as Judge. . Specification i'2tb. Tiie said -William C. Carr, does not exercise that portion of application and industry necessary to qualify him for tiie discharge ofthe duties of a judge. Specification 13th. His petulence, peevishness, and want of equihim- ity of temper render him, the said William C. Carr, entirely unfit for a Judge. Specification 14th. His oppressive aud unjustifiable conduct towards Attornies, litigants, suiters and witnesses in court, require his removal from office. S