Chick-fil-A CEO Saying ‘We Don’t Like Blacks’ As Marketing Ploy Is Fake News
Reports that Chick-fil-A said, “We don’t like blacks,” as a marketing ploy are false. The fast food chain never used racist remarks to sell their food—these claims were based on timely controversy the CEO encountered after sharing his views on gay marriage.

According to Snopes, the fake claim was originally published in 2012 on the satirical website Free Wood Post and republished over the years on several other disreputable websites. The article claimed that after experiencing a record-setting sales day, Chick-fil-A President Dan Cathy planned to oppose blacks as a new marketing ploy after realizing “that hatred and bigotry are extremely profitable.” It purported:

After a record setting sales day last week, Chick-fil-A President and Chief Operating Officer Dan Cathy has realized that hatred and bigotry are extremely profitable in the United States. While hundreds of people stood in line to “celebrate” the Chick-fil-A Appreciation Day and show their support for Cathy’s anti-gay agenda, Cathy was already considering his next move. According to a senior level manager, Cathy is planning a marketing campaign around his next controversial and extremely profitable statement. Cathy considered many targets that would appeal to his primarily southern-based conservative customers before ultimately saying the following: “Let’s milk this for all its worth. Let’s wait until this gay thing dies down a little, then I will release another statement that says that we don’t like blacks either. Now, they’re protected by those stupid discrimination laws so we’ll need to be careful, but I think it will work. I mean hey, it’s not like it’s a lie. We’ll have another Chick-Fil-A Appreciation Day before you know it!”

It also claimed that future targets would include “liberals and people of Asian, Hispanic and Arabic descent.” The article, however, is clearly marked as satire and cites their disclaimer within the article:

Free Wood Post is a news and political satire web publication, which may or may not use real names, often in semi-real or mostly fictitious ways. All news articles contained within FreeWoodPost.com are fiction, and presumably fake news.

The fast food chain did have a record setting sales day in 2012 during an “Appreciation Day.” The event occurred amid controversy over Cathy’s opposition to gay marriage. Cathy shared his support of what he described as traditional marriage and “biblical principles.” Later, he admitted his stance wasn’t the wisest business decision, however, he never actually changed his views:

“I think the time of truths and principles are captured and codified in God’s word and I’m just personally committed to that. I know others feel very different from that and I respect their opinion and I hope that they would be respectful of mine.”

Cathy never indicated that they would use racist statements as a marketing ploy. This claim was purely satirical based on Chick-fil-A’s 2012 controversy.

Social Media Shares Fake Chick-fil-A Marketing Ploy Article

not eating there nomore https://t.co/2mUHd3PDzo — la jones (@lajones1264) February 28, 2017

Recommended for You Webcast, March 28th: Beyond the Landing Page

Chick-fil-A will never, ever get my money https://t.co/qdklh1cspH — Music In Me (@SmoothSax) February 26, 2017

"BOYCOTT" LET YOUR DOLLARS BE YOUR PROTEST! Chick-fil-A President Dan Cathy – “We Don’t Like The Blacks Either” https://t.co/e8JBlFM3xJ — I Am #ABWisdom (@adbridgeforth) July 10, 2016

Did you see the fake Chick-fil-A marketing ploy circulating social media? Sound off in the comments section below!