Surgeon Exposing ‘Clinton Foundation Corruption’ In Haiti Dead From Suspicious Death?
A U.S. surgeon who exposed “Clinton Foundation corruption in Haiti” being found dead in his home under suspicious circumstances is part of a paranoid report. Rather, the story appears to be the latest in a line to accuse Bill and Hillary Clinton of being linked to the death of someone associated with them.

The Clintons have been the basis of many conspiracy theories resulting from their time in The White House. Where did this conspiracy theory originate about a Clinton related-murder?

Your News Wire published the story on Dec. 12, 2017, reporting that Dean Lorich’s suicide was actually murder as he was going to reveal fraud in the Clinton Foundation’s development work in Haiti, which has been both praised and criticized. You can read the false news below.

Dr. Lorich was found on the bathroom floor of his tony Upper East Side apartment with a knife in his chest by his 11-year-old daughter at around 1pm on Monday. The knife missed the surgeon’s heart, leaving him to bleed out and be found by his daughter. Despite the fact police were called to the property regarding an “assault“, they instantly registered the death as “suicide” and closed the case. One of the United States’ leading surgeons, Dr. Lorich was part of the relief effort sent by the U.S. to assist the relief effort led by the Clinton Foundation in Haiti after the devastating 2010 earthquake. However Dr. Lorich was disgusted by the “shameful” Clinton Foundation operation, and voiced his concerns to Hillary Clinton directly. Unsatisfied with her response, he went public, writing an article published by CNN, accusing the Clinton Foundation of widespread corruption and malpractice in Haiti that cost the lives of thousands of children.

However, Snopes reported the above story as being false.

Indeed, Lorich, the surgeon, was found dead from a self-inflicted knife wound in his Manhattan home on Dec. 10, 2017. Likewise, Snopes noted that there is truth that Lorich was part of a team of doctors volunteering their time in Haiti after the Jan. 12, 2010 earthquake. Lorich did criticize the handling of the work in Haiti from his experience in an opinion piece for CNN on Jan. 25, 2010, Snopes said.

Here are some examples of people sharing the false information on social media.

Another clinton witness found dead.https://t.co/rrtLKZ2oXU — robert depelteau (@DepelteauRobert) December 13, 2017

NEW VICTIM

Dr. Dean Lorich found at home by his 11 year old daughter, with a knife in his chest

Exposed #ClintonFoundation corruption in #Haiti

Read more:https://t.co/lfpmtIOujI https://t.co/G7K8GbBPIO — Mojica Fitz Kennedy (@politicalcomic) December 13, 2017

They want us to believe this surgeon not only committed suicide by stabbing himself in the chest-but was also too incompetent to know where his heart was thus causing a slow agonizing death. Another Clinton body count number https://t.co/n2R9uJg3Yv #QAnon #FollowTheWhiteRabbit — kristin (@okthunderkgirl) December 12, 2017

He directly called Hillary Clinton about the fraud & the lack of funds reaching the dying patients. Publicly was outraged at the corruption within the Clinton Foundation regarding money supposed to be going to earthquake victims. https://t.co/pZvW6HArexhttps://t.co/Y4zfVuCjOX — emma jones (@Abellonia38) December 14, 2017

What was the problem with the story to make it false? Your News Wire inaccurately suggested that Lorich was part of an effort associated with the Clinton Foundation. While the Clintons have had a long history with Haiti, the Clinton Foundation played no role in Lorich’s trip, and they had no formal role in Haitian relief efforts at that time.

Lorich noted in his CNN piece that David Helfet was the surgeon who organized the volunteer trip and that Helfet reached out to “Bill and Hillary Clinton” for advice on conditions on the ground. Bill Clinton had been serving as the United Nations’ special envoy to Haiti since May 2009.

Snopes further noted that it was false to imply that Lorich “voiced his concerns to Hillary Clinton directly” or reached out to anyone at the State Department personally. A Jan. 24, 2010 e-mail to Hillary Clinton published by WikiLeaks, showed that chief of staff Cheryl Mills forwarded a chain of messages sent by Lorich containing similar details found in his CNN piece.

Any suspicious activity with regards to Lorich’s death originated with an initial report from Lorich’s 11-year-old daughter, who found his body, to the building’s doorman, who called police and described the incident as an “assault.” At the time of his suicide, Lorich was sued last year by a former New York Giants running back who accused the doctor of ending his NFL career.

Recommended for You Webcast, May 8th: Customer Insights That Drive User Engagement

What did you think of the false news that Lorich who “was exposing a corruption” in the Clinton Foundation in Haiti died from a suspicious death? Did you believe the fake news or see people sharing it falsely on social media? Let us know in the comments section.

Photo credit: U.S. Marine Corps Lance Cpl. Cristian L. Ricardo, Wikimedia Commons