Ted Cruz makes flag burning an issue in Texas' Senate race against Beto O'Rourke
CLOSE Congressman Beto O'Rourke is asked about flag burning at a town hall in El Paso. O'Rourke campaign

"I don't think anyone should burn an American flag," O'Rourke said even before Cruz posted an attack video on Facebook.

Buy Photo U.S. Senate candidates Beto O'Rourke (left) and Ted Cruz (Photo: Casey Jackson/Caller-Times, )Buy Photo

AUSTIN – Republican Sen. Ted Cruz ramped up his attacks Tuesday on Democratic challenger Beto O’Rourke with a Facebook video suggesting the El Paso congressman is a supporter of flag burning.

But in an interview with the USA Today Network last week, O’Rourke said he is not.

“I don't think anyone should burn an American flag,” O’Rourke said after an Aug. 27 rally in Austin. “I also don't think this is about flags. It's about people's lives. It's about civil rights. It's about making sure that everyone has an opportunity to succeed and that there is justice and accountability for everyone in this country."

Cruz's short, heavily edited clip of a town hall meeting in El Paso comes after Cruz’s earlier ad slamming O’Rourke for his support of the “take a knee” movement by some NFL players to call attention to racial injustice.

In a longer clip of the town hall meeting, O’Rourke does not directly address flag burning, but does offer support for protest movements aimed at improving race relations. He ended his four-minute response saying he was “grateful that people are willing to do that.”

In a news release, Cruz’s spokeswoman Catherine Frazier said: “His position is an appalling display of disregard to those who have put their lives on the line to preserve the very freedoms the American flag represents.”

But the Facebook video left off O’Rourke’s final words on the matter:

“I understand that people can come down to a difference conclusion on this issue, and I respect that as well,” he said. “That's American as well. But those are my feelings on the issue, and I'm grateful for the question."

Cruz first hit O’Rourke at a campaign rally in Corpus Christi last month on the supporting NFL players who kneel during the national anthem. Then last week at another event, Cruz questioned whether O’Rourke might also support flag burning.

John C. Moritz covers Texas government and politics for the USA Today Network in Austin. Contact him at John.Moritz@caller.com and follow him on Twitter @JohnnieMo.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7096. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Related content

More: Ted Cruz ad attacks Beto O'Rourke over 'take a knee'

More: President Trump to campaign in Texas for Ted Cruz re-election

More: Ted Cruz vs. Beto O'Rourke: A campaign diary for Texas' Senate race

Read or Share this story: https://callertim.es/2Pzkfmr