Known and Probable Human Carcinogens

In general, the American Cancer Society does not determine if something causes cancer (that is, if it is a carcinogen ). Instead, we rely on the determinations of other respected agencies, such as the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and the US National Toxicology Program (NTP).

The lists below are from IARC and NTP, and more information on each of these known and probable human carcinogens can be found on their websites.

To learn more about these agencies and how they study and classify cancer causes, see Determining if Something Is a Carcinogen.

What you should know

The IARC and NTP act independently. Many known or suspected carcinogens appear on both organization’s lists; however, if a substance or exposure is only on one agency’s list, this it does not necessarily mean there is a controversy , as one agency may not have evaluated it.

, as one agency may not have evaluated it. These lists are alphabetical, but many of the substances and exposures here can go by different names. This can make it hard to find a particular substance on one or both of these lists.

This can make it hard to find a particular substance on one or both of these lists. These lists include only those agents that have been evaluated by the agencies. These agencies tend to focus on substances and exposures most likely to cause cancer, but there are many others that have not been fully studied yet.

These agencies tend to focus on substances and exposures most likely to cause cancer, but there are many others that have not been fully studied yet. These lists include agents that have been classified as known and probable human carcinogens. The lists do not include substances that have been classified as possible carcinogens, for which the evidence is not as strong. These lists also do not include substances evaluated as “not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity in humans.”

These lists also do not include substances evaluated as “not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity in humans.” Most of the agents on the lists have been linked only with certain kinds of cancer, not all cancer types. See each agency’s website for more details about the substances and exposures on their lists.

See each agency’s website for more details about the substances and exposures on their lists. The lists describe the level of evidence that something can cause cancer, not how likely it is that something will cause cancer in any person (or how much it might raise your risk) . For example, IARC considers there to be strong evidence that both tobacco smoking and eating processed meat can cause cancer, so both are listed as “carcinogenic to humans.” But smoking is much more likely to cause cancer than eating processed meat, even though both are in the same category.

. For example, IARC considers there to be strong evidence that both tobacco smoking and eating processed meat can cause cancer, so both are listed as “carcinogenic to humans.” But smoking is much more likely to cause cancer than eating processed meat, even though both are in the same category. Carcinogens do not cause cancer at all times, under all circumstances. In other words, a carcinogen does not always cause cancer in every person, every time there is any kind of exposure. Some may only be carcinogenic if a person is exposed in a certain way (for example, swallowing it as opposed to touching it). Some may only cause cancer in people who have a certain genetic makeup. Some of these agents may lead to cancer after only a very small exposure, while others might require intense exposure over many years. Again, refer to the agencies’ reports for specifics.

In other words, a carcinogen does not always cause cancer in every person, every time there is any kind of exposure. Some may only be carcinogenic if a person is exposed in a certain way (for example, swallowing it as opposed to touching it). Some may only cause cancer in people who have a certain genetic makeup. Some of these agents may lead to cancer after only a very small exposure, while others might require intense exposure over many years. Again, refer to the agencies’ reports for specifics. Even if a substance or exposure is known or suspected to cause cancer, this does not necessarily mean that it can or should be avoided at all costs. For example, sunlight is a major source of ultraviolet (UV) rays, which are a known cause of skin cancer, but it’s not practical (or advisable) to completely avoid the sun. (See How to Interpret News About Cancer Causes for more about this.)

For example, sunlight is a major source of ultraviolet (UV) rays, which are a known cause of skin cancer, but it’s not practical (or advisable) to completely avoid the sun. (See How to Interpret News About Cancer Causes for more about this.) These lists also include many commonly used medicines, particularly some hormones and drugs used to treat cancer. For example, tamoxifen increases the risk of certain kinds of uterine cancer, but it can be very useful in treating some breast cancers, which may be more important for some women. If you have questions about a medicine that appears on one of these lists, be sure to ask your doctor.

Known human carcinogens

International Agency for Research on Cancer

Group 1: Carcinogenic to humans

Learn more about the topics in this list in the IARC monographs at https://monographs.iarc.fr/monographs-and-supplements-available-online/.

Acetaldehyde (from consuming alcoholic beverages)

Acheson process, occupational exposure associated with

Acid mists, strong inorganic

Aflatoxins

Alcoholic beverages

Aluminum production

4-Aminobiphenyl

Areca nut

Aristolochic acid (and plants containing it)

Arsenic and inorganic arsenic compounds

Asbestos (all forms) and mineral substances (such as talc or vermiculite) that contain asbestos

Auramine production

Azathioprine

Benzene

Benzidine and dyes metabolized to benzidine

Benzo[a]pyrene

Beryllium and beryllium compounds

Betel quid, with or without tobacco

Bis(chloromethyl)ether and chloromethyl methyl ether (technical-grade)

Busulfan

1,3-Butadiene

Cadmium and cadmium compounds

Chlorambucil

Chlornaphazine

Chromium (VI) compounds

Clonorchis sinensis (infection with), also known as the Chinese liver fluke

Coal, indoor emissions from household combustion

Coal gasification

Coal-tar distillation

Coal-tar pitch

Coke production

Cyclophosphamide

Cyclosporine (ciclosporin)

1,2-Dichloropropane

Diethylstilbestrol (DES)

Engine exhaust, diesel

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) (infection with)

Erionite

Estrogen-only menopausal therapy

Estrogen-progestogen menopausal therapy (combined)

Estrogen-progestogen oral contraceptives (combined) (Note: There is also convincing evidence in humans that these agents confer a protective effect against cancer in the endometrium and ovary)

Ethanol in alcoholic beverages

Ethylene oxide

Etoposide

Etoposide in combination with cisplatin and bleomycin

Fission products, including strontium-90

Fluoro-edenite fibrous amphibole

Formaldehyde

Haematite mining (underground)

Helicobacter pylori (infection with)

Hepatitis B virus (chronic infection with)

Hepatitis C virus (chronic infection with)

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) (infection with)

Human papilloma virus (HPV) types 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59 (infection with) (Note: The HPV types that have been classified as carcinogenic to humans can differ by an order of magnitude in risk for cervical cancer)

Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-1) (infection with)

Ionizing radiation (all types)

Iron and steel founding (workplace exposure)

Isopropyl alcohol manufacture using strong acids

Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV), also known as human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) (infection with)

Leather dust

Lindane

Magenta production

Melphalan

Methoxsalen (8-methoxypsoralen) plus ultraviolet A radiation, also known as PUVA

Methyl-CCNU

4,4'-Methylenebis(chloroaniline) (MOCA)

Mineral oils, untreated or mildly treated

MOPP and other combined chemotherapy including alkylating agents

2-Naphthylamine

Neutron radiation

Nickel compounds

N'-Nitrosonornicotine (NNN) and 4-(N-Nitrosomethylamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK)

Opisthorchis viverrini (infection with), also known as the Southeast Asian liver fluke

Outdoor air pollution (and the particulate matter in it)

Painter (workplace exposure as a)

3,4,5,3',4'-Pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB-126)

2,3,4,7,8-Pentachlorodibenzofuran

Pentachlorophenol

Phenacetin (and mixtures containing it)

Phosphorus-32, as phosphate

Plutonium

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), dioxin-like, with a Toxicity Equivalency Factor according to WHO (PCBs 77, 81, 105, 114, 118, 123, 126, 156, 157, 167, 169, 189)

Processed meat (consumption of)

Radioiodines, including iodine-131

Radionuclides, alpha-particle-emitting, internally deposited (Note: Specific radionuclides for which there is sufficient evidence for carcinogenicity to humans are also listed individually as Group 1 agents)

Radionuclides, beta-particle-emitting, internally deposited (Note: Specific radionuclides for which there is sufficient evidence for carcinogenicity to humans are also listed individually as Group 1 agents)

Radium-224 and its decay products

Radium-226 and its decay products

Radium-228 and its decay products

Radon-222 and its decay products

Rubber manufacturing industry

Salted fish (Chinese-style)

Schistosoma haematobium (infection with)

Semustine (methyl-CCNU)

Shale oils

Silica dust, crystalline, in the form of quartz or cristobalite

Solar radiation

Soot (as found in workplace exposure of chimney sweeps)

Sulfur mustard

Talc containing asbestiform fibres

Tamoxifen (Note: There is also conclusive evidence that tamoxifen reduces the risk of contralateral breast cancer in breast cancer patients)

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-para-dioxin (TCDD); "dioxin"

Thiotepa

Thorium-232 and its decay products

Tobacco, smokeless

Tobacco smoke, secondhand

Tobacco smoking

ortho-Toluidine

Treosulfan

Trichloroethylene

Ultraviolet (UV) radiation, including UVA, UVB, and UVC rays

Ultraviolet-emitting tanning devices

Vinyl chloride

Welding fumes

Wood dust

X- and Gamma-radiation

National Toxicology Program 14th Report on Carcinogens

“Known to be human carcinogens”

Learn more about the topics in this list in the NTP’s Report on Carcinogens at https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/roc/index-1.html.

Aflatoxins

Alcoholic beverage consumption

4-Aminobiphenyl

Analgesic mixtures containing phenacetin

Aristolochic acids

Arsenic and inorganic arsenic compounds

Asbestos

Azathioprine

Benzene

Benzidine

Beryllium and beryllium compounds

Bis(chloromethyl) ether and technical-grade chloromethyl methyl ether

1,3-Butadiene

1,4-Butanediol dimethylsulfonate (also known as busulfan)

Cadmium and cadmium compounds

Chlorambucil

1-(2-Chloroethyl)-3-(4-methylcyclohexyl)-1-nitrosourea (MeCCNU)

Chromium hexavalent compounds

Coal tar pitches

Coal tars

Coke oven emissions

Cyclophosphamide

Cyclosporin A

Diethylstilbestrol (DES)

Dyes metabolized to benzidine

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)

Erionite

Estrogens, steroidal

Ethylene oxide

Formaldehyde

Hepatitis B virus

Hepatitis C virus

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)

Human papilloma viruses (HPVs): some genital-mucosal types

Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1)

Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) (also known as human herpesvirus 8, or HHV-8)

Melphalan

Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCV)

Methoxsalen with ultraviolet A therapy (PUVA)

Mineral oils (untreated and mildly treated)

Mustard gas

2-Naphthylamine

Neutrons

Nickel compounds

Radon

Silica, crystalline (respirable size)

Solar radiation

Soots

Strong inorganic acid mists containing sulfuric acid

Sunlamps or sunbeds, exposure to

Tamoxifen

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD); "dioxin"

Thiotepa

Thorium dioxide

Tobacco smoke, environmental

Tobacco, smokeless

Tobacco smoking

o‑Toluidine

Trichloroethylene (TCE)

Ultraviolet (UV) radiation, broad spectrum

Vinyl chloride

Wood dust

X-radiation and gamma radiation

Probable carcinogens

International Agency for Research on Cancer

Group 2A: Probably carcinogenic to humans

Learn more about the topics in this list in the IARC monographs at https://monographs.iarc.fr/monographs-and-supplements-available-online/.

Acrylamide

Adriamycin (doxorubicin)

Androgenic (anabolic) steroids

Art glass, glass containers, and press ware (manufacture of)

Azacitidine

Biomass fuel (primarily wood), emissions from household combustion

Bitumens, occupational exposure to oxidized bitumens and their emissions during roofing

Bischloroethyl nitrosourea (BCNU), also known as carmustine

Captafol

Carbon electrode manufacture

Chloral

Chloral hydrate

Chloramphenicol

alpha-Chlorinated toluenes (benzal chloride, benzotrichloride, benzyl chloride) and benzoyl chloride (combined exposures)

1-(2-Chloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea (CCNU)

4-Chloro-ortho-toluidine

Chlorozotocin

Cisplatin

Cobalt metal with tungsten carbide

Creosotes

Cyclopenta[cd]pyrene

DDT (4,4'-Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane)

Diazinon

Dibenz[a,j]acridine

Dibenz[a,h]anthracene

Dibenzo[a,l]pyrene

Dichloromethane (methylene chloride)

Dieldrin, and aldrin metabolized to dieldrin

Diethyl sulfate

Dimethylcarbamoyl chloride

N,N-Dimethylformamide

1,2-Dimethylhydrazine

Dimethyl sulfate

Epichlorohydrin

Ethyl carbamate (urethane)

Ethylene dibromide

N-Ethyl-N-nitrosourea

Frying, emissions from high-temperature

Glycidol

Glyphosate

Hairdresser or barber (workplace exposure as)

Human papillomavirus (HPV) type 68 (infection with)

Hydrazine

Indium phosphide

IQ (2-Amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline)

Lead compounds, inorganic

Malaria (caused by infection with Plasmodium falciparum)

Malathion

2-Mercaptobenzothiazole

Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCV)

5-Methoxypsoralen

Methyl methanesulfonate

N-Methyl-N´-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG)

N-Methyl-N-nitrosourea

Nitrate or nitrite (ingested) under conditions that result in endogenous nitrosation

6-Nitrochrysene

Nitrogen mustard

1-Nitropyrene

N-Nitrosodiethylamine

N-Nitrosodimethylamine

2-Nitrotoluene

Non-arsenical insecticides (workplace exposures in spraying and application of)

Petroleum refining (workplace exposures in)

Pioglitazone

Polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs)

Procarbazine hydrochloride

1,3-Propane sultone

Red meat (consumption of)

Shiftwork that involves circadian disruption

Silicon carbide whiskers

Styrene

Styrene-7,8-oxide

Teniposide

Tetrabromobisphenol A

3,3′,4,4′-Tetrachloroazobenzene

Tetrachloroethylene (perchloroethylene)

Tetrafluoroethylene

1,2,3-Trichloropropane

Tris(2,3-dibromopropyl) phosphate

Very hot beverages (above 65 degrees Celsius)

Vinyl bromide (Note: For practical purposes, vinyl bromide should be considered to act similarly to the human carcinogen vinyl chloride.)

Vinyl fluoride (Note: For practical purposes, vinyl fluoride should be considered to act similarly to the human carcinogen vinyl chloride.)

National Toxicology Program 14th Report on Carcinogens

“Reasonably anticipated to be human carcinogens”

Learn more about the topics in this list in the NTP’s Report on Carcinogens at https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/roc/index-1.html.