S&P; Global Market Intelligence
Already a subscriber? Login , You can view more with a RatingsDirect subscription.

[Jan 25, 2019] U.S. Government Shutdown Ends, But At What Cost? U.S. Government Shutdown Ends, But At What Cost? Rate This Article NEW YORK (S&P Global Ratings) Jan. 25, 2019--The U.S. government finally reached a compromise to open its doors for three weeks, after closing them for five, with the Senate passing a bill to end the shutdown. Based on our analysis, the U.S. economy lost at least $6 billion dollars by the close of business today, larger than the $5.7 billion that the White House requested for the border wall. The longest partial shutdown in history, which started as a minor cold, began to feel like a nasty flu that had begun to spread across the states. And the overall cost is likely worse than what we had previously expected. S&P Global Economics previously estimated that a selective shutdown would have a modest impact on the $19 trillion economy in real terms. We estimated that this shutdown could shave approximately $1.2 billion off real GDP in the quarter for each week that part of the government is closed (see "U.S. Government Shutdown Update: No Gain, More Pain," published Jan. 11 2019). The overall economic impact depended on how long the government was closed. As the shutdown aged, weekly costs likely widened beyond the average weekly cost of $1.2 billion. Here, both direct costs, on lost productivity from furloughed government workers, and indirect costs, from lost economic activity to outside businesses because of the shutdown, amplified with each week the government remained closed. We earlier assumed that indirect costs in the first quarter would be modest given it was so early in the quarter. Although some of these costs, like canceled holiday vacations around national parks or monuments, may be lost, we had expected that other indirect costs were likely just delayed, with businesses recouping some of those losses once the government reopens its doors. But, with a five week closure, we suspect that more of those economic activities indirectly tied to the government may have been outright canceled. Fortunately, the government opened right before the tax season opened on Monday, Jan. 28. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) had furloughed employees in charge of collecting back taxes, which could had deprived the government of revenue. IRS refund checks were also at risk of being delayed, which would have hurt many consumers who treat their tax overpayments like a savings account and depend on those refunds to meet expenses early in the year. And, since less than half of those recalled workers reported for work, the Trump Administration's plan to send out IRS refunds in spite of the government shutdown probably would have met a roadblock. Fortunately, that problem has been averted, at least for now. Although this shutdown has ended, little agreement on Capitol Hill will likely weigh on business confidence and financial market sentiments. For those workers who were living without a paycheck, revolving credit payments and credit scores may also take a hit. Although this funding battle has ended, the next one starts in a few weeks, which may reduce growth expectations if businesses and financial markets begin to expect that Congress and the president will repeat the experience again and again. We earlier wrote that direct costs from the U.S. government closing shop are lost forever. In particular, economic activity from lost productivity from furloughed government and contract employees won't be recovered. The direct hit to economic activity from furloughed workers is amplified by lost spending by furloughed government and contract workers due to lack of ready income. Furloughed contract workers will not get back pay, so they are left trying to repair finances after losing five weeks of wages. We did not consider the effect on morale of government workers who were required to work without pay. Even if they decided to show up to work (some, reportedly, have called in sick), we suspect that working in those conditions has lowered productivity rates for them as well. It may also create a challenge for government agencies and contractors, when they want to hire them back. With worries that Uncle Sam may leave them in the lurch, with bills to pay, the next time the government decides to close (which is all too frequent), these workers may decide to opt for a job in another industry that they feel has more job security. Apparently, the economists at the Federal Reserve, whose monetary policy is now "data-driven," must have gotten their wish that the government reach a compromise so that government economic reports, such as the foreign trade figures, will be available as they scramble to prepare for next week's Federal Open Market Committee meeting. The length of time that the central bank was without data, while they grapple to measure the five-week shutdown's impact on growth, could add more uncertainty to the Fed's decision that an economic recovery is making progress and cause members to push out the timing for their next rate hike. This report does not constitute a rating action. The views expressed here are the independent opinions of S&P Global's economics group, which is separate from, but provides forecasts and other input to, S&P Global Ratings' analysts. The economic views herein may be incorporated into S&P Global Ratings' credit ratings; however, credit ratings are determined and assigned by ratings committees, exercising analytical judgment in accordance with S&P Global Ratings' publicly available methodologies. S&P Global Ratings, part of S&P Global Inc. (NYSE: SPGI), is the world's leading provider of independent credit risk research. We publish more than a million credit ratings on debt issued by sovereign, municipal, corporate and financial sector entities. With over 1,400 credit analysts in 26 countries, and more than 150 years' experience of assessing credit risk, we offer a unique combination of global coverage and local insight. Our research and opinions about relative credit risk provide market participants with information that helps to support the growth of transparent, liquid debt markets worldwide. Rate This Article How helpful was this article? Rating Saved! Do you have any comments?



Credit-related and other analyses, including ratings, and statements in the Content are statements of opinion as of the date they are expressed and not statements of fact. S&P; Global Market Intelligence’s opinions, analyses and rating acknowledgment decisions (described below) are not recommendations to purchase, hold, or sell any securities or to make any investment decisions, and do not address the suitability of any security. S&P; Global Market Intelligence assumes no obligation to update the Content following publication in any form or format. The Content should not be relied on and is not a substitute for the skill, judgment and experience of the user, its management, employees, advisors and/or clients when making investment and other business decisions. S&P; Global Market Intelligence does not act as a fiduciary or an investment advisor except where registered as such. While S&P; Global Market Intelligence has obtained information from sources it believes to be reliable, S&P; Global Market Intelligence does not perform an audit and undertakes no duty of due diligence or independent verification of any information it receives. Rating-related publications may be published for a variety of reasons that are not necessarily dependent on action by rating committees, including, but not limited to, the publication of a periodic update on a credit rating and related analyses.



S&P; Global keeps certain activities of its divisions separate from each other in order to preserve the independence and objectivity of their respective activities. As a result, certain divisions of S&P; Global may have information that is not available to other S&P; Global divisions. S&P; Global has established policies and procedures to maintain the confidentiality of certain non-public information received in connection with each analytical process.



S&P; Global Ratings does not contribute to or participate in the creation of credit scores generated by S&P; Global Market Intelligence. Lowercase nomenclature is used to differentiate S&P; Global Market Intelligence PD credit model scores from the credit ratings issued by S&P; Global Ratings.



S&P; Global may receive compensation for its ratings and certain analyses, normally from issuers or underwriters of securities or from obligors. S&P; Global reserves the right to disseminate its opinions and analyses. S&P; Global's public ratings and analyses are made available on its Web sites, No content (including ratings, credit-related analyses and data, valuations, model, software or other application or output therefrom) or any part thereof (Content) may be modified, reverse engineered, reproduced or distributed in any form by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of S&P; Global Market Intelligence or its affiliates (collectively, S&P; Global). The Content shall not be used for any unlawful or unauthorized purposes. S&P; Global and any third-party providers, as well as their directors, officers, shareholders, employees or agents (collectively S&P; Global Parties) do not guarantee the accuracy, completeness, timeliness or availability of the Content. S&P; Global Parties are not responsible for any errors or omissions (negligent or otherwise), regardless of the cause, for the results obtained from the use of the Content, or for the security or maintenance of any data input by the user. The Content is provided on an “as is” basis. S&P; GLOBAL PARTIES DISCLAIM ANY AND ALL EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR USE, FREEDOM FROM BUGS, SOFTWARE ERRORS OR DEFECTS, THAT THE CONTENT’S FUNCTIONING WILL BE UNINTERRUPTED OR THAT THE CONTENT WILL OPERATE WITH ANY SOFTWARE OR HARDWARE CONFIGURATION. In no event shall S&P; Global Parties be liable to any party for any direct, indirect, incidental, exemplary, compensatory, punitive, special or consequential damages, costs, expenses, legal fees, or losses (including, without limitation, lost income or lost profits and opportunity costs or losses caused by negligence) in connection with any use of the Content even if advised of the possibility of such damages.Credit-related and other analyses, including ratings, and statements in the Content are statements of opinion as of the date they are expressed and not statements of fact. S&P; Global Market Intelligence’s opinions, analyses and rating acknowledgment decisions (described below) are not recommendations to purchase, hold, or sell any securities or to make any investment decisions, and do not address the suitability of any security. S&P; Global Market Intelligence assumes no obligation to update the Content following publication in any form or format. The Content should not be relied on and is not a substitute for the skill, judgment and experience of the user, its management, employees, advisors and/or clients when making investment and other business decisions. S&P; Global Market Intelligence does not act as a fiduciary or an investment advisor except where registered as such. While S&P; Global Market Intelligence has obtained information from sources it believes to be reliable, S&P; Global Market Intelligence does not perform an audit and undertakes no duty of due diligence or independent verification of any information it receives. Rating-related publications may be published for a variety of reasons that are not necessarily dependent on action by rating committees, including, but not limited to, the publication of a periodic update on a credit rating and related analyses.S&P; Global keeps certain activities of its divisions separate from each other in order to preserve the independence and objectivity of their respective activities. As a result, certain divisions of S&P; Global may have information that is not available to other S&P; Global divisions. S&P; Global has established policies and procedures to maintain the confidentiality of certain non-public information received in connection with each analytical process.S&P; Global Ratings does not contribute to or participate in the creation of credit scores generated by S&P; Global Market Intelligence. Lowercase nomenclature is used to differentiate S&P; Global Market Intelligence PD credit model scores from the credit ratings issued by S&P; Global Ratings.S&P; Global may receive compensation for its ratings and certain analyses, normally from issuers or underwriters of securities or from obligors. S&P; Global reserves the right to disseminate its opinions and analyses. S&P; Global's public ratings and analyses are made available on its Web sites, www.standardandpoors.com (free of charge), and www.capitaliq.com (subscription), and may be distributed through other means, including via S&P; Global publications and third-party redistributors. Additional information about our ratings fees is available at www.standardandpoors.com/usratingsfees Premium Access × The article you requested is a Premium Article. RatingsDirect® subscriber, please Log In to access this article. Request a free trial. Processing time: 0.202799999999115 PageId: 1765