New Funding Helps Catholic Ministries Provide Care to Immigrant Families
Three weeks after announcing the launch of its Family Reunification Fund, created to support ministries providing outreach and advocacy for immigrant families separated as a consequence of our broken immigration system, Catholic Extension made a trip to the border region to present checks directly to various frontline Catholic ministries. The fund mainly benefits ministries that are actively sheltering, defending, and caring for immigrants and their families.

Last week, Catholic Extension President Father Jack Wall led a delegation of six prominent pastors from the Archdiocese of Chicago to the U.S.-Mexico border to visit the ministries in the Rio Grande Valley being funded and to learn about their work firsthand.

Father Robert Heinz of St. Norbert Church in Northbrook, Ill., listens to an emotional story from a man now living at a migrant shelter in Reynosa, Mexico, run by the Daughters of Charity of St. Vincent de Paul.

“Catholic Extension has been supporting the Church in the border region for over 110 years,” said Father Jack Wall, president of Catholic Extension. “We know that Catholic ministries on both sides of the border have been doing heroic work with immigrants and their families for many years, and we want more people to know about this important work.”

La Posada Providencia in San Benito, Texas, gets calls directly from immigration officials asking to shelter recently paroled immigrants and asylum-seekers. Migrants seeking shelter, many of them fleeing violence in their home countries, come here from all over the world. The Catholic Extension-led delegation met many newly arrived immigrants, including a mother who was told by organized criminal organizations in her home country that they would kidnap her eight-year-old daughter, so she fled her home country of Honduras and escaped. She is now safely housed in the shelter with her daughter. Catholic Extension presented Sister Margaret Mertens with a $25,000 check to support their outreach to this very vulnerable population.

The Catholic Extension-led delegation also made a stop in Peñitas, Texas, home to the Proyecto Desarollo Humano, which is run by the Missionary Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary. The Proyecto is an outreach center mainly serving immigrant women and their children, which was created to address four main areas of concern: health, social services, education and evangelization. The colonia is also home to St. Anne Catholic Church, which was built by the sisters in response to peoples’ desire for a place of worship. It was in front of the church that Sister Fatima Santiago accepted $45,000 from Catholic Extension with funds raised from St. Anne Catholic Church in Barrington, Ill., as part of the Family Reunification Fund.

A family at the Humanitarian Respite Center in McAllen, Texas

The group crossed into Mexico to visit two other sites that provide direct aid to migrants, both those seeking asylum in the United States and those who have recently been deported and are struggling to reunite with their families.

These visits offered the priests a glimpse of the dire situation facing many people on both sides of the border. It also offered them a chance to see the various ways in which the Catholic Church is extending its pastoral presence in this region.

“We wanted this group of priests to see and experience these sites firsthand so that they could share it with their parishioners back home and help put a face on this issue,” said Joe Boland, vice president of mission for Catholic Extension. “We also wanted to dedicate these funds as quickly as possible because our immigrant brothers and sisters and the people who serve them on the borders need our help.”

In addition to the sites offering direct aid to migrants, the priests visited several parishes supported by Catholic Extension. They attended the dedication of Sacred Heart Church in Hidalgo, located three blocks from the U.S. – Mexico border wall, where Catholic Extension granted $75,000 to help build a new church for this growing community. The funds were raised in conjunction with a Vatican fundraiser during the 2016 consistory for Cardinal Blase Cupich in which the cardinal, who serves as Catholic Extension’s chancellor, earmarked the funds to support churches and ministries on the border. At a standing room-only Mass, Bishop Daniel Flores of the Diocese of Brownsville thanked Catholic Extension for its support, and concluded the Mass with a prayer for immigrants who represent a large portion of his diocese of 1.2 million Catholics.