U.S. Senator Bill Cassidy of Louisiana
On September 13, 2017, U.S. Senators Lindsey Graham (R-SC), Bill Cassidy (R-LA), Dean Heller (R-NV), Ron Johnson (R-WI) and former U.S. Senator Rick Santorum (R-PA) unveiled legislation to reform health care.

The Graham-Cassidy-Heller-Johnson (GCHJ) proposal repeals the structure and architecture of Obamacare and replaces it with a block grant given annually to states to help individuals pay for health care.

This proposal removes the decisions from Washington and gives states significant latitude over how the dollars are used to best take care of the unique health care needs of the patients in each state.

The block grant is run through CHIP and is subject to a mandatory appropriation.

The grant dollars would replace the federal money currently being spent on Medicaid Expansion, Obamacare tax credits, cost-sharing reduction subsidies and the basic health plan dollars.

The proposal gives states the resources and regulatory flexibility to innovate and create healthcare systems that lower premiums and expand coverage.

More specifically, GCHJ:

Repeals Obamacare Individual and Employer Mandates.

Repeals the Obamacare Medical Device Tax.

Strengthens the ability for states to waive Obamacare regulations.

Returns power to the states and patients by equalizing the treatment between Medicaid Expansion and Non-expansion States through an equitable block grant distribution.

Protects patients with pre-existing medical conditions.

Read more about updated GCHJ here:

Updated GCHJ Legislative Text Updated GCHJ Section-by-Section

Updated GCHJ HHS State-by-State Impact Table Updated GCHJ Claim vs Fact

Info on previous version of GCHJ here:

Updated GCHJ Legislative Text (LYN17744) Previous GCHJ Legislative Text (LYN17709)

Previous GCHJ FAQs Previous GCHJ Section By Section

Previous GCHJ Formula Description

Statements of Support

President Donald J. Trump Vice President Mike Pence Speaker Paul Ryan (R-WI)

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-KY) House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-CA)

House Majority Whip Steve Scalise (R-LA) Senator Roy Blunt (R-MO) Senator Jeff Flake (R-AZ)

Senator Tom Cotton (R-AR) Senator Tim Scott (R-SC) Senator John Thune (R-SD)

Senator Mike Rounds (R-SD) Governor Scott Walker (R-WI) Governor Doug Ducey (R-AZ)

Representative Ralph Abraham (R-LA) Former Governor Jeb Bush (R-FL) Alan Greenspan

National Right to Life Committee Family Research Council Christian Coalition of America

The Weekly Standard Wall Street Journal Hugh Hewitt Phil Kerpen