Statement on Treasury Secretary Nominee Timothy Geithner's Failure to Pay Self-Employment Taxes
Washington, D.C.,

January 14, 2009—Treasury Secretary Nominee Timothy Geithner's failure to pay

four years’ worth of self-employment taxes for Social Security and Medicare is

absolutely astonishing. And as more details are released, Geithner's actions

seem even more disturbing. According to the New

York Times, Geithner still didn't correct the same type of error for some

years, even after the Internal Revenue Services flagged him for the failure to

pay the taxes in other years. To have him leading the department that manages

the IRS would be a slap in the face to the millions of self-employed Americans

who fulfill their responsibilities to correctly asses their tax burdens.

These disturbing details paint a picture of a nominee who hasn’t been fully

vetted. Unlike previous Treasury Secretary nominees, Geithner had not

distinguished himself as a corporate leader or as an academic economist. His

only significant policy accomplishment has been his role in the Bush-Paulson

bailouts. And disturbing details are emerging about his misjudgments in this

policy area as well. According to the Bloomberg wire service, Geithner pushed

for Citigroup to take over the operations of Wachovia Corp. at taxpayer

expense, even after Wells Fargo’s offer to purchase the firm without taxpayer

backing. Had Geithner prevailed, who knows how much more trouble the financial

system would be in given Citigroup’s current financial troubles.

President-Elect Barack Obama has nominated many well-qualified candidates to

serve in his administration, and, despite some policy disagreements, CEI

scholars have praised his choices for posts in the Securities and Exchange

Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, and the Department of

Housing and Urban Development. But in this choice for the Treasury Department,

the Obama transition team members clearly dropped the ball. In an effort to

please some on Wall Street and keep the bailouts going, they glossed over their

nominee’s credentials and judgment.

Geithner’s errors and/or misjudgments make him unfit to serve as Secretary of

the Treasury. His nomination should be withdrawn, and, if this does not happen,

he should be voted down by the Senate.

CEI is a non-profit, non-partisan public policy group

dedicated to the principles of free enterprise and limited government. For more information about CEI, please visit

our website at www.cei.org.