Understanding America Study
This chart tracks our best estimate, over time, of how America plans to vote in NovemberThe final blue and red figures on the right side of the chart represent our most recent estimates of Hillary Clinton's vote (blue squares) and Donald Trump's (red diamonds). These estimates represent weighted averages of all responses in the prior week. The gray band is a "95-percent confidence interval". Figures lying outside the gray band mean that we are at least 95% confident that the candidate with the highest percentage will win the popular vote.

This chart tracks which presidential candidate our panelists believe will win in November, which may not be the same as the candidate they are supporting, if any.The final blue and red figures on the right side of the chart represent our latest update on who voters predict will win the election in November: Hillary Clinton (blue squares) or Donald Trump (red diamonds). These estimates represent weighted averages of all responses in the prior week. The gray band is a “95-percent confidence interval”. Figures lying outside the gray band mean that we are at least 95% confident that the forecast for the candidate with the highest percentage is also the forecast of the UA population.

This chart tracks our latest estimate of the likelihood that Hillary Clinton’s supporters, and Donald Trump’s supporters, will turn out to vote in the presidential election in November.The final blue and red figures on the right side of the chart represent respondents’ own predictions that they will go to the polls in November, among Clinton voters (blue squares), and among Trump voters (red diamonds). These estimates represent weighted averages of all responses in the prior week. The gray band is a "95-percent confidence interval". Figures lying outside the gray band mean that we are at least 95% confident that supporters of the candidate with the highest percentage will turn out more than the supporters of the other candidate in the general election.

The USC Dornsife/LA Times Presidential Election "Daybreak" Poll is part of the Understanding America Study (UAS) at the University of Southern California's Dornsife Center for Economic and Social Research. It is being conducted in partnership with the Jesse M. Unruh Institute of Politics and the Los Angeles Times.

The team responsible for the Daybreak Poll four years ago developed the successful RAND Continuous Presidential Election Poll, which was based on the same methodology.

The Daybreak Poll is based on an internet probability panel survey. Daybreak Poll members are participants in the ongoing UAS internet probability panel of about 6,000 U.S. residents who were randomly selected from among all households in the United States. Members of recruited households that did not have internet access were provided with tablets and internet service. The UAS panel is still growing. We project it will reach about 6000 members in the coming months.

More than 3200 UAS panel members so far (July 2016) have agreed to participate in answering questions about the election, and we expect that number will increase over time. Each day, 1/7th of those who have agreed to participate (more than 400 per day) are invited to answer three predictive questions: What is the percent chance that... (1) you will vote in the presidential election? (2) if you were to vote, you will vote for Clinton, Trump, or someone else (percentages add to 100) and (3) Clinton, Trump or someone else will win (percentages add to 100). The order of the candidates in the questions is randomized so that about half of the respondents see Clinton as the first choice and half of the respondents see Trump as the first choice.

Each night, Daybreak Poll results are weighted to match demographic characteristics (such as race and gender) from the U.S. Census Current Population Survey, and aligned to the 2012 presidential election outcome using how respondents tell us how they voted in that election. Then the latest results, averages of all of the prior week’s responses, are posted online at https://election.usc.edu and on the LATimes.com Politics site shortly after midnight.

In particular, to obtain the values shown in the election forecast chart, we weight each respondent's likelihood of voting for a candidate with their likelihood of voting in the presidential election. Next we calculate the mean of that number for all respondents during the last 7 days, taking into account respondent level weights based on demographics and past voting behavior. This is the estimated fraction of the population that will vote for the candidate. The graph shows the estimated fraction of the votes that a candidate will get, which is computed by dividing the estimated fraction of the population that will vote for the candidate by the estimated fraction of the population that will vote for any candidate. The latter is analogously obtained as the weighted mean of the respondents' likelihood of voting in the presidential election.

To find out more about what lies behind the vote, each week we also ask respondents one or two extra questions about their preferences and values. Links to documents detailing question text, sample sizes, response rates and other information for these separate surveys are provided in the detailed information section below, linked to stories or press releases where the results were disseminated.

The Daybreak Poll began on July 4, 2016, and will run through the November election.

More information about UAS panel methodology, the panel management and survey software we developed, or our publicly available datasets are available in the links here or at the UAS site (https://uasdata.usc.edu). For other questions, or to inquire about how you can conduct surveys with the UAS panel, contact us.

Delavande, Adeline, and Charles F. Manski. 2010. Probabilistic polling and voting in the 2008 presidential election: Evidence from the American Life Panel. Public Opinion Quarterly 74:433–459. doi: 10.1093/poq/nfq019 Gutsche, T. L., Kapteyn, A., Meijer, E., & Weerman, B. (2014). The RAND Continuous 2012 Presidential Election Poll. Public Opinion Quarterly, 78, 233–254. doi: 10.1093/poq/nfu009 Kapteyn, A., Meijer, E., & Weerman, B. (2012). Methodology of the RAND Continuous 2012 Presidential Election Poll (Working Paper No. WR-961). RAND Corporation. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.2146149

More information about the Daybreak poll and the methods we use can be found in the Daybreak Poll FAQ , the LA Times FAQ , and in Los Angeles Times DC Bureau Chief David Lauter’s report on why our poll is different from other polls and other poll stories published in the LA Times: Here is how one expert tweaked the USC/LA Times poll so it matches the averages , David Lauter, October 19, 2016 Even lots of Donald Trump's supporters are starting to think he'll lose the election , David Lauter, October 19, 2016 No, one 19-year-old Trump supporter probably isn’t distorting the polling averages all by himself , David Lauter, October 13, 2016 Democrats hold a wide edge among Latino voters, but turnout remains an issue , David Lauter, October 11, 2016 Lots of people have questions about the USC/LA Times tracking poll; here are some answers , David Lauter, October 7, 2016 Why is Trump still winning our poll? White men and uncertain voters , David Lauter, October 5, 2016 Trump's voters agree with him on cutting legal immigration levels , David Lauter, October 1, 2016 A lesson in how to misread a poll: Blip in black voter support for Trump comes and goes quickly , David Lauter, September 21, 2016 Voters on both sides increasingly see a Trump win as a possibility — and that may get more people to vote , David Lauter, September 19, 2016 Donald Trump's lead widens in USC/L.A. Times tracking poll, which points to likely turnout as key shift , Noah Bierman, September 15, 2016 Donald Trump still has a path to victory, but it's a tough one, USC/L.A. Times poll shows , David Lauter, August 31, 2016 New poll analysis finds a wasted summer for Donald Trump and a boost for Hillary Clinton , Cathleen Decker, August 18, 2016 Why the USC/L.A. Times tracking poll differs from other surveys , David Lauter, August 9, 2016 Trump loses ground among key voter groups, tracking poll finds , David Lauter, August 6, 2016 Even after a convention that critics panned, Trump got a big bounce. Will Clinton gain now too? LATImes.com/politics , David Lauter, July 28, 2016. As Clinton Stumbles, Trump takes an apparent slim lead in new tracking poll. LATimes.com/politics , David Lauter, July 15, 2016For a more comprehensive list of links to Daybreak Poll-related discussions and reports visit our poll coverage page Clinton gains 5 points to tie Trump in post-DNC Daybreak Poll , August 8, 2016 RNC boosts Trump – and Clinton supporters’ resolve , July 26, 2016 USC, Los Angeles Times launch daily election poll , July 15, 2016

✝Daybreak Poll methodology differs from the methods described in these references in a few ways: The sample continues to grow so sample size will increase as election day nears. In relation to the growing sample size, weights are applied daily to create rolling 7 day averages, and we are using improved standard error calculations (survey bootstrap with replication weights).