Civil Cases and Settlements
NGL Crude Logistics, LLC Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of Justice today announced a settlement with NGL Crude Logistics, LLC that resolves allegations that the company entered into a series of transactions in 2011, that resulted in the generation of more than 36 million invalid renewable fuel credits. NGL will pay a civil penalty of $25 million and retire 36 million valid renewable fuel credits. Consent Decree 09/27/2018

Derive Systems Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Department of Justice and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced a settlement with Derive Systems (Derive) addressing the sale of approximately 363,000 aftermarket products which the United States alleges were designed, in part, to defeat the emissions control systems of cars and trucks in violation of the Clean Air Act. Consent Decree 09/24/2018

Anchor Glass Container Corporation Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced a settlement agreement with Anchor Glass Container Corporation today that will resolve alleged Clean Air Act violations at all six of Anchor’s container glass manufacturing facilities located in Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Minnesota, New York and Oklahoma and improve the company’s compliance with federal [and state] clean air laws. Consent Decree 08/03/2018

CSX Transportation, Inc. Settlement Information Sheet U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and State of West Virginia announced a settlement with CSX Transportation Inc. to resolve its liability for state and federal water pollution violations related to a 2015 oil spill caused by a train derailment in Mount Carbon, West Virginia. Consent Decree 07/24/2018

MFA Incorporated and MFA Enterprises Incorporated, Settlement Information Sheet The U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have entered into a consent decree with MFA Incorporated, headquartered in Columbia, Missouri, and its wholly owned subsidiary MFA Enterprises, Incorporated (collectively, “MFA”), to address alleged chemical accident prevention and preparedness violations under the Risk Management Program of the Clean Air Act. Consent Decree 07/02/2018

Decostar Settlement Information Sheet The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) reached a settlement agreement with Decostar Industries, Inc. (Decostar) to address violations of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. Under the terms of the settlement, Decostar will take steps to control levels of hazardous air emissions from their facility in Carrollton, Ga., in order to protect workers and the surrounding community and improve overall air quality. Consent Agreement 06/13/2018

New York City Housing Authority Settlement The Complaint alleges that NYCHA for years has violated and continues to violate basic federal health and safety regulations, including regulations requiring NYCHA to protect children from lead paint and otherwise to provide decent, safe, and sanitary housing. The Complaint further alleges that NYCHA has repeatedly made false statements to HUD and the public regarding its lead paint compliance, and has intentionally deceived HUD inspectors. Consent Decree 06/11/2018

Magnolia Waco Properties, LLC Residential Property Renovation Rule Settlement Information Sheet EPA and Magnolia Waco Properties, LLC, which does business as Magnolia Homes, have reached a settlement to resolve alleged violations of the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) Lead Renovation, Repair and Painting Rule (RRP Rule), related to home renovations conducted without adequate lead paint protections as depicted on the television program Fixer Upper. Under the terms of the settlement, Magnolia will take steps to ensure compliance with lead-based paint regulations in future renovation projects, address lead-based paint hazards at high-risk homes in Waco, Texas, and educate the public to lead-based paint hazards and appropriate renovation procedures Consent Agreement and Final Order 06/05/2018

MarkWest Clean Air Act Settlement The Department of Justice, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection announced a settlement today with MarkWest Liberty Midstream Resources, LLC and Ohio Gathering Company, LLC (MarkWest), which is expected to reduce emissions of volatile organic compounds (“VOCs”) by more than 700 tons per year from company facilities in eastern Ohio and western Pennsylvania. Consent Decree 04/24/2018

$80 Million Mixed Funding Settlement for Lead Contamination Cleanup of Residential Properties Settlement agreement to address the cleanup of approximately 4100 residential yards contaminated by lead from former mining operations at the Big River Mine Tailings/St. Joe Mineral Corp. Superfund Site in Missouri. The agreement is valued at over $80 million and involves a mixed funding arrangement where the Agency would pay for approximately 40% of specific response costs incurred by Doe Run. Consent Decree 04/04/2018

Magnolia Clean Water Act Settlement Information Sheet Magnolia Valley Planation, LLC, Magnolia Hills, LLC, and Magnolia Valley, LLC own a 50-acre development site located in Evans, Georgia. The Magnolia site addressed by the complaint and lodged consent decree is a residential construction site that is an expansion of an existing residential area. Consent Decree 03/23/2018

EPA Issues Order for Groundwater Investigation at Mining Site in Colorado EPA issued a unilateral administrative order to Sunnyside Gold Corporation to conduct groundwater investigation activities at the Sunnyside Mine and surrounding area in the Bonita Peak Mining District Superfund Site in San Juan County, Colorado. Unilateral Administrative Order 03/15/2018

Third Party Settlement to Secure Wastewater Treatment and Remove a Barrier to New Mining Operations A settlement package consisting of an administrative settlement agreement and order on consent and a concurrent consent decree presents and opportunity to cleanup the site, ensure continued operation of a wastewater treatment plant, and possible reuse of a dormant mine. Settlement Agreement 03/12/2018

Amazon Services LLC FIFRA Settlement Today, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced an agreement with Amazon Services LLC to protect the public from the hazards posed by unregistered and misbranded pesticide products. Consent Agreement and Final Order 02/15/2018

Shell Chemical LP - Norco, Louisiana Clean Air Act Settlement The Department of Justice, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ) announced a settlement today with Shell Chemical LP that each year will eliminate more than 150 tons of excess emissions of harmful air pollutants from Shell’s chemical plant located in Norco, Louisiana, in St. Charles Parish. Consent Decree 02/12/2018

Middletown, Ohio Clean Water Act Settlement The City of Middletown, Ohio owns and operates approximately 342 miles of sewer pipe that convey sewage and other pollutants to the wastewater treatment plant. 02/09/2018

Alon USA, LP Settlement Alon USA, LP (Alon) has agreed to pay a civil penalty of $372,611 to resolve violations of the Clean Air Act (CAA) stemming from the production of gasoline that did not did not meet fuel volatility standards. Consent Agreement and Final Order 01/25/2018

Columbian Chemicals Company Clean Air Act Settlement EPA and the Department of Justice announced a Clean Air Act (CAA) settlement with Columbian Chemicals Company that will significantly reduce air pollution from two carbon black manufacturing plants in Franklin, Louisiana and Hickok, Kansas. The Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ) and Kansas Department of Health and Environment (KDHE) participated in the settlement. Consent Decree 12/22/2017

Orion Engineered Carbons, LLC Clean Air Act Settlement PA and the Department of Justice announced a Clean Air Act (CAA) settlement with Orion Engineered Carbons, LLC that will significantly reduce air pollution from four carbon black manufacturing plants in Louisiana, Ohio and Texas. The Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ) participated in the settlement. Consent Decree 12/22/2017

Sid Richardson Carbon and Energy Company Clean Air Act Settlement EPA and the Department of Justice announced a Clean Air Act (CAA) settlement with Sid Richardson Carbon and Energy Company that will significantly reduce air pollution from three carbon black manufacturing plants in Louisiana and Texas. The Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ) and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) participated in the settlement. Consent Decree 12/22/2017

The City of Lancaster, PA Clean Water Act Settlement The city of Lancaster, Pennsylvania has agreed to comprehensive measures to end discharges of untreated sewage and other pollutants to local waterways from the City’s combined storm and sewage system, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the U.S. Department of Justice and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) announced today. Consent Decree 12/20/2017

Morgan Stanley Capital Group Inc. Clean Air Act Settlement Morgan Stanley Capital Group Inc. (MSCG) has agreed to pay a civil penalty of $1,119,000 to resolve alleged violations of the Clean Air Act (CAA) stemming from the production of gasoline that did not did not meet fuel standards. 12/18/2017

Husqvarna Ab and Husqvarna Consumer Outdoor Products N.A., Inc., Clean Air Act Settlement Swedish company Husqvarna AB and its U.S. affiliate, Husqvarna Consumer Outdoor Products N.A., Inc., have agreed to pay a $2.85 million civil penalty to resolve alleged violations of the Clean Air Act, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Justice announced today. 12/05/2017

Exxon Mobil Corporation/Exxonmobil Oil Corporation Clean Air Act Settlement EPA, the U.S. Department of Justice, and the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality announced a settlement today with Exxon Mobil Corp. and ExxonMobil Oil Corp., (ExxonMobil) that will eliminate thousands of tons of harmful air pollution from eight of Exxon’s petrochemical manufacturing facilities in Texas and Louisiana. Consent Decree 10/31/2017

PDC Energy, Inc., Clean Air Act Settlement EPA, the Department of Justice, and the State of Colorado today announced a settlement with PDC Energy, Inc., that will comprehensively identify and address issues with vapor control systems at PDC’s condensate storage tank batteries. Consent Decree 10/31/2017

EPA’s Lead-based Paint Enforcement Helps Protect Children and Vulnerable Communities The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced 127 federal enforcement actions completed over the last year to protect the public, especially young children, from exposure to lead in paint. Consent Agreement and Final Order 10/27/2017

EPA Transfers Cleanup Oversight to Florida for cleanup of former phosphate mining sites Oversight of the cleanup work at the Coronet Industries, Inc. Superfund Alternative Site, was transferred from EPA to the Florida Department of Environmental Protection to support state regulatory consistency in the cleanup of former phosphate mining sites located in Florida Settlement Agreement 10/01/2017

StarKist Clean Water Act, Clean Air Act, Resource Conservation and Recovery and Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act Settlement StarKist Co. is also an operator of the facility and manages, directs, and controls environmental compliance and other decisions at the facility. StarKist Co. is a subsidiary of the Korean company Dongwon Industries. Consent Decree 09/12/2017

Settlement Clears Way for Purchase and Cleanup of Mine Tailing Piles An Administrative Settlement Agreement and Order on Consent (ASAOC) facilitates the sale of the Camp Bird Mine and provides for several million dollars of work at the site. Settlement Agreement 09/01/2017

NCR Corporation Agrees to End Litigation and Complete PCBs Cleanup at Fox River Superfund Site Under the consent decree, NCR will perform and fund the remaining contaminated sediment cleanup work at the Fox River Superfund site in Green Bay, Wisconsin at an estimated cost of over $200 million. Consent Decree 08/23/2017

Removal Settlement Addresses Discharge of High pH Water into the North Fork Holston River Settlement agreement implements a removal action that is intended to abate an imminent and substantial endangerment to public health and the environment from high pH water discharging into the river. Settlement Agreement 08/10/2017

Harcros Chemicals, Inc. Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Department of Justice today announced that Harcros Chemicals Inc. has entered into a consent decree that settles claims that Harcros violated provisions of the Clean Air Act that impose requirements regarding prevention of chemical releases from certain facilities. Consent Decree 07/31/2017

Third-Party Agreement Supports Cleanup and Redevelopment at MEW Study Area in Calif EPA and DOJ entered into a BFPP agreement with Warmington Fairchild Associates, LLC at the Middlefield-Ellis-Whisman (MEW) Study Area in Mountain View, California to conduct cleanup actions at three parcels within the MEW Study Area, which will significantly and rapidly reduce subsurface contamination at the properties. Settlement Agreement 07/27/2017

Rocky Mountain Bottle Company, LLC Settlement The U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and the State of Colorado announced a settlement with Rocky Mountain Bottle Company, LLC, that will improve air quality by strengthening air pollution controls and compliance with federal and state clean air laws at Rocky Mountain Bottle Company’s glass manufacturing facility in Wheat Ridge, Colorado, a western suburb of Denver, Colorado. Consent Decree 06/30/2017

NVR, Inc. Clean Water Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today announced that it has reached an agreement with home developer NVR, Inc., where NVR will implement a program to improve compliance with federal clean water laws at its sites nationwide. Consent Decree 06/15/2017

$600 Million Settlement to Clean up 94 Abandoned Uranium Mines on the Navajo Nation Settlement agreement between EPA, the Navajo Nation, and two affiliated subsidiaries of Freeport-McMoRan, Inc. for the cleanup of 94 Abandoned Uranium Mines on the Navajo Nation valued at over $600 million. Settlement Agreement 05/22/2017

Vopak North America Inc. Clean Air Act Settlement Agreement The Department of Justice, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality today announced an agreement with Vopak Terminal Deer Park Inc. and Vopak Logistics Services USA, Inc., that will improve air quality in the Houston area by strengthening air pollution controls and compliance with federal and state clean air laws at Vopak’s chemical storage terminal and wastewater treatment facility in Deer Park, Texas. Consent Decree 05/17/2017

Atlantic Trading & Marketing, Inc., Clean Air Act Settlement ATMI is a Houston-based company that engages in trading and shipping of crude oil and refined products. As a part of those operations, ATMI is a refiner that produces gasoline by adding blendstocks to previously certified gasoline at third-party bulk liquid storage terminal facilities. Consent Agreement and Final Order 05/12/2017

Corrective Action Order to address lead and VOCs impacts to soil and groundwater an Administrative Order on Consent (AOC or order) under Section 3008(h) of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) to Exide Technologies, Inc. for its facility in Frankfort, Indiana. Administrative Order on Consent 05/09/2017

Settlement Addresses Soil, Sediment and Groundwater Contamination at Site in Rhode Island $40 million between the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Protection (RIDEM) and nearly 100 settling defendants at the Peterson/Puritan, Inc. Superfund Site, in Rhode Island addresses contaminated soils, sediments, and groundwater at Operable Unit 2 at the site Consent Decree 05/03/2017

$143 Million Settlement for Cleanup Work to Prevent Future Contamination of Red River in New Mexico Consent decree between the United States, the state of New Mexico, and Chevron Mining, Inc. (CMI), requiring $143 million in cleanup work at the Chevron Questa Mine Superfund site near the village of Questa, New Mexico. Consent Decree 05/01/2017

Gulfstream Park Racing Association, Inc. Clean Water Act Settlement Gulfstream Park Racing Association, Inc. is a privately owned corporation that includes a year-round thoroughbred racing venue on approximately 243 acres located in Hallandale Beach, Florida. 05/01/2017

Alon USA, LP Clean Air Act Settlement Alon USA, LP is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Alon USA Energy, is an independent refiner and marketer of petroleum products operating primarily in the southwest and western United States. The Alon refinery is located in Big Spring TX, and has a refining capacity of 73,000 barrels per day (bbl/day), less than 1 percent of total U.S. domestic refining capacity. Consent Decree 04/19/2017

$78 Million Clean Up Settlement will address Groundwater Contamination at California Superfund Site EPA and the Department of Justice announced that a group of 66 companies have agreed to clean up contaminated groundwater at the Omega Chemical Corporation Superfund Site in Whittier, Calif. The settlement requires the companies to spend an estimated $70 million to install wells and operate a groundwater treatment system. Consent Decree 03/31/2017

Sunoco Pipeline, L.P. Clean Water Act Settlement - 2017 EPA, and the U.S. Department of Justice announced that Sunoco Pipeline, L.P. (Sunoco) has agreed to pay a civil penalty for alleged violation of the Clean Water Act stemming from a 2012 gasoline discharge near Wellington, Ohio. Consent Decree 03/31/2017

Settlement with Sherwin-Williams results in Lead and Arsenic Cleanup Work An agreement to clean up lead and arsenic contaminated soil and sediment at the Route 561 Dump site in Gibbsboro, N.J. Sherwin-Williams will pay an estimated $14 million to clean up the site, and pay EPA’s expenses in overseeing the work Settlement Agreement 03/28/2017

Contaminated sediments removal work to foster redevelopment at Michigan Lakefront and Marina Northern States Power Company agreed to dredge contaminated sediments in Chequamegon Bay in Lake Superior. The cleanup work constitutes Phase II of the site cleanup work and is expected to be completed in 2018 at an estimated cost of $42 million. Consent Decree 03/01/2017

EMD Millipore Corporation Clean Water Act Settlement EMD Millipore, known as Merck Millipore outside of the United States and Canada, is the American subsidiary of Merck, and was formed when Merck acquired the Millipore Corporation in 2010. Consent Decree 02/06/2017

Hammond Sanitary District Clean Water Act Settlement U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Justice, and the Indiana Department of Environmental Management have reached an agreement with the Hammond Sanitary District in Hammond, Ind., that will resolve long-standing violations of the Clean Water Act involving discharges of untreated sewage into the Grand and Little Calumet Rivers. Consent Decree 02/03/2017

Whole Foods Market Group, Inc. Nationwide RCRA Administrative Settlement Whole Foods Market owns and operates hundreds of retail grocery stores throughout the United States. These grocery stores are organized and managed by region. Consent Agreement and Final Order 01/23/2017

Magellan Pipeline Company, L.P. Clean Water Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Justice today announced a settlement with Magellan Pipeline Company, L.P., for alleged violations of the Clean Water Act related to gasoline, diesel and jet fuel spills in Texas City, Texas, Nemaha, Neb. and El Dorado, Kan. Consent Decree 01/19/2017

Meadowvale Dairy Clean Water Act Settlement Meadowvale Dairy, LLC, has agreed to pay a civil penalty and take actions to prevent illegal discharges to Iowa streams in compliance with the Clean Water Act, officials of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of Justice announced today. Meadowvale Dairy operates multiple concentrated animal feeding operations in Rock Valley, Iowa. Consent Decree 01/19/2017

Bandit Industries, Inc. Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today announced a settlement with Bandit Industries, Inc., for alleged violations of the Clean Air Act for selling non-road diesel engines and equipment used to process wood and waste that do not meet federal standards. Bandit, based in Remus, Michigan, will pay a $3 million civil penalty. Agreement 01/18/2017

Tauber Oil Company Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today announced a settlement with Tauber Oil Company, resolving alleged Clean Air Act violations stemming from the company's sale of a fuel additive that was not registered with the EPA. Tauber stopped selling the unregistered fuel additive and will pay a $700,000 civil penalty. 01/18/2017

City of Tyler, Texas Clean Water Act Settlement Today the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced the city of Tyler, Texas, agreed to significantly upgrade its sanitary sewer system to resolve alleged violations of the federal Clean Water Act (CWA). The city will also undertake extensive operational improvements to its sanitary sewer system and pay a total of $563,000 in civil penalties. Consent Decree 01/17/2017

Innophos Resource Conservation and Recovery Act Settlement EPA today announced that Innophos has agreed to cease sending hazardous waste from the company’s chemical processing facility in Geismar, Louisiana to an unpermitted facility for disposal to resolve alleged violations of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). Innophos will also pay a $1,398,000 civil penalty. 01/12/2017

Greer Industries, Inc., Deckers Creek Limestone Co., Pikewood, Inc. Clean Water Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Justice announced today that the owners and operators of the Pikewood National Golf Club in Morgantown, WV, have settled alleged violations of the federal Clean Water Act related to the unpermitted filling of wetlands and waterways. Consent Decree 01/10/2017

The City of West Haven, Connecticut The city is authorized under a Clean Water Act (CWA) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit to discharge stormwater through its MS4 to the New Haven Harbor provided it complies with all provisions of the permit. Consent Decree 12/15/2016

Gary Sanitary District and City of Gary Clean Water Settlement U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Justice have reached an agreement with the city of Gary and the Gary Sanitary District that will resolve long-standing violations of the Clean Water Act, including the release of raw sewage. The city will pay a civil fine of $75,000 and take corrective steps starting immediately and continuing over the next 25 years to eliminate these problems. Consent Decree 12/12/2016

Expedited Settlement Addresses Impacts on Drinking Water after On-site Explosion An Administrative Settlement Agreement and Order on Consent for a Removal Action (Removal ASAOC) allowed Airosol to quickly address onsite contamination, stop any migration of contaminants to adjacent waterways and move forward in getting their business back in operation. Settlement Agreement 12/07/2016

Slawson Exploration Co. Inc. The settlement with Slawson Exploration Company, Inc., resolves alleged Clean Air Act (CAA)violations stemming from the company's oil and gas production activities in North Dakota, including on the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation. The settlement resolves claims that Slawson failed to adequately design, operate, and maintain vapor control systems on its storage tanks at its approximately 170 oil and natural gas well pads, resulting in emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Consent Decree 12/01/2016

$5.5 Million Settlement for PCB Cleanup at the Ward Transformer Superfund Site A settlement between the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and multiple parties was approved, which requires potentially responsible parties (PRPs) to fund and perform a $5.5 million cleanup of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in areas surrounding the Ward Transformer Superfund site in Raleigh, NC. Consent Decree 11/22/2016

BFPP Settlement Addresses Cleanup and Continued Operations at Property in Washington State EPA, the Department of Justice (DOJ), and Star Forge, LLC (Star Forge) entered into a Bona Fide Prospective Purchaser Settlement Agreement (BFPP Settlement) to address cleanup work at the Jorgensen Forge Property located within the Lower Duwamish Waterway Superfund Site in Washington State. Settlement Agreement 11/11/2016

CITGO Petroleum Corporation and PDV Midwest Refining, LLC Settlement CITGO Petroleum Corporation and PDV Midwest Refining, LLC (collectively, CITGO) have agreed to pay a $1,955,000 civil penalty, perform environmental projects totaling more than $2 million, and spend an estimated $42 million in injunctive relief to resolve Clean Air Act violations and violations of CITGO’s global refinery consent decree at its refinery, located in Lemont, Illinois. Consent Decree 11/10/2016

Suzuki Motor of America, Inc., and Suzuki Motor Corporation Clean Air Act Administrative Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced an administrative settlement with motorcycle manufacturer Suzuki Motor of America, Inc. and Suzuki Motor Corporation that resolves alleged Clean Air Act violations for manufacturing, importing and selling model year 2012 motorcycles that failed to meet the EPA average emission standard for the Suzuki on-highway motorcycle fleet, and for submitting falsified production reports based on incorrect motorcycle production volumes to demonstrate compliance with the emission standard. Consent Agreement and Final Order 11/08/2016

FY2016 Enforcement Actions for the Lead Renovation, Repair and Painting Rule (RRP) EPA completed over 100 federal enforcement actions during fiscal year 2016 that require renovation contractors, landlords and others to protect communities and public health from exposure to lead. Consent Agreement and Final Order 11/03/2016

Detroit Diesel Corp. The settlement with Detroit Diesel Corp. resolves alleged violations of the Clean Air Act for selling heavy-duty diesel engines that were not certified by EPA and did not meet applicable emission standards. Under the settlement, Detroit Diesel will spend $14.5 million on projects to reduce nitrogen oxide and other pollutants, including replacing high-polluting diesel school buses and locomotive engines with models that meet current emissions standards. Detroit Diesel will also pay a $14 million civil penalty. Consent Decree 10/06/2016

Western Dubuque Biodiesel, LLC Clean Air Act (CAA) Settlement with Iowa-based Western Dubuque Biodiesel, LLC that resolves allegations that the company entered into a series of transactions in 2011, that resulted in the generation of more than 36 million invalid renewable fuel credits. Western Dubuque will pay a civil penalty of $6 million. Consent Decree 10/04/2016

$165 Million Settlement to Start Cleanup Work on the Passaic River in New Jersey EPA entered into a settlement agreement with Occidental Chemical Corporation to perform engineering and design work needed to begin the cleanup of the lower 8.3 miles of the lower Passaic River at an estimated cost of $165 million. Administrative Order on Consent 09/30/2016

New York Racing Association (NYRA) The New York Racing Association (NYRA) has violated Section 301 of the CWA by discharging pollutants into waters of the United States from Defendant’s Aqueduct Racetrack in violation of conditions of its New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (“NYSDEC”) State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“SPDES”) General Permit for Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations (“CAFO General Permit”) and the Clean Water Act (CWA) Consent Decree 09/30/2016

Southern Coal Corporation Global The settlement with Southern Coal Corporation and 26 affiliated mining companies for violations of the Clean Water Act (CWA) requires the companies to make comprehensive upgrades to their coal mining and processing operations to prevent discharges of polluted wastewater from their mines in Appalachia. The estimated cost of these measures is $5 million. Consent Decree 09/30/2016

Total Environmental Solutions, Inc. (TESI) A consent decree modification was filed on Sept. 30, 2016 for Total Environmental Solutions, Inc. (TESI) for violations of the Clean Water Act. (CWA) The first consent decree was issued on Dec. 21, 2000 for TESI. However, under the Dec. 21, 2000 consent decree, violations continued and the parties found that facility-specific problems existed.Total Environmental Solutions, Inc. (TESI) owns and operates 161 individual sewage treatment plants and the connection collection system in Louisiana. Consent Decree 09/30/2016

Chemoil Corporation This renewable fuel standard settlement with Chemoil Corporation requires the company to retire 65 million renewable fuel credits to resolve alleged violations of the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) program. The current market value of the credits -- along with an additional 7.7 million renewable identification numbers (RINs) already retired by Chemoil -- is more than $71 million. Chemoil will also pay a $27 million civil penalty under the settlement, the largest in the history of the EPA’s fuel programs. Consent Decree 09/29/2016

Sears Home Improvement Products Inc The settlement with Sears Home Improvement Products Inc. resolves alleged violations of the federal Lead Renovation, Repair and Painting (RRP) Rule for work performed by Sears’ contractors during home renovation projects across the country. This settlement will improve public health protections from lead pollution during home renovations. Consent Decree 09/28/2016

Agreement results in $18.75 million for cleanup work and $500,000 for natural resources restoration at Ohio Superfund site The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the departments of Justice and Interior, and the state of Ohio announced that Rutgers Organics Corporation (Rutgers) agreed to complete the cleanup of the Nease Chemical Superfund Site (Site) near Salem, Ohio, estimated to cost $18.75 million. Consent Decree 09/09/2016

Harley-Davidson Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) today announced a settlement with Harley-Davidson, Inc., Harley-Davidson Motor Company Group, LLC, Harley-Davidson Motorcycle Company, Inc., and Harley-Davidson Motor Company Operations, Inc. (collectively Harley-Davidson), that requires the companies to stop selling and to buy back and destroy illegal tuning devices that increase air pollution from their motorcycles, and to sell only tuning devices that are certified to meet Clean Air Act emissions standards. Consent Decree 08/18/2016

$143 million Cleanup Settlement Reached at New Mexico Mine Site EPA, DOJ, and the state of New Mexico announced a settlement with Chevron Mining, Inc. (CMI) requiring approximately $143 million in cleanup work at the Chevron Questa Mine Superfund Site. Settlement Agreement 08/09/2016

Consol Energy Inc., CNX Coal Resources LP, and Consol Pennsylvania Coal Company LLC Clean Water Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and the state of Pennsylvania, announced today that Consol Energy Inc., CNX Coal Resources and Consol Pennsylvania Coal Co., LLC (“Consol”) have agreed to implement extensive water management and monitoring activities to prevent contaminated discharges of mining wastewater from the Bailey Mine Complex (Complex) in Greene and Washington Counties, Pa., to the Ohio River and its tributaries. Consent Decree 08/04/2016

EPA Issues RCRA Corrective Action Order to Expedite Cleanup at the US Magnesium Facility EPA) issued an administrative order on consent under section 3008(h) of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) to US Magnesium LLC for cleanup work at the US Magnesium facility in Toole County, Utah. Administrative Order on Consent 08/03/2016

Lone Star Industries, Inc. (Buzzi), Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Justice Department (DOJ) announced today a Clean Air Act (CAA) settlement with Lone Star Industries, Inc., d/b/a Buzzi Unicem USA (Buzzi), which covers Buzzi’s Portland cement manufacturing facility in Missouri. Consent Decree 08/01/2016

$29 Million Cleanup Settlement at the LCP Chemicals Superfund Site Under a settlement announced by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Honeywell International Inc. and Georgia Power Company will spend almost $29 million to clean up a 760-acre saltwater marsh at the LCP Chemicals Superfund Site in Brunswick, GA. Consent Decree 07/29/2016

Nevada Department of Transportation Clean Water Settlement The agreement requires NDOT to establish a stormwater management program to control pollutants entering waters, spend $200,000 on an environmental project that will provide real-time water quality data to the public and pay $60,000 each to EPA and NDEP. Consent Decree 07/28/2016

Cemex, Inc., Global Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) today announced a settlement with Cemex, Inc., under which the company will invest approximately $10 million to cut emissions of harmful air pollution at five of its cement manufacturing plants in Alabama, Kentucky, Tennessee and Texas to resolve alleged violations of the Clean Air Act. Consent Decree 07/27/2016

Enbridge Clean Water Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Justice today announced a settlement with Enbridge Energy Limited Partnership and several related Enbridge companies to resolve claims stemming from its 2010 oil spills in Marshall, Mich. and Romeoville, Ill. Consent Decree 07/20/2016

Agreement Results in Innovate Cleanup Addressing Vapor Intrusion EPA) and TRW Automotive U.S. LLC entered into a settlement agreement that requires the company to address trichloroethylene (TCE) vapor contamination within Meramec Caverns, a tourist cave within the La Jolla Spring Complex near Sullivan, Missouri. The estimated cost to cleanup the vapor contamination is $1.5 million. Settlement Agreement 07/19/2016

Tesoro and Par Clean Air Act Settlement EPA and the U.S. Department of Justice today announced a $425 million settlement with subsidiaries of Tesoro Corp., and Par Hawaii Refining that will increase public health protections by reducing air pollution at six refineries and resolving alleged Clean Air Act violations at those same refineries. Consent Decree 07/18/2016

Cleanup Settlement Reduces Threat of Contaminated Groundwater in Massachusetts EPA announced a settlement agreement with several potentially responsible parties (PRPs) worth approximately $5.7 million to prevent contamination of the public water supply wellfield in Acton, Mass. Settlement Agreement 07/12/2016

John Hubenka and LeClair Irrigation District Clean Water Act Settlement The settlement agreement in this matter resolves a Clean Water Act (“CWA”) civil judicial action against John Hubenka and LeClair Irrigation District (“LID”) for unlawful discharges into the Wind River in Fremont County, Wyoming. Settlement Agreement 07/11/2016

Sunoco Pipeline, L.P. Clean Water Act Settlement EPA and the U.S. Department of Justice announced that Sunoco Pipeline, L.P. (Sunoco) has agreed to pay a civil penalty and implement corrective measures for alleged violation of the Clean Water Act stemming from a 2009 crude oil spill from Sunoco’s Barbers Hill, Texas facility and a 2011 crude oil spill from Sunoco’s Cromwell, Oklahoma facility. Consent Decree 07/11/2016

Volkswagen Clean Air Act Partial Settlement On June 28, 2016, the United States lodged with the court a settlement with automakers Volkswagen AG, Audi AG, Volkswagen Group of America, Inc., and Volkswagen Group of America Chattanooga Operations, LLC (collectively “Volkswagen”). The settlement partially resolves allegations that Volkswagen violated the Clean Air Act (“CAA”) by the sale of approximately 500,000 model year 2009 to 2015 motor vehicles containing 2.0 liter diesel engines equipped with “defeat devices” (“CAA 2.0 liter partial settlement”). Consent Decree 06/28/2016

D.G. Yuengling and Son, Inc. Clean Water Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Justice today announced that D. G. Yuengling and Son Inc., has settled Clean Water Act (CWA) violations involving its two large-scale breweries near Pottsville, Pennsylvania. Consent Decree 06/23/2016

Trader Joe’s Company Clean Air Act Settlement The national grocery store chain Trader Joe’s Company has agreed to reduce emissions of potent greenhouse gases from refrigeration equipment at 453 of its stores under a proposed settlement with the U.S. Department of Justice and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to resolve alleged violations of the Clean Air Act. Consent Decree 06/21/2016

Settlement Reached at Salt Creek Park Firing Range Site In the consent decree, the PRPs agreed to reimburse EPA for over $800,000 of the costs the Agency incurred when it cleaned up lead and other contaminants at the Salt Creek Park Firing Range. Consent Decree 06/13/2016

First Amendment to 2012 U.S. v. Marathon Petroleum Co. Clean Air Act Consent Decree On June 9, 2016, EPA and DOJ announced that Marathon, under an amendment to the 2012 agreement, will spend $319 million to install state-of-the-art Flare Gas Recovery Systems (FGRSs) that will capture and recycle gases that would otherwise be sent to flares at facilities in Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan and Ohio. Amended Consent Decree 06/09/2016

EPA Finalizes Agreement with New York City on Design Elements of Gowanus Canal Cleanup EPA announced an agreement with the City of New York that secures the design elements for one of two retention tanks, which is a key component of the Gowanus Canal cleanup. Settlement Agreement 06/06/2016

Southern Minnesota Beet Sugar Cooperative Clean Water Act Settlement U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency today announced a $6 million agreement with the Southern Minnesota Beet Sugar Cooperative to resolve Clean Water Act violations at its processing facility near Renville, Minn. The company manufactures refined sugar, liquid sugar and other products from sugar beets. Consent Decree 05/12/2016

$6.8 Million Penalty for Violations at Rodale Manufacturing Superfund Site in Pennsylvania U.S. Environmental Protection Agency announced that Schneider Electric USA agreed to pay a $6,868,975 penalty for allegedly violating the terms of a 2002 court-approved Superfund consent decree. Agreement 05/03/2016

OXY USA Agrees to Settlements Valued at $50 Million for Work at Tennessee Superfund Site EPA announced settlement agreements valued at approximately $50 million for cleanup work and reimbursement of past cleanup costs at the Copper Basin Mining District Superfund Site in Polk County, Tenn. Consent Decree 04/22/2016

EPA Orders $25+ million Cleanup Along the Kalamazoo River EPA issued a unilateral administrative order (UAO) to three companies requiring cleanup work valued at $25 – $30 million for removal of polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) contaminated sediment and soil from a 1.7-mile stretch of the Kalamazoo River. Unilateral Administrative Order 04/15/2016

EPA Recovers Over $10 million for Cleanup Costs at the Gilt Edge Mine Site EPA) and the state of South Dakota reached agreement with Coca Mines, Inc., and Thomas Congdon to settle their respective liabilities at the Gilt Edge Mine Superfund Site by making a payment of just over $10 million. Consent Decree 04/15/2016

EPA Recovers $6 Million for Costs to Cleanup Colorado Abandoned Hard Rock Mine Site EPA, Department of Justice (DOJ) and the state of Colorado reached an agreement with CoCa Mines, Inc. (CoCa), to settle its liabilities at the Nelson Tunnel/Commodore Waste Rock Superfund Site (Site) by paying $6 million in past cleanup costs. Settlement Agreement 03/01/2016

Salt Lake County, Utah Clean Water Act Settlement Salt Lake County, Utah owns and operates a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The County is authorized under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit to discharge stormwater through its MS4 to the Jordan River, its tributaries, and tributaries of the Great Salt Lake provided it complies with all provisions of the permit. Consent Decree 02/02/2016

Greenville, Mississippi Clean Water Settlement he City of Greenville, MS (City) owns and operates the Greenville Wastewater Treatment Facility (WWTP), approximately 200 miles of sanitary sewer lines, and 100 sanitary sewer pump stations and associated appurtenances. Consent Decree 01/28/2016

EPA and Navy Reach Multimillion Dollar Cleanup Agreement for Gorst Creek site EPA) and the U.S. Navy reached a multimillion dollar agreement to remove a landfill located in Gorst Creek south of Bremerton, Wash. Agreement 01/20/2016

$22 million cleanup settlement for Cooper Drum Superfund Site in California EPA and the Department of Justice announced that a group of 40 parties agreed to conduct the cleanup of the Cooper Drum Superfund site in South Gate, 10 miles southeast of downtown Los Angeles, Calif. Consent Decree 12/29/2015

James C. Justice, II and James C. Justice Companies, Inc., and High Mountain Living, LLC Clean Water Act Settlement Today, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection filed a settlement withJames C. Justice II, the James C. Justice Companies, Inc. and High Mountain Living LLC resolving violations of state and federal environmental laws designed to protect the health of wetlands and waterways. Consent Decree 12/10/2015

Stop Sale, Use, or Removal Order issued to Earth Science Laboratories, Inc. On December 4, 2015, EPA issued an order to Earth Science Laboratories, Inc. directing the company to immediately stop the sale, use, or removal of EarthTec (EPA Reg. No. 64962-1), PristineBlue (EPA Reg. No. 64962-1), and Cleanwater Blue (EPA. Reg. No. 64962-1-82043). These are registered pesticide products marketed as algicides and bactericides for lakes, ponds, reservoirs, canals, lagoons, pools, spas, hot tubs, and other water systems. Stop Sale, Use or Removal Order 12/04/2015

J.R. Simplot Company Clean Air Act (CAA) Settlement The J.R. Simplot Company (Simplot) has agreed to upgrade and operate emissions controls, and implement improved emissions monitoring, at each of its five sulfuric acid plants across facilities in Lathrop, California (one plant), near Pocatello, Idaho (two plants), and in Rock Springs, Wyoming (two plants). Consent Decree 12/03/2015

Settlement Provides for Aggressive Investigation at Site in Montana EPA) announced an agreement with Columbia Falls Aluminum Company to investigate contamination at the Anaconda Aluminum Co Columbia Falls Reduction Plant, also known as the Columbia Falls Aluminum Company (CFAC) Plant, in Flathead County, Mont. Settlement Agreement 11/20/2015

HollyFrontier Refining & Marketing Company LLC et al Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Justice today announced a settlement with HollyFrontier Corporation subsidiaries (HollyFrontier Refining & Marketing LLC, Frontier El Dorado Refining, LLC, Holly Refining & Marketing Company-Woods Cross, LLC, and Navajo Refining Company, L.L.C.) that resolves alleged Clean Air Act violations regarding fuel quality emissions standards and testing requirements at three HollyFrontier facilities. Consent Decree 11/19/2015

ASARCO LLC Settlement Today, the U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency announced a settlement with ASARCO requiring the company to spend $150 million to install new equipment and pollution control technology to reduce emissions of toxic heavy metals at a large smelter located in Hayden, Ariz. Consent Decree 11/03/2015

Lead Renovation, Repair and Painting Rule - October 2015 The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today announced 75 enforcement actions from the past year that require renovation contractors and training providers to protect people from harmful exposure to lead dust and debris, as required by EPA's Lead-based Paint Renovation, Repair, and Painting (RRP) regulations. Consent Agreement 10/27/2015

Rhode Island Department of Transportation Settlement The Rhode Island Department of Transportation (RIDOT) operates a Phase II municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) that serves RIDOT roadways and facilities across the State of Rhode Island. Consent Decree 10/15/2015

The City of Rockford, Illinois Clean Water Act Settlement The City of Rockford, Illinois owns and operates a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The city is authorized under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit to discharge stormwater to waters of the United States through its MS4 provided it complies with all provisions of the permit. Consent Decree 10/08/2015

Mosaic Fertilizer, LLC Settlement EPA and the U.S. Department of Justice announced a settlement with Mosaic Fertilizer, LLC that will ensure the proper treatment, storage, and disposal of an estimated 60 billion pounds of hazardous waste at six Mosaic facilities in Florida and two in Louisiana. Consent Decree 10/01/2015

$19 Million Cleanup Settlement for Blair Waterway in Tacoma, Washington EPA announced that it had entered into an administrative settlement agreement and order on consent (ASAOC) with the Port of Tacoma for the performance of a time-critical removal action in connection with the Blair Waterway TBT Site Tacoma, Wash. Administrative Order on Consent 09/30/2015

$55 Million Settlement with Shell Oil and GSA for Del Amo Cleanup EPA announced a settlement valued at $55 million with Shell Oil Company and the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) for the cleanup of contaminated soil at the Del Amo Superfund Site in Los Angeles, Calif Consent Decree 09/30/2015

Agreement reached for past costs and clean up at Capitol City Plume Superfund Site EPA, the Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM), and the Downtown Environmental Alliance (Alliance) held a signing ceremony that included EPA’s agreement to defer listing of this Site on the Superfund National Priorities List (NPL). Administrative Order on Consent 09/30/2015

Tractor Supply Company Inc. Settlement Tennessee-based Tractor Supply Company Inc. and Tractor Supply Company of Texas, L.P. (collectively, “Tractor Supply Company” or “TSC”) have agreed to pay a civil penalty of $775,000 to resolve Clean Air Act (CAA) violations stemming from the illegal importation and sale of about 28,000 uncertified vehicles and engines. Consent Decree 09/30/2015

$194 Million Settlement for Cleanup Work at the American Cyanamid Superfund Site EPA and DOJ announced a remedial action consent decree valued at nearly $194 million with Wyeth Holdings LLC, a subsidiary of the Pfizer Corporation. Wyeth Holdings will perform cleanup work at the American Cyanamid Superfund Site in Bridgewater Township, N.J. Consent Decree 09/29/2015

Guardian Industries Corp. Clean Air Act Settlement EPA and the U.S. Department of Justice announced that Michigan-based Guardian Industries Corp., a manufacturer of flat glass used in automobiles and buildings, which is also known as float glass, has agreed to install pollution control equipment to reduce emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur dioxide (SO2), sulfuric acid mist (H2SO4), and particulate matter (PM) by nearly 7,500 tons per year, implement a $150,000 mitigation project, and pay a $312,000 penalty to resolve alleged Clean Air Act violations at the company’s glass manufacturing plants. Consent Decree 09/29/2015

The Town of Swampscott, Massachusetts Clean Water Act Settlement The Town of Swampscott entered into a Consent Decree today agreeing to pay a $65,000 civil penalty and to take critical remedial measures to address pollution the Town discharged into the ocean near local beaches. Consent Decree 09/18/2015

Insurance Settlement and a Favorable Court Decision Positively Impact Cleanup at the Centredale Manor Superfund Site In fiscal year 2015, an insurance settlement and a federal district court decision holding a company responsible for cleanup under the Superfund law provided significant progress at the Centredale Manor Restoration Project Superfund Site in Providence, R.I. Consent Decree 09/17/2015

Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority, et al. Clean Water Act Settlement Under a settlement with the U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA) has agreed to make major upgrades, improve inspections and cleaning of existing facilities within the Puerto Nuevo system and continue improvements to its systems island-wide. Consent Decree 09/15/2015

Stop Sale, Use, or Removal Order issued to sBioMed, LLC The order was issued after sample products that were provided by a hospital were tested by EPA, and the results showed that the products were ineffective against C. diff. Stop Sale, Use or Removal Order 09/11/2015

Duke Energy Corporation Clean Air Act (CAA) Settlement EPA and the Department of Justice (DOJ) announces a consent decree with Duke Energy Corporation involving coal-fired power plants in North Carolina for violations of the Clean Air Act (CAA) in North Carolina. The settlement includes $4.4 million for mitigation projects to benefit local communities. Consent Decree 09/10/2015

Bangor, Maine Clean Water Act (CWA) Settlement Under the terms of a Consent Decree lodged today in federal court to address noncompliance with the Clean Water Act, the City of Bangor, Maine, will take action to prevent sewer overflows and contaminated stormwater from entering the Penobscot River and Kenduskeag Stream. Consent Decree 08/26/2015

Delaware County Regional Water Quality Control Authority Clean Water Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) today announced a settlement with the Delaware County Regional Water Quality Control Authority (DELCORA) resolving alleged Clean Water Act violations involving combined sewer overflows (CSOs) to the Delaware River and its tributaries. Consent Decree 08/17/2015

Teck Agrees to Clean Up Lead-contaminated Residential and Allotment Properties Cleanup agreement with Teck Metals Limited and Teck American Inc. to begin removing lead and other contaminants from 15 properties in northeast Washington State. Administrative Order on Consent 08/13/2015

Arch Coal, Inc. and International Coal Group Subsidiaries Settlement EPA and the U.S. Department of Justice the announced today that Arch Coal Inc., one of the nation’s largest coal companies, and 14 of its subsidiaries under the International Coal Group Inc. have agreed to conduct comprehensive upgrades to their operations to ensure compliance with the Clean Water Act. Consent Decree 08/06/2015

Interstate Power and Light Company Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Justice Department (DOJ) today announced a global Clean Air Act settlement with Interstate Power and Light Company, (IPL) that will cover seven coal-fired power plants located in Allamakee, Clinton, Des Moines, Dubuque, Linn, Marshall, and Wapello counties in Iowa. Consent Decree 07/15/2015

Modifications to Settlement with Alabama Power Company Will Reduce Harmful Air Pollution EPA and the U.S. Department of Justice today lodged in U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Alabama a proposed modification of a prior 2006 consent decree with Alabama Power Company that will secure further reductions of harmful air pollutants, primarily sulfur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen oxide (NOx), from three of the company’s coal-fired power plants in Alabama. Consent Decree 06/25/2015

Four Corners Power Plant Clean Air Act Settlement EPA and the Department of Justice announced today a consent decree with Arizona Public Service Company (APS), Southern California Edison (SCE), El Paso Electric Company (El Paso Electric), Public Service Company of New Mexico (PNM), Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District (Salt River Project), and Tucson Electric Power Company (Tucson Electric Power), (collectively Defendants). Consent Decree 06/24/2015

Millard Refrigerated Services, LLC Clean Air Act (CAA) Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Department of Justice announced a Clean Air Act (CAA) settlement with Millard Refrigerated Services, LLC to address three accidental releases of anhydrous ammonia at its Mobile Marine Terminal located in Theodore, Alabama. Complaint 06/02/2015

District of Columbia of Water and Sewer Authority, District of Columbia Clean Water Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the District of Columbia (District) and DC Water today announced an agreement to modify a 2005 federal consent decree (CD) allowing DC Water to incorporate green infrastructure in its long-term strategy for curtailing combined sewer overflows (CSOs). Consent Decree 05/20/2015

Marathon Petroleum Corporation Clean Air Settlement EPA and the U.S. Department of Justice announced a settlement with Marathon Petroleum Corporation today that resolves various alleged Clean Air Act violations at 10 Marathon facilities and requires Marathon to take steps to reduce harmful air pollution emissions at facilities in three states. Consent Decree 05/19/2015

Cleanup Order for Lockheed West Seattle/Shipyard 2 will help Puget Sound EPA issued a unilateral administrative order (UAO) for remedial design/remedial action (RD/RA) to Lockheed Martin Corporation for the cleanup of their property on Seattle’s Elliott Bay. Unilateral Administrative Order 04/28/2015

Exxonmobil Mayflower Clean Water Settlement EPA, the U.S. Department of Justice and the State of Arkansas announced that ExxonMobil Pipeline Company and Mobil Pipeline Company (ExxonMobil) have agreed to pay a civil penalty, fund an environmental project and implement corrective measures for an alleged violation of the Clean Water Act stemming from a 2013 crude oil spill from ExxonMobil’s “Pegasus” pipeline near Mayflower, Arkansas. Consent Decree 04/22/2015

Noble Energy, Inc. Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Justice, and the State of Colorado announced a settlement with Noble Energy, Inc. (Noble) that comprehensively identifies and addresses issues with vapor control systems at Noble’s condensate storage tank batteries in the Denver-area 8-hour ozone marginal nonattainment area (nonattainment area). Consent Decree 04/22/2015

$11 Million Agreement for Cleanup of Uranium Contaminated Mine Waste in New Mexico Under an April 2015 administrative order on consent (AOC) with EPA Regions 6 and 9, the United Nuclear Corporation (UNC) and the General Electric Company (GE) have agreed to design the remedy selected by EPA for removal of uranium contaminated mine waste. Administrative Order on Consent 04/15/2015

Cal-Maine Foods, Inc. Clean Water Act Settlement EPA and Justice Department’s Environment and Natural Resources Division announced today a settlement with Cal-Maine Foods, Inc., one of the nation’s largest egg producers, that resolves Clean Water Act violations at the company’s poultry egg production facility in Edwards, Miss. Consent Decree 04/13/2015

Missouri Highways and Transportation Commission Missouri Department of Transportation Settlement The Missouri Department of Transportation (MoDOT) has agreed to implement a statewide compliance program and to pay a $750,000 civil penalty to settle alleged violations of the Clean Water Act at two road construction sites. The sites are Highway 54 in Osage Beach, and on Highway 67 between Coldwater and Silva. Consent Decree 04/08/2015

Hammerhead Clean Air Act Settlement Four interrelated Dallas, Texas-based recreational vehicle importers and their Shanghai, China-based manufacturer have agreed to pay a civil penalty of $560,000 to resolve Clean Air Act violations stemming from the illegal importation and sale of about 4,000 uncertified recreational vehicles under the brand name “Hammerhead.” Consent Agreement and Final Order 04/07/2015

MTU America Inc. Clean Air Act Settlement MTU America Inc. (MTU), a subsidiary of Rolls-Royce Power Systems AG, will implement an auditing program to ensure proper emissions testing and compliance with federal emission standards for its heavy-duty diesel non-road engines as part of a settlement to resolve alleged Clean Air Act violations, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Justice and announced today. Consent Decree 03/24/2015

Continental Carbon Company Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Justice announced a Clean Air Act (CAA) settlement with Continental Carbon Company (Continental) that will significantly reduce air pollution from three carbon black manufacturing plants in Oklahoma, Alabama and Texas. Consent Decree 03/23/2015

Washakie Renewable Energy, LLC Clean Air Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of Justice today announced a settlement with Utah-based Washakie Renewable Energy, LLC, that resolves allegations that the company generated more than 7.2 million invalid renewable fuel credits worth more than $2 million. Washakie will pay a civil penalty of $3 million. Consent Decree 03/19/2015

Settlement Addresses Cleanup Work at Orlando Gasification Superfund Site RD/RA consent decree was approved to address the cleanup of ground water and soil from coal tar and other contaminants at operable unit (OU) 1 of the Orlando Gasification Superfund Site in Orlando, Fla. Consent Decree 03/18/2015

Western Operating Company The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today that Western Operating Company has agreed to pay $122,900 in penalties to resolve alleged violations of the Clean Air Act (CAA) and the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA) at its gas plant in Morgan County, Colorado. Consent Decree 03/05/2015

Order to Navy for Gorst Creek Landfill Cleanup EPA issued a RCRA 7003 order to the U.S. Department of the Navy to clean up contaminants at the Gorst Creek Landfill in Port Orchard, Wash. Administrative Order on Consent 03/03/2015

City of Harrisburg Clean Water Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency today announced a proposed partial settlement with co-plaintiff Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) and the City of Harrisburg and Capital Region Water to resolve alleged Clean Water Act violations involving sewer overflows and discharges of polluted stormwater to the Susquehanna River and Paxton Creek. Consent Decree 02/11/2015

Newfield Production Company The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today that Denver, Colorado-based Newfield Production Company (Newfield) has agreed to resolve alleged Clean Water Act violations and complete wetlands restoration and creation projects at production sites in Uintah and Duchesne counties in Utah’s Uinta Basin. The company will also pay a penalty of $175,000. 02/02/2015

Equilon Enterprises LLC, doing business as Shell Oil Products US, Motiva Enterprises LLC, and Deer Park Refining Limited Partnership The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced that Equilon Enterprises LLC, doing business as Shell Oil Products US, Motiva Enterprises LLC, and Deer Park Refining Limited Partnership have agreed to pay a $900,000 civil penalty, in order to resolve alleged violations of the Clean Air Act (CAA) at refining, distribution, and retail facilities around the country. Administrative Agreement 01/20/2015

$92 Million Cleanup Agreement for Pohatcong Superfund Site EPA and DOJ announced a settlement with several companies to address the Pohatcong Valley Groundwater Contamination Superfund site in Warren County, N.J. Consent Decree 01/13/2015

City of Fort Smith, Arkansas Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the U.S. Department of Justice and the state of Arkansas announced that the city of Fort Smith, Ark. will spend more than $255 million plus the cost of routine operation and maintenance over the next 12 years on upgrades to its sewer collection and treatment system to reduce discharges of raw sewage and other pollutants into local waterways. Consent Decree 01/05/2015

XTO Energy, Inc. Settlement - 2014 The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Justice (DOJ) announced today that XTO Energy, Inc. (XTO), a subsidiary of ExxonMobil and the nation’s largest holder of natural gas reserves, will spend an estimated $3 million to restore eight sites damaged by unauthorized discharges of fill material into streams and wetlands in connection with hydraulic fracturing operations. Consent Decree 12/22/2014

Lead Renovation, Repair and Painting Rule - December 2014 In December 2014, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced 62 enforcement actions that require renovation contractors and training providers to protect people from harmful exposure to lead dust and debris, as required by EPA’s Lead-based Paint Renovation, Repair, and Painting (RRP) standards. Consent Agreement and Final Order 12/19/2014

Corrective Action Order Spurs Redevelopment in Toledo Industrial Corridor EPA entered into a RCRA 3008(h) administrative order on consent (AOC) with the city of Toledo to address corrective action at the former Textileather Corporation site in Toledo, Ohio. Administrative Order on Consent 12/08/2014

City of Lima, Ohio Clean Water Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Department of Justice, and the State of Ohio today announced a Clean Water Act settlement with the City of Lima, Ohio, to resolve claims that untreated sewer discharges were released into the Ottawa River during wet weather. Consent Decree 11/20/2014

U.S. District Court Southern District New York Opinion & Order Issued for Anadarko Fraud Case U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York (SDNY) approves the historic settlement agreement that was announced by EPA and the Department of Justice (DOJ) on April 3, 2014, resolving fraudulent conveyance claims against Kerr-McGee Corporation and related subsidiaries of Anadarko Petroleum Corporation. 11/10/2014

PCS Nitrogen Fertilizer Settlement The settlement requires PCS Nitrogen Fertilizer, AA Sulfuric Inc., and White Springs Agricultural Chemicals Inc. to install, upgrade and operate state-of-the-art pollution reduction measures, as well as install emissions monitors at eight sulfuric acid plants across facilities in Geismar, Louisiana (one plant), White Springs, Florida (four plants), and Aurora, North Carolina (three plants). Consent Decree 11/06/2014

Stone Energy Corporation In a settlement with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Stone Energy Corporation will restore streams damaged by the company’s unauthorized discharge of dredged or fill material in Wetzel County, West Virginia. Stone Energy has also agreed to pay a civil penalty of $177,500. Consent Decree 11/04/2014

Hyundai and Kia Settlement Automakers Hyundai and Kia will pay a $100 million civil penalty to resolve alleged Clean Air Act violations based on their sale of more than 1 million vehicles that collectively will emit approximately 4.75 million metric tons of greenhouse gases (GHG) in excess of what the automakers certified to the EPA. Consent Decree 11/03/2014

Cleanup Agreement addresses contaminated soil at the U.S. Smelter and Lead Refinery Superfund Site Consent decree valued a $21 million for cleaning up contaminated soil in the Calument neighborhood of East Chicago, Ind. Consent Decree 10/28/2014

The ATP Infrastructure Partners, LP Clean Water Act Settlement Under a settlement agreement with the United States, ATP Infrastructure Partners, LP (ATP-IP) will pay a $1 million civil penalty and perform corrective measures to resolve claims by the U.S. under the Clean Water Act and the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA) of unauthorized discharges of oil and chemicals from an oil platform into the Gulf of Mexico, announced the Department of Justice, the Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE), and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Consent Decree 10/16/2014

Consent Decree provides for cleanup at Iron Horse Park Superfund Site in Massachusetts EPA announces a $4.2 Million settlement with Boston and Maine Corp. (B&M;) and the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) for partial reimbursement of EPA’s past costs, and for full payment and performance of future cleanup work at the Iron Horse Park Superfund Site, Operable Unit 4 (OU4), in Billerica, Mass. Consent Decree 10/07/2014

GE Agrees to Further Investigate Upper Hudson River Floodplain in a $20.5 Million Comprehensive Study EPA and General Electric Company entered into a settlement agreement under which the company will conduct a comprehensive study of the contamination in the shoreline areas of the upper Hudson River. The estimated value of this investigation work is $20.5 million. Administrative Order on Consent 09/30/2014

$1.1 Million Cost Recovery Settlement for Grasse River Superfund Site with Innovative Financial Assurance Requirements EPA) and Alcoa Inc. reached a settlement for reimbursement of approximately $1.1 million for EPA's past cleanup costs associated with the Grasse River Superfund Site in New York. Settlement Agreement 09/29/2014

RCRA Settlement will Result in Improvements to Moca, P.R. Landfill Operations EPA reached a settlement agreement under section 7003 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act with the Municipality of Moca, P.R. and Moca ECO-Park Corporation that will result in improvements to the municipal solid waste landfill in Moca, P.R. The total project costs are expected to be around $10 million. Administrative Order on Consent 09/26/2014

EPA Receives $5.7 Million for Cleanup Costs at A.C. Lawrence Superfund Site ConAgra Grocery Products Company, LLC, a subsidiary of ConAgra Foods, Inc., agreement to reimburse EPA $5.7 million for cleanup costs of the A.C. Lawrence Leather Company Sludge Lagoons Superfund Site in South Paris, Maine Consent Decree 09/25/2014

EPA Requires Nevada Gold Mining Company to Correct Reporting Violations The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency settled with Veris Gold USA, Inc. for failing to correctly report toxic chemical releases and waste management activities as required by the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act. The company agreed to a civil penalty of $182,000. 09/25/2014

Consumers Energy Clean Air Act Settlement In a settlement with the United States, Consumers Energy, a subsidiary of CMS Energy Corporation, has agreed to install pollution control technology, continue operating existing pollution controls and comply with emission rates to reduce harmful air pollution from the company’s five coal-fired power plants located in West Olive, Essexville, Muskegon and Luna Pier, Michigan, the Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today. Consent Decree 09/16/2014

E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Company FIFRA Settlement On September 15, 2014, EPA filed a Consent Agreement and Final Order (CAFO) which simultaneously commences and resolves an administrative proceeding against E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Company (DuPont) for alleged violations of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). Consent Agreement and Final Order 09/15/2014

Residential Developers Agree to Liability Relief Settlements Worth $20 Million in Cleanup Work along the Gowanus Canal EPA announced it entered into settlement agreements under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA, commonly referred to as Superfund) with two subsidiaries of The Lightstone Group to conduct sampling, cleanup work, and other measures along the Gowanus Canal. Settlement Agreement 09/09/2014

Prospective Purchaser Agreement Promotes Cleanup and Redevelopment at Former Steel Mill in Maryland EPA entered into a prospective purchaser agreement (PPA) with Sparrows Point Terminal LLC (SPT), regarding cleanup and redevelopment of a former steel mill located in the Sparrows Point area of Baltimore, Md. The PPA will result in $3 million for EPA assessment and remediation work of any contamination of off-shore areas around Sparrows Point. Agreement 09/08/2014

Costco Wholesale Corporation Clean Air Act Settlement Costco Wholesale Corporation, the nation’s second largest retailer, has agreed to cut its emissions of ozone-depleting and greenhouse gas chemicals from refrigeration equipment at more than half of its stores nationwide. Consent Decree 09/03/2014

Trans Energy Inc. Clean Water Act Settlement EPA, the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection (WVDEP), and the Department of Justice announced a settlement with Trans Energy Inc., requiring the oil and gas company to restore portions of streams and wetlands at 15 sites in West Virginia polluted by the company’s unauthorized discharge of dredge or fill material. Consent Decree 09/02/2014

EPA Orders Mine Cleanup Work in Areas on the Navajo Nation Settlement with Homestake Mining Company of California to assess contamination and address safety hazards at four abandoned uranium mines in the Mariano Lake and Smith Lake areas on the Navajo Nation. EPA and Navajo Nation will oversee the work totaling about $500,000. Administrative Order on Consent 08/27/2014

$23 Million Settlement Reached at the Cedar Creek Superfund Alternative Site EPA and the Mercury Marine Corporation entered into an Administrative Settlement Agreement and Order on Consent (ASAOC) where Mercury Marine will produce an Engineering Evaluation/Cost Analysis (EE/CA) for a Non-Time-Critical Removal Action at the Cedar Creek Superfund Alternative site for the Ponds Operable Unit in Cedarburg, Wis. Administrative Order on Consent 08/21/2014

East Bay Municipal Utility District Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency today announced a Clean Water Act settlement requiring the East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) and seven East Bay communities to conduct extensive system repairs aimed at eliminating millions of gallons of sewage discharges into San Francisco Bay. Consent Decree 07/28/2014

Minnesota Power Settlement In a settlement with the United States, Minnesota Power, an ALLETE company based in Duluth, has agreed to install pollution control technology and meet stringent emission rates to reduce harmful air pollution from the company’s three coal-fired power plants located in Cohasset, Hoyt Lakes, and Schroeder, Minnesota, the Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today. Consent Decree 07/16/2014

EPA Awarded $4.5 Million Judgment for Cleanup Work Conducted at Mine Sites in Idaho EPA and the U.S. Forest Service entered into a settlement agreement with several parties to address payment for cleanup work conducted at mine sites in Idaho. When finalized, the parties will reimburse EPA and the USFS $3.6 million for cleanup work performed under CERCLA at the Minnie Moore Mine and the Conjecture Mine sites in Idaho. Settlement Agreement 07/14/2014

Hercules Agrees to $1 Million Cleanup at its Hattiesburg, Miss. Facility EPA and Hercules Incorporated (Hercules) agreed to an order on consent under section 3008(h) of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act regarding the Hercules facility in Hattiesburg, Miss. to conduct cleanup work valued at $1 million to address on and off-site contamination. Administrative Order on Consent 07/03/2014

Ivory Home, Ltd. Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today announced that Ivory Homes, Ltd. has agreed to resolve alleged Clean Water Act violations at several locations in Utah and will invest in a company-wide compliance program to improve employee training and stormwater management at all current and future residential construction sites. Consent Decree 06/24/2014

EPA issues $104 Million Order for Cleanup Work at Centredale Manor Superfund Site EPA issued a Unilateral Administrative Order (UAO) valued at $104 million to Emhart Industries, Inc. and Black & Decker, Inc. to perform cleanup work at the Centredale Manor Restoration Project Superfund Site. Unilateral Administrative Order 06/10/2014

EPA Receives $2.225 Million Settlement for Response Costs at the Valmont TCE Superfund Site U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania entered a settlement agreement for more than $2.2 million to resolve past costs associated with cleanup work at the Valmont TCE Superfund Site in Pennsylvania. The cleanup work included removal of contaminated soil and extraction of trichloroethylene (TCE) contaminated soil vapor. Consent Decree 06/05/2014

TIMET Settlement Titanium Metals Corporation (TIMET), one of the world’s largest producers of titanium parts for jet engines and other industrial applications, has agreed to perform an extensive investigation and cleanup of potential contamination stemming primarily from the unauthorized manufacture and disposal of PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) at its Black Mountain Industrial Complex manufacturing facility in Henderson, Nev., the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Department of Justice announced today. Consent Decree 05/14/2014

Bankruptcy Settlements Reached with the Eastman Kodak Company worth $49 Million U.S Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York approved bankruptcy settlement agreements to resolve Kodak’s liabilities under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act at the Eastman Business Park in Rochester, N.Y. and under Superfund at the Mercury Refining Superfund Site in Colonie and Guilderland, N.Y., and the Fair Lawn Well Field Superfund Site in Fair Lawn, N.J. Settlement Agreement 05/13/2014

Duke Energy Agrees to $3 Million Cleanup for Coal Ash Release in the Dan River EPA entered into a $3 million cleanup agreement with Duke Energy Carolinas, LLC to address the February 2014 coal ash spill into the Dan River at Eden, N.C. Administrative Order on Consent 05/02/2014

Lowe’s Home Centers, LLC Settlement Lowe’s Home Centers, one of the nation’s largest home improvement retailers, has agreed to implement a comprehensive, corporate-wide compliance program at its over 1,700 stores nationwide to ensure that the contractors it hires to perform work minimize lead dust from home renovation activities, as required by the federal Lead Renovation, Repair, and Painting (RRP) Rule, the Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today. Consent Decree 04/17/2014

Anadarko Fraud Case Results in Billions for Environmental Cleanups EPA and the Department of Justice (DOJ) announced an agreement to resolve fraudulent conveyance claims against Kerr-McGee Corporation and related subsidiaries of Anadarko Petroleum Corporation. Of the environmental-related recovery in this settlement, nearly $2 billion will be paid for cleanup work associated with numerous EPA-lead sites, resulting in the largest bankruptcy-related award that EPA has ever received for environmental claims and liabilities. Consent Decree 04/03/2014

American Lifan Industry, Inc. An Ontario, California-based vehicle and engine importer has agreed to ensure that future imports meet environmental standards after illegally importing and selling nearly 28,000 highway motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and engines manufactured in China that did not comply with emission limits for harmful pollution required by the Clean Air Act (CAA). Consent Agreement and Final Order 03/27/2014

Phillips 66 Takes Steps Toward Reducing Pollution from Vehicles The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced that the Houston, Texas-based Phillips 66 Company recently agreed to retire over 21 billion sulfur credits that could have been used in the production of gasoline, which could potentially lead to significantly less pollution from vehicles. The company will also pay a $500,000 penalty for violations of the Clean Air Act. Administrative Agreement 03/24/2014

EPA Issues Two Orders for Remedial Design Work at the Gowanus Canal Site in N.Y. In March and May of 2014, EPA issued unilateral administrative orders to potentially responsible parties to conduct remedial design work associated with cleanup of the Gowanus Canal Superfund Site in Brooklyn, N.Y. The value of design work associated with these orders is $38 to $40 million. Unilateral Administrative Order 03/21/2014

Flint Hills Resources, Port Arthur The Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today that Flint Hills Resources of Port Arthur has agreed to implement innovative technologies to control harmful air pollution from industrial flares and leaking equipment at the company’s chemical plant in Port Arthur, Texas. Consent Decree 03/20/2014

El Dorado Chemical Co. et al. Clean Air Act Settlement LSB Industries, Inc. (LSB), the largest merchant manufacturer of concentrated nitric acid in North America, and four of its subsidiaries have agreed to reduce harmful emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) by meeting emission limits that are among the lowest for the industry in the nation at plants in Alabama, Arkansas, Oklahoma and Texas, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Department of Justice announced today. Consent Decree 03/19/2014

EPA Inspections Reveal Clean Water Act Violations by Former Dairy Owner near Rock Valley, Iowa U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) personnel conducted a series of inspections in March and May 2013 at the Double V Dairy, LLC, near Rock Valley, Iowa. As a result of the inspections, the former owner of the dairy has agreed to pay a $75,000 civil penalty to settle alleged violations of the Clean Water Act, according to a proposed consent agreement. 03/10/2014

United Park City Mines agrees to clean up mine waste at Richardson Flat Superfund Site in Utah United Park City Mines Inc. (UPCM entered an administrative order on consent (AOC) for engineering evaluation, cost analysis (EE/CA), removal, and restoration of more than 2,700 acres contaminated with historic mine waste at the Richardson Flat Superfund Site near Park City, Utah. Administrative Order on Consent 03/07/2014

Alpha Natural Resources Inc. Settlement Alpha Natural Resources, Inc. (Alpha), one of the nation’s largest coal companies, Alpha Appalachian Holdings (formerly Massey Energy), and 66 subsidiaries have agreed to spend an estimated $200 million on installing and operating wastewater treatment systems and implementing comprehensive, system-wide upgrades to reduce discharges of pollution from coal mines in Kentucky, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia, the U.S. Department of Justice and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency announced today. Consent Decree 03/05/2014

CFMOTO Powersports, Inc., CFMOTO America, Inc., Zhejiang CFMOTO Power Co., Ltd., and Chunfeng Holding Group Co., Ltd. (Collectively “CFMOTO”) Clean Air Settlement A Chinese powersports company and its related U.S. distributor have agreed to recall and replace fuel tanks that will better control gasoline vapors in approximately 1,000 vehicles and take other steps to control pollution stemming from the illegal import of over 12,000 recreational vehicles and highway motorcycles. Consent Agreement and Final Order 03/04/2014

City of Great Falls, Montana and Malteurop North America, Inc. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today that the City of Great Falls, Mont., and Malteurop North America, Inc. (Malteurop) have agreed to control wastewater discharges that generate high levels of toxic gas in the City’s sewer system. Consent Decree 03/03/2014

EPA Recovers $1.776 Million for Cleanup Costs at the Strube, Inc. Superfund Site United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania approved a cost recovery consent decree for more than $1.7 million that resolves the liability of Strube, Inc., Donald C. Dallmeyer, and the Estate of Craig E. Dallmeyer (Settling Defendants), in connection with the Strube, Inc. Superfund Site in Lancaster County, Penn. Consent Decree 02/26/2014

Superfund Penalties and Punitive Damages Awarded for Noncompliance with Response Order U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Iowa awarded EPA more than $1.6 million in penalties and more than $1.4 million in punitive damages for noncompliance with a cleanup order associated with the Dico, Inc. facility in Des Moines, Iowa. 02/24/2014

Lead Renovation, Repair and Painting Rule - February 2014 The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today announced enforcement actions that will require 35 home renovation contractors and training providers to take additional steps to protect communities by minimizing harmful lead dust from home renovation activities, as required by the EPA’s Lead Renovation, Repair, and Painting (RRP) Standards. Consent Agreement and Final Order 02/18/2014

City of Mishawaka Settlement United States Attorney David Capp and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today announced that the City of Mishawaka, Indiana has agreed to make an estimated $132.1 million worth of improvements to its combined sewer system to completely eliminate overflows of raw sewage to the St. Joseph River during a typical year of rainfall. Consent Decree 02/12/2014

Settlement Reached for the North Alcoa Superfund Alternative Site in Illinois The settlement requires the settling defendants to perform approximately $24.9 million worth of work to address 3 million cubic yards of contaminated soil at the North Alcoa Site, Operable Unit 1, in East St. Louis, Ill. Consent Decree 02/06/2014

EPA Receives over $54 Million from W.R. Grace Bankruptcy W.R. Grace & Co., under its bankruptcy plan of reorganization, paid over $63 million to the U.S. government to resolve claims for environmental cleanups at approximately 39 sites in 21 states, the U.S. Department of Justice and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced. The payment includes approximately $54 million for the EPA. Agreement 02/05/2014

Gasco Energy, Inc. Clean Water Act Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today that Gasco Energy, Inc., a Denver-based company, has agreed to permanently close a natural gas production well and fully restore approximately 2.3 acres of damaged wetlands in a floodplain adjacent to the Green River in Utah’s Uintah Basin. Consent Decree 02/04/2014

$11 Million Cleanup Settlement Helps Protect Drinking Water in Rialto, Calif. EPA reached an $11 million settlement for contamination at the Rockets, Fireworks, and Flares Superfund Site (formerly known as the B.F. Goodrich Superfund Site) in Rialto, Calif. The settlement is with the estate of Harry Hescox, the late president of a defunct company known as Pyrotronics, which manufactured fireworks at the site. Consent Decree 01/31/2014

$79 Million Cleanup Will Remove Toxic Lead from New Jersey Beach and Public Park EPA directed NL Industries to conduct a $79 million cleanup at the Raritan Bay Slag Superfund Site in Old Bridge and Sayreville, N.J. Unilateral Administrative Order 01/30/2014

Savoia, Inc., BMX Imports, L.P., BMX Trading, L.L.C., and Terry Zimmer A Dallas-based group of companies and their owner must either stop importing vehicles or follow a comprehensive compliance plan to settle Clean Air Act (CAA) violations stemming from the alleged illegal import of over 24,167 highway motorcycles and recreational vehicles into the United States without proper documentation, announced the Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The four parties are also required to pay a $120,000 civil penalty. Consent Decree 01/06/2014

Harrell’s, LLC Pesticide Settlement (WASHINGTON, DC - December 20, 2013) The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today that Harrell’s LLC, a pesticide producer based in Lakeland, Fla., has agreed to pay $1,736,560 in civil penalties for allegedly distributing and selling misbranded pesticides and other violations of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). Consent Agreement and Final Order 12/20/2013

AL Solutions, Inc. Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today that AL Solutions, a West Virginia-based metal recycler, has agreed to implement extensive, company-wide safeguards to prevent future accidental releases of hazardous chemicals from its facilities, resolving alleged Clean Air Act violations (CAA) stemming from an explosion at the company’s New Cumberland, W. Va. facility that killed three people. Consent Decree 12/19/2013

Chesapeake Appalachia, LLC Clean Water Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Justice announced that Chesapeake Appalachia, LLC, a subsidiary of Chesapeake Energy, the nation’s second largest natural gas producer, will spend an EPA-estimated $6.5 million to restore 27 sites damaged by unauthorized discharges of fill material into streams and wetlands and to implement a comprehensive plan to comply with federal and state water protection laws at the company’s natural gas extraction sites in West Virginia, many of which involve hydraulic fracturing operations. Consent Decree 12/19/2013

City of West Haven, Connecticut Clean Water Settlement A major settlement involving federal and state regulators and the City of West Haven, Conn. will significantly reduce illegal discharges of raw sewage into the environment throughout West Haven from the City’s wastewater collection system. The agreement is between the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Department of Justice, the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, the Connecticut Attorney General’s Office, and the City of West Haven. Consent Decree 12/19/2013

Oregon Companies Settle with EPA for Illegal Disposal of Millions of Pounds of Reactive Hazardous Waste Oregon Metallurgical of Albany, Ore. and TDY Industries of Millersburg, Ore. have agreed to pay a combined total of $825,000 in civil penalties to resolve alleged violations related to improper storage, transportation, and disposal of anhydrous magnesium chloride, a reactive hazardous waste that can pose serious fire and explosion threats. 12/17/2013

Court Decision in Tronox Bankruptcy Fraudulent Conveyance Case Results in Largest Environmental Bankruptcy Award Ever The U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York decided against Kerr-McGee Corporation and related companies that are subsidiaries of Anadarko Petroleum Corporation in a fraudulent conveyance case. The Court awarded damages between approximately $5.2 billion and $14.2 billion to the plaintiffs, which, even at the low end of the damages range, is the largest amount ever awarded in a bankruptcy proceeding for governmental environmental claims and liabilities. 12/12/2013

EPA Issues $9 Million Order for Removal Work at the Columbia Nitrogen Superfund Site in S.C. EPA issued a Unilateral Administrative Order (UAO) to eight potentially responsible parties (PRPs) to perform cleanup work at the Columbia Nitrogen Site in Charleston, S.C. The non-time critical removal action UAO is estimated to cost $9 million. Unilateral Administrative Order 12/11/2013

Delphi Corporation Bankruptcy Settlement Provides Funding for Cleanup Work at Michigan and Ohio Sites U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York approved a settlement agreement between EPA, the states of Michigan and Ohio, and DPH Holdings Corporation and its affiliates. Under the settlement, DPH Holdings agreed to establish and fund an environmental response trust valued at $23.1 million Consent Decree 12/08/2013

Cabot Corporation The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Justice announced a Clean Air Act (CAA) settlement with Cabot Corporation (Cabot) that will significantly reduce air pollution from three carbon black manufacturing plants in Louisiana and Texas. Consent Decree 11/19/2013

City of Shreveport Settlement WASHINGTON – The city of Shreveport, La., has agreed to make significant upgrades to reduce overflows from its sanitary sewer system and pay a $650,000 civil penalty to resolve Clean Water Act (CWA) violations stemming from illegal discharges of raw sewage, the Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today. The state of Louisiana, a co-plaintiff in this case, will receive half of the civil penalty. Consent Decree 11/13/2013

Newfield Production Company The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency today announced that Newfield Production Company (Newfield) has settled violations of the Safe Drinking Water Act in the Monument Butte Well Field in Duchesne County, Utah on the Uintah and Ouray Reservation. Consent Decree 11/05/2013

EPA Receives $14 Million for Cleanup Costs at Oklahoma Refining Company Superfund Site he U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware approved a settlement agreement for APCO Liquidating Trust to pay the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) $14 million in past and future response costs for cleanup activity at the Oklahoma Refining Company Superfund Site located in Cyril, Okla. Consent Decree 11/01/2013

City of Starkville, Mississippi This is the consent agreement and final order for City of Starkville, Mississippi 10/29/2013

DuPont The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today announced that E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Company (DuPont) has agreed to settle alleged Clean Air Act violations at DuPont’s Washington Works Facility, located in Washington, Wood County, West Virginia. Consent Decree 10/28/2013

County Edge Dairy Inc. County Edge Dairy Inc. has agreed to pay a $20,000 civil penalty to settle alleged violations of the Clean Water Act at its Inwood, Iowa, facility, the Environmental Protection Agency announced today. 10/25/2013

EPA Issues AOC to Implement Final Remedy at Occidental Chemical Company Facility in West Virginia EPA issued a RCRA section 3008(h) Administrative Order on Consent (AOC) to Occidental Chemical Company (OxyChem) to implement the final remedy at its facility in Belle, West Virginia. Administrative Order on Consent 09/26/2013

Total Petrochemical USA, Inc. Total Petrochemical USA, Inc. (Total) will pay an $8.75 million penalty for failing to comply with the terms of a 2007 settlement with the United States that resolved alleged violations of the Clean Air Act at its Port Arthur, Texas refinery, the Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today. Consent Decree 09/20/2013

CITGO Petroleum Corporation Clean Air Act Settlement The Department of Justice and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced that Houston-based CITGO Petroleum Corp. (CITGO) has agreed to pay a $737,000 civil penalty and to implement projects to reduce harmful air pollution, resolving alleged violations of the Clean Air Act (CAA) at its petroleum refining facilities located in Lemont, Ill. and Lake Charles (Westlake), La. Consent Decree 09/19/2013

EPA Issues RCRA Cleanup Order for North Field Properties Site in New Jersey EPA Region 2 issued a Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) section 7003 administrative consent order (AOC) to four corporations for appropriate site investigation and any necessary remediation of contamination of a 17.8 acre former industrial site in Woodbridge Township, N.J. Administrative Order on Consent 09/19/2013

AVX Agrees to Pay $366,250,000 Towards the Clean-up of New Bedford Harbor in New Bedford, Mass. On September 18, 2013, the U.S. District Court for the District of Massachusetts approved the settlement agreement between the United States, the State of Massachusetts, and AVX Corporation (AVX). Under the terms of the settlement, AVX agrees to pay $366.25 million, plus interest, for cleanup of the New Bedford Harbor Superfund Site. Consent Decree 09/18/2013

Agrium U.S., INC. Agrium U.S., INC. Consent Agreement and Final Order 09/18/2013

Settlement reached at the Chemetco Superfund Site Under the settlement reached between EPA, DOJ, the State of Illinois, the bankruptcy trustee for the estate of defendant Chemetco, Inc., and Paradigm, the trustee and potential purchaser of the site, will implement a Superfund removal action to address existing contamination at the Chemetco Superfund site at an estimated cost of $20 million and cleanup. Consent Decree 09/13/2013

Atlantic Richfield to pay over $21 million for past costs at Anaconda Smelter Site in Montana A past cost settlement with Atlantic Richfield to reimburse the EPA for over $21 million of it’s cleanup costs at the Anaconda Smelter Site and the Warm Springs Ponds Operable Units. Consent Decree 09/11/2013

Columbia, South Carolina Clean Water Act Settlement The Department of Justice, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) announced a proposed settlement today with the City of Columbia to resolve violations of the Clean Water Act (CWA), including unauthorized overflows of untreated raw sewage. Columbia has agreed to undertake a thorough assessment of, and implement extensive improvements to, its sanitary sewer system at an estimated cost of $750 million. Consent Decree 09/10/2013

Alcoa, Inc. to conduct $243 million cleanup at Grasse River Superfund Site in New York Alcoa, Inc. confirmed its intent to design, implement, operate, and maintain EPA's selected remedy for cleaning up the Grasse River Superfund Site in Massena, N.Y., as required by an unilateral administrative order (UAO) issued in 1989. Unilateral Administrative Order 09/05/2013

Safeway, Inc. Clean Air Act Settlement In a settlement agreement with the United States, Safeway, the nation’s second largest grocery store chain, has agreed to pay a $600,000 civil penalty and implement a corporate-wide plan to significantly reduce its emissions of ozone-depleting substances from refrigeration equipment at 659 of its stores nationwide, estimated to cost approximately $4.1 million. Consent Decree 09/04/2013

MotorScience and Chi Zheng Clean Air Act Settlement Two Los Angeles-based consulting firms, MotorScience Inc., and MotorScience Enterprise Inc., (MotorScience) and their owner, Chi Zheng, have agreed to settle alleged Clean Air Act (CAA) violations stemming from the illegal import of 24,478 all-terrain, recreational vehicles into the U.S. from China without testing to ensure emissions would meet applicable limits on harmful air pollution, announced the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Department of Justice, and the California Air Resources Board (ARB). Consent Decree 08/29/2013

Big West Oil Big West Oil LLC has agreed to pay a $175,000 penalty and to spend approximately $18 million to install emission controls at its refinery in North Salt Lake, Utah, announced the Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today. Consent Decree 08/23/2013

AK Steel Corporation The United States and the Commonwealth of Kentucky have reached a settlement with the AK Steel Corporation (AK Steel) in Ashland, Ky., resolving alleged violations of the Clean Air Act, AK Steel’s title V permit, and the Kentucky State Implementation Plan, announced the Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Consent Decree 08/21/2013

Agreements Clears Way for $30 Million Cleanup of the Carter Carburetor Site in Missouri EPA reached settlement agreements with two corporations, ACF Industries, Inc. (ACF) and Carter Building, Inc. (CBI), for a $30 million environmental cleanup of the Carter Carburetor Superfund Site in St. Louis, Mo. Administrative Agreement 07/29/2013

City of Vicksburg, Mississippi This is th Consent Agreement and Final Order for City of Vicksburg, Mississippi 07/23/2013

San Antonio Water System (SAWS) Settlement The Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today that the San Antonio Water System (SAWS) has agreed to make significant upgrades to reduce overflows from its sewer system and pay a $2.6 million civil penalty to resolve Clean Water Act (CWA) violations stemming from illegal discharges of raw sewage. Consent Decree 07/23/2013

Settlement Reached on Requiring Monitoring and Testing at Schott Metal Facility in Ohio EPA and Schott Metal Products, Inc. agreed to a settlement resolving claims for alleged violations of section 3013 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), which calls for completion of activities under and approved work plan for monitoring and testing of soil and groundwater contamination at the Schott Metal facility and for payment of a $375,000 civil penalty. Consent Decree 07/22/2013

XTO Energy, Inc. Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of Justice announced a settlement with XTO Energy Inc. to resolve an alleged violation of the Clean Water Act (CWA) related to the discharge of stored wastewater from natural gas exploration and production activities, commonly known as fracking, in Penn Township, Pa. Consent Decree 07/18/2013

Cape Fear/Wilmington, North Carolina Settlement (ATLANTA, GA - July 11, 2013) - The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) today announced a Clean Water Act (CWA) settlement with the City of Wilmington, New Hanover County and the Cape Fear Public Utility Authority (Authority) in North Carolina. The proposed settlement set forth in a consent decree will resolve these parties’ liability for violations of the CWA, including unauthorized overflows of untreated raw sewage. Consent Decree 07/11/2013

Holcim (US) Inc. Settlement The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Justice Department today announced a Clean Air Act settlement with Holcim (US) Inc. (Holcim) and former owner St. Lawrence Cement Company, LLC, that covers the Portland cement manufacturing facility in Hagerstown, Maryland. Holcim has agreed to invest approximately $20 million or more to resolve violations of the Clean Air Act. Consent Decree 07/11/2013

Shell Deer Park Settlement (Flaring) The Department of Justice and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced today that Shell Oil and affiliated partnerships (Shell) have agreed to resolve alleged violations of the Clean Air Act at a large refinery and chemical plant in Deer Park, Texas by spending at least $115 million to control harmful air pollution from industrial flares and other processes, and by paying a $2.6 million civil p