These States Allow Early Voters to Change Their Minds
With less than a week before Election Day, Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump offered some startling advice to early voters who might be second-guessing their selection: Switch your vote.

Interested in 2020 Elections? Add 2020 Elections as an interest to stay up to date on the latest 2020 Elections news, video, and analysis from ABC News. Add Interest

His target was Democratic voters who have cast their ballot for Hillary Clinton but may be having a bad case of “buyer's remorse,” he said, calling his suggestion a "public service announcement.”

“In other words, you want to change your vote," he said at a Tuesday campaign rally in Eau Claire, Wisconsin. "So if you live here or in Michigan or Pennsylvania or Minnesota, you can change your vote to Donald Trump. We’ll make America great again."

Trump is right that these states are among those with obscure laws allowing some people to change their vote, though it’s not easy. And the rules are sometimes buried in state election laws and not easily searchable on state voting websites. Here's what we know:

Wisconsin

Voters have a right to three ballots in Wisconsin, according to state law. If they vote at the polls or absentee, they are allowed to cancel their ballot if they believe they made the wrong choice. "Any elector who, by accident or mistake, spoils or erroneously prepares a ballot may receive another by returning the defective ballot but not to exceed three ballots in all," state law reads.

The use of "any elector" indicates the law is applicable to people voting absentee.

Minnesota

Voters in Minnesota no longer have the option of changing their votes. But they did as of the close of business day Tuesday. Voters have until the close of business one week before Election Day to do so, according to rules on the Minnesota secretary of state's website.

"You can ask to cancel your ballot until the close of business one week before Election Day," it reads. "After that time, you cannot cancel your ballot. To cancel your ballot, contact the election office that sent your ballot. Your options are to have a new ballot mailed, vote in person at your local election office or vote at your polling place on Election Day."

Pennsylvania

Pennsylvania voters may vote early only if they send in an absentee ballot, for which they need to fulfill certain requirements. But state election law stipulates that voters who send in an absentee ballot are allowed to change their vote if they show up in person on Election Day.

Michigan

As in Pennsylvania, Michigan voters may cast ballots early only if they do so absentee, which requires certain conditions. But Michigan absentee voters are allowed to obtain a new ballot if they visit their local clerk’s office in person by 4 p.m. on Monday, Nov. 7. If they use the new ballot, their first one will not be counted.