Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry into the United States
The Executive Order became effective on January 27, 2017.

Yes, this Executive Order applies to nearly all travelers, except U.S. citizens, traveling on passports from Iraq, Syria, Sudan, Iran, Somalia, Libya, and Yemen who are applying for entry to the United States at any port of entry—air, land or sea.

CBP is not currently holding in its custody any individual solely based on the Executive Order. However, at any given time there may be a number of people going through inspection who fall within the scope of the Executive Order. All individuals who arrive in the United States are subject to inspection.

DHS and State can review individual cases and grant waivers on a case-by-case basis if that individual’s admission to the United States is deemed to be in the national interest and if they do not pose a national security threat.

Senior DHS personnel can review individual cases and grant exemptions on a case-by-case basis if that individual’s admission to the United States falls within the parameters of the Executive Order. CBP is processing exemptions consistent with the Secretary’s guidance.

Travelers are being treated according to the travel document they present.

Approximately 80 million international travelers enter the United States every year. Less than one percent of the more than 325,000 international air travelers who arrive every day were inconvenienced after the Executive Order was signed while enhanced security measures were implemented. These individuals went through enhanced security screenings and were processed for entry to the United States, consistent with our immigration laws and judicial orders. The Department of Homeland Security will faithfully execute the immigration laws, and we will treat all of those we encounter humanely and with professionalism. No foreign national in a foreign land, without ties to the United States, has any unfettered right to demand entry into the United States or to demand immigration benefits in the United States. The Department of Homeland Security will comply with judicial orders; faithfully enforce our immigration laws, and implement President Trump’s Executive Orders to ensure that those entering the United States do not pose a threat to our country or the American people.

Under the recent guidance from the White House, we will continue to ensure that lawful permanent residents are processed through our borders efficiently. Under that guidance, the Executive Order issued January 27, 2017, does not apply to their entry to the United States. U.S. Customs and Border Protection will continue to execute its mission to protect the homeland in its processing of all individuals at ports of entry.

Under the recent guidance from the White House, CBP will continue to ensure that LPRs are processed through our borders efficiently. Under that guidance, the Executive Order entitled "Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry into the United States" does not apply to LPRs’ entry to the United States. Prior to this guidance, and as of February 1, 2017, CBP processed 1,610 waivers for LPRs to re-enter the United States.

Two. One, who was entered into proceedings based on a criminal record. Another individual chose to return to Canada and withdrew his request for entry.

CBP is committed to following the law. Any withdrawal of an application for admission must be voluntary. The withdrawal process is not new and CBP officers are well trained to ensure that individuals make voluntary decisions.

Travelers are being processed and, when eligible, admitted according to the travel document they present.

Dual nationals with a valid immigrant or nonimmigrant visa in a passport issued by any country not restricted under the Executive Order will be permitted to apply for admission to the United States.

Department of State’s Posts are allowed to process visa applications and issue nonimmigrant and immigrant visas to otherwise eligible visa applicants who apply with a passport from an unrestricted country, even if they hold dual nationality from a restricted country. Please contact the Department of State with any questions related to the issuance of visas.

F1/J1/M1 visas are currently provisionally revoked due to the Executive Order. Individuals who were in the U.S. at the time of the signing of the executive order are not affected by the order. However, individuals who were out of the country at the time of the signing, or who travel out of the country and attempt to return will not be allowed to return for this temporary period because of a lack of valid travel documents. The Department is evaluating whether those who are precluded from returning as a result of the Executive Order will be considered to have maintained their status as F1 or M1 students.

DHS and DOS continue to review the Executive Order and will conduct interviews as appropriate and consistent with the Executive Order.

DHS and DOS will coordinate the processing of individual refugee cases which may be appropriate for travel consistent with the Executive Order.

These cases will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

There are currently 872 refugees who are considered to be in transit who are scheduled to arrive in the United States this week. The Secretaries of State and DHS have coordinated and will process the 872 individuals consistent with the terms of the Executive Order, which we’ve operationalized by assessing each traveler on a case-by-case basis.

No. USCIS will continue to adjudicate N-400 applications for naturalization and administer the oath of citizenship consistent with prior practices.

Landed immigrants of Canada (not including refugees) who hold passports of a restricted country can apply for admission to the United States, if the individual presents that passport with a valid immigrant or nonimmigrant visa and proof of their landed immigrant status, and only if the travel both originates in Canada and is through a land border or Preclearance location.

Landed immigrants of Canada (not including refugees) who hold passports of a restricted country can apply for an immigrant or nonimmigrant visa to the United States, if the individual presents that passport and proof of landed immigrant status to a consular officer. These applications shall be made at a U.S. consular section in Canada.

The entry of Iraqi nationals with a valid Special Immigrant Visa to the United States is deemed to be in the national interest and such individuals can apply for admission to the United States. Accordingly, absent the receipt of significant derogatory information indicating a serious threat to public safety and welfare, possession of a Special Immigrant Visa will be a dispositive factor in case-by-case determinations. Iraqi nationals can also apply to a consular officer for Special Immigrant Visas, and, if otherwise qualified, can be issued a Special Immigrant Visa.

None

Yes, CBP issued guidance to the field expeditiously upon the signing of the Executive Order. CBP has and will continue to issue any needed guidance to the field with respect to court orders. All individuals, including those affected by the court orders, are being given all rights afforded under the law.

CBP has been and will remain in constant communication with the airlines through CBP regional carrier liaisons. In addition, CBP has held multiple executive level calls with the airlines in order to provide guidance, answer questions, and address concerns.

In adjudicating both admission to the United States and issuance of visas, both DHS and DOS will continue to apply all appropriate security vetting procedures.

All international travelers arriving to the U.S. are subject to CBP inspection. This inspection may include electronic devices such as computers, disks, drives, tapes, mobile phones and other communication devices, cameras, music and other media players and any other electronic or digital devices. Various laws that CBP is charged to enforce authorize searches and detention in accordance with 8 U.S.C. § 1357 and 19 U.S.C. §§ 1499, 1581, 1582. All persons, baggage, and merchandise arriving in, or departing from, the United States are subject to inspection, search and detention. This is because CBP officers must determine the identity and citizenship of all persons seeking entry into the United States, determine the admissibility of foreign nationals, and deter the entry of possible terrorists, terrorist weapons, controlled substances, and a wide variety of other prohibited and restricted items. Keeping America safe and enforcing our nation’s laws in an increasingly digital world depends on our ability to lawfully examine all materials entering the U.S. Additional information on electronic searches is available here and here.