CBP Officers Seize More than $1M in Drugs in 24 Hours
SAN DIEGO-- During a 24-hour period at ports of entry along the California border with Mexico, U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers seized a total of 368 pounds of narcotics valued at more than $1 million.

A significant seizure occurred on Thursday at the Tecate port of entry at about 3:40 p.m., when CBP officers encountered a 24-year-old female Mexican citizen driving a 2009 Dodge Caliber and referred her the vehicle for an in-depth investigation. CBP officers utilized a density meter on vehicle’s floor and received an abnormal reading. A canine team screened the vehicle and the dog alerted to the floor area. CBP officers removed 63 packages of methamphetamine weighing 142 pounds with an estimated street value of $482,000.

Officers found 368 lbs. of meth

in 24-hour period.

The second incident occurred at the Otay Mesa port of entry at about 5 p.m., when a 43-year-old male Mexican citizen driver and his two minor children in a 2016 Mazda 3, were referred for a more in-depth inspection. A canine team screened the vehicle and the dog alerted to one of the children’s seats. CBP officers removed seven packages of methamphetamine concealed in the bottom of the child’s seat. The drugs weighed eight pounds and was valued at $27,000.

During the 24-hour period from 11 a.m. yesterday to 11 a.m. today, CBP officers also intercepted 191 pounds of methamphetamine and 27 pounds of marijuana hidden inside vehicles within various locations such as, the fuel tank, spare tire and quarter panels.

“These seizures are reflective of the vigilance demonstrated by our officers and their committed to keeping drugs off our streets,” said Pete Flores, director of field operations for CBP in San Diego.

View the CBP Snapshot to learn more of what CBP achieves ‘On a Typical Day.’

Learn more about how CBP secures our nation's borders at www.CBP.gov.

Criminal charges are merely allegations. Defendants are presumed innocent unless proven guilty in a court of law.