2017 NBA All-Star Games
Content1

​​​​​​2017 NBA All-Star Game Frequently Asked Questions​​​



​

When will Charlotte host the NBA All-Star Game?

​Charlotte has been selected as the host of the NBA All-Star Game in 2017. The 66th annual game will take place at Time Warner Cable Arena, home of the Hornets, on Sunday, Feb. 19. The 2017 game will mark the second NBA All-Star celebration in Charlotte, as the city hosted the event in 1991. Recent host cities have included New York City in 2015, New Orleans in 2014, Houston in 2013 and Orlando in 2012.





What did it take for Charlotte to secure the NBA All-Star Game?





The Charlotte Hornets, City of Charlotte and the Charlotte Regional Visitors Authority (CRVA) were all instrumental in solidifying Charlotte’s selection as host of the 2017 NBA All-Star Game. Major events such as these are significant undertakings that require the community’s full support with the logistics involved to successfully accommodate event needs and collaboration between businesses, venues and infrastructure.





While planning for the game hasn’t begun yet and resources haven’t officially been finalized, projections on the overarching financial picture were developed to aid with the bid process. The investment by the three partners, both in-kind and monetary, are estimated to total between $5 and $6 million. Meanwhile, the expenses to execute the event are estimated to be approximately $5.9 million. For any difference, the partners will look for support via the state, the county or sponsorship sales that exceed budget for packages sold. However, the overall anticipated economic impact for the Charlotte community is the primary motivation for competing to host this event in the first place, which has surpassed more than $60 million in direct spending and more than $100 million in other destinations.





The $5 million investment is estimated at the following:

City of Charlotte In-Kind Services (police, fire, etc.): $600,000



Hospitality Taxes (hotel/motel occupancy taxes created by visitor spending): $1.5 million



CRVA Business Development Funds (the CRVA is funded via revenues from the operations and venue management of its brands, hotel/motel occupancy taxes and a 1 percent food & beverage tax): $1 million



Sponsorship Packages (Packages sold by the Charlotte Hornets surrounding the NBA All-Star Game in conjunction with the CRVA): $1.5 million



Time Warner Cable Arena Event Profits: $150,000



CRVA Venue Profits: $250,000





Projected expenses that comprise the $5.9 million include the following:

Usage of Time Warner Cable Arena: $1.6 million



Usage of the Charlotte Convention Center and Bojangles’ Coliseum (for additional fan-based activities): $1 million



Destination Management (fees associated with the required marketing and production of the event at various venues): $1.15 million



Host Fee (payment to the NBA for hosting the game): $750,000



City Services (police, fire, etc.): $600,000



Sales Tax for Sponsor Tickets (tickets provided to game sponsors): $750,000 ​



What are some of the benefits of hosting the NBA All-Star Game?

Beyond the economic impact value that the game produces, it also generates sizable international exposure for the host city. Previous games have garnered as much as 22.3 million television viewers and 1.2 billion social media impressions. The game will utilize venues beyond the arena as well including the Charlotte Convention Center and Bojangles’ Coliseum. Programs in previous host cities designed around community outreach for identified charitable areas have also been developed by the NBA and have become legacy service projects.

What are the next steps to finalize the NBA All-Star Game?

There are additional next steps needed to finalize the NBA All-Star Game in Charlotte. Charlotte City Council will need to approve an in-kind contribution of City services for FY17, approve appropriation from the hospitality tax funds for FY17 and review and approve an agreement on the City services being provided with the NBA. These items will be scheduled for action at the July 27 City Council Meeting.

Charlotte’s hotel community has also played a critical role in helping to secure the game by generously committing significant room blocks. These are finalized at this point and each will be essential pieces in the planning of the event in the coming months. The partners are grateful for the hotel community’s participation and willingness to assist.​



​Why does Charlotte pursue major events such as the NBA All-Star Game?





The benefits of hosting major events such as the NBA All-Star Game are vast. Economic impact surrounding high profile events like the NBA All-Star Game can reach upward of $100 million* (New Orleans generated $106.1 million in economic impact and $60.4 million in direct spending in 2014). Visitor spending from these events benefit the businesses in our community that wouldn’t experience that impact otherwise when fans stay in hotels, dine in restaurants, utilize various services, visit attractions and much more; ultimately creating valuable tax revenue for the city. In addition, these events also generate impact based on the new spending that occurs by this direct spending in other industries, creating a powerful trickle-down effect that helps the entire community.





Spending that supports the visitor economy continues to be a vital catalyst in ensuring Charlotte is an attractive place to live, work, play and visit. Tourism and hospitality generates approximately $4.6 billion annually in Mecklenburg County. In turn, this visitor spending has supported major events that also generate economic impact as well as the creation of some of Charlotte’s most notable assets including, but not limited to, BB&T Ballpark, Levine Center for the Arts, Bank of America Stadium, Time Warner Cable Arena and so much more.





As the largest event in Charlotte’s history and the record holder for creating economic impact for the community, the 2012 Democratic National Convention (DNC) produced direct spending that totaled $91 million with an overall total

impact of $164 million. In addition to the event itself, the international and national media exposure the event garnered still serves as one of the most qualitative ancillary benefits that has helped to book conventions and establish awareness of Charlotte as an attractive site on the economic development front.





Another prominent extraordinary event for Charlotte, the CIAA Men’s and Women’s Basketball Tournament also continues to prove its economic impact value year after year. The event generated approximately $50 million in economic impact in 2013 and 2014 (2015 study is still in progress).

​



​​

​Event Democratic National Convention (2012)​

CIAA Men’s & Women’s Basketball Tournament (2014)​

ACC Football Championship (2014)

Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority 66th Boule (2014)

Belk Bowl (2014)

Guinness International Champions Cup (2014)​

American Legion National Convention (2014) Direct spending $91 million

$28.06 million

$15.9 million

$11.4 million

$8.7 million

$8.3 million

$8.0 million ​​​Economic impact $164 million​​

$46.92 million

$30.9 million​​

$22.0 million

​$16.7 million

​$16.5 million​

$15.4 million​





What is the projected economic impact for the NBA All-Star Game?

There is currently no projection for the economic impact of the 2017 NBA All-Star Game in Charlotte. The CRVA only conducts economic impact studies after events have come and gone from the city and calculates final numbers via internationally recognized research methodology based on the actualized visitation and spending that took place. However, there are several destinations that have released reports and the partners thoroughly examined each during the bid process to assess the value of bringing the NBA All-Star Game to the Charlotte community (see below for the two that were utilized in the Charlotte bid process as they most closely aligned based on population size and scope of the game).​





​ Total Visitors​​

Total direct spending​

Total economic impact

Local taxes collected

Jobs supported New Orleans (2014 Host) 54,576

$60.4 million

$106.1 million

$2.3 million

1,350 ​​​Orlando (2012 Host) 36,890​​

$56.3 million

$95.1 million​​

$2.4 million

2,250​​

​

All-Star 2017 Press Release​ | All-Star 2017 presentation to City Council | Service Agreement