Trump adviser: Administration will send a signal "very soon" to N.K.
Stephen Miller, a senior policy adviser to President Trump, weighed in on North Korea’s ballistic missile test Sunday, defending the president’s response as a “show of strength” to the Asian nation.

“He went out, stood shoulder to shoulder and sent a message to the whole world that we stand with our allies,” Miller said in an interview with CBS’ “Face the Nation,” referencing the president’s brief statement Saturday standing beside Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe. Mr. Trump, on Saturday, said the U.S. “stands by” Japan, but did not mention North Korea.

“Last night was a show of strength,” Miller said of the president’s remarks. “Saying we stand with our ally, having the two men appear on camera worldwide to all of planet Earth was a statement that will be understood very well by North Korea.”

The top policy aide said the administration would also be “sending another signal very soon” to North Korea -- one involving a show of military might.

“That signal is when we begin a great rebuilding of the armed forces of the United States,” Miller said, previewing the president’s ask to Congress to invest in the military. He said the support from Mr. Trump would show “unquestioned military strength beyond anything anyone can imagine.”

Miller also addressed a federal appeals court decision earlier this week refusing to reinstate Mr. Trump’s controversial travel ban, which bars refugees and citizens from seven Muslim majority countries from entering the U.S.

The policy aide said the administration is considering a host of options to fight back against the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals decision, including “new and further executive actions” meant to address similar vetting concerns.

Miller blasted the court for what he said was a judicial overreach.

“We have a judiciary that has taken far too much power and become in many cases a supreme branch of government,” Miller said. “One unelected Judge in Seattle cannot make laws for the entire country. I mean this is just crazy.”

Of the administration itself, “Face the Nation” host John Dickerson asked whether Miller felt that President Trump and his staff was “in control of events” at the White House, following reports of disorganization in the executive branch.

“I think to say that we’re in control would be a substantial understatement,” Miller responded. “The president of the United States has accomplished more in just a few weeks than many Presidents do in an entire administration.”

The policy adviser also commenting on the recent immigration raids that have taken place across the U.S., defending the nationwide crackdown.

“The effect of that is going to be saving many American lives, American property and American safety.”

Asked whether undocumented immigrants who have not committed any crime should “feel less worried,” Miller responded with this: “Look, it’s not for me to tell people how to feel or how not to feel.”

“We’re in the process of removing criminal aliens from this country and enforcing our immigration laws and keeping the public safe,” he said. “And the bottom line is this -- in the calculation between -- between -- een open borders and saving American lives, it is the easiest choice we will ever have to make.”