Trump says he wants "my people" to sit at attention for him like people do for Kim Jong Un
President Trump declared in a spur-of-the-moment interview with "Fox and Friends" Friday morning that he wants people to sit at attention for him like they do for North Korean dictator Kim Jong Un.

It was just one of the surprising things the president said in the roughly 50 minutes he spent on the White House lawn speaking to the Fox News show and other reporters in a surprise appearance. The spur-of-the-moment White House lawn interview was, in the memory of those present, unprecedented.

Here are the highlights from Friday morning's surprise free-for-all press availability and TV interview:

Trump praises "strong" Kim Jong Un

Kim stands accused of leading a murderous regime that starves its own people. But Mr. Trump has heaped praise on Kim since meeting with him in Singapore, saying repeatedly that the two have "good chemistry."

"Hey, he is the head of a country and I mean he is the strong head," Mr. Trump told Fox News' Steve Doocy on the White House lawn Friday. "Don't let anyone think anything different. He speaks and his people sit up at attention. I want my people to do the same."

Pressed by a reporter about those remarks moments later, Mr. Trump said he was "kidding."

"I'm kidding, you don't understand sarcasm," the president said.

Trump on why he can defend Kim's human rights record

Mr. Trump was later asked how he can mourn the death of American Otto Warmbier, who was held hostage in North Korea, while defending Kim's disastrous human rights record.

"I don't want to see a nuclear weapon destroy you and your family," Mr. Trump said. "I want to have a good relationship with North Korea. I want to have a good relationship with many countries."

"I don't want to see a nuclear weapon destroy you and your family. I want to have a good relationship with North Korea. I want to have a good relationship with many countries," President Trump says https://t.co/QXs0h4qARv pic.twitter.com/C3UaOWvAAZ — CBS News (@CBSNews) June 15, 2018

Mr. Trump was also pressed about his past claim that Kim loves his people. "How can Kim love his people if he's killing them?" a reporter asked.

"I can't speak to that," the president responded.

Those comments come after a different Fox News interview earlier this week, when the president also downplayed Kim's human rights record.

"You know you call people sometimes killers, he is a killer. He's clearly executing people," Fox News' Bret Baier told Mr. Trump.

"He's a tough guy," the president responded.

"Hey, when you take over a country, tough country, with tough people, and you take it over from your father, I don't care who you are, what you are, how much of an advantage you have," the president continued. "If you can do that at 27 years old, I mean that's one in 10,000 that could do that. So he's a very smart guy, he's a great negotiator. But I think we understand each other."

Baier paused, before pressing, "But he's still done some really bad things."

Mr. Trump downplayed Kim's actions, suggesting Kim isn't alone in that.

"Yeah, but so have a lot of other people done some really bad things," Mr. Trump said. "I mean, I could go through a lot of nations where a lot of bad things were done. Now look, with all of that being said, the answer is yes."

Michael Cohen isn't Trump's lawyer anymore

Mr. Trump on Friday also said Michael Cohen is no longer his lawyer, although he didn't elaborate on that much.

"No, he's not my lawyer, anymore," he said.

It's unclear when Cohen stopped being the president's lawyer.

Trump blasts FBI after "horror show" inspector general report

On Friday, Mr. Trump also called the Department of Justice Inspector General report examining the FBI's approach to the Hillary Clinton email investigation a "horror show."

The president also claimed the report completely exonerates him, even though the report was about the FBI's approach to the Hillary Clinton email investigation, not about special counsel Robert Mueller's Russia investigation.

"I think the report yesterday, maybe more importantly than anything, totally exonerates me. There was no collusion. There was no obstruction," Mr. Trump claimed.

Trump claims he hates separation of families at the border

Mr. Trump claimed he hates the separation of children from their families at the southern border, again blaming Democrats for the situation. Mr. Trump continues to insist Democrats created a law requiring the family separation, although it is his administration separating families.

"I hate the children being taken away," the president said. "The Democrats have to change their law, that's their law."

How this unusual White House lawn appearance happened

"Wow, the highest rated (by far) morning show, @foxandfriends, is on the Front Lawn of the White House. Maybe I'll have to take an unannounced trip down to see them?" Mr. Trump tweeted early Friday morning.

Wow, the highest rated (by far) morning show, @foxandfriends, is on the Front Lawn of the White House. Maybe I’ll have to take an unannounced trip down to see them? — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 15, 2018

A little more than half an hour later, the president was on the White House lawn.

"Secret Service is thrilled," the president said.