Prescription Opioid Data
Key Messages Millions of Americans suffer from pain and are often prescribed opioids to treat their conditions. However, the dangers of prescription misuse, opioid use disorder, and overdose have been a growing problem throughout the United States. Since the 1990s, when the amount of opioids prescribed to patients began to grow, the number of overdoses and deaths from prescription opioids has also increased. Even as the amount of opioids prescribed and sold for pain has increased, the amount of pain that Americans report has not similarly changed. From 1999 to 2017, almost 218,000 people died in the United States from overdoses related to prescription opioids. Overdose deaths involving prescription opioids were five times higher in 2017 than in 1999.1

Prescribing Practices Changes in Opioid Prescribing Practices Taking prescription opioids for longer periods of time or in higher dosages can increase the risk of opioid use disorder (addiction), overdose, and death. It is also important for patients and providers to discuss the risks of opioids, consider alternative therapies, and, if prescribing opioids is appropriate, the provider should offer fewer prescriptions for fewer days and at lower dosages. The overall opioid prescribing rate in the United States peaked and leveled off from 2010-2012 and has been declining since 2012, but the amount of opioids in morphine milligram equivalents (MME) prescribed per person is still around three times higher than it was in 1999.2 MME is a way to calculate the total amount of opioids, accounting for differences in opioid drug type and strength. There was a more than 19% reduction in annual prescribing rate from 2006 to 2017. The declines in opioid prescribing rates since 2012 and high-dose prescribing rates (≥90 MME) since 2008 suggest that healthcare providers have become more cautious in their opioid prescribing practices. In 2017, however, there were still almost 58 opioid prescriptions written for every 100 Americans. More than 17% of Americans had at least one opioid prescription filled, with an average of 3.4 opioid prescriptions dispensed per patient.

Per prescription, the average daily amount was more than 45.3 MME.

The average number of days per prescription continues to increase, with an average of 18 days in 2017.3 There is wide variability at the county level in the amount of opioids received per resident. Counties with higher prescribing have been shown to have these characteristics: Generally smaller cities or larger towns

Higher percentage of white residents

Higher number of dentists and primary care physicians per capita

More people who are uninsured or unemployed

More residents who have diabetes, arthritis, or a disability2 Healthcare providers report concerns about opioid-related risks of addiction and overdose for their patients, as well as insufficient training in pain management. The 2016 CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain offers recommendations that may help to improve prescribing practices and ensure all patients receive safer, more effective pain treatment. Healthcare providers can also earn continuing education through this interactive training series called Applying the CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids .

Overdose Deaths Calculating Prescription Opioid Overdose Deaths When looking at overdose deaths from prescription opioids, CDC analyzes the following: Natural opioids: Pain medications like morphine and codeine

Pain medications like morphine and codeine Semi-synthetic opioids : Pain medications like oxycodone, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, and oxymorphone

: Pain medications like oxycodone, hydrocodone, hydromorphone, and oxymorphone Methadone: A synthetic opioid used to treat pain, but it can also be provided through opioid treatment programs to treat opioid use disorders Current information reported about overdose deaths does not distinguish pharmaceutical fentanyl from illegally-made fentanyl. In order to account for increases in illicitly manufactured fentanyl, CDC Injury Center separates synthetic opioids (other than methadone) from prescription opioid death calculations. Overdose Deaths Involving Prescription Opioids 46 people die every day from overdoses involving prescription opioids.4 In 2017, prescription opioids continue to contribute to the epidemic in the U.S. – they were involved in more than 35% of all opioid overdose deaths. The most common drugs involved in prescription opioid overdose deaths include: Methadone

Oxycodone (such as OxyContin®)

Hydrocodone (such as Vicodin®)5 For people who died from prescription opioid overdose in 2017: Overdose rates from prescription opioids significantly increased among people more than 65 years of age.

Overdose rates from prescription opioids were higher among non-Hispanic whites and American Indian or Alaskan Natives, compared to non-Hispanic blacks and Hispanics.

The rate of overdose deaths from prescription opioids among men was 6.1 per 100,000 people and the rate among women was 4.2 in 2017. The highest overdose death rates from prescription opioids were in West Virginia, Maryland, Kentucky, and Utah.4

Guideline Evaluation Guideline in Practice Health systems can create Electronic Health Record (EHR) alerts (e.g., for high daily dosage, multiple opioid prescriptions), which allows providers to make informed prescribing decisions within clinical workflow. In March 2016, CDC released the CDC Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain to ensure that patients have access to safer, more effective chronic pain treatment, while reducing the number of people who misuse opioids, develop opioid use disorder, or overdose. The Guideline focused on the prescribing of opioid pain medication to patients 18 years and older in primary care settings outside of active cancer treatment, palliative care and end of life care. CDC is evaluating implementation of the Guideline by providers, health systems, and insurers with the goal of identifying how the recommendations are being applied, and potential barriers to implementation. As of April 2018: 46 states are now implementing activities to improve local prescribing practices so that they are in alignment with the Guideline

1,300 continuing education (CE) credits have been earned from the interactive training series, Applying CDC’s Guideline for Prescribing Opioids.

3,600 CE credits have been earned from the COCA Call Webinar Series

35 state Medicaid programs have elected to or plan to implement the Guideline’s recommendations. 5

Providers have downloaded 2,200 copies of the poster: Safer, More Effective Pain Management 9,800 copies of the brochure: Pocket Guide: Tapering Opioids for Chronic Pain 30,000 of the CDC Opioid Guideline Mobile App



Overdose Map Statistically significant changes in drug overdose death* rates† involving prescription opioids§ by select states,¶ United States, 2016 to 2017.** Note: Rate comparisons between states should not be made due to variations in reporting across states. *Deaths are classified using the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD–10). Drug overdose deaths are identified using underlying cause-of-death codes X40–X44, X60–X64, X85, and Y10–Y14. † Rates shown are for the number of deaths per 100,000 population. Age-adjusted death rates were calculated using the direct method and the 2000 standard population. § Drug overdose deaths, as defined, that have natural and semi-synthetic opioids (T40.2) and methadone (T40.3) as contributing causes. ¶ Analyses were limited to states meeting the following criteria: For states with very good to excellent reporting, ≥90% of drug overdose deaths mention at least one specific drug in 2016, with the change in drug overdose deaths mentions of at least one specific drug differing by no more than 10 percentage points (pp) between 2016 and 2017. States with good reporting had 80% – <90% of drug overdose deaths mention of at least one specific drug in 2016, with the change in the percentage of drug overdose deaths mentioning at least one specific drug differing by no more than 10 percentage points between 2016 and 2017. States included also were required to have stable rate estimates, based on ≥20 deaths, in at least two drug categories (i.e., opioids, prescription opioids, synthetic opioids other than methadone, heroin). **Absolute rate change is the difference between 2016 and 2017 rates. Percent change is the absolute rate change divided by the 2016 rate, multiplied by 100. Statistically significant at p<0.05 level. Nonoverlapping confidence intervals based on the gamma method were used if the number of deaths was <100 in 2016 or 2017, and z-tests were used if the number of deaths was ≥100 in both 2016 and 2017. Note that the method of comparing confidence intervals is a conservative method for statistical significance; caution should be observed when interpreting a nonsignificant difference when the lower and upper limits being compared overlap only slightly. SOURCE: CDC/NCHS, National Vital Statistics System, Mortality. CDC WONDER, Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2018. https://wonder.cdc.gov/. 2015-2016 Overdose Map