Local Mosquito-Borne Transmission of Zika Virus — Miami-Dade and Broward Counties, Florida, June–August 2016
Discussion

The first identified occurrence of isolated local mosquito-borne transmission and the first identified outbreak of mosquito-borne Zika virus infection in the continental United States occurred in Florida in Miami-Dade and Broward counties during June–August, 2016. After identification of two cases linked geographically by places of employment, enhanced passive and active case finding identified a cluster of 29 infections with illness onset during June 30–August 5. Multiple cases were identified in residents of the affected area; however, the investigation highlighted the potential risk for workplace mosquito exposure. Workplaces A, B, and C all had significant open-air areas where employees worked or took breaks and which were in close proximity to identified larval development sites. Health departments should collect information on occupation, industry, and workplace as part of ongoing Zika case investigations. Including the systematic collection of this information as part of surveillance might facilitate identifying future workplace-associated outbreaks.

Aggressive mosquito control efforts, including aerial adulticiding and larviciding, most likely contributed to a decrease in Zika virus transmission; no new cases in this area were identified with symptom onset more than 2 weeks after the first aerial adulticide and larvicide applications. The affected community also played a role in preventing new infections when residents and businesses began observing Drain and Cover prevention measures. Although the outbreak continued for more than 1 month, it remained limited to a small geographic area, as has been the case in previous arbovirus outbreaks in Florida (6).

Despite intensive investigation, no evidence of further spread was identified within the households or neighborhoods of two unrelated locally transmitted cases. Epidemiologic investigations of outbreaks of dengue, a related flavivirus spread by the same vectors, suggest that the wide use of air conditioning and low population densities limit spread of viruses transmitted by Ae. aegypti, a mosquito that bites indoors and outdoors and has a limited flight range (7); however, other factors might play a role in limited spread. Open doors and windows were observed at the homes of both Patients A and B, but air conditioning appeared functional in neighboring houses, and population density thresholds for flavivirus transmission have not been determined.

Currently, the Food and Drug Administration’s Emergency Use Authorization recommends rRT-PCR testing of urine and serum.†† However, many assessments of ongoing community transmission in these investigations included collection of urine specimens only for rRT-PCR testing. This approach had several advantages. For example, a positive PCR test provides a definitive diagnosis of Zika virus infection, no phlebotomist and fewer laboratory supplies are required (reducing costs and required skills for investigations), and willingness of survey respondents to provide a single, noninvasive specimen might have enhanced participation. In addition, detection of Zika virus RNA has been documented with a higher frequency and for a longer duration in urine than in serum (8). However, a disadvantage of only collecting urine is that persons with earlier exposures might no longer have viral RNA present in their urine, and without serologic confirmation, a diagnosis of Zika virus infection could be missed.

Control of Ae. aegypti during outbreaks is hampered by factors including a large number of cryptic larval development sites in urban environments, the possibility that truck-based spraying might not reach backyards or areas distant from roads, and the presence of adult mosquitoes indoors. In this affected area, high numbers of Ae. aegypti adults persisted despite aggressive efforts at eliminating larval development sites and truck-based and backpack spraying with adulticides. In contrast, mosquito counts decreased >10 fold following two aerial applications of naled at 3-day intervals; however, a sustained reduction was maintained only in the area sprayed aerially with both naled and Bti. Substantial reductions in mosquito counts coincided with apparent cessation of the outbreak.

Aerial insecticide applications have the potential to treat large areas rapidly and more uniformly; however, data on the efficacy of controlling Ae. aegypti populations by aerial spraying with modern ultralow volume spray technologies that can precisely control droplet size are limited. Less than one ounce of naled per acre is used for aerial spraying, which might explain the absence of observed negative health effects during and after aerial spraying. This finding is consistent with previous reports showing no difference in naled metabolites in urine before and after spraying, suggesting that residents in spray zones have negligible insecticide exposure (9,10).

The findings in this report are subject to at least four limitations. First, the number of persons infected with Zika virus likely was higher than reported. Most persons identified with Zika virus infection did not seek medical care; several were asymptomatic and were only identified by investigations of workplaces and neighborhood surveys. Second, the neighborhood surveys in the outbreak area were a convenience sample selected to detect ongoing transmission, and thus, the proportions of persons identified with recent infection could not be extrapolated to produce communitywide estimates of infection incidence. No other similar investigations exist for comparison of findings. Third, some persons infected earlier in the course of the outbreak might not have had Zika virus RNA still present in urine, resulting in an underestimation of the number of infected persons among those surveyed. Finally, the threshold reduction of Ae. aegypti populations needed to interrupt Zika virus transmission in South Florida is unknown and likely would vary by location and environment. Thus, although the combination of aerially applied naled and Bti along with source reduction and ground-based applications of larvicide and adulticides reduced Ae. aegypti populations to low levels, it cannot be concluded definitively that these reductions were responsible for ending the outbreak.

Local and state health departments serving communities with a competent Zika virus vector should continue active monitoring for local virus transmission. To reduce risk for local transmission within the continental United States, persons returning from areas with ongoing Zika virus transmission should use insect repellent routinely for 3 weeks after return to prevent human-to-mosquito-to-human transmission and should use condoms to prevent sexual transmission.§§ All residents, regardless of travel history, and all business establishments should empty or drain standing water around their homes and businesses. Clinicians who suspect Zika virus disease in patients who reside in or have recently returned from areas with ongoing Zika virus transmission should consider testing for Zika virus and promptly report cases to public health officials. Clinicians in areas where the vector is found might consider testing persons with compatible illness even in the absence of travel.