Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China
The following translation was retrieved from the Fujian Provincial People's Government Web site on January 15, 2013. The Chinese text was retrieved on December 13, 2016, from the website of the Gaoxin District Branch of the Baoding Municipal Public Security Bureau in Hebei Province.

* * *



Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China

(Adopted at the Second Session of the Fifth National People's Congress on July 1, 1979, Revised at the Fifth Session of the Eighth National People's Congress on March 14, 1997)

Amendment I, adopted at the 13th Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Ninth National People’s Congress on December 25, 1999

Amendment II, adopted at the 23rd Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Ninth National People's Congress on August 31, 2001

Amendment III, adopted at the 25th Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Ninth National People's Congress on December 29, 2001

Amendment IV, adopted at the 31st Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Ninth National People's Congress on December 28, 2002

Amendment V, adopted at the 14th Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Tenth National People’s Congress on February 28, 2005

Amendment VI, adopted at the 22nd Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Tenth National People’s Congress on June 29, 2006

Amendment VII, adopted at the 7th Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Eleventh National People’s Congress on February 28, 2009

Amendment VIII, adopted at the 19th Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Eleventh National People’s Congress on February 25, 2011.

TABLE OF CONTENTS:

SECTION 1 CRIMES AND CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY

SECTION 2 PREPARATION FOR A CRIME, CRIMINAL ATTEMPT AND DISCONTINUATION OF A CRIME

SECTION 3 JOINT CRIMES

SECTION 4 CRIMES COMMITTED BY A UNIT

SECTION 1 TYPES OF PUNISHMENTS

SECTION 2 PUBLIC SURVEILLANCE

SECTION 3 CRIMINAL DETENTION

SECTION 4 FIXED-TERM IMPRISONMENT AND LIFE IMPRISONMENT

SECTION 5 THE DEATH PENALTY

SECTION 6 FINES

SECTION 7 DEPRIVATION OF POLITICAL RIGHTS

SECTION 8 CONFISCATION OF PROPERTY

SECTION 1 SENTENCING

SECTION 2 RECIDIVISTS

SECTION 3 VOLUNTARY SURRENDER AND MERITORIOUS PERFORMANCE

SECTION 4 COMBINED PUNISHMENT FOR SEVERAL CRIMES

SECTION 5 SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE

SECTION 6 COMMUTATION OF PUNISHMENT

SECTION 7 PAROLE

SECTION 8 LIMITATION

SECTION 1 CRIMES OF PRODUCING AND MARKETING FAKE OR SUBSTANDARD COMMODITIES

SECTION 2 CRIMES OF SMUGGLING

SECTION 3 CRIMES OF DISRUPTING THE ORDER OF ADMINISTRATION OF COMPANIES AND ENTERPRISES

SECTION 4 CRIMES OF DISRUPTING THE ORDER OF FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION

SECTION 5 CRIMES OF FINANCIAL FRAUD

SECTION 6 CRIMES OF JEOPARDIZING ADMINISTRATION OF TAX COLLECTION

SECTION 7 CRIMES OF INFRINGING ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

SECTION 8 CRIMES OF DISRUPTING MARKET ORDER

SECTION 1 CRIMES OF DISTURBING PUBLIC ORDER

SECTION 2 CRIMES OF IMPAIRING JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION

SECTION 3 CRIMES AGAINST CONTROL OF NATIONAL BORDER (FRONTIER)

SECTION 4 CRIMES AGAINST CONTROL OF CULTURAL RELICS

SECTION 5 CRIMES OF IMPAIRING PUBLIC HEALTH

SECTION 6 CRIMES OF IMPAIRING THE PROTECTION OF ENVIRONMENT AND RESOURCES

SECTION 7 CRIMES OF SMUGGLING, TRAFFICKING IN, TRANSPORTING AND MANUFACTURING NARCOTIC DRUGS

SECTION 8 CRIMES OF ORGANIZING, FORCING, LURING, SHELTERING OR PROCURING OTHER PERSONS TO ENGAGE IN PROSTITUTION

SECTION 9 CRIMES OF PRODUCING, SELLING, DISSEMINATING PORNOGRAPHIC MATERIALS

Article 1

In order to punish crimes and protect the people, this Law is enacted on the basis of the Constitution and in the light of the concrete experiences and actual circumstances in China's fight against crimes.

Article 2

The aim of the Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China is to use criminal punishments to fight against all criminal acts in order to safeguard security of the State, to defend the State power of the people's democratic dictatorship and the socialist system, to protect property owned by the State, and property collectively owned by the working people and property privately owned by citizens, to protect citizens' rights of the person and their democratic and other rights, to maintain public and economic order, and to ensure the smooth progress of socialist construction.

Article 3

For acts that are explicitly defined as criminal acts in law, the offenders shall be convicted and punished in accordance with law; otherwise, they shall not be convicted or punished.

Article 4

The law shall be equally applied to anyone who commits a crime. No one shall have the privilege of transcending the law.

Article 5

The degree of punishment shall be commensurate with the crime committed and the criminal responsibility to be borne by the offender.

Article 6

This Law shall be applicable to anyone who commits a crime within the territory and territorial waters and space of the People's republic of China, except as otherwise specifically provided by law.

This Law shall also be applicable to anyone who commits a crime on board a ship or aircraft of the People's Republic of China.

If a criminal act or its consequence takes place within the territory or territorial waters or space of the People's Republic of China, the crime shall be deemed to have been committed within the territory and territorial waters and space of the People's Republic of China.

Article 7

This Law shall be applicable to any citizen of the People's Republic of China who commits a crime prescribed in this Law outside the territory and territorial waters and space of the People's Republic of China; however, if the maximum punishment to be imposed is fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years as stipulated in this Law, he may be exempted from the investigation for his criminal responsibility.

This Law shall be applicable to any State functionary or serviceman who commits a crime prescribed in this Law outside the territory and territorial waters and space of the People's Republic of China.

Article 8

This Law may be applicable to any foreigner who commits a crime outside the territory and territorial waters and space of the People's Republic of China against the State of the People's Republic of China or against any of its citizens, if for that crime this Law prescribes a minimum punishment of fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years; however, this does not apply to a crime that is not punishable according to the laws of the place where it is committed.

Article 9

This Law shall be applicable to crimes which are stipulated in international treaties concluded or acceded to by the People's Republic of China and over which the People's Republic of China exercises criminal jurisdiction within the scope of obligations, prescribed in these treaties, it agrees to perform.

Article 10

Any person who commits a crime outside the territory and territorial waters and space of the People's Republic of China, for which according to this Law he should bear criminal responsibility, may still be investigated for his criminal responsibility according to this Law, even if he has already been tried in a foreign country. However, if he has already received criminal punishment in the foreign country, he may be exempted from punishment or given a mitigated punishment.

Article 11

The criminal responsibility of foreigners who enjoy diplomatic privileges and immunities shall be solved through diplomatic channels.

Article 12

If an act committed after the founding of the People's Republic of China and before the entry into force of this Law was not deemed a crime under the laws at the time, those laws shall apply. If the act was deemed a crime under the laws in force at the time and is subject to prosecution under the provisions of Section 8, Chapter IV of the General Provisions of this Law, criminal responsibility shall be investigated in accordance with those laws. However, if according to this Law the act is not deemed a crime or is subject to a lighter punishment, this Law shall apply.

Before the entry into force of this Law, any judgment that has been made and has become effective according to the laws at the time shall remain valid.

SECTION 1: CRIMES AND CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY

Article 13

A crime refers to an act that endangers the sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of the State, splits the State, subverts the State power of the people's democratic dictatorship and overthrows the socialist system, undermines public and economic order, violates State-owned property, property collectively owned by the working people, or property privately owned by citizens, infringes on the citizens' rights of the person, their democratic or other rights, and any other act that endangers society and is subject to punishment according to law. However, if the circumstances are obviously minor and the harm done is not serious, the act shall not be considered a crime.

Article 14

An intentional crime refers to an act committed by a person who clearly knows that his act will entail harmful consequences to society but who wishes or allows such consequences to occur, thus constituting a crime.

Criminal responsibility shall be borne for intentional crimes.

Article 15

A negligent crime refers to an act committed by a person who should have foreseen that his act would possibly entail harmful consequences to society but who fails to do so through his negligence or, having foreseen the consequences, readily believes that they can be avoided, so that the consequences do occur.

Criminal responsibility shall be borne for negligent crimes only when the law so provides.

Article 16

An act is not a crime if it objectively results in harmful consequences due to irresistible or unforeseeable causes rather than intent or negligence.

Article 17

If a person who has reached the age of 16 commits a crime, he shall bear criminal responsibility.

If a person who has reached the age of 14 but not the age of 16 commits intentional homicide, intentionally hurts another person so as to cause serious injury or death of the person, or commits rape, robbery, drug- trafficking, arson, explosion or poisoning, he shall bear criminal responsibility.

If a person who has reached the age of 14 but not the age of 18 commits a crime, he shall be given a lighter or mitigated punishment.

If a person is not given criminal punishment because he has not reached the age of 16, the head of his family or his guardian shall be ordered to discipline him. When necessary, he may be taken in by the government for rehabilitation.

Article 17a

A person attaining the age of 75 may be given a lighter or mitigated penalty if he commits an intentional crime; or shall be given a lighter or mitigated penalty if he commits a negligent crime.

Article 18

If a mental patient causes harmful consequences at a time when he is unable to recognize or control his own conduct, upon verification and confirmation through legal procedure, he shall not bear criminal responsibility, but his family members or guardian shall be ordered to keep him under strict watch and control and arrange for his medical treatment. When necessary, the government may compel him to receive medical treatment.

Any person whose mental illness is of an intermittent nature shall bear criminal responsibility if he commits a crime when he is in a normal mental state.

If a mental patient who has not completely lost the ability of recognizing or controlling his own conduct commits a crime, he shall bear criminal responsibility; however, he may be given a lighter or mitigated punishment.

Any intoxicated person who commits a crime shall bear criminal responsibility.

Article 19

Any deaf-mute or blind person who commits a crime may be given a lighter or mitigated punishment or be exempted from punishment.

Article 20

An act that a person commits to stop an unlawful infringement in order to prevent the interests of the State and the public, or his own or other person's rights of the person, property or other rights from being infringed upon by the on-going infringement, thus harming the perpetrator, is justifiable defence, and he shall not bear criminal responsibility.

If a person's act of justifiable defence obviously exceeds the limits of necessity and causes serious damage, he shall bear criminal responsibility; however, he shall be given a mitigated punishment or be exempted from punishment.

If a person acts in defence against an on-going assault, murder, robbery, rape, kidnap or any other crime of violence that seriously endangers his personal safety, thus causing injury or death to the perpetrator of the unlawful act, it is not undue defence, and he shall not bear criminal responsibility.

Article 21

If a person is compelled to commit an act in an emergency to avert an immediate danger to the interests of the State or the public, or his own or another person's rights of the person, property or other rights, thus causing damage, he shall not bear criminal responsibility.

If the act committed by a person in an emergency to avert danger exceeds the limits of necessity and causes undue damage, he shall bear criminal responsibility; however, he shall be given a mitigated punishment or be exempted from punishment.

The provisions of the first paragraph of this Article with respect to averting danger to oneself shall not apply to a person who is charged with special responsibility in his post or profession.

SECTION 2: PREPARATION FOR A CRIME, CRIMINAL ATTEMPT AND DISCONTINUATION OF A CRIME

Article 22

Preparation for a crime refers to the preparation of the instruments or the creation of the conditions for a crime.

An offender who prepares for a crime may, in comparison with one who completes the crime, be given a lighter or mitigated punishment or be exempted from punishment.

Article 23

A criminal attempt refers to a case where an offender has already started to commit a crime but is prevented from completing it for reasons independent of his will.

An offender who attempts to commit a crime may, in comparison with one who completes the crime, be given a lighter or mitigated punishment.

Article 24

Discontinuation of a crime refers to a case where, in the course of committing a crime, the offender voluntarily discontinues the crime or voluntarily and effectively prevents the consequences of the crime from occurring.

An offender who discontinues a crime shall, if no damage is caused, be exempted from punishment or, if any damage is caused, be given a mitigated punishment.

SECTION 3: JOINT CRIMES

Article 25

A joint crime refers to an intentional crime committed by two or more persons jointly.

A negligent crime committed by two or more persons jointly shall not be punished as a joint crime; however, those who should bear criminal responsibility shall be individually punished according to the crimes they have committed.

Article 26

A principal criminal refers to any person who organizes and leads a criminal group in carrying out criminal activities or plays a principal role in a joint crime.

A criminal group refers to a relatively stable criminal organization formed by three or more persons for the purpose of committing crimes jointly.

Any ringleader who organizes or leads a criminal group shall be punished on the basis of all the crimes that the criminal group has committed.

Any principal criminal not included in Paragraph 3 shall be punished on the basis of all the crimes that he participates in or that he organizes or directs.

Article 27

An accomplice refers to any person who plays a secondary or auxiliary role in a joint crime.

An accomplice shall be given a lighter or mitigated punishment or be exempted from punishment.

Article 28

Anyone who is coerced to participate in a crime shall be given a mitigated punishment or be exempted from punishment in the light of the circumstances of the crime he commits.

Article 29

Anyone who instigates another to commit a crime shall be punished according to the role he plays in a joint crime. Anyone who instigates a person under the age of 18 to commit a crime shall be given a heavier punishment.

If the instigated person has not committed the instigated crime, the instigator may be given a lighter or mitigated punishment.

SECTION 4: CRIMES COMMITTED BY A UNIT

Article 30

Any company, enterprise, institution, State organ, or organization that commits an act that endangers society, which is prescribed by law as a crime committed by a unit, shall bear criminal responsibility.

Article 31

Where a unit commits a crime, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the crime shall be given criminal punishment. Where it is otherwise provided for in the Specific Provisions of this Law or in other laws, those provisions shall prevail.

SECTION 1: TYPES OF PUNISHMENTS

Article 32

Punishments are divided into principal punishments and supplementary punishments.

Article 33

The principal punishments are as follows:

(1) public surveillance;

(2) criminal detention;

(3) fixed-term imprisonment;

(4) life imprisonment; and

(5) the death penalty.

Article 34

The supplementary punishments are as follows:

(1) fine;

(2) deprivation of political rights; and

(3) confiscation of property.

Supplementary punishments may be imposed independently.

Article 35

Deportation may be imposed independently or supplementarily to a foreigner who commits a crime.

Article 36

If a victim has suffered economic losses as a result of a crime, the criminal shall, in addition to receiving a criminal punishment according to law, be sentenced to making compensation for the economic losses in the light of the circumstances.

If criminal who is liable for civil compensation is sentenced to a fine at the same time but his property is not sufficient to pay both the compensation and the fine, or if he is sentenced to confiscation of property at the same time, he shall, first of all, bear his liability for civil compensation to the victim.

Article 37

If the circumstances of a person's crime are minor and do not require criminal punishment, he may be exempted from it; however, he may, depending on the different circumstances of the case, be reprimanded or ordered to make a statement of repentance, offer an apology or pay compensation for the losses, or be subjected to administrative penalty or administrative sanctions by the competent department.

SECTION 2: PUBLIC SURVEILLANCE

Article 38

The term of public surveillance shall be not less than three months but not more than two years.

In light of the crime committed, a convict sentenced to control may also be prohibited from engaging in certain activities, entering certain areas or places or contacting certain persons during the term of execution.

Criminals sentenced to control shall be subject to community correction.

Whoever violates a restraining order as provided for in paragraph 2 shall be punished in accordance with the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Public Security Administration Punishments.

Article 39

Any criminal who is sentenced to public surveillance shall observe the following during the term in which his sentence is being executed:

(1) observe laws and administrative rules and regulations, and submit to supervision;

(2) exercise no right of freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, of association, of procession or of demonstration without the approval of the organ executing the public surveillance;

(3) report on his own activities as required by the organ executing the public surveillance;

(4) observe the regulations for receiving visitors stipulated by the organ executing the public surveillance; and

(5) report to obtain approval from the organ executing the public surveillance for any departure from the city or county he lives in or for any change in residence.

Criminals sentenced to public surveillance shall, while engaged in labour, receive equal pay for equal work.

Article 40

Upon the expiration of a term of public surveillance, the executing organ shall immediately announce the termination of public surveillance to the criminal sentenced to public surveillance and to his work unit or the people of the place where he resides.

Article 41

A term of public surveillance shall be counted from the date the judgment begins to be executed; if the criminal is held in custody before the execution of the judgment, one day in custody shall be considered two days of the term sentenced.

SECTION 3: CRIMINAL DETENTION

Article 42

A term of criminal detention shall be not less than one month but not more than 6 months.

Article 43

Where a criminal is sentenced to criminal detention, the sentence shall be executed by the public security organ in the vicinity.

During the period of execution, a criminal sentenced to criminal detention may go home for one to two days each month; an appropriate remuneration may be given to those who participate in labor.

Article 44

A term of criminal detention shall be counted from the date the judgment begins to be executed; if the criminal is held in custody before the execution of the judgment, one day in custody shall be considered one day of the term sentenced.

SECTION 4: FIXED-TERM IMPRISONMENT AND LIFE IMPRISONMENT

Article 45

A term of fixed-term imprisonment shall be not less than six months but not more than 15 years, except as stipulated in Articles 50 and 69 of this Law.

Article 46

Any criminal who is sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment or life imprisonment shall serve his sentence in prison or another place for the execution. Anyone who is able to work shall do so to accept education and reform through labor.

Article 47

A term of fixed-term imprisonment shall be counted from the date the judgment begins to be executed; if the criminal is held in custody before the execution of the judgment, one day in custody shall be considered one day of the term sentenced.

SECTION 5: THE DEATH PENALTY

Article 48

The death penalty shall only be applied to criminals who have committed extremely serious crimes. If the immediate execution of a criminal punishable by death is not deemed necessary, a two-year suspension of execution may be pronounced simultaneously with the imposition of the death sentence.

All death sentences, except for those that according to law should be decided by the Supreme People's Court, shall be submitted to the Supreme People's Court for verification and approval. Death sentences with a suspension of execution may be decided or verified and approved by a Higher People's Court.

Article 49

The death penalty shall not be imposed on persons who have not reached the age of 18 at the time the crime is committed or on women who are pregnant at the time of trial.

Death penalty shall not be given to a person attaining the age of 75 at the time of trial, unless he has caused the death of another person by especially cruel means.

Article 50

Where a convict is sentenced to death with a reprieve, if he does not commit any intentional crime during the period of reprieve, the sentence shall be commuted to life imprisonment upon expiration of the two-year period; if he has any major meritorious performance, the sentence shall be commuted to imprisonment of 25 years upon expiration of the two-year period; or if it is verified that he has committed any intentional crime, the death penalty shall be executed with the approval of the Supreme People’s Court.

For a recidivist or a convict of murder, rape, robbery, abduction, arson, explosion, dissemination of hazardous substances or organized violence who is sentenced to death with a reprieve, the people’s court may, in sentencing, decide to put restrictions on commutation of his sentence in light of the circumstances of the crime committed.

Article 51

The term of suspension of execution of a death penalty shall be counted from the date the judgment becomes final. The term of a fixed-term imprisonment that is commuted from a death penalty with suspension of execution shall be counted from the date the suspension of execution expires.

SECTION 6: FINES

Article 52

The amount of any fine imposed shall be determined according to the circumstances of the crime.

Article 53

A fine may be paid in a lump sum or in installments within the time limit specified in the judgment. If a fine is not paid upon the expiration of that time limit, the payment shall be compelled. If a person is not able to pay the fine in full, the People's Court shall demand the payment whenever it finds the person has property for execution of the fine. If a person has true difficulties in paying because of an irresistible disaster, the fine may be reduced or remitted according to the circumstances.

SECTION 7: DEPRIVATION OF POLITICAL RIGHTS

Article 54

Deprivation of political rights refers to deprivation of the following rights:

(1) the right to vote and to stand for election;

(2) the rights of freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, of association, of procession and of demonstration;

(3) the right to hold a position in a State organ; and

(4) the right to hold a leading position in any State-owned company, enterprise, institution or people's organization.

Article 55

A term of deprivation of political rights shall be not less than one year but not more than five years, except as stipulated in Article 57 of this Law.

Anyone who is sentenced to public surveillance is deprived of political rights as a supplementary punishment, the term of deprivation of political rights shall be the same as the term of public surveillance, and the punishments shall be executed simultaneously.

Article 56

Anyone who commits the crime of endangering national security shall be sentenced to deprivation of political rights as a supplementary punishment; anyone who commits the crime of seriously undermining public order by intentional homicide, rape, arson, explosion, poisoning or robbery may be sentenced to deprivation of political rights as a supplementary punishment.

Where deprivation of political rights is imposed exclusively, the Specific Provisions of this Law shall apply.

Article 57

Any criminal who is sentenced to death or to life imprisonment shall be deprived of his political rights for life.

When a death penalty with a suspension of execution is commuted to a fixed-term imprisonment, or a life imprisonment is commuted to a fixed- term imprisonment, the term of the supplementary punishment of deprivation of political rights shall be changed to not less than three years but not more than 10 years.

Article 58

A term of deprivation of political rights as a supplementary punishment shall be counted from the date on which imprisonment or criminal detention ends or from the date on which parole begins. Deprivation of political rights shall, as a matter of course, be in effect during the period in which the principal punishment is being executed.

Any criminal who is deprived of his political rights shall, during the period of execution, observe laws, administrative rules and regulations and other regulations governing supervision and control stipulated by the department of public security under the State Council and submit to supervision; he shall not exercise any of the rights listed in Article 54 of this Law.

SECTION 8: CONFISCATION OF PROPERTY

Article 59

Confiscation of property refers to the confiscation of part or all of the property personally owned by a criminal. Where confiscation of all the property of a criminal is imposed, the amount necessary for the daily expenses of the criminal himself and the family members supported by him shall be taken out.

When a sentence of confiscation of property is imposed, property that the criminal's family members own or should own shall not be subject to confiscation.

Article 60

Where it is necessary to use part of the confiscated property to repay the legitimate debts that the criminal incurred before his property is confiscated, the debts shall be repaid at the request of the creditors.

SECTION 1: SENTENCING

Article 61

When sentencing a criminal, a punishment shall be meted out on the basis of the facts, nature and circumstances of the crime, the degree of harm done to society and the relevant provisions of this Law.

Article 62

In cases where the circumstances of a crime call for a heavier or lighter punishment under the provisions of this Law, the criminal shall be sentenced to a punishment within the limits of the prescribed punishment.

Article 63

Where there is any circumstance of mitigation of penalty, a convict shall be given a penalty below the statutory penalty; and if there are two or more ranges of sentencing under this Law, the penalty shall be given within the range next lower to the statutory range.

In cases where the circumstances of a crime do not warrant a mitigated punishment under the provisions of this Law, however, in the light of the special circumstances of the case, and upon verification and approval of the Supreme People's Court, the criminal may still be sentenced to a punishment less than the prescribed punishment.

Article 64

All money and property illegally obtained by a criminal shall be recovered, or compensation shall be or dered; the lawful property of the victim shall be returned without delay; and contrabands and possessions of the criminal that are used in the commission of the crime shall be confiscated. All the confiscated money and property and fines shall be turned over to the State treasury, and no one may misappropriate or privately dispose of them.

SECTION 2: RECIDIVISTS

Article 65

Where a convict sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment or a heavier penalty commits again a crime for which a fixed-term imprisonment or a heavier penalty shall be given within five years after finishing serving his sentence or being pardoned, he shall be a recidivist and be given a heavier penalty, unless it is a negligent crime or he commits the crime under the age of 18.

For criminals who are paroled, the period stipulated in the preceding paragraph shall be counted from the date the parole expires.

Article 66

A convict of jeopardizing the national security, terrorist activities or organized crime of a gangland nature shall be punished as a recidivist for any of such crimes committed again by him at any time after he finishes serving his sentence or is pardoned.

SECTION 3: VOLUNTARY SURRENDER AND MERITORIOUS PERFORMANCE

Article 67

Voluntary surrender refers to the act of voluntarily delivering oneself up to justice and truthfully confessing one's crime after one has committed the crime. Any criminal who voluntarily surrenders may be given a lighter or mitigated punishment. The ones whose crimes are relatively minor may be exempted from punishment.

If a criminal suspect or a defendent under compulsory measures or a criminal serving a sentence truthfully confesses his other crimes that the judicial organ does not know, his act shall be regarded as voluntary surrender.

A criminal suspect who truthfully confesses to his crime may be given a lighter penalty although there is no voluntary surrender as mentioned in the preceding two paragraphs; and may be given a mitigated penalty if any especially serious consequence is avoided for his truthful confession.

Article 68

Any criminal who performs such meritorious services as exposing an offence committed by another, which is verified through investigation, or producing important clues for solving other cases may be given a lighter or mitigated punishment. Any criminal who performs major meritorious services may be given a mitigated punishment or be exempted from punishment.

SECTION 4: COMBINED PUNISHMENT FOR SEVERAL CRIMES

Article 69

Where a person is convicted of more than one crime before a sentence is pronounced, except for death penalty or life imprisonment, the term of criminal penalty to be executed shall be decided in light of the actual circumstances below the sum of terms but above the highest term of the imposed criminal penalties; however, the decided term of control shall not exceed three years, the decided term of criminal detention shall not exceed one year, and the decided fixed-term imprisonment shall not exceed 20 years if the sum of terms of fixed-term imprisonment is less than 35 years or shall not exceed 25 years if the sum of terms is 35 years or more.

If there are accessory penalties imposed for the crimes, the accessory penalties must still be executed. Accessory penalties of the same kind shall be executed on a consolidated basis, while those of different kinds shall be executed separately.

Article 70

If, after a judgment has been pronounced but before the punishment has been completely executed, it is discovered that before the judgment is pronounced the criminal committed another crime for which he is not sentenced, a judgment shall also be rendered for the newly discovered crime; the punishment to be executed shall be determined on the basis of the punishments imposed in the earlier and latest judgments and according to the provisions of Article 69 of this Law. Any portion of the term that has already been served shall count towards fulfilment of the term imposed by the latest judgment.

Article 71

If, after a judgment has been pronounced but before the punishment has been completely executed, the criminal again commits a crime, another judgment shall be rendered for the newly committed crime; the punishment to be executed shall be determined on the basis of the punishment that remains to be executed for the earlier crime and the punishment imposed for the new crime and according to the provisions of Article 69 of this Law.

SECTION 5: SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE

Article 72

Where a convict sentenced to criminal detention or imprisonment of not more than 3 years meets the following conditions, a probation may be announced, and a probation shall be announced if he is under the age of 18, is pregnant or attains the age of 75:

(1) The circumstances of the crime are minor;

(2) He shows repentance;

(3) He is not likely to commit any offense again; and

(4) Announcing the probation will not have any major adverse impact on the community where he lives.

When probation is announced, in light of the crime committed, the convict may also be prohibited from engaging in certain activities, entering certain areas or places or contacting certain persons during probation.

If there is any accessory penalty imposed on a convict on probation, the accessory penalty must still be executed.

Article 73

The probation period for suspension of criminal detention shall be not less than the term originally decided but not more than one year, however, it may not be less than two months.

The probation period for suspension of fixed-term imprisonment shall be not less than the term originally decided but not more than five years, however, it may not be less than one year.

The probation period for suspension of sentence shall be counted from the date the judgment is made final.

Article 74

Probation shall not apply to recidivists and ringleaders of criminal gangs.

Article 75

A criminal whose sentence is suspended shall observe the followings:

(1) to observe laws and administrative rules and regulations, and submit to supervision;

(2) to report on his own activities as required by the observing organ;

(3) to observe the regulations for receiving visitors stipulated by the observing organ; and

(4) to report to obtain approval from the observing organ for any departure from the city or county he lives in or for any change in residence.

Article 76

A convict on probation shall be subject to community correction during probation, and if none of the circumstances as set out in Article 77 of this Law occurs, the original sentence shall no longer be executed upon expiration of probation, which shall be announced to the public.

Article 77

If, during the probation period for suspension of sentence, a criminal whose sentence is suspended commits a crime again or it is discovered that before the judgment is pronounced, he has committed another crime for which he is not sentenced, the suspension shall be revoked and another judgment rendered for the newly committed or discovered crime; the punishment to be executed shall be decided on the basis of the punishments for the old crime and the new crime and according to the provisions of Article 69 of this Law.

Where a convict on probation violates any provision of laws, administrative regulations or the relevant department of the State Council on probation supervision and management or violates any restraining order in the judgment of the people’s court during probation, if the circumstances are serious, the probation shall be revoked and the original sentence shall be executed.

SECTION 6: COMMUTATION OF PUNISHMENT

Article 78

The punishment of a criminal sentenced to public surveillance, criminal detention, fixed-term imprisonment or life imprisonment may be commuted if, while serving his sentence, he conscientiously observes prison regulations, accepts education and reform through labor and shows true repentance or performs meritorious services; the punishment shall be commuted if a criminal performs any of the following major meritorious services:

(1) preventing another person from conducting major criminal activities;

(2) informing against major criminal activities conducted inside or outside prison and verified through investigation;

(3) having inventions or important technical innovations to his credit;

(4) coming to the rescue of another in everyday life and production at the risk of losing his own life;

(5) performing remarkable services in fighting against natural disasters or curbing major accidents; or

(6) making other major contributions to the country and society.

After commutation, the actually executed term of criminal penalty shall not be:

(1) less than 1/2 of the original term of criminal penalty, if control, criminal detention or fixed-term imprisonment is imposed;

(2) less than 13 years, if life imprisonment is imposed; or

(3) less than 25 years if the death penalty with a reprieve imposed on a convict is legally commuted to life imprisonment upon expiration of the reprieve period, or less than 20 years if it is commuted to imprisonment of 25 years upon expiration of the reprieve period, where the people’s court has put restrictions on commutation of the death penalty with a reprieve according to paragraph 2, Article 50 of this Law.

Article 79

If punishment to a criminal is to be commuted, the executing organ shall submit to a People's Court at or above the intermediate level a written proposal for commutation of punishment. The People's Court shall form a collegiate panel for examination and, if the criminal is found to have shown true repentance or performed meritorious services, issue an order of commutation. However, no punishment shall be commuted without going through legal procedure.

Article 80

A term of fixed-term imprisonment that is commuted from life imprisonment shall be counted from the date the order of commutation is issued.

SECTION 7: PAROLE

Article 81

Where a convict sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment has served not less than half of the term of his original sentence, or a convict sentenced to life imprisonment has actually served not less than 13 years of imprisonment, he may be paroled if he earnestly observes the prison rules, accepts reform through education and shows true repentance and is not likely to commit any crime again. Under special circumstances, with the approval of the Supreme People’s Court, a parole may be granted without regard to the above restrictions on the term served.

No parole shall be granted to a recidivist or a convict sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment for murder, rape, robbery, abduction, arson, explosion, dissemination of hazardous substances or organized violent crime.

When a parole decision is made on a convict, the impact of his release on parole on the community where he lives shall be considered.

Article 82

Parole shall be granted to a criminal through the procedure prescribed in Article 79 of this Law. No parole shall be granted without going through legal procedure.

Article 83

The probation period for parole in the case of fixed-term imprisonment shall be equal to the portion of the term that has not been completed; the probation period for parole in the case of life imprisonment shall be 10 years.

The probation period for parole shall be counted from the date the criminal is released on parole.

Article 84

Any criminal who is granted parole shall observe the following:

(1) observe laws and administrative rules and regulations, and submit to supervision;

(2) report on his own activities as required by the supervising organ;

(3) observe the regulations for receiving visitors stipulated by the supervising organ; and

(4) report to obtain approval from the supervising organ for any departure from the city or county he lives in or for any change in residence.

Article 85

A convict released on parole shall be subject to community correction during parole according to law, and if none of the circumstances as set out in Article 86 of this Law occurs, the original sentence shall be deemed to have been fully served upon expiration of parole, which shall be announced to the public.

Article 86

If a criminal who is granted parole commits another crime during the probation period for parole, the parole shall be revoked, and he shall be given a combined punishment for several crimes as provided in Article 71 of this Law.

If a criminal who is granted parole is discovered to have committed, before the judgment is pronounced, other crimes for which no punishment is imposed, the parole shall be revoked and a combined punishment for several crimes shall be given according to the provisions of Article 70 of this Law.

Where a convict released on parole violates any provision of laws, administrative regulations or the relevant department of the State Council on parole supervision and management during parole, if it does not constitute a new crime, his parole shall be revoked under statutory procedures, and he shall be taken into custody to serve his remaining term of sentence.

SECTION 8: LIMITATION

Article 87

Crimes shall not be prosecuted if the following periods have elapsed:

(1) five years, when the maximum punishment prescribed is fixed-term imprisonment of less than five years;

(2) 10 years, when the maximum punishment prescribed is fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years but less than 10 years;

(3) 15 years, when the maximum punishment prescribed is fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years; and

(4) 20 years, when the maximum punishment prescribed is life imprisonment or death penalty. If after 20 years it is considered necessary to prosecute a crime, the matter shall be submitted to the Supreme People's Procuratorate for examination and approval.

Article 88

No limitation on the period for prosecution shall be imposed with respect to a criminal who escapes from investigation or trial after a People's Procuratorate, public security organ or national security organ files the case or a People's Court accepts the case.

No limitation on the period for prosecution shall be imposed with respect to a case which should have been but is not filed by a People's Court, People's Procuratorate or public security organ after the victim brings a charge within the period for prosecution.

Article 89

The limitation period for prosecution shall be counted from the date the crime is committed; if the criminal act is of a continual or continuous nature, it shall be counted from the date the criminal act is terminated.

If further crime is committed during a limitation period for prosecution, the limitation period for prosecution of the old crime shall be counted from the date the new crime is committed.

Article 90

Where the provisions of this Law cannot be completely applied in national autonomous areas, the people's congresses of the autonomous regions or the provinces concerned may formulate adaptive or supplementary provisions on the basis of the political, economic and cultural characteristics of the local ethnic groups and the basic principles stipulated in this Law, and these provisions shall go into effect after they have been submitted to and approved by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress.

Article 91

"Public property" as mentioned in this Law refers to the following;

(1) property owned by the State;

(2) property owned collectively by working people; and

(3) public donations or special funds used for elimination of poverty or for other public welfare undertakings.

Private property that is being managed, used or transported by State organs, State-owned companies and enterprises, or enterprises owned by collectives, or people's organizations shall be treated as public property.

Article 92

"Citizens' privately owned property" as mentioned in this Law refers to the following;

(1) citizens' lawful earnings, savings, houses and other means of subsistence;

(2) any means of production that is under private or family ownership according to law;

(3) property lawfully owned by self-employed workers or private enterprises; and

(4) shares, stocks, bonds and other property that are under private ownership according to law.

Article 93

"State functionaries" as mentioned in this Law refers to persons who perform public service in State organs.

Persons who perform public service in State-owned companies or, enterprises, institutions or people's organizations, persons who are assigned by State organs, State-owned companies, enterprises or institutions to companies, enterprises or institutions that are not owned by the State or people's organizations to perform public service and the other persons who perform public service according to law shall all be regarded as State functionaries.

Article 94

"Judicial officers" as mentioned in this Law refers to persons who exercise the functions of investigation, prosecution, adjudication and supervision and control.

Article 95

"Serious injuries" as mentioned in this Law refers to any of the following:

(1) injuries resulting in a person's disability or disfigurement;

(2) injuries resulting in a person's loss of his hearing, sight or the function of any other organ; or

(3) other injuries that cause grave harm to a person's physical health.

Article 96

"Violation of State regulations" as mentioned in this Law refers to violation of the laws enacted or decisions made by the National People's Congress or its Standing Committee and the administrative rules and regulations formulated, the administrative measures adopted and the decisions or orders promulgated by the State Council.

Article 97

"Ringleader" as mentioned in this Law refers to any criminal who plays the role of organizing, plotting or directing in a crime committed by a criminal group or a crowd.

Article 98

"To be handled only upon complaint" as mentioned in this Law means that a case shall only be handled if the victim brings a complaint. However, if the victim is unable to bring a complaint because of coercion or intimidation, a People's Procuratorate or a close relative of the victim may bring a complaint.

Article 99

"Not less than", "not more than" and "within" as used in this Law all include the given figure.

Article 100

Anyone who has been subjected to criminal punishment shall, before being recruited in the army or employed, report to the unit concerned about the fact; he may not conceal it.

Whoever is given a penalty lighter than imprisonment of 5 years for a crime committed under the age of 18 shall be exempted from the reporting obligation as mentioned in the preceding paragraph.

Article 101

The General Provisions of this Law shall be applicable to other laws with provisions for criminal punishments, unless otherwise specifically provided for in those laws.

Article 102

Whoever colludes with a foreign State to endanger the sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of the People's Republic of China shall be sentenced to life imprisonment or fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years.

Whoever commits the crime prescribed in the preceding paragraph in collusion with any organ, organization or individual outside the territory of China shall be punished according to the provisions in the preceding paragraph.

Article 103

Among those who organize, plot or carry out the scheme of splitting the State or undermining unity of the country, the ringleaders and the others who commit major crimes shall be sentenced to life imprisonment or fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years; the ones who take an active part in it shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years; and the other participants shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years, criminal detention, public surveillance or deprivation of political rights.

Whoever incites others to split the State or undermine unity of the country shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years, criminal detention, public surveillance or deprivation of political rights; the ringleaders and the ones who commit major crimes shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years.

Article 104

Among those who organize, plot or carry out armed rebellion or armed riot, the ringleaders and the others who commit major crimes shall be sentenced to life imprisonment or fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years; the ones who take an active part in it shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years; and the other participants shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years, criminal detention, public surveillance or deprivation of political rights.

Whoever instigates, coerces, lures or bribes State functionaries or members of the armed forces, the people's police or the people's militia to commit armed rebellion or armed riot shall be given a heavier punishment according to the provisions in the preceding paragraph.

Article 105

Among those who organize, plot or carry out the scheme of subverting the State power or overthrowing the socialist system, the ringleaders and the others who commit major crimes shall be sentenced to life imprisonment or fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years; the ones who take an active part in it shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years; and the other participants shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years, criminal detention, public surveillance or deprivation of political rights.

Whoever incites others by spreading rumors or slanders or any other means to subvert the State power or overthrow the socialist system shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years, criminal detention, public surveillance or deprivation of political rights; and the ringleaders and the others who commit major crimes shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years.

Article 106

Whoever commits the crime as prescribed in Article 103, 104 or 105 of this Chapter in collusion with any organ, organization or individual outside the territory of China shall be given a heavier punishment according to the provisions stipulated in these Articles respectively.

Article 107

Where any domestic or overseas institution, organization or individual provides financial support for the commission of a crime as provided for in Article 102, 103, 104 or 105 of this Chapter, the directly liable person shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not more than 5 years, criminal detention, control or deprivation of political rights; or if the circumstances are serious, be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 5 years.

Article 108

Whoever defects to the enemy and turns traitor shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years; if the circumstances are serious or if he leads members of the armed forces, the people's police or the people's militia to defect to the enemy and turn traitor, he shall be sentenced to fixed- term imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment.

Article 109

A state functionary who, in the course of performing his official duties, leaves his post without permission and flees this country or flees when he is already outside this country shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not more than 5 years, criminal detention, control or deprivation of political rights; or if the circumstances are serious, be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 5 years but not more than 10 years.

A state functionary knowing any national secret, who flees this country or flees when he is already outside this country, shall be given a heavier penalty according to the provision of the preceding paragraph.

Article 110

Whoever endangers national security by committing any of the following acts of espionage shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment; if the circumstances are minor, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years:

(1) joining an espionage organization or accepting a mission assigned by the organization or its agent; or

(2) directing the enemy to any bombing or shelling target.

Article 111

Whoever steals, spies into, buys or unlawfully supplies State secrets or intelligence for an organ, organization or individual outside the territory of China shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years but not more than 10 years; if the circumstances are especially serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment; if the circumstances are minor, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years, criminal detention, public surveillance or deprivation of political rights.

Article 112

Whoever aids the enemy during wartime by providing him with weapons and equipment or military materials shall be sentenced to fixed- term imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment; if the circumstances are minor, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years.

Article 113

Whoever commits any of the crimes of endangering national security as mentioned above in this Chapter, with the exception of those provided for in Paragraph 2 of Article 103 and in Articles 105, 107 and 109, if the crime causes particularly grave harm to the State and the people or if the circumstances are especially serious, may be sentenced to death.

Whoever commits any of the crimes mentioned in this Chapter may concurrently be sentenced to confiscation of property.

Article 114

Whoever commits arson, breaches a dike, causes explosion, spreads poisonous or radioactive substances, infectious-disease pathogens or other substances, or uses other dangerous means, thereby endangering public security but causing no serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 3 years but not more than 10 years.

Article 115

Whoever commits arson, breaches a dike, causes explosion, spreads poisonous or radioactive substances, or infectious-disease pathogens or other substances, or uses other dangerous means, thereby inflicting serious injury or death on people or causing heavy losses of public or private property, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years, life imprisonment or death.

Whoever negligently commits the crime mentioned in the preceding paragraph shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years; if the circumstances are minor, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention.

Article 116

Whoever sabotages a train, motor vehicle, tram, ship or aircraft to such a dangerous extent as to overturn or destroy it, but with no serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years.

Article 117

Whoever sabotages a railroad, bridge, tunnel, highway, airport, waterway, lighthouse or sign or conducts any other sabotaging activities to such a dangerous extent as to overturn or destroy it, but with no serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years.

Article 118

Whoever sabotages any electric power or gas facility or any other inflammable or explosive equipment, thereby endangering public security, but causing no serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years.

Article 119

Whoever sabotages any means of transport, transportation facility, electric power facility, gas facility, or inflammable or explosive equipment, thereby causing serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years, life imprisonment or death.

Whoever negligently commits the crime mentioned in the preceding paragraph shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years; if the circumstances are minor, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention.

Article 120

Whoever forms or leads a terrorist organization shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment; persons who actively participate in a terrorist organization shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 3 years but not more than 10 years; other participants shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than 3 years, criminal detention, public surveillance or deprivation of political rights.

Whoever, in addition to the crime mentioned in the preceding paragraph, commits other crimes of homicide, explosion or kidnap shall be punished in accordance with the provisions on combined punishment for several crimes.

Article 120a

Whoever provides funds to any terrorist organization or individual who engages in terrorism shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years, criminal detention, public surveillance or deprivation of political rights, and shall also be fined; if the circumstances are serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years, and he shall also be fined or his property shall be confiscated.

Where a unit commits the crime mentioned in the preceding paragraph, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the offence shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph.

Article 121

Whoever hijacks any aircraft by means of violence, coercion or by any other means shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment; any hijacker who causes serious injury to or death of any other person or serious damage to the aircraft shall be sentenced to death.

Article 122

Whoever hijacks a ship or motor vehicle by means of violence, coercion or by any other means shall be sentenced to fixed- term imprisonment of not less than five years but not more than 10 years; if there are serious consequences, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment.

Article 123

Whoever uses violence against any person on board an aircraft and thereby endangers air safety, if there are no serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years or criminal detention; if there are serious consequences, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years.

Article 124

Whoever sabotages any broadcasting, television or public telecommunications facility, thereby endangering public security, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years; if there are serious consequences, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than seven years.

Whoever negligently commits the crime mentioned in the preceding paragraph shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years; if the circumstances are minor, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention.

Article 125

Whoever illegally manufactures, trades in, transports, mails or stores any guns, ammunition or explosives shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years; if the circumstances are serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years, life imprisonment or death.

Whoever illegally manufactures, trades in, transports or stores poisonous or radioactive substances, infectious disease pathogens or other substances, thereby endangering public security, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph.

Where a unit commits any of the crimes mentioned in the preceding two paragraphs, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the crime shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the first paragraph.

Article 126

If, in violation of the regulations governing control of guns, any enterprise that is designated or determined pursuant to law for manufacturing or selling guns commits any of the following acts, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the act shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years; if the circumstances are serious, they shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years but not more than 10 years; if the circumstances are especially serious, they shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment:

(1) to manufacture or sell guns in excess of the quotas or at variance with the variety prescribed, for purposes of illegal sale;

(2) to manufacture guns without numbers or with duplicate or false numbers, for purposes of illegal sale; or

(3) to sell guns illegally, or sell guns in China that are manufactured for export.

Article 127

Whoever steals or forcibly seizes any guns, ammunition or explosives, or steals or forcibly seizes poisonous or radioactive substances, infectious disease pathogens or other substances, thereby endangering public security, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 3 years but not more than 10 years; if the circumstances are serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years, life imprisonment or death.

Whoever robs any guns, ammunition or explosives, or robs poisonous or radioactive substances, infectious disease pathogens or other substances, thereby endangering public security, or steals or forcibly seizes any guns, ammunition or explosives from State organs or members of the armed forces, the police or the people's militia, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years, life imprisonment or death.

Article 128

Whoever, in violation of the regulations governing control of guns, illegally possesses or conceals any guns or ammunition shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years, criminal detention or public surveillance; if the circumstances are serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

Whoever is lawfully equipped with a gun for the discharge of official duties illegally leases or loans his gun shall be punished according to the provisions of the preceding paragraph.

If persons who are lawfully provided with guns illegally lease or loan such guns, thereby causing serious consequences, they shall be punished according to the provisions of the first paragraph.

Where a unit commits the crime mentioned in the second or third paragraph, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the crime shall be punished according to the provisions of the first paragraph.

Article 129

If persons who are lawfully equipped with guns for the discharge of official duties lose their guns and fail to report about the matter immediately, thereby causing serious consequences, they shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention.

Article 130

Whoever illegally enters a public place or gets on a public transportation vehicle with any gun, ammunition, controlled cutting tool or explosive, inflammable, radioactive, poisonous or corrosive materials and thereby endangers public security, if the circumstances are serious, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years, criminal detention or public surveillance.

Article 131

Any member of the crew on board an air craft who operates in violation of rules or regulations and thereby causes a grave air accident, if there are serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; if an air crash or death of another is caused, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

Article 132

Any railway worker who operates in violation of rules or regulations and thereby causes a railway operational accident, if there are serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; if there are especially serious consequences, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

Article 133

Whoever violates regulations governing traffic and transportation and thereby causes a serious accident, resulting in serious injuries or deaths or heavy losses of public or private property, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention. Whoever runs away from the spot after he has caused a traffic accident or is involved in other especially flagrant circumstances shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years; if his escape results in the death of another person, he shall be sentenced to fixed- term imprisonment of not less than seven years.

Article 133a

Whoever races a motor vehicle on a road with execrable circumstances or drives a motor vehicle on a road while intoxicated shall be sentenced to criminal detention and a fine.

Whoever commits any other crime while committing a crime as mentioned in the preceding paragraph shall be convicted and punished according to the provisions on the crime with the heavier penalty.

Article 134

Whoever violates the safety provisions in the course of production and operations, thereby causing an accident involving heavy casualties or causing other serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; and if the circumstances are especially flagrant, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

Whoever forces another person to work under hazardous conditions in violation of rules, thereby causing an accident involving heavy casualties or causing other serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years or criminal detention; and if the circumstances are especially flagrant, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years.

Article 135

Where the facilities for safety production or the conditions for safety production are not in conformity with State requirements, thereby causing an accident involving heavy casualties or causing other serious consequences, the person directly in charge and the other persons directly responsible shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; and if the circumstances are especially flagrant, the said persons shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

Article 135a

Where a large-scale mass activity is held in violation of the safety provisions, thereby causing an accident involving heavy casualties or causing other serious consequences, the person directly in charge and the other persons directly responsible shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; and if the circumstances are especially flagrant, the said persons shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

Article 136

Whoever violates the regulations on the control of explosive, inflammable, radioactive, poisonous or corrosive materials and thereby causes a serious accident during the production, storage, transportation or use of those materials, if there are serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; if the consequences are especially serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

Article 137

Where any building, designing, construction or engineering supervision unit, in violation of State regulations, lowers the quality standard of a project and thereby causes a serious accident, the person who is directly responsible for the accident shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years or criminal detention and shall also be fined; if the consequences are especially serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years but not more than 10 years and shall also be fined.

Article 138

If a person who is directly responsible knowingly fails to adopt measures against dangers in school buildings or in educational or teaching facilities or to make a timely report about the matter, so that an accident involving heavy casualties occurs, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; if the consequences are especially serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

Article 139

If a person who is directly responsible violates the regulations on fire prevention and control and refuses to take measures to set it right after being told by the organ for supervision over fire prevention and control to do so, if serious consequences ensue, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; if the consequences are especially serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

Article 139a

Where after the occurrence of an accident endangering safety, the person whose duty it is to report such occurrence fails to do so or makes a false report about the accident, thus causing the delay of rescue efforts, if the circumstances are serious, the said person shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; and if the circumstances are especially serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

SECTION 1: CRIMES OF PRODUCING AND MARKETING FAKE OR SUBSTANDARD COMMODITIES

Article 140

Any producer or seller who mixes impurities into or adulterates the products, or passes a fake product off as a genuine one, a defective product as a high-quality one, or a substandard product as a standard one, if the amount of earnings from sales is more than 50,000 yuan but less than 200,000 yuan, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than two years or criminal detention and shall also, or shall only, be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales; if the amount of earnings from sales is more than 200,000 yuan but less than 500,000 yuan, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than two years but not more than seven years and shall also be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales; if the amount of earnings from sales is more than 500,000 yuan but less than 2,000,000 yuan, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than seven years and shall also be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales; if the amount of earnings from sales is more than 2,000,000 yuan, he shall be sentenced to fixed- term imprisonment of 15 years or life imprisonment, and shall also be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales or be sentenced to confiscation of property.

Article 141

Whoever produces or sells bogus drugs shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not more than 3 years or criminal detention and a fine; if any serious damage is caused to the people’s health or there is any other serious circumstance, shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 3 years but not more than 10 years and a fine; or if any human death is caused or there is any other especially serious circumstance, shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 10 years, life imprisonment or death penalty and a fine or forfeiture of property.

Fake medicines as mentioned in this Article refer to medicines or any non-medical substances that fall under the category of or are regarded as fake medicines under the Pharmaceutical Administration Law of the People's Republic of China.

Article 142

Whoever produces or sells medicines of inferior quality and thereby causes serious harm to human health shall be sentenced to fixed- term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years and shall also be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales; if the consequences are especially serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment, and shall also be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales or be sentenced to confiscation of property.

Medicines of inferior quality as mentioned in this Article refer to medicines that fall under the category of medicines of inferior quality under the Pharmaceutical Administration Law of the People's Republic of China.

Article 143

Whoever produces or sells food not up to the food safety standards which may cause any serious food poisoning accident or any other serious food-borne disease shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not more than 3 years or criminal detention and a fine; if any serious damage is caused to the people’s health or there is any other serious circumstance, shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 3 years but not more than 7 years and a fine; or if there are especially serious consequences, shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 7 years or life imprisonment and a fine or forfeiture of property.

Article 144

Whoever mixes poisonous or harmful non-food raw materials into food produced or sold or knowingly sells food mixed with poisonous or harmful non-food raw materials shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not more than 5 years and a fine; if any serious damage is caused to the people’s health or there is any other serious circumstance, shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 5 years but not more than 10 years and a fine; or if any human death is caused or there is any other especially serious circumstance, shall be punished according to the provisions of Article 141 of this Law.

Article 145

Whoever produces medical apparatus and instruments or medical hygiene materials that are not up to the national or trade standards for safeguarding human health or sells such things while clearly knowing the fact, which is harmful enough to seriously endanger human health, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention and shall, in addition, be fined not less than half, but not more than two times, the amount of earnings from sales; if serious harm is caused to human health, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than ten years and shall, in addition, be fined not less than half, but not more than two times, the amount of earnings from sales; if the consequences are especially serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than ten years or life imprisonment, and shall, in addition, be fined not less than half, but not more than two times, the amount of earnings from sales or be sentenced to confiscation of property.

Article 146

Whoever produces electrical appliances, pressure containers, inflammable or explosive products or any other products that are not up to the national or trade standards for safeguarding personal or property safety or knowingly sells such products, thereby causing serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years and shall also be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales; if the consequences are especially serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years and shall also be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales.

Article 147

Whoever produces fake pesticides, fake animal pharmaceuticals or fake chemical fertilizers or sells pesticides, animal pharmaceuticals, chemical fertilizers or seeds while clearly knowing that they are fake or no longer effective, or any producer or seller who passes substandard pesticides, animal phamarceuticals, chemical fertilizers or seeds off as up-to-standard ones, thus causing relatively heavy losses to production, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention and shall also, or shall only, be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales; if heavy losses are caused to production, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years and shall also be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales; if especially heavy losses are caused to production, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than seven years or life imprisonment and shall also be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales or be sentenced to confiscation of property.

Article 148

Whoever produces cosmetics that are not up to hygiene standards or knowingly sells such cosmetics, thus causing serious consequences, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention and shall also, or shall only, be fined not less than half but not more than two times the amount of earnings from sales.

Article 149

Whoever produces or sells products listed in Articles 141 through 148 of this Section, if the case does not constitute the crime as mentioned in these Articles respectively but more than 50,000 yuan is earned from sales, shall be convicted and punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 140 of this Section.

Whoever produces or sells products listed in Articles 141 through 148 of this Section, if the case constitutes the crime as mentioned in these Articles respectively and also the crime mentioned in Article 140 of this Section, shall be convicted and punished in accordance with the provisions for a heavier punishment.

Article 150

Where a unit commits the crime as mentioned in Articles 141 through 148 of this Section, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the crime shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the Articles respectively.

SECTION 2: CRIMES OF SMUGGLING

Article 151

Whoever smuggles weapons, ammunitions, nuclear materials or counterfeit currencies shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 7 years and a fine or forfeiture of property; if the circumstances are especially serious, shall be sentenced to life imprisonment or death penalty and a forfeiture of property; or if the circumstances are minor, shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 3 years but not more than 7 years and a fine.

Whoever smuggles cultural relics, gold, silver or any other noble metal whose export is prohibited by the state or smuggles rare animals whose import and export are prohibited by the state or products made thereof shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 5 years but not more than 10 years and a fine; if the circumstances are especially serious, shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment and a forfeiture of property; or if the circumstances are minor, shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not more than 5 years and a fine.

Whoever smuggles rare plants or their products or any other goods or articles that are prohibited by the state from being imported or exported shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment not more than five years or criminal detention, and/or be fined; or if the circumstances are serious, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment not less than five years and be fined.

Where an entity commits a crime as provided for in this Article, the entity shall be sentenced to a fine, and its directly responsible person and other directly liable persons shall be punished according to the provisions of this Article.

Article 152

Whoever, for the purpose of making profits or dissemination, smuggles pornographic movies, videotapes, magnetic tapes, pictures, books or periodicals or other pornographic materials shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years and shall also be fined; if the circumstances are serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment and shall also be fined or be sentenced to confiscation of property; if the circumstances are minor, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years, criminal detention or public surveillance, and shall also be fined.

Whoever, evading Customs supervision and control, transports solid waste, liquid waste or gaseous waste from outside China into the territory of China, if the circumstances are serious, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years and shall in addition, or shall only, be fined; if the circumstances are especially serious, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years and shall in addition be fined.

Where a unit commits any of the crimes as mentioned in the preceding two paragraphs, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge of the unit and the other persons who are directly responsible for the crime shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the preceding two paragraphs.

Article 153

Whoever smuggles goods or articles other than those as mentioned in Articles 151, 152 and 347 shall be punished in light of the graveness of the crime according to the following provisions:

(1) Whoever smuggles goods or articles to evade a relatively large amount of tax payable, or smuggles again after having been given administrative punishment twice for smuggling within a year, shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not more than 3 years or criminal detention and a fine of not less than the evaded amount of tax payable but not more than five times the evaded amount of tax payable.

(2) Whoever smuggles goods or articles to evade a huge amount of tax payable or with any other serious circumstance shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 3 years but not more than 10 years and a fine of not less than the evaded amount of tax payable but not more than five times the evaded amount of tax payable.

(3) Whoever smuggles goods or articles to evade an especially huge amount of tax payable or with any other especially serious circumstance shall be sentenced to imprisonment of not less than 10 years or life imprisonment and a fine of not less than the evaded amount of tax payable but not more than five times the evaded amount of tax payable or a forfeiture of property.

Where a unit commits the crime mentioned in the preceding paragraph, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the crime shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; if the circumstances are serious, they shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than 10 years; if the circumstances are especially serious, they shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than 10 years.

Whoever smuggles goods or articles many times, and goes unpunished shall be punished on the basis of the cumulative amount of the payable duties he invades or dodges in smuggling goods or articles.

Article 154

Whoever commits any of the following acts of smuggling that constitutes a crime according to the provisions in this Section shall be convicted and punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 153 of this Law:

(1) without permission of the Customs and without having paid the overdue payable duties, selling for profits within the territory of the People's Republic of China authorized imported bonded goods such as materials supplied by foreign clients for processing, parts supplied by them for assembly, or raw or processed materials, parts, finished products or equipment for compensation trade; or

(2) without permission of the Customs and without having paid the overdue payable duties, selling for profits within the territory of the People's Republic of China imported goods and articles specially designated for reduction of or exemption from duties.

Article 155

Whoever commits any of the following acts shall be deemed to have committed the crime of smuggling and shall be punished in accordance with the relevant provisions of this Section:

(1) directly and illegally purchasing from smugglers articles, the import of which is forbidden by the State, or directly and illegally purchasing from smugglers other smuggled goods or articles and in and of relatively large quantities and values;

(2) transporting, purchasing or selling in inland seas, territorial waters, boundary rivers or boundary lakes articles the import and export of which are forbidden by the State, or transporting, purchasing or selling, without legal certificates and in and of relatively large quantities and values, goods or articles the import and export of which are restricted by the State.

Article 156

Whoever conspires with criminals of smuggling and provides them with loans, funds, account numbers, invoices or certificates or with such conveniences as transportation, storage and mailing shall be deemed an accomplice in the crime of smuggling and punished as such.

Article 157

Whoever provides armed escort for smuggling shall be given a heavier penalty according to paragraph 1, Article 151 of this law.

Whoever, by means of violence or threat, resists the seizure of smuggled goods shall be punished for the crime of smuggling and the crime of preventing State functionaries from performing their duties according to law, as stipulated in Article 277 of this Law, and in accordance with the provisions regarding the combined punishment for several crimes.

SECTION 3: CRIMES OF DISRUPTING THE ORDER OF ADMINISTRATION OF COMPANIES AND ENTERPRISES

Article 158

Whoever, when applying for company registration, obtains the registration by deceiving the competent company registration authority through falsely declaring the capital to be registered with falsified certificates or by other deceptive means shall, if the amount of the falsely registered capital is huge, and the consequences are serious or if there are other serious circumstances, be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention and shall also, or shall only, be fined not less than one percent but not more than five percent of the capital falsely declared for registration.

Where a unit commits the crime as mentioned in the preceding paragraph, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the crime shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention.

Article 159

Any sponsor or shareholder of a company who, in violation of the provisions of the Company Law, makes a false capital contribution by failing to pay the promised cash or tangible assets or to transfer property rights, or surreptitiously withdraws the contributed capital after the incorporation of the company shall, if the amount involved is huge, and the consequences are serious, or if there are other serious circumstances, be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years or criminal detention and shall also, or shall only, be fined not less than two percent but not more than 10 percent of the false capital contribution or of the amount of the capital contribution surreptitiously withdrawn.

Where a unit commits the crime as mentioned in the preceding paragraph, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the crime shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years or criminal detention.

Article 160

Whoever issues shares or company or enterprise bonds by concealing important facts or falsifying major information in the prospectus on share offer, subscription forms or measures for offer of company or enterprise bonds shall, if the amount involved is huge, and the consequences are serious, or if there are other serious circumstances, be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years or criminal detention and shall also, or shall only, be fined not less than one percent but not more than five percent of the funds illegally raised.

Where a unit commits the crime as mentioned in the preceding paragraph, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the crime shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years or criminal detention.

Article 161

Where a company or an enterprise obligated to disclose information according to law provides its shareholders and the general public with false financial statements or such statements concealing important facts, or fails to disclose other important information in accordance with relevant provisions, which is required to be disclosed according to law, thus causing serious harm to the interests of its shareholders or other persons, or engendering other serious circumstances, the person directly in charge and the other person directly responsible shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention, and a fine of not less than 20,000 yuan but not more than 200,000 yuan shall, in addition, or shall only, be imposed on the said persons.

Article 162

Where, in the process of its liquidation, a company or enterprise conceals its assets, records false information in its balance sheet or inventory of assets, or distributes the company or enterprise assets prior to full payment of its debts, thus causing serious harm to the interests of the creditors or others, the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the crime shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years or criminal detention and shall also, or shall only, be fined not less than 20,000 yuan but not more than 200,000 yuan.

Whoever conceals or intentionally destroys accounting vouchers, account books or financial and accounting statements, if the circumstances are serious, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years or criminal detention and shall also, or shall only, be fined not less than 20,000 yuan but not more than 200,000 yuan.

Where a unit commits the crime mentioned in the preceding paragraph, it shall be fined, and the persons who are directly in charge and the other persons who are directly responsible for the crime shall be punished according to the provisions in the preceding paragraph.

Article 162b

Where a company or an enterprise transfers or disposes of its property by means of concealing its property or assuming non-existent debts or by other means in order to make believe that it has gone bankrupt, thus causing serious harm to the interests of its creditors or other persons, the person directly in charge and the other persons directly responsible shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years or criminal detention, and a fine of not less than 20,000 yuan but not more than 200,000 yuan shall, in addition, or shall only, be imposed on the said persons.

Article 163

Where an employee of a company, an enterprise or other unit who, taking advantage of his position, demands money or property from another person, or illegally accepts another person’s money or property in return for the benefits sought for that person, and if the amount involved is relatively large, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than five years or criminal detention; and if the amount involved is huge, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than five years and may, in addition, be sentenced to confiscation of his property.

Where an employee of a company, an enterprise or other unit who, taking advantage of his position in economic activities, accepts rebates or service charges of various descriptions and takes them into his own possession in violation of State regulations, he shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph.

Where a person who is engaged in public service in a State-owned company, enterprise or other State-owned unit or who is assigned by the said company, enterprise or unit to a company, enterprise or other unit that is not owned by the State to engage in public service commits any of the acts mentioned in the preceding two paragraphs, he shall be convicted and punished in accordance with the provisions of Articles 385 and 386 of this Law respectively.

Article 164

Where a person gives money or property to an employee of a company, enterprise or other unit for the purpose of seeking illegitimate benefits, if the amount involved is relatively large, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; and if the amount involved is huge, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than ten years and shall, in addition, be fined.

Whoever gives any property to a functionary of a foreign country or an official of an international public organization for any improper commercial benefit shall be punished according to the provision of the preceding paragraph.

Where an entity commits a crime as provided for in the preceding two paragraphs, a fine shall be imposed on it, and its directly responsible person and other directly liable persons shall be punished according to the provision of paragraph 1 of this Article.

A briber who voluntarily confesses to his bribery before a criminal investigation on him is opened may be given a mitigated penalty or be exempted from penalty.

Article 165

Any director or manager of a State-owned company or enterprise who, taking advantage of his office, operates for himself or for another the same business as that of the company or enterprise in which he holds the office and obtains illegal interests, if the amount involved is huge, shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention and shall also, or shall only, be fined; if the amount is especially huge, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years and shall also be fined.

Article 166

Any employee of a State-owned company, enterprise or institution who, taking advantage of his office, commits any of the following acts and thus causes heavy losses to the interests of the State shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention and shall also, or shall only, be fined; if especially heavy losses are caused to the interests of the State, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years and shall also be fined:

(1) turning management of the profitable business of his unit over to his relatives or friends;

(2) purchasing commodities from the unit managed by his relatives or friends at a price obviously higher than the market price, or selling commodities to such unit at a price obviously lower than the market price; or

(3) purchasing from the unit managed by his relatives or friends commodities that are not up to standards.

Article 167

If a person who is directly in charge of a State-owned company, enterprise or institution, when signing or fulfilling a contract, is defrauded due to serious neglect of responsibility and thus causes heavy losses to the interests of the State, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; if especially heavy losses are caused to the interests of the State, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

Article 168

Where an employee of a State-owned company or enterprise, because of being seriously irresponsible or abuse of power, causes bankruptcy or heavy losses to the said company or enterprise, thus occasioning major losses to the interests of the State, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more than three years or criminal detention; if especially major losses are occasioned to the interests of the State, he shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not less than three years but not more than seven years.

Any employee of a State-owned institution commits any of the crimes mentioned in the preceding paragraph and causes major losses of the interests of the State, he shall be punished in accordance with the provisions in the preceding paragraph.

Any employee of a State-owned company, enterprise or institution who engages in malpractices for selfish ends and commits any of the crimes mentioned in the preceding two paragraphs shall be a given heavier punishment in accordance with the provisions in the first paragraph.

Article 169

If a person who is directly in charge of a State-owned company or enterprise or the competent department at a higher level practises irregularitie