Chris Dodd for President
Chris Dodd understands that making America more secure starts with ending the Iraq war responsibly. It's made us less secure, more vulnerable and more isolated. Our country's men and women in uniform have performed heroically -- but their political leadership has failed. But to do that, we need clear, bold actions, and leadership that has the experience and judgment to recognize there's only one way to responsibly end this war:

To set a firm and enforceable timeline for the withdrawal of U.S. troops.

It may not be an easy thing to say -- but it's the right thing to do. For our troops. For our security and standing in the world.

The Dodd Plan to End the War

Chris Dodd believes the time for giving President Bush blank checks is over and that we should begin safely redeploying U.S. combat troops out of Iraq, beginning immediately and completed within eight to ten months. Iraq must assume the responsibility of policing and governing itself. There isn't an Army big enough or treasury deep enough to accomplish this if Iraqis aren't willing to stand up fight for their own future. Chris Dodd's plan would:

Begin safely redeploying U.S. combat troops out of Iraq.

Provide all the funding necessary for a safe redeployment of our troops.

Complete redeployment within eight to ten months.

In addition, Chris Dodd would insist on three narrowly targeted exceptions -- the protection of U.S. personnel and infrastructure, specific counterterrorism operations, and assistance with the training and equipping of Iraqi forces.

Chris Dodd understands prolonging this war will not make us more secure -- ending it will.

Beyond Iraq and Into an Era of Bold Engagement

Chris Dodd believes we don't need a surge in troops in Iraq and the Middle East-- we need a surge of diplomacy. That's why as president, Chris Dodd would:

Engage in direct negotiation with all the countries in the region

Convene a regional summit

By ending our military's participation in Iraq's civil war, we can begin focusing our attention on fighting al Qaeda in Afghanistan and elsewhere -- boldly engaging friends and foes alike in a robust diplomacy, dedicating more resources and manpower to homeland security and leading the world on energy independence. Hope alone will not wipe away the damage to America's moral authority these last 6 years. Hope alone will not bring our allies back to our side. And hope alone will not restore America's leadership.

But with conviction and clarity, Chris Dodd believes we can bring an end to the war in Iraq and make America more secure. With the right leadership, America can lead again.