Jason Carter's plan to fund education may not be as fruitful as he hopes, experts say
Carter, the Democratic challenger and a legislator from Decatur, hasn’t said how much he wants to boost education spending, but his campaign spokesman Bryan Thomas said Tuesday the goal is to close a gap of about $1 billion per year over the last eight years.

Carter says he expects to collect $2.5 billion in delinquent taxes, pointing to a January report by the Department of Audits & Accounts that includes an estimate from the Department of Revenue of $4.4 billion outstanding. Carter figures if he only collects half of what scofflaws owe, it will be a major boost to the $7 billion education budget.

“There’s no dispute there’s a huge amount of money that’s sitting there uncollected,” Thomas said, adding that improved collections is a matter of leadership. “You put the force of the governor’s office behind it.”

Carter’s plan to have deadbeats fund part of his education boost may face problems.

Deal already increased resources for the Revenue Department twice, resulting in 150 more auditors and other employees as well as technical equipment. That succeeded in squeezing some into ponying up, according to the Department of Audits; however, getting the rest of the outstanding taxes will be tougher, the department wrote.

Of the uncollected amount, nearly $2 billion is owed by individuals, and 80 percent is older than four years. The older the debt, the more likely the person owing it has moved, died or gone broke. Just $374 million is owed for corporate income taxes, $122 million for sales taxes, and $113 million for employer’s withholding, and most of it is older than four years, too.

Another snag in Carter’s plan is that even if he succeeded in collecting $2.5 billion, it would only pay for a one-year increase in the budget, said public-finance expert Thomas Lauth.

“Delinquent-tax collection is one-time funding (unless one assumes continuing delinquency), not recurring funding,” he wrote in an e-mail. “The more sensible ways to increase funding for public education are to (1) allocate a substantial portion of revenue growth (new money) to that purpose or (2) designate a tax increase for that purpose.”

He notes that mention of tax increases in a fiscally conservative state like Georgia would likely cost votes.

“The search for alternative funding for education improvement seems to have led to the delinquent-tax collection idea, which seems not a very viable substitute for the amount of new money that might be expected from strong economic growth or a dedicated tax,” he added.