A sharp rise in road fatalities is prompting Georgia officials for a seat belt crackdown
ATLANTA — Highway fatalities in Georgia jumped 25 percent in the first three months of the year, and state officials vowed Monday to take action with a crackdown on seat belt use.

Transportation Commis­sio­ner Russell McMurry said the 450 automobile-related deaths puts the state on pace to lose 1,200 lives this year. It also represents a reversal of nine years of declines, although McMurry acknowledged that driving has also increased somewhat.

“We know that they are preventable because data tells us a very alarming story,” he said.

Three of every five deaths happened in a single-car crash, suggesting to experts that the driver was distracted or impaired. An additional 17 percent involved a pedestrian or someone riding a bicycle.

Most of the people killed were not wearing a seat belt. That’s noteworthy because 95 percent of all drivers are belted now.

“We’re going to get people to be safe, whether they want it or not,” said Harris Blackwood, the director of the Governor’s Office of High­way Safety. “If you think an airbag alone is going to protect you, think again. It’s a supplemental device.”

Starting next Monday, the Geor­gia State Patrol and other police agencies will launch a crackdown on seat belt use, especially in the evenings when most deaths occur.

Using mounted lights to see into vehicles, spotters will radio ahead to colleagues who will pull over motorists not seen wearing a shoulder belt. Tickets for not wearing a seat belt are $15.

Capt. Mark Perry, a spokesman for the Georgia De­part­ment of Public Safety, said the effort is prompted by safety concerns.

“It’s not about raising revenue. … It’s about changing driver behavior,” he said.

Fines from tickets by troopers don’t go to the State Patrol or even to the state but to the local county where the incident occurred.

Failure to wear a seat belt worsens crashes but doesn’t cause them. Use of a smartphone while driving often does, the officials said.

The fine for using one – even at a stop sign or red light – is $150. Blackwood said enforcement has steadily grown since phone use behind the wheel was outlawed in 2010.

“I will tell you, that’s a tough law to enforce,” he said.