CN Advisory of Donald J. Trump Foundation
On September 13, 2016, The New York Times reported on the operations of Donald J. Trump Foundation, a charity that has announced intentions to dissolve, in an article titled, "New York Attorney General to Investigate Donald Trump’s Nonprofit." For this reason, we have issued a High Concern CN Advisory. For more information, please see The New York Times article.

On November 22, 2016, The Washington Post published an article titled, "Trump Foundation admits to violating ban on 'self-dealing,' new filing to IRS shows." For more information, please see The Washington Post article.

On December 24, 2016, The Trump-Pence Transition Team issued a press release titled, "President-Elect Donald J. Trump Intends to Dissolve the Donald J. Trump Foundation." For more information, please see The Trump-Pence Transition Team press release.

On December 24, 2016, The Washington Post published an article titled, "Donald Trump plans to shut down his charitable foundation, which has been under scrutiny for months." For more information, please see The Washington Post article.

On November 20, 2017, The Washington Post published an article titled, "Trump golf course reimbursed President Trump’s charity amid ongoing investigation into the foundation." For more information, please see The Washington Post article.

On November 21, 2017, TIME published an article titled, "President Trump Is Officially Dissolving His Charitable Foundation." For more information, please see the TIME article.

On June 14, 2018, the New York State Office of the Attorney General issued a press release titled, "Attorney General Underwood Announces Lawsuit Against Donald J. Trump Foundation And Its Board Of Directors For Extensive And Persistent Violations Of State And Federal Law." For more information, please see the New York State Office of the Attorney General press release.

On August 22, 2018, CNN published an article titled, "New York tax investigators subpoena Michael Cohen in Trump Foundation probe." For more information, please see the CNN article.

On August 31, 2018, PBS News Hour published an article titled, "New York’s attorney general says Trump Foundation bankrolled political campaign, pursues lawsuit." For more information, please see the PBS News Hour article.

On October 4, 2018, NPR published an article titled, "New York AG Presses Forward With Suit Against Trump's Charitable Foundation." For more information, please see the NPR article.

On October 25, 2018, The Star published an article titled, "No one wanted Trump’s portrait. So his charity had to buy it for $10,000, lawyer says." For more information, please see The Star article.

On November 23, 2018, The New York Times published an article titled, "New York State’s Lawsuit Against Trump Foundation Can Proceed, Judge Rules." For more information, please see The New York Times article.

On December 18, 2018, CNN published an article titled, "Trump Foundation agrees to dissolve under court supervision." For more information, please see the CNN article.

On February 11, 2019, CNN published an article titled, "Trump Foundation says NY AG's comments show lawsuit is political." For more information, please see the CNN article.

On February 27, 2019, CNN published an article titled, "Michael Cohen testifies that Trump paid for portrait with Trump Foundation funds." For more information, please see CNN article.