New NC elections board named amid 9th District probe
Judge rules against Mark Harris in NC 9 election fraud case In his ruling on a petition by Republican Mark Harris, Wake County Superior Court Judge Paul Ridgeway said it would be inappropriate for him to order elections officials to take an action while they are still investigating election fraud in NC 9. Up Next × SHARE COPY LINK In his ruling on a petition by Republican Mark Harris, Wake County Superior Court Judge Paul Ridgeway said it would be inappropriate for him to order elections officials to take an action while they are still investigating election fraud in NC 9.

More from the series Election fraud investigation Read more about the investigation into the 9th Congressional District Expand All

The investigation into North Carolina’s alleged election fraud moved closer to a possible February resolution when Gov. Roy Cooper Thursday named a new state elections board to oversee the probe of the last undecided congressional race in the nation.

The chairman of the new State Board of Elections said a vote could come next month on whether to certify the election of Republican Mark Harris or order a new election in the 9th Congressional District.

The vote could come on the heels of a still-unscheduled February hearing into allegations, said Democrat Bob Cordle.

“I think we would do it at the end of the hearing,” Cordle, a Charlotte attorney, told The Charlotte Observer.

Cordle was elected board chairman in a five-minute teleconference. The new board is expected to formally meet for the first time next week.

The old elections board was dissolved by a court on Dec. 28 over a separate dispute involving its legal structure.

Cooper named Democrats Cordle, Stella Anderson of Boone and Jeff Carmon of Durham as well as Republicans David Black of Concord and Ken Raymond of Winston-Salem. Anderson and Cordle had served on previous election boards.

“North Carolinians deserve fair and honest elections, and I am confident this board will work to protect our electoral process,” Cooper said in a statement.

Bob Cordle

The board will oversee an ongoing investigation into alleged absentee ballot fraud in the 9th District. Harris leads Democrat Dan McCready by 905 votes in unofficial returns.

Allegations of irregularities surfaced in November when then-board member Josh Malcolm expressed concerns over “unfortunate activities” in the eastern part of the district that runs from Charlotte to Bladen County. Those concerns led the bipartisan board to twice decline to certify Harris’ election.





Even without an elections board for the past five weeks, its staff has continued the investigation, gathering thousands of pages of affidavits and other documents.

“The appointments come at an important time for the state board, which is investigating absentee voting irregularities . . . and plans an evidentiary hearing on that matter in February to decide whether to certify a winner or order a new election,” board spokesman Patrick Gannon told The Charlotte Observer.

After the hearing the board could do one of three things: certify Harris as the winner, order a new election, or deadlock, throwing the election deeper into uncharted territory.

State law requires four votes to order a new election or three to certify Harris’ election. That means at least one Republican would have to join the three Democrats in calling a new election, or one Democrat would need to join the two Republicans to certify Harris.

That would delay resolution of a situation that already has left 733,000 North Carolinians without representation in Congress.