City of Chicago :: Police Discipline
Overview

The Civilian Office of Police Accountability (COPA), the Police Department, and the Police Board have different roles. The responsibility to receive complaints of alleged misconduct by Chicago police officers rests with COPA. Depending on the nature of the allegations, either COPA or the Police Department's Bureau of Internal Affairs will investigate the complaint. The Board’s role is to decide those disciplinary matters that are filed with the Board.

For more information, watch this video in English or Spanish.

The Police Board's Role

The Police Board decides disciplinary matters involving allegations of serious misconduct made against members of the Chicago Police Department. The Board has the responsibility to:

Decide cases when the Superintendent of Police files charges to discharge or suspend a police officer for more than thirty days; and

Decide matters in which the Chief Administrator of the Civilian Office of Police Accountability and the Superintendent of Police do not agree regarding discipline of a police officer.

See Allegations of Police Misconduct: A Guide to the Complaint and Disciplinary Process and other Police Board publications for detailed information.

Reports and Data on Police Board Cases

Police Board Decisions

Section 2-84-030 of the Municipal Code of Chicago requires the Police Board to post on this website its Findings and Decisions in disciplinary cases. Below are the Findings and Decisions decided in:

Go to the Archives for the Findings and Decisions of cases decided in previous years.

Cases Currently Before the Police Board

Currently before the Police Board are the following cases in which the Superintendent of Police has filed charges against a member of the Chicago Police Department (unless otherwise noted below, the Superintendent recommended that the member be discharged from the Chicago Police Department). A copy of the charges filed in a particular case is available by clicking on the case number below.

Hearings take place at the Board’s office and are open to the public. Unless otherwise indicated, hearings are scheduled to begin at 10:00 a.m. The evidentiary hearing resembles a trial in court, although not as formal; the typical case includes opening statements, witness testimony, and closing arguments. Status hearings typically include the attorneys and the hearing officer addressing various issues in preparation for the evidentiary hearing. TUA = Taken under advisement (the evidentiary hearing is complete and a decision will be forthcoming).

Case Number: Description of Alleged Misconduct--Next Hearing Date

No. 16 PB 2901: Charges related to the Koschman homicide investigation (Supt recommends a one-year suspension)--June 25-27 (evidentiary hearing) (tentative)

No. 16 PB 2908: Charges related to the Laquan McDonald shooting--Date of next status hearing to be determined.

No. 16 PB 2909: Charges related to the Laquan McDonald shooting--TUA

No. 16 PB 2910: Charges related to the Laquan McDonald shooting--TUA

No. 16 PB 2911: Charges related to the Laquan McDonald shooting--TUA

No. 16 PB 2912: Charges related to the Laquan McDonald shooting--TUA

No. 16 PB 2913: Verbal abuse (Supt recommends a 270-day suspension)--Motion to w/d charges to be considered (Respondent resigned from the CPD)

No. 17 PB 2938: Did not transport to the hospital an arrestee in need of treatment (Supt recommends a 120-day suspension)--August 15-16 (evidentiary hearing)

No. 18 PB 2947: Unjustified altercations while off duty and refused to cooperate with investigation--Next hearing date to be determined

No. 18 PB 2948: Solicitied sexual favors while off duty--TUA

No. 18 PB 2949: Used deadly force without justification (charges against two officers)--Next hearing date to be determined.

No. 18 PB 2950: Charges related to the shooting of Quintonio LeGrier and Bettie Jones--July 8-10 (evidentiary hearing).

No. 18 PB 2951: De-certified as a law enforcement officer due to felony conviction--May 21 (status hearing)

No. 19 PB 2952: Domestic incidents and made false statements (charges against two officers)--June 18-20 (evidentiary hearing)

No. 19 PB 2953: Made false reports--May 21 (status hearing)

Reviews of Disciplinary Recommendations Under the COPA Ordinance

When the Chief Administrator and the Superintendent of Police do not agree regarding discipline of a Department member, the Chief Administrator shall refer the matter to a member of the Police Board.

The reviewing member shall then resolve the disagreement between the Chief Administrator and the Superintendent, as follows:

If, in the opinion of the reviewing member, the Superintendent’s response did not meet the burden of overcoming the Chief Administrator’s recommendation for discipline, the recommendation shall be deemed to be accepted by the Superintendent.

If, in the opinion of the reviewing member, the Superintendent’s response met the burden of overcoming the Chief Administrator’s recommendation for discipline, the Superintendent's response shall be implemented.

The reviewing member must recuse her/himself from any future involvement with such case by the full Police Board.

This review process is set forth in Section 2-78-130 of the Civilian Office of Police Accountability (COPA) ordinance and in Article VI of the Police Board Rules of Procedure.

The decisions of reviewing members are posted below, as required by the COPA ordinance.