PROPOSED BUDGET HAS PUPIL FOCUS
That the Chicago Public Schools' new executives have managed to plug a hole projected to reach $1.4 billion by 1999 and balance the habitually red-inked budget for four years without new state money is amazing.

That they were able to do it and find $206.8 million in surplus funds is miraculous.

Spending less than what they get and putting students-not bureaucrats-first are radical concepts in the nation's third-largest public school system.

For years, school officials have led the public to believe that, because of tight funds, they were virtually helpless to do anything about declining test scores, violent students, the low graduation rate and other seemingly insurmountable problems plaguing the schools.

The lack of money, they claimed, was due to the state's stinginess, not their own wasteful spending practices.

But Chief Executive Officer Paul Vallas is proposing to correct the sins of the past and use surplus monies to attack deeply-entrenched barriers to learning.

Vallas, while directing the bulk of the surplus to balance the budget over time, would use $35 million to: help schools extend the class day and year; move violent students from regular classrooms into several new alternative schools; send armies of tutors and mentors into schools to help students who consistently fail; and establish apprenticeship programs for high school students prone to dropping out.

"Student performance improves when schools are better organized, when you have a longer school year and when you get violent students out of the schools," Vallas said. "Failure is not an option for us; we have to deliver."

Vallas, who will submit his proposed $2.9 billion budget to the Chicago School Reform Board of Trustees Monday, said he trimmed $161.8 million by reducing 1,700 central office staffers and trades workers; eliminating waste from special education and other departments; and gutting an elaborate program designed to network the district's computers.

At the same time, he came up with $206.8 million in revenue by contributing less to the teachers pension fund; keeping some of the discretionary funds schools get for low-income students; putting 20 surplus properties up for sale; and shifting to the general fund monies that financed after-school programs at school fieldhouses.

A 70-page report prepared in 1986 by a task force called by then-Mayor Harold Washington first outlined the need for a comprehensive solution to the growing high school dropout rate.

Much of the study led to the School Reform Law of 1988, but recommendations were largely ignored by a string of superintendents who asserted the district couldn't afford it.

Vallas, attempting to revive the plan, wants to use surplus funds to establish three alternative high schools in each of the district's six regions, an effort to lower the 42 percent dropout rate.

Several schools would each house 1,000 violent students. The schools would not only give the students the discipline and psychological help they need, but get them out of regular schools where their behavior often frustrates teachers and other students.

Another set of schools, called Dropout Centers, would seek to recover students who've quit. The services are sorely needed, in light of the old school board's spring decision to close evening high school programs.

"Eighty percent of the guys going to jail are dropouts," said Jack Wuest, executive director of the Alternative Schools Network. "If we can give (kids prone to dropping out) job training, work experience and other services, we can make a difference in crime on the streets."

Business leaders have long charged that the quality of the applicant pool in this country is inferior to that in other industrialized nations, a complaint they attribute partly to the shorter academic year here.

Vallas is proposing to use surplus funds to help schools voluntarily extend their class year to 220 days from the standard 180 days, a move that could lay the groundwork for Mayor Richard Daley's call for year-round learning districtwide.

Schools would also be able to extend their days, with money for after-school instruction and recreational activities.

Vallas also wants to set up "direct instruction" teams at troubled schools. Direct instruction revives the back-to-basics approach, touted by Daley, in which students are required to constantly repeat a task until they master it.

As Vallas envisions it, "an army of 10,000 tutors"-mainly students from Chicago-area colleges and universities-would get credit for working in the schools.

"There's a lot of evidence that direct instruction helps (low-achieving) students," said Barbara Sizemore, dean of DePaul University's school of education.

"Direct instruction has fallen out of favor and has been replaced by new philosophies that say children should discover things for themselves instead of being given specific instructions by a teacher," added Sizemore. "What Paul Vallas is trying to do is bring balance back into the curriculum, which I support."