Emanuel raised vehicle sticker prices, but city clerk likely to take heat
With a smile on her face, City Clerk Susana Mendoza was the first to shake the hand of a beaming Mayor Rahm Emanuel after the City Council unanimously approved his first budget, creating an image of satisfaction shared by Chicago's two newest citywide officials.

That impression masked, at least for the moment, an ongoing public disagreement about Emanuel's plan to raise the price of vehicle stickers sold through the clerk's office.

Emanuel prevailed, after reworking the increase in response to Mendoza's criticism that the mayor was making life tougher on minivan-driving moms and other law-abiding Chicagoans to balance his budget. But it's the clerk's office that will likely receive the complaints next year when the owners of nearly 1.3 million vehicles have to renew their stickers before the June 30 expiration.

"That's when you hear it from people," said Miguel del Valle, Mendoza's predecessor. "There are people out there who keep track of these things. I'm sure that there will be a lot of grumbling."

The increases are potential campaign fodder if Mendoza seeks re-election in 2015 and has an opponent with enough ad money to make an issue of it, del Valle said.

But voters also will be reminded of Mendoza's outspoken opposition and the council's 50-0 vote for the mayor's plan, he and other political observers noted.

"It's a shared responsibility between the mayor and the City Council," said longtime Ald. Joe Moore, 49th. "The clerk is on the record as having opposed it, so she's protected herself there."

In fact, Mendoza led the opposition to Emanuel's initial proposal, which would have added $60 to the cost of a vehicle sticker for 184,000 larger SUVs, minivans and full-size cars.

Mendoza learned of Emanuel's first plan to raise sticker fees from a reporter the night before the mayor introduced his budget in mid-October, she said. Right after the mayor made his formal presentation, she said, she approached him in the council chambers and told him: "I'm sorry that I have to oppose it."

Mendoza then conducted a series of interviews bashing the plan, saying it was the wrong time to ask folks who buy the required stickers to shell out more money. Targeting scofflaws with higher late-purchase fees and fines was a better idea, one that would go a long way toward raising the $14.8 million in new sticker revenue Emanuel said he needed to fill more potholes, she said.

Emanuel initially defended his plan, but some of his top aides met with Mendoza to talk about alternatives, and a new proposal took shape.

The mayor's revised plan increased the rates on all passenger vehicles by $10 to $15. That wiped out the $60 soccer mom increase, but it spread the pain to the owners of an additional 818,000 vehicles that wouldn't have been subject to an increase at all under his first plan.

He also picked up Mendoza's idea to increase the late fee, by $20 to $60, and the fine for not having a vehicle sticker, by $80 to $200. He told Mendoza about the changes before they were announced.

"I felt that was very productive at that point, but not necessarily what I wanted to hear," Mendoza said.

After the mayor's announcement, she noted that she wanted the higher late fees and fines to replace sticker increases, not augment them. She continued to oppose the increases.

But the mayor was not going to alter the plan a second time. He had made other budget adjustments, including saving the jobs of 100 library workers. He was counting on the $14.8 million expected from the sticker fees to fix more potholes, and the $9.3 million from the higher late fees and fines to help balance the budget.

Mendoza said she believes her budget differences with the mayor won't harm their relationship.

"I told the mayor that we can agree to disagree with that, it's not personal," Mendoza said.

Emanuel spokeswoman Chris Mather said: "The mayor has a great relationship with clerk Mendoza."

For now, Mendoza is left with the task of putting in place the new sticker fees.

Owners of 1 million passenger vehicles will pay $85, or an extra $10, to buy a sticker next year. It's the first price increase on those stickers since 2000.

Owners of about 90,000 larger SUVs and other bigger passenger vehicles, who previously experienced an increase in 2008, will pay $135, or $15 more.

About 114,000 pickup truck owners will pay $200, or $20 more, and owners of nearly 60,000 commercial trucks will pay $450, or $30 more.

After those increases are in place, sticker fees will automatically rise every two years by the rate of inflation, capped at 5 percent. The first inflation increase will be in mid-2014, months before the next round of city elections.

hdardick@tribune.com

Twitter @ReporterHal