Chicago's murder rate at its lowest since 1965
Chicago's murder tally officially fell to its lowest in more than four decades, with 443 murders, according to final statistics released Thursday by the Police Department.

The total marks the fourth year in a row that murders fell below 500 and represents the fewest homicides since 1965, when the city posted 395.

Overall reported crime decreased 3.8 percent in 2007 compared with the previous year, while violent crime declined by 2 percent.

Surrounded by the department's top brass, outgoing First Deputy Supt. Dana Starks credited the department's officers and commanders as well as active citizens for the decline. Despite scandals within the department and the retirement of the department's top cop, Chicago police have continued to successfully fight crime, he said.

"[The decline] is the result of the commitment of the 13,500 officers, approximately 3,000 civilians [and] our community partnerships, who do so much every day to carry out the mission we all share to protect and serve the citizens of Chicago," Starks said. "When we are strategic, focused and innovative about what we do, we can prevent and lower crime."

Police continued to focus on dismantling drug and gang activity, the cause of nearly half of the homicides in the city, officials said. Of the murders in which a motive was known -- 384 of them -- about 44 percent of them were gang-related, police said.

The data also showed that almost three-fourths of the murder victims had criminal records.

"That number has probably stayed consistent" in recent years, said Chief of Detectives Maria Maher. Still, the fact that most murder victims had criminal records makes the homicides more difficult to solve, she said.

"Chances are any witnesses that were there are a little leery to come forward and give information," she said.

Reluctant witnesses, and an increase in hard-to-solve gang homicides, have contributed to the city's decline in solving murders in recent years. Clearance rates in Chicago fell from the 70 percent range in the early 1990s to the 40 percent range in the first half of this decade. In 2007, about 36 percent of murders were solved, about the same as 2006.

Maher said the department is trying to combat the trend by working with the community and organizations such as Crimestoppers to encourage witnesses to come forward. It also relies on beat officers to develop relationships in the community.

The clearance decline is not just Chicago's problem, though. As murder totals have fallen across the country, so too have clearance rates. When using the FBI's method -- of counting any murders solved in a year, whether the homicide occurred that year or in previous years -- Chicago's clearance rate rises to 59 percent, comparable to the national rate of about 60 percent. But that same national rate was 69 percent in 2000 and even higher in decades past.

James Alan Fox, a criminologist at Northeastern University in Boston, said it's a nationwide problem.

"It's not the ability to solve crimes that has changed," Fox said. "Homicides have shifted away from the easy ones to solve to the more difficult ones to solve. Over the years, perpetrators have gotten younger, homicides are much more likely to involve strangers, much more likely to involve gangs, and there's a code of silence."

Police say guns continue to be a problem in the city, with firearms used in three-fourths of all murders. Chicago police collected more guns last year than they have in five years, a total of 13,474, including more than 6,000 during a city-sponsored gun turn-in during the summer.

Although most categories of crime declined in 2007, sexual assaults, aggravated batteries, arsons and burglaries showed small increases. Shootings decreased slightly, to 1,741 compared with 1,794 incidents in 2006.

Police continued to crack down on curfew violators, citing the fact that 7 percent of all murders in the city were of children ages 16 and younger.

Police officials also credited the continued decreases to the use of Targeted Response Units in violence zones, increased use of cameras for surveillance, a new "fusion center" focused on crime analysis and preventing crime; and a focus on dismantling open-air drug markets.

----------

arozas@tribune.com