Bruce Rauner becomes Illinois governor Monday, but honeymoon likely short
Marking a new chapter in Illinois government, Bruce Rauner will be sworn in Monday, an untested business executive with little time to enjoy a traditional political honeymoon in a state with immediate and severe financial problems.

Rauner is the first Republican governor since 2003, and he faces overwhelming Democratic control of the General Assembly, requiring that the executive and legislative branches work together.

"Transformation's coming," Rauner said Friday during a two-day tour of rural Illinois at a stop in Chillicothe, north of Peoria. "The special interest groups are going to get challenged. We're going to change the culture in Springfield and, starting Monday, there's going to be a big turnaround."

Just how the first-time officeholder and self-described nonpolitician relates to the legislature, Democrats and the confines of public office that didn't exist in his former life of equity investor will say much about Illinois' future.

"I will just say the task is unbelievable," said former Republican Gov. Jim Edgar, an adviser on Rauner's transition team.

"It is tricky. You're going from a Democrat to a Republican administration. You've got a governor, a lot of people close to him have not been involved before, so there's an adjustment. But I have to tell you, when I went in, I thought I was as well prepared as anybody, but there was an adjustment for me too," said Edgar, a former Illinois secretary of state who had served as a lobbyist for the governor's office under Republican Gov. James R. Thompson.

Foremost are state government's myriad problems — a ballooning deficit, the worst-in-the-nation unfunded public employee pension debt and negotiations on a new contract with the state's largest public workers' union.

For Rauner, there are major staffing decisions, including members of his inner-office circle, his Cabinet, other agency directors and a trove of appointments to various state boards and commissions.

On Friday, Rauner's transition team issued a 91-page report of recommendations for the incoming administration. While noting "shared sacrifice and difficult decisions will be necessary for some time," the report also said the transition team was "not in a position to provide specific recommendations on budgetary solutions."

Instead, the report echoed Rauner's largely generic campaign themes, including seeking changes in workers' compensation and limits on lawsuit damage awards to improve the state's business climate.

In addition, Rauner, who formerly headed Chicago's tourism efforts under Mayor Rahm Emanuel, was urged to hire a professional marketing firm to "rebuild Illinois' reputation" and rebrand the state — similar to the "Pure Michigan" advertising campaign.

But I have to tell you, when I went in, I thought I was as well prepared as anybody, but there was an adjustment for me too. — Former Republican Gov. Jim Edgar

The report also called for a new school funding formula but provided no details on what form it would take, and proposed creation of a consolidation czar to reduce the number of Illinois' local governmental units.

At the same time, the report called for increased investment in roads, bridges and waterways. It noted the state's 19-cents-per-gallon motor fuel tax has not been increased since 1990 and said the state should explore broadening the sales tax to "bring additional investment in infrastructure," particularly for mass transit.

During the campaign, Rauner criticized Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn for an early release program at the state's prisons. But the Republican's transition team said the new administration should work with lawmakers to find ways to save money at the Illinois Department of Corrections by looking at "how the number of people in prison can be safely reduced by altering sentencing policy."

On Friday, Rauner said after taking office he would issue a number of executive orders "starting right away around ethics, around conflicts of interests, around efficiency in government and cost cutting."

To that end, aides said Rauner created a "blind trust" to avoid conflicts of interests involving his many investments. Rauner, the wealthiest person to hold the office of governor, has said he is worth more than $500 million but is not a billionaire.

The trust gave Roundtable Investment Partners exclusive power of attorney to act for Rauner and his wife, Diana, in investment decisions. Rauner is an investor in Roundtable and its employees donated $58,300 to his campaign, state records showed.

Rauner spokesman Mike Schrimpf said Rauner was "a passive investor with a nominal interest" in Roundtable with no involvement in its day-to-day operations. Schrimpf said he could not further describe the size of Rauner's investment in the company.

With the campaign over and governing about to begin, it's up to Rauner to lead the effort to fix the state's problems. So far, his camp has shown more inclination to blame previous politicians. An end-of-December memo released by Rauner's transition team explained it was more important to "continue outlining" to the public how the state's financial problems occurred than it was to propose any detailed solutions.

Still, in urging unspecific "major structural reforms" and "honest budget practices" to deal with the state's challenges, the Rauner transition memo also acknowledged that "a revenue problem" exists, though it said that was not the only cause of Illinois' financial issues.

But finding more state money could put Rauner's anti-tax campaign theme to a test with the legislature, particularly with fellow Republicans who are out of power in the House and Senate.

"We're going to have a bipartisan budget and if he proposes any tax increases, if Gov. Rauner says, 'Hey, we have to have a tax increase,' which might surprise a few people who voted for him, there will have to be Republican votes for that," said Senate President John Cullerton, a Democrat from Chicago.

"That's what comes with being in charge and being governor," Cullerton said.

Rauner backed the scheduled Jan. 1 phase down of the 2011 state income tax hike, which means an immediate loss of $2 billion in revenue for the final six months of the budget year and more than $4 billion in the next one. He also campaigned on fully phasing the tax hike out in his first term.

Senate Republican leader Christine Radogno of Lemont said she understands that there will be some heavy lifting by Republicans who had not been forced to take hard roll calls during a dozen years of Democratic one-party rule.

"It will be a challenge. There is a sea change with a new governor, especially after ... years of one-party rule. The dynamic is different, it would have been different no matter what new person was at the table, but this one will be very different," Radogno said.