Illinois’ wealthiest man giving $1 million to Chicago mayoral candidate Bill Daley
Billionaire hedge fund CEO Ken Griffin, who has given tens of millions to former Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner and supported Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel, is donating $1 million to Bill Daley’s mayoral campaign.

In a statement about the contribution, Griffin called Daley “a proven leader who understands the critical importance of working for all Chicagoans regardless of politics, race or background.”

“He will bring together a diversity of views across the city on our most pressing challenges of creating jobs, reducing violent crime, and improving our schools so we all can be proud to live and work in this world-class city that we call our home,” Griffin said.

Daley lauded Griffin right back in a statement, though he also attempted to deflect the likely criticism that the donation will generate over Griffin’s ties to Rauner and Emanuel.

Zbigniew Bzdak/Chicago Tribune Mayoral candidate Bill Daley participates in a debate at WFLD-Ch. 32's studio in Chicago on Feb. 8, 2019. Mayoral candidate Bill Daley participates in a debate at WFLD-Ch. 32's studio in Chicago on Feb. 8, 2019. (Zbigniew Bzdak/Chicago Tribune)

“His investments in Chicago, in its cultural institutions, in its healthcare organizations, and in improvements that benefit all residents are a model of giving back to the community,” Daley said in a statement. “While we may not agree on every political issue, Ken’s commitment to Chicago is unquestionable and unwavering.”

State records show Griffin, Citadel’s CEO, donated $36 million to Rauner’s political committee, including a $20 million contribution that’s believed to be the largest contribution ever given to a campaign by a noncandidate in the state.

Griffin also has personally contributed nearly $1.29 million to Emanuel-aligned campaign funds. His ex-wife, Anne Dias Griffin, contributed an additional $125,300 to the mayor while the two were still married, records show.

For Daley, Griffin’s donation is a major boost that will help him flood the airwaves in the final 13 days before the Feb. 26 mayoral election with ads touting his promised property tax freeze and “no more excuses” tagline as he seeks to finish in the top two and make a nearly certain April 2 runoff.

It also shows that Daley, who has now raised about $7.5 million, is increasingly getting support from big business interests that backed Emanuel.

The downside for Daley is the contribution will invite attacks that he will cater to business interests at the expense of neighborhoods — criticism that dogged Emanuel, who was dubbed “Mayor One Percent” by some critics, for eight years.

It could also draw more attention to Daley’s Rauner ties. Last week, Illinois Comptroller Susana Mendoza criticized Daley at a mayoral forum for co-chairing Rauner’s transition, sparking a sharp back-and-forth between the two.

Like Emanuel, Daley is a centrist Democrat who gives corporate executives a sense of predictability at a time when the city faces tough financial decisions with massive pension spikes looming.

In addition to his political contributions, Griffin also has donated millions as a philanthropist, giving $12 million to the Chicago Park District for a lakefront bike path, $19 million to the Art Institute of Chicago, $16 million to Children’s Memorial Hospital and $10 million to a childhood center in Chicago Heights, among other gifts.

Chicago Tribune’s Bill Ruthhart contributed.

gpratt@chicagotribune.com

Twitter @royalpratt

MORE COVERAGE:

Who is Ken Griffin? »

Inside Bill Daley's insurance exam scandal: Beers, an altered test and a passing grade »

Bill Daley shows up at second TV debate after bailing on one Thursday night »

Former Vice President Al Gore endorses Bill Daley in Chicago mayor's race »