Behind Lori Lightfoot’s image as police reformer, her past reveals complicated picture
Lori Lightfoot is pitching herself to voters as the mayoral candidate who fights abuses of power by law enforcement.

In a campaign ad, Lightfoot says she “held police accountable” as the head of Mayor Rahm Emanuel’s reform task force, which suggested sweeping changes and called out the Chicago Police Department for discrimination. She also fired cops accused of misconduct in her role as Police Board president.

Lightfoot’s profile as a police reform advocate largely has been built during the last three years, after video showing white Officer Jason Van Dyke shooting black teen Laquan McDonald turned the political tide toward dramatic change in the way law enforcement operates in Chicago.

A look at Lightfoot’s earlier tenure running the city’s former police disciplinary agency and working as a federal prosecutor reveals a more complicated picture, however.

During the early 2000s, Lightfoot’s rulings cut both ways on controversial shootings by police officers. In one particularly egregious fatal shooting caught on video, Lightfoot stood against the police brass and moved to fire an officer. But in another case, she sided with high-ranking officers over her investigators, who had recommended that a cop be fired for lying repeatedly about a fatal shooting they found unjustified. Lightfoot declared the shooting justified and confirmed a 30-day suspension.

Before the police disciplinary job, Lightfoot was a federal prosecutor. Nearly 20 years ago, she was formally reprimanded for “professional misconduct” by an esteemed federal appeals judge who found that she had misled another judge in a botched extradition case. The reprimand raised questions about whether prosecutors had abused their power.

The situation created enough alarm that then-U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno sent a contrite letter to the judge who’d written the reprimand, calling what happened “unfortunate” and vowing changes. Reno opened an internal investigation that eventually cleared Lightfoot.

The episodes from earlier in her career contrast with the more recent police reform roles that elevated her into the political spotlight. While other mayoral candidates have taken up the mantle of police reform, Lightfoot says her record shows she’s the mayoral candidate who can be counted on to curb law enforcement abuses.

“There’s been nobody in the city that’s been a more vocal, persistent, demanding advocate for police reform and accountability than I have,” Lightfoot said in an interview with the Tribune.

Jose M. Osorio/Chicago Tribune Then-Chicago Police Board President Lori Lightfoot talks with reporters on March 17, 2016, after the board recommended three candidates for consideration as Chicago's new police superintendent. Mayor Rahm Emanuel later appointed Eddie Johnson, who was not on the list. Then-Chicago Police Board President Lori Lightfoot talks with reporters on March 17, 2016, after the board recommended three candidates for consideration as Chicago's new police superintendent. Mayor Rahm Emanuel later appointed Eddie Johnson, who was not on the list. (Jose M. Osorio/Chicago Tribune)

A role in reforms

As Emanuel struggled to get in front of the police reform issue in December 2015, he named Lightfoot to lead one of his first major efforts — the Police Accountability Task Force.

The appointment was a double-edged sword. It elevated Lightfoot to a prominent role in the official city response, but it also made her a target for activists who distrusted the mayor and felt he was using the panel to give him political cover to make cosmetic changes. Protesters rushed the stage at a February 2016 public task force hearing and cops escorted Lightfoot from the venue.

The task force moved quickly, taking four months to release a report that called on the police superintendent to acknowledge the department’s “history of racial disparity and discrimination” and make dozens of changes to department practices. Emanuel adopted some of the task force recommendations — most notably, abolishing the city’s defective police disciplinary agency, the Independent Police Review Authority, and replacing it with the better-funded Civilian Office of Police Accountability.

The task force report eventually was overshadowed by a January 2017 Justice Department report that made many of the same fundamental points in describing a badly broken police department in which poorly trained and supervised officers violated the civil rights of minorities with little fear of repercussions. That built momentum for a consent decree requiring broad changes to police practices that will be overseen by a federal judge.

“There’s a straight line” leading from the task force to the Justice Department report and the consent decree, Lightfoot said.

She did double duty for Emanuel, continuing as chair of the Police Board, which handles the most serious disciplinary cases and has the authority to fire cops. While the Police Board is part of a disciplinary system that has long been slow and prone to excusing misconduct, Lightfoot’s tenure came as the city faced pressure to root out bad cops.

During the campaign, Lightfoot has touted her rate of firing officers. A Tribune analysis of Police Board data showed that the panel fired roughly 75 percent of officers whose cases were decided during her service from 2015 to 2018. From 2011 through 2014, the rate was under 40 percent.

Under Lightfoot, the Police Board also led the nationwide search for a new superintendent after Emanuel fired Garry McCarthy, who’s now running for mayor. Emanuel, however, cast aside the board’s three finalists in favor of veteran cop Eddie Johnson, who had not applied.

Several mayoral candidates have said they would fire Johnson if they win. Lightfoot said she would wait until after the summer to evaluate the department’s leadership, noting that the superintendent soon will be responsible for making plans to deal with summer violence.

“Do you really want a lame duck and a lame duck executive team in charge of putting that plan together and then executing it?” she asked. “I just think that’s irresponsible.”

Chris Walker/Chicago Tribune Former death row inmate Aaron Patterson leads a 2004 confrontation with Lori Lightfoot, who was then the head of the Chicago police's Office of Professional Standards, over the death of May Molina, who died while in police custody. Former death row inmate Aaron Patterson leads a 2004 confrontation with Lori Lightfoot, who was then the head of the Chicago police's Office of Professional Standards, over the death of May Molina, who died while in police custody. (Chris Walker/Chicago Tribune)

Mixed record on shootings

In June 2002, then-Mayor Richard M. Daley appointed Lightfoot as chief administrator of the Office of Professional Standards, a post she held for two years. The disciplinary organization, which was an arm of the Police Department, would be abolished in 2007 amid scandals and complaints of its ineffectiveness — particularly its inadequate investigations of shootings.

In one high-profile case, Lightfoot broke with that trend.

During a March 2003 scuffle involving several people in the 95th Street Red Line CTA station, Officer Alvin Weems fatally shot an unarmed man in the head. The shooting of Michael Pleasance was caught on security video.