How Toni Preckwinkle rose from Hyde Park also-ran to Cook County boss
Raised in St. Paul, Minn., Toni Preckwinkle attended the University of Chicago, where she got involved in the progressive politics of Hyde Park. She eventually became 4th Ward alderman after losing two previous battles for the seat. During nearly two decades as alderman, she successfully pushed for Chicago’s first affordable housing set-asides, changes to a ward remap after judges determined the original version diluted black voting rights and criminal justice reforms including the release of police misconduct records. In 2010, she became the first woman elected as Cook County Board president. She ran for Chicago mayor and lost to Lori Lightfoot in a runoff election.

A sign of Preckwinkle’s melding of a progressive agenda with a pragmatic approach is seen in how she and 22nd Ward Ald. Ricardo Munoz won approval in 1998 for a living wage ordinance, which required that workers for city contractors get paid a higher wage. The proposal had languished for more than two years and was presumed dead after the powerful Finance Committee led by 14th Ward Ald. Edward Burke rejected it. But Preckwinkle and Munoz saw an opportunity to resurrect the idea when allies of then-Mayor Richard M. Daley were looking for cover as they prepared to give themselves and the mayor big pay boosts. With protesters outside council chambers vowing “Payback Time in ’99” at the ballot box for aldermen who padded their own pockets but ignored the working poor, a deal was struck. First, the council approved the living wage. Then, aldermen passed their own pay hikes, which Munoz rejected but Preckwinkle voted for. Reminded of that day, Preckwinkle chuckled and described her philosophy: “Politics is always the art of the possible.” Asked if she casts herself in the same mold as the late Mario Cuomo, a three-term New York governor who styled himself a “progressive pragmatist,” Preckwinkle drew a distinction. “I tried to put myself in a place where I could both serve and move an agenda forward,” said Preckwinkle, who noted she was one of three original council Progressive Caucus members, a co-chair of the Women’s Caucus and vice chair of the Black Caucus. “Cuomo may have described himself as a progressive pragmatist. I usually just describe myself as a progressive.” There were times when Preckwinkle decided it best not to go along with the mayor. In 1999, she voted against Daley’s choice for fire chief. In 2006, she was the lone vote against his budget — a protest against what she called the city’s “pattern of insensitivity” to African-Americans, particularly in city contracting. And in 2008, she was one of five aldermen who bucked Daley and voted against the controversial 75-year lease of the city’s parking meters for $1.15 billion. Ovie Carter/Chicago Tribune Then-Ald. Toni Preckwinkle, shown in 1998 in her 4th Ward, counts criminal justice reform and establishment of Chicago’s first affordable housing set-asides among her achievements during nearly two decades on the City Council. Then-Ald. Toni Preckwinkle, shown in 1998 in her 4th Ward, counts criminal justice reform and establishment of Chicago’s first affordable housing set-asides among her achievements during nearly two decades on the City Council. (Ovie Carter/Chicago Tribune) The following year, however, Preckwinkle eyed a promotion to County Board president, and Daley’s opposition could have diminished her chances. At first, she balked at his doomed bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics. Later, she voted for it after securing guarantees about how related development in her ward would be done. Preckwinkle wasn’t the favorite in the 2010 Democratic primary. She wasn’t widely known and didn’t have a lot of campaign money. But then-Board Chairman Todd Stroger was unpopular because he’d raised the sales tax by 1 percentage point and had numerous patronage scandals. She was the first to announce she would challenge Stroger, giving her a chance to line up early support. And Preckwinkle was fortunate as the other top Democratic candidate had her own controversies. Circuit Court Clerk Dorothy Brown had taken thousands of dollars in campaign contributions and gifts from employees and required employees to pay for the privilege of wearing jeans on Friday. The unions got behind Preckwinkle, who aired much-lauded TV ads featuring an actor portraying famous penny pincher Benjamin Franklin as she promised to eliminate what remained of Stroger’s partially repealed tax increase. Preckwinkle handily won. Governing’s harder It’s Preckwinkle’s eight years as County Board president that has provided the most fodder for her mayoral opponents. Leading as a chief executive is different than being one of 50 aldermen, and Preckwinkle raised the very same sales tax she had earlier cut and muscled through a politically disastrous pop tax. Mayoral foes say those tax increases were regressive, tending to hit low-income people harder than the wealthy. Preckwinkle maintains the sales tax increase was the only option available to bail out the underfunded county worker pension system after the state failed to act on her plan to fix the system at a lower cost. “I did what I thought I had to do in order to ensure the financial stability of the county and to keep from burdening future generations with our unpaid bills,” Preckwinkle said. She still defends the pop tax, even after a citizen backlash fueled by a multimillion-dollar campaign funded by the beverage industry led the County Board to quickly repeal it. Preckwinkle had hoped the pop tax would allow the county to cover costs for years to come without other tax hikes and produce health benefits from reduced sugar consumption. “I say sometimes good public policy is neither possible nor popular,” said Preckwinkle, who noted she balanced the budget for now by laying off hundreds of employees. Phil Velasquez/Chicago Tribune Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle's penny-an-ounce sweetened beverage tax became a political headache and was quickly repealed. Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle's penny-an-ounce sweetened beverage tax became a political headache and was quickly repealed. (Phil Velasquez/Chicago Tribune) Also coming under fire is Preckwinkle’s leadership style. Mayoral candidate Lori Lightfoot said Preckwinkle governs from the top down — a trait she said Preckwinkle shares with Mayor Rahm Emanuel. Lightfoot also said the way Preckwinkle handled the recent firing of her former chief of staff amid allegations of sexual misconduct and her security chief after a probe into use of a county vehicle for political purposes shows a lack of commitment to reform.