How Preckwinkle's pop tax backfired
When Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle first floated the idea of a pop tax to commissioners last October, a big part of her pitch was an appeal to their sense of self-preservation.

"We said to people, 'We're going to take one tough vote in the next three years, that's it. Then we're done,'" said Preckwinkle, making a reference to the financial stability the new money would bring. "And needless to say, that's very attractive when you have to run for election."

As political calculations go, this one backfired in a big way.

A botched rollout coupled with a huge public backlash fueled by general tax fatigue and the beverage industry's well-funded pushback campaign has made the pop tax the biggest issue in county government in nearly a decade.

Now a repeal vote is slated for next month, and several commissioners could find themselves fighting for their political lives next year. So could Preckwinkle, who a few months ago seemed like a shoo-in to win her third and final term despite pushing through the soda tax on top of a 1-percentage-point sales tax increase in 2015.

"It's really simple," said Commissioner Sean Morrison, a Palos Park Republican and the lead sponsor of the repeal measure. "It's going to come down to an up-or-down vote and, at the end of the day, the residents are tellin' 'em 'Can the tax or can the commissioner.'"

A boisterous rally outside the Thompson Center took aim at Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle and her push for a Cook County soda pop tax. Preckwinkle countered at a more sedate news conference at Provident Hospital. (Lou Foglia / Chicago Tribune) A boisterous rally outside the Thompson Center took aim at Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle and her push for a Cook County soda pop tax. Preckwinkle countered at a more sedate news conference at Provident Hospital. (Lou Foglia / Chicago Tribune) SEE MORE VIDEOS

Warning signs

Approval of the soda tax was not a slam-dunk. Even before Preckwinkle publicly unveiled the penny-per-ounce charge on Oct. 13, the whispers had started at the County Building, and opponents went up with TV and radio ads opposing it.

But Preckwinkle sweetened the deal by giving each commissioner control over $500,000 in gas tax revenue to spend on transportation projects in their districts. She also rallied public health advocates to point out that downing fewer Mountain Dews could lead to a drop in obesity and diabetes.

Commissioners deadlocked, and Preckwinkle cast a rare, tie-breaking vote to impose the tax. If it hadn't gone as smoothly as Preckwinkle hoped, at least the new tax had passed, the budget was balanced and the heat was mostly on her.

Then it all started to unravel.

While the vote was taken in November 2016, providing plenty of distance from the March 2018 primary election, the tax wasn't scheduled to take effect until July 1.

The vagaries of federal law, the Illinois Constitution and state statutes meant it took months to come up with the rules of how the tax would be put in place, and changes were still being made late in the game.

For example, county officials at one point planned to tax low-income folks receiving Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits, but the state later told them that could not be done.

For weeks, reporters warned the public the tax was about to take effect. A few days before July 1, merchants sued to block the tax.

That raised the public focus on the issue. Preckwinkle called for laying off hundreds of county workers if a judge tossed the pop tax, even as county taxpayers stocked up on Coke and Pepsi while hoping for a reprieve.

Preckwinkle prevailed in court and, when the tax went into effect Aug. 2, both retailers and their customers were confused about what drinks should be taxed. That, in turn, triggered more lawsuits that stoked the negative headlines and consumer frustration.

While the tax was meant to apply to all sugar- and artificially sweetened beverages, pop drinkers demanded to know why diet beverages were hit. The rules also meant that some restaurants taxed free refills, which diners found particularly irksome.

In Philadelphia, a soda tax was applied to distributors, meaning it didn't show up on store receipts. But here, county officials said the Illinois Department of Revenue ruled the pop tax had to be applied at the cash register. And so store owners opted to list the new tax on receipts, a reminder to consumers that the case of soda they'd purchased now cost an additional $2.88.

"From messaging to implementation to rollout, anything that could go wrong with this tax did go wrong," said Commissioner John Fritchey, a Chicago Democrat and co-sponsor of the repeal ordinance.

Political fallout

County government hasn't seen such a backlash since 2009, when then-Board President Todd Stroger pushed through a 1 percentage-point sales tax increase. The furor eventually led to its repeal and helped topple Stroger from office. Preckwinkle defeated him by promising to repeal the half-percent that remained. She did so, but after winning re-election, she reinstated the sales tax increase as a way to pay for vastly underfunded county worker pensions.

The sales tax flip-flop, however, did not result in anywhere near the furor Preckwinkle faces over the soda tax.

Unlike during the Stroger era, the anger this time is not just directed at the county board president. Some commissioners who voted for the pop tax are in the political crosshairs too. If the issue provided fertile ground for would-be challengers, a run for office was made all the more appealing by the promise of campaign money from the beverage industry and retailers that have made repeal their core mission.

For longtime Chicagoans, the politics involved are akin to the 2007 city elections. Back then, well-funded labor unions started targeting aldermen over then-Mayor Richard M. Daley's veto of an ordinance requiring higher wages for big-box retailers like Wal-Mart. Daley held on to his power, but some aldermen lost their seats.