Fake news in Clarendon Hills: How a satirical story about manure duped thousands of readers
Clarendon Hills made the world of fake news Monday in a story on a satirical news site, stating a lottery winner from the village had been arrested for having $224,000 worth of manure dumped on his former employer’s property.

World News Daily Report bills itself as an independent satirical media organization dedicated to covering news and events from around the world in a completely ludicrous manner.

And the story stating that 54-year-old Brian Morris had paid for the prank after winning $125 million in a Powerball lottery is nothing if not ludicrous.

“I guess it is humor to a certain extent, but people need to read to the bottom and find out it’s not a real news story,” Village President Len Austin said Wednesday. “The problem these days is that people see a headline online and jump to conclusions.”

Austin said he learned of the story from his wife, who found out about it via a Clarendon Hills mom’s email list of several hundred people.

“I also heard from a friend who now lives out of state, wanting to know what was going on,” Austin said.

Clarendon Hills Police Chief Paul Dalen said the department fielded a few calls Tuesday from people who saw the story and had questions about it.

“It’s ridiculous, and some people don’t know it’s satire,” Dalen said of the story, noting that he is unaware of any Brian Morris living in Clarendon Hills.

On the World News Daily Report Facebook page, the story had been shared more than 49,000 times as of 10:15 a.m. Wednesday, after being posted at 12:33 p.m. Monday.

Facebook comments on the story make it clear that most people reading it didn’t know it wasn’t real.

The story includes a photo of Dalen and recently-retired police chief Boyd Farmer from a November 2017 Doings story, and a mug shot that was used with a July 2014 story about former Westmont village manager Ronald R. Searl being charged with driving under the influence of alcohol in Clarendon Hills.

Comments in the story are attributed to Clarendon Hills Police Lt. Frank Meyers, someone who doesn’t exist.

cfieldman@pioneerlocal.com

Twitter @chuckwriting