Congress passes special tax breaks for hurricane victims

See some of the most heartbreaking and inspirational photographs of Hurricane Harvey. See some of the most heartbreaking and inspirational photographs of Hurricane Harvey.

In this NASA handout image, Hurricane Harvey is photographed aboard the International Space Station as it intensified on its way toward the Texas coast on August 25, 2017. The Expedition 52 crew on the station has been tracking this storm for the past two days and capturing Earth observation photographs and videos from their vantage point in low Earth orbit.Now at category 4 strength, Harvey's maximum sustained winds had increased to 130 miles per hour. (Photo by NASA via Getty Images) less In this NASA handout image, Hurricane Harvey is photographed aboard the International Space Station as it intensified on its way toward the Texas coast on August 25, 2017. The Expedition 52 crew on the station ... more Photo: NASA/Getty Images

Precinct 6 Deputy Constables Sgt. Paul Fernandez, from left, Sgt. Michael Tran and Sgt. Radha Patel rescue an elderly woman from rising water on North MacGregor Way, near Brays Bayou, after heavy rains from the remnants of Hurricane Harvey, Saturday, August 27, 2017, in Houston. ( Jon Shapley / Houston Chronicle ) less Precinct 6 Deputy Constables Sgt. Paul Fernandez, from left, Sgt. Michael Tran and Sgt. Radha Patel rescue an elderly woman from rising water on North MacGregor Way, near Brays Bayou, after heavy rains from the ... more Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle

Hurricane Harvey couldn't keep Otis the dog down. Hurricane Harvey couldn't keep Otis the dog down. Photo: Tiele Dockens

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-5', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 5', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Two kayakers try to beat the current pushing them down an overflowing Brays Bayou along S. Braeswood in Houston, Texas, Sunday, Aug. 27, 2017. Rescuers answered hundreds of calls for help Sunday as floodwaters from the remnants of Hurricane Harvey climbed high enough to begin filling second-story homes, and authorities urged stranded families to seek refuge on their rooftops. (Mark Mulligan/Houston Chronicle via AP) less Two kayakers try to beat the current pushing them down an overflowing Brays Bayou along S. Braeswood in Houston, Texas, Sunday, Aug. 27, 2017. Rescuers answered hundreds of calls for help Sunday as floodwaters ... more Photo: Mark Mulligan, Houston Chronicle

Don and Peg Sauter celebrated their 55th wedding anniversary on August 22. The two have moved from their assisted living home to the George R. Brown Convention Center in Houston as Tropical Storm Harvey inches its way through the area on Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017. less Don and Peg Sauter celebrated their 55th wedding anniversary on August 22. The two have moved from their assisted living home to the George R. Brown Convention Center in Houston as Tropical Storm Harvey inches ... more Photo: Elizabeth Conley, Houston Chronicle

A dog comforts his owner. A dog comforts his owner. Photo: Joe Raedle/Getty Images

Jan Allen with dogs, Daisy and Toby, and her son, Chris Allen, ride in a rescue boat to a pickup area along Edgebrook Sunday, August 27, 2017. Much of the area is flooded from rains after Hurricane Harvey. Jan Allen with dogs, Daisy and Toby, and her son, Chris Allen, ride in a rescue boat to a pickup area along Edgebrook Sunday, August 27, 2017. Much of the area is flooded from rains after Hurricane Harvey. Photo: Melissa Phillip, Houston Chronicle

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-10', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 10', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Jose Alarco shakes hands with his neighbor as he makes his way out of the Melrose Park neighborhood and his flooded home in Houston as Tropical Storm Harvey inches its way through the area on Monday, Aug. 28, 2017. ( Elizabeth Conley / Houston Chronicle ) less Jose Alarco shakes hands with his neighbor as he makes his way out of the Melrose Park neighborhood and his flooded home in Houston as Tropical Storm Harvey inches its way through the area on Monday, Aug. 28, ... more Photo: Elizabeth Conley, Houston Chronicle

Amanda Ankney hugs her father Byron Gilleon after he was rescued from his homes near Crossroads and Walkwood drives during Tropical Storm Harvey Monday, Aug. 28, 2017, in Houston. Amanda Ankney hugs her father Byron Gilleon after he was rescued from his homes near Crossroads and Walkwood drives during Tropical Storm Harvey Monday, Aug. 28, 2017, in Houston. Photo: Godofredo A. Vasquez, Houston Chronicle

Thousands take shelter from the Tropical Storm Harvey at the George R. Brown Convention Center, Monday, Aug. 28, 2017, in Houston. Thousands take shelter from the Tropical Storm Harvey at the George R. Brown Convention Center, Monday, Aug. 28, 2017, in Houston. Photo: Marie D. De Jesus, Houston Chronicle

Lauren Durst holds onto her ten-month-old son, Wyatt Durst, as they evacuate from the Savannah Estates neighborhood as Addicks Reservoir nears capacity Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017 in Houston. Lauren Durst holds onto her ten-month-old son, Wyatt Durst, as they evacuate from the Savannah Estates neighborhood as Addicks Reservoir nears capacity Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017 in Houston. Photo: Michael Ciaglo, Houston Chronicle

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-15', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 15', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Kathryn Loder sorts donated clothing at George R. Brown Convention Center in Houston as Tropical Storm Harvey inches its way through the area on Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017. Kathryn Loder sorts donated clothing at George R. Brown Convention Center in Houston as Tropical Storm Harvey inches its way through the area on Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017. Photo: Elizabeth Conley, Houston Chronicle

Shiann Barker holds her nephew, Brayln Matthews Sims Jr., 1, between cots at the George R. Brown Convention Center where nearly 10,000 people are taking shelter after Tropical Storm Harvey Wednesday, Aug. 30, 2017 in Houston. They have ben at the shelter since Sunday after they evacuated from the Clayton Homes neighborhood. ( Michael Ciaglo / Houston Chronicle) less Shiann Barker holds her nephew, Brayln Matthews Sims Jr., 1, between cots at the George R. Brown Convention Center where nearly 10,000 people are taking shelter after Tropical Storm Harvey Wednesday, Aug. 30, ... more Photo: Michael Ciaglo, Houston Chronicle

Gideon Kim, 2, plus with a toy train while his father, Nathan, is sorting donated shoes as they volunteer at The Forge for Families, a Christian community organization that has been transformed into an Red Cross shelter, on Thursday, Aug. 31, 2017, in Houston. The Kim family, including Gideon's mother, Dr. Judy Kim, had been volunteer at The Forge since Tuesday. less Gideon Kim, 2, plus with a toy train while his father, Nathan, is sorting donated shoes as they volunteer at The Forge for Families, a Christian community organization that has been transformed into an Red ... more Photo: Yi-Chin Lee, Houston Chronicle

Rikki Saldivar goes through old family photos at a house that belonged to her grandparents, Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017, in Houston. Saldivar's grandparents, and four young relatives, drowned in a van in Greens Bayou during Tropical Storm Harvey. less Rikki Saldivar goes through old family photos at a house that belonged to her grandparents, Tuesday, Sept. 5, 2017, in Houston. Saldivar's grandparents, and four young relatives, drowned in a van in Greens ... more Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-20', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 20', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Rescue boats work along Tidwell at the east Sam Houston Tollway helping to evacuate people Monday, August 28, 2017. Much of the area is flooded from rains after Hurricane Harvey. Rescue boats work along Tidwell at the east Sam Houston Tollway helping to evacuate people Monday, August 28, 2017. Much of the area is flooded from rains after Hurricane Harvey. Photo: Melissa Phillip, Houston Chronicle

TOPSHOT - People walk through flooded streets as the effects of Hurricane Harvey are seen August 26, 2017 in Galveston, Texas. Hurricane Harvey left a trail of devastation Saturday after the most powerful storm to hit the US mainland in over a decade slammed into Texas, destroying homes, severing power supplies and forcing tens of thousands of residents to flee. / AFP PHOTO / Brendan Smialowski / The erroneous mention[s] appearing in the metadata of this photo by Brendan Smialowski has been modified in AFP systems in the following manner: [Hurricane Harvey] instead of [Hurricane Henry]. Please immediately remove the erroneous mention from all your online services and delete it from your servers. If you have been authorized by AFP to distribute it to third parties, please ensure that the same actions are carried out by them. Failure to promptly comply with these instructions will entail liability on your part for any continued or post notification usage. Therefore we thank you very much for all your attention and prompt action. We are sorry for the inconvenience this notification may cause and remain at your disposal for any further information you may require. (Photo credit should read BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI/AFP/Getty Images) less TOPSHOT - People walk through flooded streets as the effects of Hurricane Harvey are seen August 26, 2017 in Galveston, Texas. Hurricane Harvey left a trail of devastation Saturday after the most powerful storm ... more Photo: BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI/AFP/Getty Images

Angelina De Los Santos, 7, left, Vanessa Pasillas, 2, center, and Jade de los santos, 5, center right, watch videos with Rosemarie Pasillas, right, as people seek shelter at the George R. Brown Convention Center in Houston, TX on Monday, Aug 28, 2017. Rising water from Hurricane now Tropical Storm Harvey pushed thousands of people to rooftops or higher ground Sunday as the had to flee their homes in Houston. less Angelina De Los Santos, 7, left, Vanessa Pasillas, 2, center, and Jade de los santos, 5, center right, watch videos with Rosemarie Pasillas, right, as people seek shelter at the George R. Brown Convention ... more Photo: The Washington Post/The Washington Post/Getty Images

A submerged vehicle is seen at the intersection of the Hardy Toll Road and the Sam Houston Tollway, as heavy rains continue from Tropical Storm Harvey, Tuesday August 29, 2017, in Houston. Sgt. Steve Perez, 60, reportedly drowned in his car at the intersection while on his way to work. He was a 30-year veteran of the HPD. less A submerged vehicle is seen at the intersection of the Hardy Toll Road and the Sam Houston Tollway, as heavy rains continue from Tropical Storm Harvey, Tuesday August 29, 2017, in Houston. Sgt. Steve Perez, 60, ... more Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-25', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 25', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Volunteer rescuers evacuate people from the Georgetown Colony neighborhood on a Heavy Expanded Mobility Tactical Truck, which was used as a prop in the latest Planet of the Apes movie, as Addicks Reservoir surpasses capacity due to near constant rain from Tropical Storm Harvey Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017 in Houston. less Volunteer rescuers evacuate people from the Georgetown Colony neighborhood on a Heavy Expanded Mobility Tactical Truck, which was used as a prop in the latest Planet of the Apes movie, as Addicks Reservoir ... more Photo: Michael Ciaglo, Houston Chronicle

A neighborhood is inundated by floodwaters from Tropical Storm Harvey on Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017, in Spring. A neighborhood is inundated by floodwaters from Tropical Storm Harvey on Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017, in Spring. Photo: Brett Coomer, Houston Chronicle

Mailboxes are inundated by Brazos River flooding along Newlin Drive in Richmond on Friday. Several areas are still dealing with high waters related to Harvey. Mailboxes are inundated by Brazos River flooding along Newlin Drive in Richmond on Friday. Several areas are still dealing with high waters related to Harvey. Photo: Michael Ciaglo, Houston Chronicle

Saltwater Salvage diver Justin Hendrickson prepares to dive near the Columbia Lakes subdivision Wednesday, Aug. 30, 2017, in West Columbia. Hendrickson was walked to the dive spot by fellow diver Dave Oltroge before he dove to shut a levee gate value to prevent more flooding to the neighborhood. less Saltwater Salvage diver Justin Hendrickson prepares to dive near the Columbia Lakes subdivision Wednesday, Aug. 30, 2017, in West Columbia. Hendrickson was walked to the dive spot by fellow diver Dave Oltroge ... more Photo: Steve Gonzales, Houston Chronicle

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-30', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 30', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

University of Houston players assist with Hurricane Harvey relief efforts on Friday. University of Houston players assist with Hurricane Harvey relief efforts on Friday. Photo: Joseph Duarte

A reader submitted this photo of his family's first big storm in Houston. Jeremy Blanton noted that the family lost a car but him, his wife and 2-year-old daughter are all safe. A reader submitted this photo of his family's first big storm in Houston. Jeremy Blanton noted that the family lost a car but him, his wife and 2-year-old daughter are all safe. Photo: Jeremy Blanton

Westpark Tollway is underwater following Tropical Storm Harvey north of Richmond, Texas. Westpark Tollway is underwater following Tropical Storm Harvey north of Richmond, Texas. Photo: Dr D Tyler Brown

Luca Cernosek, 15, helps clean his grandfather's house in the Meyerland area, Thursday, Aug. 31, 2017, in Houston. Luca Cernosek, 15, helps clean his grandfather's house in the Meyerland area, Thursday, Aug. 31, 2017, in Houston. Photo: Jon Shapley, Houston Chronicle

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-35', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 35', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

People walk out of their flooded Meyerland streets, Sunday, August 27, 2017. People walk out of their flooded Meyerland streets, Sunday, August 27, 2017. Photo: Mark Mulligan, Houston Chronicle

Alma Castenda pulls her children's artwork off the walls as she cleans up her flood damaged home in the Verde Forest subdivision in the aftermath of Tropical Storm Harvey on Thursday, Aug. 31, 2017, in Houston. Alma Castenda pulls her children's artwork off the walls as she cleans up her flood damaged home in the Verde Forest subdivision in the aftermath of Tropical Storm Harvey on Thursday, Aug. 31, 2017, in Houston. Photo: Brett Coomer, Houston Chronicle

Rainwater from Hurricane Harvey surrounds oil refinery storage tanks stand in this aerial photograph taken above Texas City, Texas, U.S., on Wednesday, Aug. 30, 2017. Unprecedented flooding from the Category 4 storm that slammed into the state's coast last week, sending gasoline prices surging as oil refineries shut, may also set a record for rainfall in the contiguous U.S., the weather service said Tuesday. Photographer: Luke Sharrett/Bloomberg less Rainwater from Hurricane Harvey surrounds oil refinery storage tanks stand in this aerial photograph taken above Texas City, Texas, U.S., on Wednesday, Aug. 30, 2017. Unprecedented flooding from the Category 4 ... more Photo: Bloomberg

Flood victims are evacuated by boat from their neighborhood near the Addicks Reservoir as floodwaters rise from Tropical Storm Harvey on Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017, in Houston. Flood victims are evacuated by boat from their neighborhood near the Addicks Reservoir as floodwaters rise from Tropical Storm Harvey on Tuesday, Aug. 29, 2017, in Houston. Photo: Brett Coomer, Houston Chronicle

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-40', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 40', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Floodwaters fill the road running through the Lakes On Eldridge North subdivision in the aftermath of Tropical Storm Harvey on Wednesday, Aug. 30, 2017, in Houston. Floodwaters fill the road running through the Lakes On Eldridge North subdivision in the aftermath of Tropical Storm Harvey on Wednesday, Aug. 30, 2017, in Houston. Photo: Brett Coomer, Houston Chronicle

HOUSTON, TX - AUGUST 27: A man helps children across a flooded street as they evacuate their home after the area was inundated with flooding from Hurricane Harvey on August 27, 2017 in Houston, Texas. Harvey, which made landfall north of Corpus Christi late Friday evening, is expected to dump upwards to 40 inches of rain in Texas over the next couple of days. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images) less HOUSTON, TX - AUGUST 27: A man helps children across a flooded street as they evacuate their home after the area was inundated with flooding from Hurricane Harvey on August 27, 2017 in Houston, Texas. Harvey, ... more Photo: Joe Raedle/Getty Images

ROCKPORT, TX - AUGUST 26: Terry Smith stands in the kitchen as Henry McKay sleeps in the apartment where the ceiling collapse when Hurricane Harvey hit on August 26, 2017 in Rockport, Texas. Ms. Smith said she has never been as terrified in her life as when the winds started roaring through town. Harvey made landfall shortly after 11 p.m. Friday, just north of Port Aransas as a Category 4 storm and is being reported as the strongest hurricane to hit the United States since Wilma in 2005. Forecasts call for as much as 30 inches of rain to fall in the next few days. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images) less ROCKPORT, TX - AUGUST 26: Terry Smith stands in the kitchen as Henry McKay sleeps in the apartment where the ceiling collapse when Hurricane Harvey hit on August 26, 2017 in Rockport, Texas. Ms. Smith said she ... more Photo: Joe Raedle/Getty Images

The State of Texas Emergency Command Center at DPS headquarters in Austin, Texas monitors Hurricane Harvey Sunday afternoon August 27, 2017. Tropical Storm Harvey lashed central Texas with torrential rains on Sunday, unleashing "catastrophic" floods after the megastorm -- the most powerful to hit the United States since 2005 -- left a deadly trail of devastation along the Gulf Coast. / AFP PHOTO / SUZANNE CORDEIRO (Photo credit should read SUZANNE CORDEIRO/AFP/Getty Images) less The State of Texas Emergency Command Center at DPS headquarters in Austin, Texas monitors Hurricane Harvey Sunday afternoon August 27, 2017. Tropical Storm Harvey lashed central Texas with torrential rains on ... more Photo: SUZANNE CORDEIRO/AFP/Getty Images

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-45', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 45', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

HOUSTON, TX - AUGUST 28: Barb Davis, 74. is helped to dry land after being rescued from her flooded neighborhood after it was inundated with rain water, remnants of Hurricane Harvey, on August 28, 2017 in Houston, Texas. Harvey, which made landfall north of Corpus Christi late Friday evening, is expected to dump upwards to 40 inches of rain in areas of Texas over the next couple of days. (Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images) less HOUSTON, TX - AUGUST 28: Barb Davis, 74. is helped to dry land after being rescued from her flooded neighborhood after it was inundated with rain water, remnants of Hurricane Harvey, on August 28, 2017 in ... more Photo: Scott Olson/Getty Images

HOUSTON, TX - AUGUST 28: People are rescued from a flooded neighborhood after it was inundated with rain water, remnants of Hurricane Harvey, on August 28, 2017 in Houston, Texas. Harvey, which made landfall north of Corpus Christi late Friday evening, is expected to dump upwards to 40 inches of rain in areas of Texas over the next couple of days. (Photo by Scott Olson/Getty Images) less HOUSTON, TX - AUGUST 28: People are rescued from a flooded neighborhood after it was inundated with rain water, remnants of Hurricane Harvey, on August 28, 2017 in Houston, Texas. Harvey, which made landfall ... more Photo: Scott Olson/Getty Images

HOUSTON, TX - AUGUST 27: Naomi Coto carries Simba on her shoulders as they evacuate their home after the area was inundated with flooding from Hurricane Harvey on August 27, 2017 in Houston, Texas. Harvey, which made landfall north of Corpus Christi late Friday evening, is expected to dump upwards to 40 inches of rain in Texas over the next couple of days. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images) less HOUSTON, TX - AUGUST 27: Naomi Coto carries Simba on her shoulders as they evacuate their home after the area was inundated with flooding from Hurricane Harvey on August 27, 2017 in Houston, Texas. Harvey, ... more Photo: Joe Raedle/Getty Images

A UH-60 Blackhawk Helicopter and crew from U.S. Customs and Border Protection's Air and Marine Operations rescues residents in areas flooded by Hurricane Harvey on August 28, 2017. A UH-60 Blackhawk Helicopter and crew from U.S. Customs and Border Protection's Air and Marine Operations rescues residents in areas flooded by Hurricane Harvey on August 28, 2017. Photo: Customs And Border Protection

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-50', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 50', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Texas National Guard soldiers conduct rescue operations in flooded areas around Houston, Texas Aug. 27, 2017. (U.S. Texas Military Department photo by 1Lt. Zachary West, 100th MPAD) Texas National Guard soldiers conduct rescue operations in flooded areas around Houston, Texas Aug. 27, 2017. (U.S. Texas Military Department photo by 1Lt. Zachary West, 100th MPAD) Photo: Texas Military Department

Vi Tran greets her husband Joseph and their dogs after being briefly separated when rescue boats evacuated them and their two young daughters from Houston's Meyerland area, Aug. 27, 2017. On Sunday, Harvey, now a tropical storm, pounded the region with torrential rains, and the National Weather Service forecasts rainfall of 15 to 25 inches through Friday, with as much as 50 inches in a few areas. (Alyssa Schukar/The New York Times) less Vi Tran greets her husband Joseph and their dogs after being briefly separated when rescue boats evacuated them and their two young daughters from Houston's Meyerland area, Aug. 27, 2017. On Sunday, Harvey, now ... more Photo: ALYSSA SCHUKAR, NYT

Flooded scenes of Grand Mission Estates, Richmond, Texas. Flooded scenes of Grand Mission Estates, Richmond, Texas. Photo: Shannon O'Hara

To add to reader photos. Houston native Austin Leighton, 28, rides in a kayak with his sons Eli, 6, and Samuel, 3, in Mont Belvieu, Texas on Monday, August 28, 2017. To add to reader photos. Houston native Austin Leighton, 28, rides in a kayak with his sons Eli, 6, and Samuel, 3, in Mont Belvieu, Texas on Monday, August 28, 2017. Photo: Austin Leighton

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-55', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 55', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

A reader sent these photos Sunday, Aug. 27, 2017. A reader sent these photos Sunday, Aug. 27, 2017. Photo: Casey Keller

Readers share photos of how Hurricane Harvey is affecting them in East Texas on Aug. 27, 2017. Readers share photos of how Hurricane Harvey is affecting them in East Texas on Aug. 27, 2017. Photo: Kasey Keeller

A garage sale sign is humorously posted outside a home as debris from Hurricane Harvey fills the front yard, Thursday, Sept. 21, 2017, in Woodloch. A garage sale sign is humorously posted outside a home as debris from Hurricane Harvey fills the front yard, Thursday, Sept. 21, 2017, in Woodloch. Photo: Jason Fochtman, Houston Chronicle

A man tosses debris from Hurricane Harvey out of the back of his truck at the Montgomery County Precinct 4 dumpsite at FM 1314 and Texas 242, Thursday, Sept. 21, 2017, in Conroe. A man tosses debris from Hurricane Harvey out of the back of his truck at the Montgomery County Precinct 4 dumpsite at FM 1314 and Texas 242, Thursday, Sept. 21, 2017, in Conroe. Photo: Jason Fochtman, Houston Chronicle

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-60', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 60', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Contractor Ricky Green of Alabama finishes a day of picking up large debris in a Memorial-area neighborhood. A red X signifying that someone died inside still marks Robert Arthur Haines' house on Langwood. Contractor Ricky Green of Alabama finishes a day of picking up large debris in a Memorial-area neighborhood. A red X signifying that someone died inside still marks Robert Arthur Haines' house on Langwood. Photo: Yi-Chin Lee, Staff

window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-62', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 62', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});































































































Image 1 of / 62 Caption Close Congress passes special tax breaks for hurricane victims 1 / 62 Back to Gallery

WASHINGTON – The U.S. House and Senate cleared legislation Thursday providing special tax benefits for residents affected by the hurricanes that recently hit Texas, Florida, the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.

The final version of the hurricane aid came after the Senate reworked unrelated flood insurance provisions as part of a legislative package that also includes major aviation policy.

Controversy surrounding the flood insurance measures tripped up the same bill on Monday, when the House could not muster the two-thirds majority needed to pass it under expedited rules.

READ ALSO: Weather service confirms a new record of rainfall during Harvey

After the House passed its version Thursday morning, the Senate stripped out controversial flood insurance reforms encouraging the creation of new private flood insurance markets. Those changes were adopted by the House later in the day.

"Hundreds of thousands of families have lost everything – even loved ones," said Texas Republican Kevin Brady, chairman of the tax-writing House Ways and Means Committee. "This legislation will help them begin to recover through meaningful, targeted tax relief they need now."

Now Playing:

The special tax provisions received bipartisan support, particularly among members of the Texas delegation.

The original House bill passed 264-155, with all but seven of the no votes coming from Democrats who opposed the flood insurance provisions. Among those voting against the Disaster Tax Relief and Airport and Airway Extension Act were Texas Democrats Joaquin Castro, Marc Veasey, Lloyd Doggett and Beto O'Rourke, who is running for Senate against Republican Ted Cruz.

Not voting were Texas Republicans Sam Johnson and Kay Granger, along with Democrat Eddie Bernice Johnson.

The Senate-amended House bill -- without the insurance flood provisions --passed by unanimous consent.

"What's no longer up in the air is this: for many Texans, Floridians, and Puerto Ricans, targeted tax relief will serve to make a difficult year just a little easier," said Texas U.S. Sen. John Cornyn "I salute the House for getting the job done, and I'm glad that we in this chamber have quickly followed suit.'

Among those leading the effort was Texas U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz. "By providing significant tax relief for those with extensive property damage, storm survivors will be able to keep more of their hard earned money as they rebuild," he said.

READ ALSO: Tattoo enthusiasts get inked to remember Hurricane Harvey

Lawmakers from Houston and along the Gulf Coast rallied around the bill.

"Our communities in Houston and Harris County are hurting and need immediate relief to rebuild and fully recover," said Houston Democrat Gene Green, who appeared outside the Capitol with other Texas lawmakers of both parties in a show of regional solidarity.

The bill would permit Harvey victims to access their retirement funds penalty-free, allow victims to easily write off hurricane losses, and provide a tax credit of up to $6,000 for employers who hire in a declared disaster area like Harris County. It is also intended to spur charitable giving by waiving deduction limits, and would allow taxpayers to use income from the past year to determine the Earned Income Tax Credit or Child Tax Credit.

The bill comes two weeks after Congress approved more than $15 billion in disaster relief for the victims of Hurricane Harvey, which flooded Houston and much of the Gulf Coast. More federal help is expected in the coming months.