Photos show logjam of immigrants detained at government facility

These photos were provided to the Houston Chronicle by U.S. Rep Henry Cuellar, D-Laredo. The images were taken recently at a Customs and Border Protection facility in South Texas. They show unidentified immigrants who have been detained after crossing the U.S.-Mexico border illegally less These photos were provided to the Houston Chronicle by U.S. Rep Henry Cuellar, D-Laredo. The images were taken recently at a Customs and Border Protection facility in South Texas. They show unidentified ... more Photo: Provided By U.S. Rep. Henry Cuellar Photo: Provided By U.S. Rep. Henry Cuellar Image 1 of / 13 Caption Close Photos show logjam of immigrants detained at government facility 1 / 13 Back to Gallery

The Houston Chronicle has obtained photos showing unidentified immigrants crammed into federal government facilities after being detained as part of an ongoing surge of people crossing the border into Texas.

U.S. Rep Henry Cuellar, D-Laredo, provided the Chronicle images taken recently at a Customs and Border Protection facility in South Texas.

More than 160,000 immigrants have been apprehended in Texas' Valley sector in the first eight months of this fiscal year, eclipsing the total for all of last year. Those apprehensions included more than 33,000 unaccompanied children.

The surge in Central and South Americans caught in the Valley has created a processing backlog that has left federal officials scrambling to reduce overcrowding in Border Patrol processing stations, which are not designed for long-term detention.

The logjam has prompted complaints by advocates that immigrants - including unaccompanied children - are forced to sleep on concrete floors and benches in holding cells without private restrooms or showers.

Several advocacy organizations today lodged complaints with Department of Homeland Security officials on behalf of more than 100 unaccompanied youths alleging mistreatment by Customs and Border Patrol agents within the past year.

Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson testified today before a Congressional committee that the Federal Emergency Management Agency has 70 personnel dedicated full time to coordinating humanitarian relief efforts for the surge of unaccompanied children caught at the border. The government has resorted to using three military installations to house an overflow of unaccompanied children, including an Air Force base in San Antonio.

The Obama administration is attributing the steep influx to violence in poverty in Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador. Some Republicans are calling the influx an "administration-made disaster" because of policies that typically quickly reunite children caught at the border with family members and other sponsors in the U.S.