Democrat Dennis Kucinich returns $20K he received to speak in 2017 to pro-Syrian group
Buy Photo Democratic gubernatorial candidate Dennis Kucinich, right, appears with Hamilton County Commissioner Todd Portune at a press conference in Cincinnati on March 26, 2018. (Photo: The Enquirer/Jason Williams)Buy Photo

COLUMBUS - Democratic gubernatorial candidate Dennis Kucinich said he would return $20,000 he was given for a speech from a group sympathetic to Syrian President Bashar Assad.

Kucinich's London speech was disclosed in an updated financial disclosure statement filed last week. The speech initially was not listed on Kucinich's form, which a campaign spokesman called an oversight.

Kucinich's speech was given in London and paid for by the Association for Investment in Popular Action Committees in Cerrito, California. That group is an umbrella organization for the Syrian Solidarity Movement, which opposes "military conflict and imperialist interests" in the country.

"Having only recently learned of their advocacy, I am returning their fee," Kucinich told the Cleveland.com editorial board in a letter. "I am not nor have I ever been an apologist for anyone."

Paul Larudee, treasurer of the group, told The Enquirer that the speech focused on "U.S. foreign policy with an emphasis on the situation in Syria."

"He’s not a warmonger and that’s exactly the type of person we want to sponsor," Larudee said. The speech was part of "Syria - Six Years On: From Destruction to Reconstruction" hosted by the European Centre for the Study of Extremism in April 2017.

Kucinich spokesman Andy Juniewicz said the former U.S. representative was paid to attend a peace conference. The campaign sent a copy of Kucinich's speech, which included neither praise nor condemnation of Assad.

"The Syrian people, who are not unanimous on the question of President Assad, are resolute in protecting their way of life, which includes free education and free healthcare, while supporting the Assad government from a military overthrow which would destroy Syria," Kucinich said in remarks shared by his campaign.

The conference was criticized for happening the day after a chemical attack in Syria and for including members of the Syrian regime.

The purpose of the speech was not to promote Assad, Laurdee said. "I have never heard him say anything about support for the Assad government in Syria."

But Kucinich met with Assad in Syria in January 2017 with U.S. Rep. Tulsi Gabbard, a Hawaii Democrat. The trip was condemned by those who oppose the regime and its brutal practices.

Earlier this month, President Donald Trump ordered a U.S.-led airstrike in Syria after reports that a chemical weapon attack had killed dozens near the capital of Damascus. Trump also lashed out at Russia and Iran for "backing Animal Assad."

Kucinich said on Twitter that Trump's recent action was a clear violation of the U.S. Constitution.

"It is noteworthy that those responsible for the gas attack have yet to be identified. We are not free to bomb in retaliation based on suspicion," Kucinich wrote.

The London speech was one of three Kucinich disclosed in the updated financial disclosure statement. He also received $3,000 from author Marianne D. Williamson and $10,000 from Nexus Earth.

Kucinich, a former Cleveland mayor, is running for governor as a Democrat against former Ohio attorney general Rich Cordray, state Sen. Joe Schiavoni and former Ohio Supreme Court Justice Bill O'Neill. The primary is May 8.

Read or Share this story: https://cin.ci/2H7BSK7