The NRA has a love-hate relationship with these Ohio Republicans – and Democrats.
CLOSE Things got pretty heated between NRA spokeswoman, Dana Loesch, and Broward County Sheriff, Scott Israel, during a CNN Town Hall meeting on gun control. USA TODAY

John Kasich's NRA rating has gone from "F" to "A." Is it on its way back down? (Photo11: Evan Vucci, AP)

COLUMBUS - The National Rifle Association has long supported Republicans around the country, and vice versa.

In Ohio, sometimes it's complicated.

While many of the state's Republican politicians are aligned with the NRA, a few, such as Gov. John Kasich, have had on-again, off-again relationships with the gun rights group.

Kasich is charting a publicized course toward "off-again," after spending his first seven years as governor signing every gun rights bill that arrived on his desk.

Other politicians are quieter about their history with the NRA. For instance, both Republicans and Democrats running for Ohio governor this year have nontraditional histories with gun issues.

John Kasich, R, Ohio governor

It's complicated: As a congressman, Kasich earned an "F" rating from the NRA by voting for a 1994 ban on assault rifles. The group endorsed Democrat Ted Strickland over Kasich in his 2010 bid for governor. Kasich signed on to several gun bills in his first gubernatorial term, earning him an "A."

This week, Kasich changed his mind on gun rights, saying he supported "commonsense gun laws" such as restrictions on assault rifles.

The NRA didn't respond to requests for comment, but gun rights groups in Ohio slammed Kasich.

NEWSLETTERS Get the News Alerts newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Be the first to be informed of important news as it happens in Greater Cincinnati. Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-876-4500. Delivery: Varies Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for News Alerts Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Will voters care? Kasich may launch a 2020 presidential bid, positioning himself as an option for people who don't like President Donald Trump.

The president has floated ideas such as arming teachers. He also wants to increase the minimum age to buy an assault rifle, an idea the NRA has opposed, but has stopped short of calling for a ban on the weapons.

More: Will John Kasich support Dems on AR-15 ban in Ohio?

More: Which guns are legal in Ohio, Kentucky?

Mike DeWine, R, 2018 candidate for governor

Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine, right (AP Photo/John Minchillo) (Photo11: John Minchillo, AP)

It's complicated: In Congress, DeWine's support of gun control, such as background checks at gun shows, earned him an "F" rating from the NRA. He improved to a "C" in 2014, after his first term as attorney general. Recent overtures to gun rights advocates include obtaining an exception that allows Ohioans with concealed-carry permits to forgo background checks when buying a new gun.

After last week's Florida school shooting, DeWine called for improving the state's existing background check database but didn't advocate for any new gun control laws.

Will voters care? DeWine is running in the GOP primary against Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor, who has long carried an "A" rating from the NRA. Taylor responded to last week's Florida school shooting by criticizing Kasich's change of heart on guns and calling for "law-abiding citizens" to be allowed to carry guns on school campuses.

Rich Cordray, D, 2018 candidate for governor

Rich Cordray in 2015 (Photo11: Associated Press file)

It's complicated: The last time Cordray ran for statewide office, his failed re-election bid for attorney general in 2010, Cordray joined the slim ranks of Democrats with "A" ratings from the NRA. Cordray's attorney general office had fought in court for Ohio's right to prevent cities from enacting their own gun bans.

This week, Cordray said he still believes in the Second Amendment, and he didn't call for any new gun bans. But he did advocate for expanding background checks before gun purchases and said Americans need to "rethink our approach to military-style weapons used to perpetrate mass shootings." He stopped short of calling for a ban on the weapons. Still, his ideas are dangerous territory for those who want full NRA support.

Will voters care? Cordray's top opponent in the Democratic primary is former Cleveland mayor and congressman Dennis Kucinich. He called this week for a complete ban on assault-style rifles such as the AR-15.

Joe Schiavoni, D, 2018 candidate for governor

Sen. Joe Schiavoni, D-Boardman (Photo11: Provided file photo)

It's complicated: Schiavoni, a state senator, represents the Youngstown area, traditionally full of blue-collar Democratic voters. These aren't the socially liberal Democrats found in the state's major cities, said Kyle Kondik, author of "The Bellwether: Why Ohio Picks the President." In fact, thousands of Schiavoni's constituents helped Trump win Ohio.

That helps to explain Schiavoni's more moderate stance on guns. He had a "C" rating from the NRA in 2010 and a "B+" in 2014.

After the Florida shooting, Schiavoni emphasized his opposition to banning assault rifles.

Studies from #GunReform groups like @Everytown tell us bans aren't very effective.



Sellers tell us bans would greatly increase demand & illegal sales.



So I'm working to close loopholes, increase regulations, & keep guns out of dangerous hands.



Our Plan:https://t.co/XDgCoCSOKPpic.twitter.com/lTjD57UKiS — Sen Joe Schiavoni (@JoeSchiavoni) February 19, 2018

Instead, Schiavoni called for requiring people who own an AR-15-style assault rifle to complete regular training and pay an additional fee. He also wants to close loopholes in background check laws, and he introduced for the third time a bill that would provide grants to school districts to improve safety.

Will voters care? Schiavoni isn't viewed as one of the top Democrats in the race for governor, but he offers a middle ground to Cordray's support for gun rights and Kucinich's outspoken stance on gun control.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Editor's note: This story has been updated to include Joe Schiavoni's 2014 NRA grade.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/2osAoii