Trump in Ohio: Fact-checking claims on coal jobs, the wall and the president's Cincy job
CLOSE President Trump's full speech from his MAGA rally in Lebanon, Ohio Fox19

Buy Photo President Donald J. Trump speaks during President Donald J. Trump’s Make America Great Again Rally in Lebanon, Ohio, on Friday, Oct. 12, 2018. (Photo: Albert Cesare / The Enquirer)Buy Photo

President Donald Trump made several boasts and claims at a Warren County rally while encouraging voters to pick Republicans this fall.

The Enquirer looked into some of those statements, focusing on the ones that affected Ohio.

Unemployment

Trump: “The unemployment rate has just fallen to the lowest level in more than 50 years.”

“Manufacturing confidence just announced has just reached an all-time high.”

The facts: National unemployment dropped to 3.7 percent in September – the lowest rate since 1969. That’s nearly 50 years.

The U.S. unemployment rate had been declining even before President Trump took office, according to U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

The National Association of Manufacturers polls its members each quarter on their confidence in the industry. The most recent report showed 92.5 percent were either somewhat or very positive about their own company’s outlook. That was slightly lower than June but still among the highest rates since the survey started in 1997.

Ohio steel

Trump: “All across Ohio, steel mills are reopening.”

The facts: In June 2018, JSW Steel of India proposed a $500 million investment in a steel plant in eastern Ohio’s Mingo Junction. JSW wants to purchase and revamp the plant.

JSW Steel USA president John Hritz credited Trump with the expansion. “we are completely in lockstep with the president,” he said on CNBC.

In April 2017, Nucor Steel announced it would invest $85 million in an upgrade to its Marion plant.

In January 2017, Charter Steel of Wisconsin announced a $150 million new steel mill in the Cleveland area. That company had been expanding in the area before Trump took office.

About 696,000 Ohioans work in manufacturing – a number that has increased since a low of 611,900 in June 2009. The number of people working in manufacturing has increased by about 10,000 jobs since Trump took office, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-876-4500. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Ohio coal

Trump: “We’re putting our coal workers back to work.”

The facts: Ohio mining and logging employment hit a peak of 15,700 workers in December 2014. Since Trump took office, that number has increased from 10,900 to 12,800, according to the most recent Bureau of Labor Statistics figures.

Coal production was slightly lower this week than the same time last year.

Still, the National Mining Association sees fewer regulations as a good sign for the industry.

Trump's Cincinnati job

Trump: “I spent a lot of time in the Queen City. I love the Queen City. We had a job, Swifton Village. Swifton Village. Has anyone ever heard of Swifton? It was a great experience. It was a successful experience. I did it with my father – one of my earliest things that I’ve done.”

The facts: Trump helped his father manage Bond Hill’s Swifton Village, a location now called the Villages of Daybreak, after Fred Trump bought it in 1962. Fred Trump bought the vacancy-riddled property for $5.7 million, turned it around and filled it with renters, then sold it in 1972 for a profit, according to reports in The Enquirer archives.

In 1970, a lawsuit accused Fred Trump’s company of racial discrimination because it decided who could rent the apartments.

In 1969, an African-American stock clerk at General Electric Aircraft Engines applied for an apartment and was told there were no vacancies.

The Trumps’ company never admitted discrimination and settled the suit by giving the stock clerk an apartment, according to a Los Angeles Times review of Trump-related housing discrimination suits.

Renovating Cordray's office building

Trump: “(Rich) Cordray spent $250 million federal dollars trying to renovate a headquarters, his agency, that they didn’t even own – more than twice what the entire building was worth. They didn’t own it.”

“Then, after spending like $50 million on some elevators, it turned out that they didn’t work.”

The facts: Cordray’s U.S. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau spent $145 million on the renovation of a building near the White House, which had been previously abandoned. A CFPB spokesperson said at the time that renovations were needed to ensure the health and safety of workers.

Republicans railed about the cost, saying the bureau could have saved money by working in Virginia. But the Office of Inspector General said the construction costs “appeared reasonable.”

There was no evidence that any elevators cost $50 million.

Abolish ICE?

Trump: “The new platform of the Democratic party is to abolish ICE.”

The facts:While some – largely progressive – Democratic lawmakers in Washington D.C. want to eliminate U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, many planned to vote against the proposal.

Republicans didn’t actually call a vote on the bill, so it’s impossible to say what the vote breakdown would have been.

Still, it’s not a part of the Democratic Party’s platform.

Sherrod Brown and Trump's wall

Trump: “We started building the wall and we’re making progress, but (Sen. Sherrod Brown) voted against it.”

The facts: Construction started on a four-mile section of a wall in El Paso, Texas, according to a September Newsweek report. It will cost about $22 million.

U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown, a Democrat, has called the wall “ludicrous.”

But Congress hasn’t voted on fully funding the wall, despite Trump’s repeated promises to force a government shutdown over it. On Friday, House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy introduced a bill to fully pay for the wall. The cost: $23.4 billion.

Read or Share this story: https://www.cincinnati.com/story/news/politics/elections/2018/10/12/fact-checking-trump-ohio-coal-jobs-wall-swifton-village/1621582002/