CREW Releases Third Annual Most Corrupt Members of Congress Report
Washington, D.C. – Today, Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (CREW) released its third annual report on the most corrupt members of Congress entitled Beyond DeLay: The 22 Most Corrupt Members of Congress (and two to watch). This encyclopedic report on corruption in the 110th Congress documents the egregious, unethical and possibly illegal activities of the most tainted members of Congress. CREW has compiled the members’ transgressions and analyzed them in light of federal laws and congressional rules.

Sixteen members have been replaced from last year’s list of 25.

Members of the Senate:

Sen. Pete V. Domenici (R-NM)

Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-KY)

Sen. Lisa Murkowski (R-AK)

Sen. Ted Stevens (R-AK)

Members of House:

Rep. Ken Calvert (R-CA)

Rep. John T. Doolittle (R-CA)

Rep. Tom Feeney (R-FL)

Rep. Doc Hastings (R-WA)

Rep. Duncan Hunter (R-CA)

Rep. William J. Jefferson (D-LA)

Rep. Jerry Lewis (R-CA)

Rep. Gary G. Miller (R-CA)

Rep. Alan B. Mollohan (D-WV)

Rep. Timothy F. Murphy (R-PA)

Rep. John P. Murtha (D-PA)

Rep. Steve Pearce (R-NM)

Rep. Rick Renzi (R-AZ)

Rep. Harold Rogers (R-KY)

Rep. David Scott (D-GA)

Rep. Don Young (R-AK)

Rep. Jerry Weller (R-IL)

Rep. Heather A. Wilson (R-NM)

Dishonorable Mention:

Sen. Larry Craig (R-ID)

Sen. David Vitter (R-LA)

“Every year CREW creates this compendium of corruption to expose and hold accountable those members of Congress who believe they are above the law,” Melanie Sloan, executive director of CREW said today. “With the third edition of Beyond DeLay it has become abundantly clear that many public officials believe that the rules don’t apply to them.”

Sloan continued, “Nevertheless, Congress persists in abdicating its constitutional responsibility to police itself, opting to ignore the ethical and legal transgressions of its members. Luckily for the public, at least the Department of Justice still believes that political corruption is worth pursuing.”

Several members in the study are already under federal investigation including: Reps. Calvert, Doolittle, Feeney, Jefferson, Lewis, Miller, Mollohan, Murphy, Renzi and Young, as well as Senator Stevens.

Click Here to read Beyond Delay 2007 (Full Report)