ATM maker Diebold Inc. exits the voting business
Diebold's voting record

January 2002:

Diebold buys Global Election Systems Inc. of McKinney, Texas, a maker of electronic voting machines, for $23.5 million.

May 2002:

Diebold wins a $54 million contract to build more than 19,000 voting machines for Georgia.

July 2003:

Independent review of voting software finds "significant security flaws" in Diebold's touch-screen machines.

August 2003:

Then-Chief Executive Walden O'Dell comes under fire for saying in a Republican fund-raising letter that he is "committed to helping Ohio deliver its electoral votes to the president next year."

February 2004:

Ohio signs contract to buy voting machines from Diebold and two other vendors. Diebold wins $18 million contract in Cuyahoga County.

May 2004:

California's secretary of state bans Diebold touch-screen machines, citing concerns about reliability and security. The decision is later reversed.

November 2004:

Diebold settles, for $2.6 million, a civil action California filed accusing the company of making false claims about the security of its voting machines.

December 2005:

O'Dell resigns, and is later replaced by Chief Executive Thomas Swidarski.

May 2006:

Cuyahoga County installs Diebold voting machines - 6,300 touch-screens and 20 optical scanners.

August 2007:

Diebold slashes its revenue expectations by $120 million after reports from California and Florida question the reliability and security of electronic voting systems. It also renames the division Premier Election Solutions.

2007:

Ohio Secretary of State Jennifer Brunner tells Cuyahoga County to scrap its $21 million touch-screen Diebold voting system after it crashes twice on election night.

November 2008:

Diebold's electronic voting machine is featured on the cover of TIME magazine, next to the headline "7 Things that could go wrong on election day."

Sept. 2, 2009:

Diebold sells Premier Election Solutions for $5 million.

(Sources: Diebold Inc., Hoovers Inc.)

Updated at 7 p.m.

GREEN, Ohio -- Diebold Inc., the Green-based maker of automatic teller machines and bank security systems, has sold off its controversial electronic voting subsidiaries to Elections Systems & Software Inc. for $5 million and exited the voting business.

Election Systems & Software, a competitor in the elections business and the nation's largest voting system vendor, bought Diebold's Premier Election Solutions Inc. of Allen, Texas. ES&S;, based in Omaha, Neb., provides software, systems and services to manage everything from voter registration to vote tabulation.

The deal, announced before the markets opened on Thursday, effectively closes the chapter on a sore spot in Diebold's storied 150-year history.

"The elections business has been a PR nightmare and a huge distraction for management," said analyst Gil Luria, vice president of research for Wedbush Morgan Securities Inc. in Los AnGeles.

California, Florida and Ohio have all at one point questioned the reliability and security of electronic voting machines and software. And while Diebold isn't the largest maker of voting machines, it has received the lion's share of publicity for voting irregularities.

Diebold, which got into the election business in 2002, has been trying to sell off the operations since early 2006 because it wasn't central to its banking and security businesses, said spokesman Mike Jacobsen.

"Since becoming CEO, one of my top priorities has been to focus our company's resources on those markets in which we can most effectively apply our talents and skills," said Thomas W. Swidarski, president and chief executive officer.

Luria, the analyst, wrote a report entitled "Good Riddance: Long overdue sale of election business . . . a huge relief," and praised Chief Executive Thomas Swidarski for "exorcising" the final ghost he inherited from previous executives.

"This has been a black eye for them for as long as they've owned it," he said.

In 2008, Premier earned $88.2 million in revenue in 2008, only 2.8 percent of Diebold's total revenues.

Aldo Tesi, ES&S;'s president and chief executive, said in a written statement that "Premier has a proud heritage of providing voting solutions.

"This acquisition is an opportunity to continue fulfilling our company's core mission of maintaining voter confidence, and enhancing the voting experience," he said.

But the deal also raises serious antitrust questions about how much power it gives ES&S;, said Candice Hoke, founding director of the Center for Election Integrity at Cleveland State University's Cleveland-Marshall College of Law.

When the nation's largest vendor of voting systems buys the nation's second-largest, "you've got extraordinary concentration of power over a central function of the preservation of our democracy," she said.

It raises "all sorts of possibilities for the sort of mischief-making that could produce skewed or intentionally fraudulent election results," and gives ES&S; control of elections in 86 of Ohio's 88 counties, she said. She thinks the U.S. Justice Department should definitely review the transaction.

Under the terms of the transaction which closed Wednesday, Diebold gets $5 million in cash, plus 70 percent of any cash payments collected from any accounts receivable over the next five years. This is a far cry from the $23.5 million the company paid for what was then a much-smaller voting manufacturing business.

Diebold retains certain existing liabilities, including the ongoing lawsuit with the Cuyahoga County Board of Elections, and shares with ES&S; other liabilities of the elections systems business.

The lawsuit involving Cuyahoga County argues that Premier should pay for voting machine problems in Cuyahoga and 10 other counties. Cuyahoga dropped Premier for ES&S; in 2007 after Premier's vote-counting software crashed on election night.

Ohio Secretary of Staff Jennifer Brunner's legal staff is reviewing the impact of the deal with regard to the ongoing litigation with Cuyahoga County and other entities, said spokesman Jeff Ortega.

Diebold said it expects to take an estimated pre-tax loss of $45 million to $55 million in the third quarter of 2009. But it did not change its full-year earnings-per-share forecast.

Diebold also signed a non-compete agreement that does not impact its Brazilian subsidiary, Tribunal Superior Eleitoral, which makes voting terminals for Brazil's national elections board.

Shares of Diebold rose 66 cents, or 2.2 percent, to close at $30.69 in Thursday's trading.