Charter Steel to build new $150 million mill in Cuyahoga Heights
CUYAHOGA HEIGHTS, Ohio - Charter Steel, of Wisconsin, today announced plans to build a new $150 million steel mill adjacent to its coil mill and steelmaking operations in Cuyahoga Heights.

The new rolling mill will utilize precision sizing to produce carbon and alloy steel bars for a variety of industries. Construction of the new mill is expected to begin this spring. Operations at the existing plant, 4300 E. 49th St. in Cuyahoga Heights, will continue uninterrupted during construction.

The new mill is expected to be online in the second half of 2018, said John W. Mellowes, CEO of parent company Charter Manufacturing Co. The project will create about 25 jobs and represents the largest investment in the family-owned company's 81-year history.

"Growth and continuous improvement are in Charter's DNA," Mellowes said. "Over the past 10 years, we have invested more than $250 million in our existing Cuyahoga Heights facilities. Those improvements - coupled with a strong workforce and Ohio's positive business climate - have set the stage for this expansion. With this new investment we see an opportunity to grow by leveraging a very successful high-service model, coupled with advanced steelmaking, to serve both existing and prospective new customers with an engineered, cut-length steel bar."

Cuyahoga Heights Mayor Jack Bacci said he was glad to see a strong company like Charter Steel, which began its local operations in 2002, grow in the community.

"This is simply incredible news for our region and a great example of how a collaborative effort from local, county and state governments is getting things done for the sustainability of our workforces," he said. "The climate for Ohio's businesses is right, from the smallest villages to our biggest cities. To that, I would like to say congratulations to the men and women of Charter Steel and their vendors."

Charter Steel, a division of Charter Manufacturing, is a leading American supplier of carbon and alloy steel bar, rod and wire products with distribution and manufacturing facilities in Wisconsin and Ohio. Built in 1996 and purchased by Charter Steel in 2002, the Cleveland Rolling Mill was designed to roll and process high-quality rod and bar from a full range of billets, including those produced from semi-finished blooms and basic oxygen furnaces. In October of 2012, Charter Steel announced plans to expand it's electric art furnace in the Cuyahoga Heights steel mill. The plant employs about 330 workers.

Kristi Tanner, senior managing director of JobsOhio said, "Charter Steel is a North American leader in the advanced manufacturing of steel, and its expansion here in Northeast Ohio will help it further innovate and grow here. This significant investment demonstrates Charter Steel's confidence in the Cuyahoga Heights community as well as its workforce at the facility, which will soon increase by 25 new jobs."

Additionally, Walt Good, senior director at Team NEO said, "We are thrilled that Charter Steel has decided to make this major investment at its Cuyahoga Heights complex. Their commitment to Northeast Ohio further strengthens our diverse and innovative supply chain."