Cleveland sex crimes unit faces scrutiny as questions about priorities and staffing resurface
CLEVELAND, Ohio - In 2002, Cleveland officials announced a plan to turn around the police department's troubled sex crimes unit.

The promises came weeks after The Plain Dealer reported on an internal investigation that showed years of mounting problems in the unit: uninvestigated cases, staggering workloads and supervisory lapses.

Department and city leaders pledged to staff the unit with more detectives, to provide them with needed training and to increase supervision over investigations.

It was one of many times in the three decades since the unit was created that such promises were made.

Yet problems, some of the very same ones, persist.

"It's incredibly frustrating," Sondra Miller, president & CEO of the Cleveland Rape Crisis Center (CRCC) said. "This unit has not been made a priority... [the unit] has no more resources to do this work than it did 10 years ago," she said. "Until that changes, I fear it is going to be Groundhog Day."

The unit now has 14 detectives, 13 of whom investigate sex crimes and child abuse cases. The department has repeatedly promised to bolster that staffing to at least 17 or 18 detectives.

The department is currently investigating one sex crimes detective for failing to submit rape evidence.

A second detective, who has since been promoted, faces administrative discipline after an internal investigation found 60 sex crimes case assigned to him went uninvestigated. Two of the detective's supervisors also face discipline.

The unit is not seeking indictments in cases where lab tests of rape kits is unknown or "John Doe" DNA , which would preserve the right to prosecute offenders once identified.

which would preserve the right to prosecute offenders once identified. Some recommendations made by experts and paid consultants in the wake of the Anthony Sowell serial killing case have fallen by the wayside, including twice-a-year case audits by an external organization, and a plan for the Cuyahoga County prosecutor's office to review all felony sex crimes cases.

Current issues include:

Kits not tested, cases not investigated

Last month, The Plain Dealer reported that Cleveland police failed to follow state law that requires rape kits collected from victims to be sent to a crime lab for testing within 30 days.

The department first learned in late 2016 that a detective had delayed in sending kits from 2014, 2015 and 2016, Sgt. Jennifer Ciaccia said in an email. The Plain Dealer reported the number of kits in that backlog could be as high as 220. The department determined this week the exact number was 187, according to Ciaccia.

All of those rape kits have since been tested at state and county forensic labs, she said.

The department's internal affairs unit is investigating why the evidence was not submitted, a job that was assigned to sex crimes Det. Keith Hunter.

Hunter is still assigned to the unit but is not investigating sex crimes cases or submitting evidence while the probe is ongoing, Ciaccia said.

Cleveland Police Patrolmen's Association President Jeff Follmer said Hunter, who has been an officer since 1998, is a dedicated detective who was given an impossible task that involved logging and transporting thousands of pieces of forensic evidence each year to and from the department's property room to the county and state crime labs for testing. Correctly tagging and logging the evidence is essential to investigations and proving a proper "chain of custody" for court proceedings.

Follmer said there was so much evidence that Hunter ran out of space to store it and sometimes worked 12-hour days to try and keep up.

Hunter should not shoulder the blame for becoming overwhelmed, Follmer said.

"It's easy to blame the police officers but this goes up the chain," he said. "When do we hold City Hall and upper management responsible for the staffing levels and for where we are today?" he asked.

At this point, the internal investigation involves only Hunter, Ciaccia said.

Three Cleveland police supervisors face discipline after a separate internal investigation found that 60 sex crimes cases were not fully investigated by a different detective. The cases, which date back to 2014, were assigned to Tom Ross when he was a detective in the unit. He is now a sergeant in the city's Third District Downtown Service Unit.

When promoted in June 2015, Ross took the cases with him but did not complete the investigations. Fraternal Order of Police President Brian Betley said Ross wanted to finish the cases but was in a tough spot and became overwhelmed while also trying to learn and handle his new supervisory duties.

Ross was a dedicated detective and has already become a respected supervisor who took responsibility during his disciplinary hearing and refused to make excuses, Betley said.

Also facing discipline are Commander James McPike and Sgt. Anthony McMahan. An internal investigation found that McPike allowed Ross to take the cases and then didn't take the proper steps to make sure they were completed or returned to the unit. McMahan also didn't act swiftly enough to get the cases returned, Internal Affairs found.

Betley said both had good intentions to get the work completed. The officers are awaiting decisions on discipline.

In early 2016, McPike alerted CRCC about the incomplete investigations, Miller said. Center advocates reached out to some of those victims about the delays and also started to ask for more regular updates on cases if they didn't see "forward momentum," Miller said.

CRCC's main mission, she said, is to serve the needs of individual survivors of sexual assault but the organization also works to improve how systems respond to sexual violence. That has included ongoing training of hundreds of Cleveland officers to help them understand how victims' brains and bodies are affected by traumatic events, she said. The center has a victim advocate embedded in the unit.

In the past decade, Miller said, a lot has been learned about how inadequate approaches to sexual violence cases by criminal justice agencies across the nation have been harmful to victims and threaten public safety when offenders aren't held accountable.

Some cities, Miller said, have embraced the opportunity to learn from past mistakes and committed to cultural change with the understanding that aggressively pursuing sex offenders will also help reduce other connected crimes, like domestic violence.

But it requires leadership willing to make it a priority, she said.

"In Cleveland, we've made attempts at cultural change, but the resources needed to make the fundamental change have not yet been committed," Miller said.

Current and former sex crimes unit detectives and supervisors said they feared repercussions for speaking publicly but shared with a reporter that the heavy caseloads involving children and traumatized rape victims contribute to high stress levels for detectives in the unit. For some, that has led to marital problems, divorce and excessive drinking. That's compounded by supervisors who also struggle to keep tabs on caseloads or to support officers who fall behind with interviews or paperwork. Supervisors have, for years, requested more resources to deal with the time-consuming and sensitive cases, those who have worked in the unit say.

"This unit is like the Titanic and detectives are like the people on board, like the passengers who aren't getting off the ship," one described.



"It's like a cycle," another said. "When there's a problem the people at the top put it all on us, even though they let it get this way."

Cleveland police did not respond to a request for an interview about the ongoing troubles.

The department is already under pressure to make changes required under an agreement with the U.S. Department of Justice, after an investigation that found officers violated the rights of citizens by using excessive force, among other issues. It is also understaffed in other areas, and it has struggled to recruit enough officers to replace the ones who retire each year.

Hard work, support lacking



The sex crimes and child abuse unit, which handles sensitive and complicated cases involving vulnerable adult and child victims, has lacked proper staffing and support dating back 30 years, according to news reports and unit reviews by community and professional police organizations.

The unit's history is dotted with leaps forward, such as creating best practices for interviewing young victims.

But also with revelations of neglected cases, sloppy record-keeping and a lack of supervision that often has come in the wake of tragedy.

After a 2002 internal investigation, one sex crimes detective accused of shirking his duties was forced to resign from the department and pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges. One of the allegations was that he hid 50 uninvestigated cases in his desk drawer.

At the time, the detective said the high volume of cases made it impossible for him, or any other detective in the unit, to keep up.

Promises prompted by tragedy

In 2010, Mayor Frank Jackson created a Special Commission on Missing Persons and Sex Crimes Investigations after it was discovered that Anthony Sowell killed 11 women and buried them in and around his Imperial Avenue home. Sowell also raped or attacked several others. The community raised serious questions about the response, or lack of response, to those reports.

After months of work, the commission found that the sex crimes unit lacked basic resources, like computers and cell phones, and that its offices were a dingy, unwelcoming place for victims.

The commission made a total of 26 recommendations to improve the department's response to both sex crimes cases and missing persons reports, and the city vowed to adopt many of those changes.

The sex crimes unit has managed to bolster the number of reported sexual assault cases that get referred to the county for felony prosecution, a Plain Dealer analysis two years ago found. Whether that's because of increased testing of sexual assault evidence, which is now mandatory under state law, or because of better training and advocacy or a combination of those things isn't clear.

But the larger staffing and support issues have lingered, exacerbated by efforts to clear a departmental backlog of more than 4,400 untested rape kits dating back to 1993 and to assist a county-led task force in investigating some of the cases.

The Police Executive Research Forum, a police policy group hired by the city, recommended in a 2013 report that the unit add at least 4 detectives to the unit but, bringing the total to at least 17 or 18. The unit currently has 13 detectives who investigate sex crimes and child abuse cases and three supervisors.

Cleveland Councilman Michael Polensek, assistant chair of the public safety committee, said the unit deserves more support from the department but he's not optimistic it will happen.

Polensek said the department can't even staff its basic patrol operation, "so how are they going to staff up homicide or sex crimes?"

If years of internal investigations, expert reports, and community outcry following tragedy haven't spurred change perhaps rape victims need to sue the city to demand action, Polensek said.

"Is it incompetence? Malfeasance? Both? All I know is nobody who lets this happen gets fired. They just get promoted," he said.