Why now? DeWine calls ECOT business deals "corrupt" after he and Yost ignored them: Analysis
CLEVELAND, Ohio - Ohio Attorney General and gubernatorial candidate Mike DeWine ran into a few unintended consequences this week as he sought to recover money from the closed ECOT charter school and its founder.

He added fuel and a new angle to a debate over whether he and Ohio Auditor Dave Yost should have taken action against the Electronic Classroom of Tomorrow (ECOT) years ago, not just now.

A court filing this week by DeWine, the Republican nominee, called some longstanding business arrangements of the school "corrupt" - a claim that would normally draw applause from charter school critics.

But those business arrangements have been common knowledge for years. And they never attracted previous attention from DeWine or from Yost in his annual audits of the school.

Two companies in question, Altair Learning Management and IQ Innovations, did millions worth of work each year for ECOT, totaling over $200 million in work over the life of the school.

Since both are owned by ECOT founder William Lager, DeWine argues in the court filing that the arrangement violated Lager's fiduciary duty to the school and was a "corrupt" and illegal enterprise.

See the filing below.

That DeWine is aiming at a longstanding problem now, during campaign season, is raising eyebrows. Why would this be illegal now, but not worthy of action years ago?

"If Lager's relationship to his companies and the school was so problematic, wasn't it always problematic?" asked Steven Dyer, a former Democratic state legislator and one of the state's loudest charter school critics. "So why would DeWine suddenly be so troubled only four months from an election and not the previous eight years?"

Dyer also questioned why Yost, whose audits have acknowledged the work by Altair and IQ, never flagged them as a problem.

"If that's a violation of the corrupt practices act, and Dave Yost signed off on it year after year, what does that tell us about our aspiring Attorney General?" he asked.

The filing does not only affect Republicans. It also raises questions for Democratic gubernatorial candidate Richard Cordray. The business relationships ECOT had with Lager's companies were in place when Cordray was Ohio Attorney General from 2009 to 2011, but he never acted on them either.

DeWine's staff defended delays in acting this week, saying that Ohio's courts would not have allowed the attorney general to act on its own against an open school. DeWine spokesman Dan Tierney said recent court rulings have opened the door for action regarding closed schools - as ECOT is now - but still not against open ones.

He said that doesn't mean that behavior of a school is legal until it closes, then becomes illegal. It's a matter of who has jurisdiction to act - the attorney general or the Ohio Department of Education or the state auditor.

Cordray's staff said that when he was attorney general there were few concerns about corruption with ECOT, so he pursued cases against other schools instead.

Yost, a Republican who is running for attorney general, agreed with DeWine that it took recent court rulings to establish the fiduciary duty that DeWine has now highlighted. He said he has pushed for several changes in financial disclosure and responsibility for charters in the last few years - many of which members of his own party rejected as going too far.

But he and DeWine differed on a key point - whether ECOT's ongoing funding dispute with the state over student participation in their online classes affects the legality of ECOT's operation.

Yost said the finances and troubles of the school were not made clear until the Ohio Department of Education changed how it reviews funding in 2016 and accused the school of collecting millions in unsupported funding. That change is now being disputed before the Ohio Supreme Court.

"The facts were not fully before us until the Ohio Department of Education (ODE) changed its funding documentation and review requirements," Yost said.

DeWine, however, explicitly distances his claims from that funding and class participation dispute, calling them "conceptually distinct."

"The claims just discussed are based on conflicts of interest among adults, while the Supreme Court is considering whether students must actually participate in instruction as a condition for State funding," DeWine wrote in the filing. "There is no overlap between those questions."

Steve Dettelbach, the Democratic candidate for attorney general and Yost's opponent, declined to answer detailed questions about DeWine's legal argument and whether Cordray should have acted.

But he disputed DeWine's claim that he could not have acted sooner and said DeWine regularly oversteps his jurisdiction. Dettelbach repeated his belief that the state should be seizing assets of Lager and the companies and pursuing criminal charges against them.

Though he accused DeWine of "grandstanding" and covering his tracks with this filing, he added that it was a "critical" case that he would pursue if elected.

The Electronic Classroom of Tomorrow (ECOT) was once Ohio's largest charter school, with over 15,000 students. Lager was also a major donor to Republican candidates and officials, some of whom spoke at ECOT graduations. But failing test scores, low graduation rates and a public losing patience with charters that under-perform put the school increasingly out of favor.

The Ohio Department of Education added financial pressure to the school in 2016 when it started basing funding for e-schools on how much students participate in classes, not just being enrolled. That led to two separate findings the state school board that the school owed $60 million, then $20 million more, back to the state.

The debt led the school to close in January.

With ECOT now cast as an enemy, candidates and officials on both sides of the aisle are vying for credit in shutting it down - and in trying to recover money from Lager and the school.

DeWine spokesman Tierney said previous attorneys general have tried to act against troubled charter schools but have been blocked. He pointed to a 2007 case by fill-in Democratic Attorney General Nancy Rogers, who tried to intervene with the New Choices charter school in Dayton, but was rebuffed by courts. Courts found that the state auditor and Ohio Department of Education are designated to take action, not the attorney general.

He said DeWine and others - including Cordray - have been able to avoid that restriction when seeking recovery from officers of schools that have closed. Among those was a recently-decided claim against officers of the former Value Learning and Teaching Academy in Cincinnati.

In that case, Hamilton County Common Pleas Court said the restrictions in the New Choices ruling did not apply to VLT officials because the school had closed and DeWine was pursuing recovery from officers, not action against the school itself.

One of those post-New Choices cases was pursued by Cordray against the former International Preparatory School in Cleveland. Cordray won an Ohio Supreme Court Judgement that charter schools officer count as public officials who are liable for use of school money. DeWine has cited that ruling multiple times, including now against Lager.