Democrats say Trump education nominee Betsy DeVos owes $5.3 million to Ohio
WASHINGTON - Ohio Democrats on Tuesday attacked Donald Trump's education secretary nominee, Betsy DeVos, on the House of Representatives floor, calling her a lawbreaker who owes Ohio $5.3 million in fines for campaign finance violations.

"How can the public trust Ms DeVos to ensure that borrowers repay their student loans when the group she chaired has failed to pay fines that were imposed nearly a decade ago?" asked Columbus-area Democratic Rep. Joyce Beatty.

Betsy DeVos ran a PAC that owes a record $5.3 million in unpaid fines for Ohio campaign finance violations. This is not draining the swamp. pic.twitter.com/YPQ4IcYVQJ -- Marcy Kaptur (@RepMarcyKaptur) January 10, 2017

Toledo Democratic Rep. Marcy Kaptur said a pro-charter school organization that DeVos chaired called All Children Matter violated Ohio law by funneling over $870,000 in national money to Ohio Republican candidates and didn't pay the fine the Ohio Elections Commission assessed for those actions in 2008.

"Betsy DeVos' attempt to subvert the law and buy influence are diametrically opposed to everything the president-elect advised was wrong with America," said Kaptur. "No-one in America should be above the law, and neither should Betsy DeVos be above the law."

Betsy DeVos broke the law and owes Ohio $5.3 million. How can we trust her to run our nation's schools when she refuses to pay back Ohioans? -- Congressman Tim Ryan (@RepTimRyan) January 10, 2017

Ed Patru, the spokesman for a group that backs DeVos' nomination, said both the fines and the current Democratic effort to highlight them are politically motivated. He said a trial court ruled that DeVos and other officers of the organization could not be held liable for the fine and said the matter was put to rest eight years ago.

He said DeVos, who advocates charter schools, believes public education works well for many American families, but families should have other options when schools are not effective.

Sen. Sherrod Brown said education secretary nominee, Betsy DeVos, should pay $5.3 million in fines she owes to Ohio. https://t.co/ltVOstbtvG -- Coshocton Tribune (@coshtribune) December 15, 2016

"She fundamentally does not believe that a parent of a child should be forced to send that child to a failing school," said Patru.

The issue Ohio Democrats highlighted Tuesday will likely be raised during DeVos' confirmation before the U.S. Senate, scheduled for next week. A group of Senate Democrats, including Ohio's Sherrod Brown, have sent DeVos multiple letters that urge her to pay the fine.

"We cannot entrust the future of our children to a person who breaks the law, cozies up to Wall Street, calls calls public schools - which I believe are the bedrock of our education system -- a dead end," said Warrensville Heights Democratic Rep. Marcia Fudge. "I urge my Senate colleagues to vote 'no' on DeVos."