Democrats again push ECOT as a central campaign issue
COLUMBUS, Ohio -- Democrats on Thursday again jumped on Republican Auditor Dave Yost's response to the scandal surrounding a shuttered online charter school accused of fleecing the state out of $80 million.

The party hopes that the Electronic Classroom of Tomorrow controversy -- Republicans including Yost received thousands of dollars in campaign contributions from entities affiliated with the school -- will help propel their candidates to victory this year. Democrats are taking every opportunity to blast Republicans on this issue.

They got another chance Thursday when Yost, the GOP nominee for attorney general, announced the results of an audit showing that the school may have committed fraud by misleading the state so it could collect more public money.

Emblematic of the politics surrounding ECOT: The Ohio Democratic Party unveiled a website critiquing Yost's relationship with the school. Yost's Democratic opponent Steve Dettelbach and Democratic gubernatorial candidate Richard Cordray released separate statements attacking the Republican response to ECOT. And Yost announced Thursday he's donating the money he received from ECOT to charity. Republican auditor candidate Keith Faber followed, and said he's donating contributions he received from ECOT founder Bill Lager to "high quality charter schools." Republican secretary of state candidate Frank LaRose also plans to donate the money he received from ECOT to help support the families of fallen service members and police officers.

Yost announced at a news conference that he's referred the ECOT case to prosecutors, but it's not soon enough for Democrats.

Dettelbach, in a statement, criticized Yost for not contacting authorities sooner. A whistleblower approached the auditor's office a year ago with information about the potential fraud. The auditor's office referred the case to authorities within the last 10 days, Yost said.

"Finally, after years and years, Dave Yost has admitted that a fraud occurred on his watch that cost Ohio taxpayers $80 million and counting," said Dettelbach, a former U.S. attorney said in a phone interview. "I know as a federal prosecutor for 20 years that fraud cases just don't get better with age."

Yost said it's common practice for the auditor's office to wait until the end of an investigation to refer a case to prosecutors. He said that if he approached federal prosecutors or local prosecutors about ECOT they would have told him to put the case together, and then come back.

"The criminal referrals always happen at the conclusion or near the conclusion of our work," Yost said.

Dettelbach, a former federal prosecutor, vehemently disagreed.

"It's not only not the norm, it absolutely endangers the case. Evidence disappears, witnesses disappear," Dettelbach said. "These kinds of things are very time sensitive. And it is not what happens. It is not the norm."

Yost at his news conference touched on the politics surrounding ECOT, blasting criticism from Democrats that he had attended ECOT graduations.

"Think about what those kids did, the 1,500 kids that graduated. They got out of bed every morning, and didn't have anybody standing over them. No teacher taking attendance, and they did the work anyway. And they learned," Yost said. "So that's why I went to ECOT, and shame on the people that are demagoguing this issue to call into question those kids' achievements. I'd do it again in a heartbeat."

Dettelbach had choice words for Yost's defense of his relationship with ECOT.

"I believe in supporting the students. This is not the students' fault. This is not the families' fault," Dettelbach said. "But there are a lot of graduation ceremonies in the state of Ohio and a lot of hard working students who could use some recognition from the auditor of state, and Dave Yost chose to go three times to the graduation ceremony at ECOT."