Mike DeWine and Richard Cordray turn the focus on each other in Ohio governor's race
CLEVELAND, Ohio - The race to succeed term-limited Gov. John Kasich is the one most political observers predicted for months as Republican Attorney General Mike DeWine and Democratic former Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Director Richard Cordray will face off in a rematch of the 2010 attorney general's race.

Republicans are trying to maintain dominance in state government while Democrats are hungry to win a seat they've controlled for only four years since 1991. The race pits one of the longest-serving politicians in Ohio against a President Barack Obama appointee who many Democrats felt was their only hope at recapturing the governor's office.

DeWine and Cordray won in landslide contests, with multiple media outlets declaring the other's victory just an hour after the polls closed. As of 11:20 p.m., DeWine carried 60 percent of the Republican primary vote while Cordray had 62 percent of the Democratic primary.

DeWine declined to address his general election opponent in a scrum with reporters following his victory speech in Columbus.

"I'm not going to give away the game plan here, as much as I would love to," he said. "But I don't think I should do that. This is about where we want to take the state of Ohio. We'll get to the comparing and contrasting, I suppose, later."

Cordray congratulated DeWine on winning "one of the ugliest campaigns" he has ever seen but wasted no time in jabbing his general election component. Cordray painted himself as an advocate for consumers and working people while claiming DeWine only looked out for the wealthy and well-connected.

"We now have a clear choice in November and the things we stand for cannot be more different," Cordray said.

Cordray touted his work saving homeowners from foreclosure and going after Wall Street as head of the ConsumerFinancial Protection Bureau. He said DeWine, as the state's top cop, looked the other way amid scandals involving the ECOT charter school and legislation cracking down on payday lenders.

"These are the same predatory lenders I have fought for years while Mike DeWine has said and done nothing to stop them from abusing people," Cordray said.

DeWine starts the general election with the advantage in name recognition, campaign cash and historical success winning. Cordray is running in an atmosphere that favors Democrats and could have Obama and other officials campaigning for him in the state.

Limited general election polling has shown DeWine in the lead.

The DeWine-Cordray matchup is almost guaranteed to be the most expensive governor's race in Ohio history. DeWine has already shown fundraising skills and that he's not afraid to use significant sums of money. He dropped more than $8 million in ads in the final weeks of the primary.

The attack ads from outside groups were up less than an hour after the races were called. Moments after DeWine and Cordray were declared the victors, American Bridge, a liberal super PAC, announced a digital ad for the general election attacking DeWine.

National exposure from Kasich's exit and intense interest in the state by Republican President Donald Trump will only intensify interest - and fundraising.

The previous record was reached in 2010 when Kasich and Democratic then-Gov. Ted Strickland spent a combined $30.4 million.

Strengths and weaknesses

Cordray has the advantage of not tacking too hard to the left during his contentious primary against former U.S. Rep. Dennis Kucinich. Despite calls from his party to demand a ban on assault-style weapons, Cordray refused.

The gambit could pay off. Ohio is a more gun-friendly state than traditionally liberal strongholds. The Democratic Party once housed numerous pro-gun Democrats, though that has waned in recent years.

As much as it might pay off for Cordray with independents, he runs the risk of alienating some of his base voters who consider guns their main issue.

Jerry Austin, a veteran Democratic strategist who was campaign manager for two-term Democratic Gov. Dick Celeste, said Cordray also has a national network to tap into.

"There's a real opportunity for Democrats to win this election in November," Austin said. "Cordray has always been the strongest candidate. He's got the best resume and the ability to raise national money."

The main knock on Cordray is usually his campaign style. Quieter and more collegial than some of his political counterparts, he's often criticized for being dull on the trail.

Cordray is running in an environment that favors Democrats nationwide. Trump's approval ratings remain relatively low. Other races around the country have shown an ascending Democratic Party winning in places once thought unimaginable.

He'll also get some help from U.S. Sen. Sherrod Brown, the popular Democratic senator who is facing a challenge of his own. Keeping Brown in Washington is a priority for national Democrats. Their efforts could tangentially help Cordray.

Austin said the matchup favors Cordray for another reason: Cordray at 59 years old represents a vote for change compared with DeWine, who is 71.

"If I was Cordray, I'd want DeWine in this general election because he basically has been around since 1976 and been there through the scandals that the Republican Party has been involved in," Austin said.

DeWine has a long political history in the state, having been in office since the 1970s essentially uninterrupted, save for four years after a loss to then-U.S. Rep. Sherrod Brown in the 2006 Senate race.

"DeWine, we already know his story," Austin said. "He's been around a long time. He's 71-years of age. He's been elected to everything except this. He's been around for 42 years and he is the poster child for a career politician. Compared to Cordray, Cordray is a neophyte when it comes to being a career politician."

But Matt Borges, former chairman of the Ohio Republican Party and a DeWine supporter, said the DeWine's 40-year political career was an asset. Voters already know DeWine, which is why he was able to withstand attack ads from primary rival Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor with only minimal damage.

In his victory speech, DeWine didn't shy away from his length of service, saying he and running mate Jon Husted had been angling for the November election their whole lives.

"We both have prepared our lives for this moment," DeWine said.

Borges, an ally of Kasich, said DeWine also has the same political demeanor as the governor, making him popular with voters.

That, Borges said, could help blunt enthusiasm seen among Democrats in other states nationwide.

"They have to have huge enthusiasm and that has to be coupled with our enthusiasm being way down," Borges said. "If that doesn't happen, we'll probably revert to the norm. And the norm since 1990 is Republicans winning statewide election after statewide election."

A massive campaign war chest and personal funds to contribute to the race give the attorney general a head start. Campaign finance reports filed before the primary showed DeWine with a more than $5 million advantage on Cordray, though DeWine used some of that money to attack his primary opponent, Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor.

Fundraising should only increase as Ohio becomes one of the preeminent gubernatorial battlegrounds in the country.

Dark money from outside groups will also pour into the state as financial institutions like payday lenders and auto title loan companies look to undermine Cordray's candidacy, seeing him as a threat to their operation in the state.

But it's not a sure win for DeWine, who won by only 68,000 votes in 2010 against Cordray.

Scandal has plagued Republicans for the past year. Ohio House Speaker Cliff Rosenberger resigned amid an FBI investigation into his foreign travels. The true breadth of the investigation is still unknown.

The Electronic Classroom of Tomorrow - the online charter school accused of bilking the state out of millions of dollars under Republicans' watch - has also dogged the GOP.

DeWine has been personally insulated from the scandals, but the Democratic Party has telegraphed that it plans to make both an issue in the general election. Historically, Democrats have performed well when the GOP is on the defensive from perceived wrongdoing.

What matters

Health care:

Health care will be front-and-center for the gubernatorial race. Voters routinely say it is the most important issue to them in the 2018 election.

Legislative Republicans have tried to kill the Affordable Care Act's Medicaid expansion in the state, though Kasich - a firm proponent of the expansion - vetoed it.

The Medicaid expansion extended health care to more than 700,000 Ohioans and provided funds to help treat opioid addicts.

DeWine has refused to take a firm position on what he would do regarding Medicaid. He released a television ad during the primary criticizing Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor for supporting the Medicaid expansion. He equivocated during his interview with the cleveland.com editorial board, leaving the option open for doing away with the expansion.

Cordray has said he outright opposes ending the Medicaid expansion.

Local government funding:

Tax cuts at the state level have drained the local government fund, leaving cities and counties to raise taxes to pay for essential services like infrastructure.

That's peeved many mayors and local officials around the state, who have said they feel starved by Columbus.

Cordray has made local government funding one of the cornerstones of his campaign, criticizing Republicans in the Legislature and Kasich for draining local government coffers.

Opioids:

The ongoing drug scourge in the state is one of both DeWine's and Cordray's main concerns on the campaign trail.

DeWine has filed lawsuits against the opioid manufacturers and distributors for flooding the state with prescription painkillers, leading to a surge in overdoses and deaths. Ohio currently ranks first in the nation in total opioid deaths.

Cordray said he would declare a "state of emergency" as governor, potentially opening up resources for combating the problem. He has argued the issue is intertwined with the Medicaid expansion and funding to local governments from the state - which could be used for addiction services.

The extent of the problem was largely unknown until it was too late, but the blame could fall at the hands of Republicans in general.

John Kasich's legacy:

The general election will be something of a referendum on Kasich's time at the helm of the state. The governor has an increased national profile since his unsuccessful 2016 run for president, and he's seen around the state less often.

But Kasich remains popular. A March poll showed Kasich just as popular with Democrats as Republicans and independents.

If Ohioans remain happy with the Republican governor's performance, they may be less inclined to vote for a change in party control.

Cleveland.com Columbus reporter Jackie Borchardt contributed reporting.