Ohio budget signed by Gov. Kasich shorts cities - again: editorial
To his great credit, Gov. John Kasich's political choices have shown he cares about working Ohioans -- including the working poor who don't make enough to afford health insurance. That's why he vetoed legislative efforts to freeze -- effectively kill -- Medicaid expansion in Ohio, provisions that should stay dead.

Too bad Kasich doesn't feel the same way about the communities where those people live. The two-year state budget Kasich just signed yet again shorts Ohio's local governments.

Ohio Gov. John Kasich vetoes Medicaid freeze, signs state budget bill

The steady decline in state financial support for counties, cities, villages, townships and park districts is a thread that runs through all four Ohio budgets during Kasich's governorship.

It's a decline that accords with the Kasich administration's budget goals -- but the view that localities can make do with less has merely driven increased local taxes and fees, or reduced services, in too many communities.

2016: Ohio tax changes under Gov. John Kasich leave villages, cities scrambling to cope with less (database)

During Ohio's 2010-11 fiscal year that started before Kasich took office, localities received $694.4 million from Ohio's Local Government Fund.

The budget Kasich just signed appropriates $381.8 million for the Local Government Fund for the year that began July 1.

That's a 45 percent drop in just seven years.

The new budget as passed by the General Assembly and signed by Kasich took $35 million over two years from the Local Government Fund to spend on tackling opioid addiction and made permanent a $24 million transfer to townships and small villages.

True, the Local Government Fund, created in the 1930s when Ohio enacted its first sales tax, isn't the only form of state aid to localities. But other forms have likewise been slashed or repealed. Effective in 2013, the General Assembly and Kasich repealed Ohio's estate tax; cleveland.com reported that the estate tax had produced about $250 million a year for local governments and $60 million for the state.

Ohio cities pay the price for state tax cuts: Impact 2016

Earlier, during Republican Gov. Bob Taft's 1999-2007 administration, legislators replaced Ohio's longstanding property tax on business equipment and inventories with the Commercial Activity Tax on business gross receipts. The business property tax had produced about $500 million a year for local governments (even more for schools), according to a coalition of local government organizations. CAT proceeds go to the state -- and Kasich accelerated revenue-sharing cuts.

The latest budget is also likely to hurt local governments' ability to raise revenue by eliminating the municipal net profit "throwback" provision used by a number of municipalities, effectively allowing businesses to file municipal income taxes directly with the state instead of locally.

This past winter, the Kasich administration designed a fix after federal rules changed on taxing Medicaid managed-care organizations that fully immunized state revenues -- but offered only meager interim funds to counties and transit authorities that were looking at an annual loss of more than $200 million. So the legislature devised its own fix - which Kasich declared to be flawed and vetoed, a veto just overridden by the Ohio House and now awaiting Senate action.

January: Ohio Auditor's report reveals harm to cities and counties after state budget cuts

The Kasich administration should recognize that the net effect of starving counties, cities and towns is bad for Ohio, forcing many local officials simply to raise local taxes. That's robbing Peter to pay Paul - for political gain.

Editor's note: This editorial was updated at 10 a.m. to correct the percentage drop over the last seven years in Ohio Local Government Fund appropriations and to add further details about relevant provisions in the current state budget.

About our editorials: Editorials express the view of the editorial board of cleveland.com and The Plain Dealer -- the senior leadership and editorial-writing staff. As is traditional, editorials are unsigned and intended to be seen as the voice of the news organization.

Have something to say about this topic? Use the comments to share your thoughts, and stay informed when readers reply to your comments by using the Notification Settings (in blue).

* Send a letter to the editor, which will be considered for print publication.

* Email general questions about our editorial board or comments on this editorial to Elizabeth Sullivan, director of opinion, at esullivan@cleveland.com