Mike DeWine and Mary Taylor debate, sort of, during match up of Ohio Republican governor candidates
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- It wasn't exactly a debate, but it was close, and it might be the only thing like it that voters get during the Republican primary in the Ohio governor's race.

Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor and Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine mixed it up Thursday during an endorsement interview with the editorial board for cleveland.com and The Plain Dealer. Both landed solid blows -- Taylor cut into DeWine as a career politician with a mixed records on guns, while DeWine cast Taylor as a bomb-thrower with no meaningful record of accomplishment as an elected official.

In her closing remarks, Taylor returned to her frequent complaint that DeWine is dodging her. DeWine led Taylor in a recent poll by about 30 points, and it's not unusual for front-running candidates to try to avoid debates. As she's struggled to gain traction in the race, Taylor increasingly has sought to cast herself as a conservative outsider and DeWine as the GOP's anointed candidate.

"I appreciate the only opportunity Mike DeWine and Mary Taylor will have to appear in the same room together, because he will not debate me..." Taylor said.

DeWine interjected that the two of them have appeared "in the same room many times" throughout the campaign.

Taylor continued: "...And have a conversation that the voters of this state deserve to see."

That conversation had several revealing moments:

- DeWine notably stopped short of laying out his exact plans for Medicaid, the state and federally run government healthcare program for Ohio's poor and disabled. Current Gov. John Kasich in 2015 accepted federal money to expand Medicaid eligibility to cover an additional 700,000 poor Ohioans. Overall, the program covers one-quarter of all Ohioans and represents about a third of the state budget.

DeWine said Medicaid expansion is fiscally unsustainable, but didn't describe how he'd reduce the costs, which likely would require reducing enrollment or cutting services. He did say he supports requiring able-bodied Medicaid recipients to work, and that he'd see to it that the addicts who receive treatment through Medicaid now will continue to do so.

"It's very difficult to center on one particular person or one particular category of people," DeWine said. "What I'm saying is, when [running mate] Jon Husted and Mike DeWine take office in January, the first thing we will do is ask the Trump administration to give us more flexibility."

Taylor has said she'd end Medicaid expansion if she's elected, although she's similarly proposed work requirements for Medicaid recipients and seeking federal permission to use Medicaid funds to treat addicts.

- DeWine said he supports a proposal to allow the state auditor to review the books for JobsOhio, the privatized economic development non-profit Kasich created. Taylor, whose husband, Don, sits on the board for Northeast Ohio's JobsOhio affiliate, said she does not.

- Both Taylor and DeWine said they oppose legislation supported by Kasich that would increase the governor's control over the state Department of Education, as part of a larger consolidation of state education agencies, at the expense of the state's elected school board.

"I believe it's wrong, and in fact, it's the exact opposite of what I would propose to do," Taylor said.

DeWine said he evaluates education policy based on whether it "does a better job for kids."

"I don't believe this proposal really does that, or accomplishes very much at all," DeWine said.

- Asked to evaluate Kasich's legacy as governor, Taylor said she feels Kasich started off OK, but eventually "walked away from conservative principles."

"This is about the eighth time the lieutenant governor has said that she's the true conservative in this race," DeWine, who grew visibly annoyed with Taylor multiple times during the hour-long meeting, eventually responded. "And I would say... One of us is a conservative who's done things. The other is a conservative who says she's a conservative who has not really done things."

Asked to clarify when she feels Kasich abandoned conservatism, Taylor first said "she hasn't put her finger on exactly" when that happened, but then identified Kasich's move to expand Medicaid eligibility in 2013. DeWine turned to his right, staring at her as she searched for her exact words.

"I think it was earlier on in this administration than I would have liked," she said. "I continued to be the conservative voice at the table, and was successful at times, but not at others."

However, Taylor ran for re-election with Kasich in 2014, and endorsed Kasich's run for president; she campaigned on his behalf, included penning a March 2016 op-ed that touted the positive effects of Medicaid expansion for women. In the aftermath of the November 2016 election, Taylor has striven to distance herself from Kasich politically, even though she's received his endorsement.

- Both candidates said they oppose any statewide assault weapons ban, or allowing cities to set their own gun restrictions.

Both candidates also were asked if they would support "red flag legislation" -- a law that basically would allow a judge to seize guns from people deemed to be a risk to themselves or others.

Taylor said no, that government shouldn't make decisions on who is and isn't qualified to own a gun.

DeWine said he would support such a red flag law, as long as there's due process involved. He went on to say that he wants to fund mental health specialists in every school in the state to help prevent school shootings.

Taylor called this a "big government solution."

"Putting counselors in schools to make decisions about the mental capacity of students. That is a decision that belongs to parents, not government," she said.

"Do you want to take nurses out of the schools too, Mary? Jeez," DeWine said, laughing and shaking his head.

He later added: "I'm shocked that you think putting a mental health specialist in a school is somehow infringing on parents' rights, or is somehow big government. I can't say anything more than I'm just shocked."