Payday loan bill would protect Ohioans from predatory lenders: State Rep. Kyle Koehler (Opinion)
COLUMBUS, Ohio - In order for government to be good, it must be efficient, operate on the facts, and promote public safety. This is why I have worked with Ohioans from across the ideological spectrum, including borrowers, business owners, and faith leaders, to advance (HB 123). It is a bipartisan, compromise approach to reforming Ohio's onerous payday loan laws. The bill is backed by extensive research and ensures that the payday loan industry in Ohio will not be eliminated. It will keep credit available and enable responsible lenders to provide safe, affordable loans, as they do under similar laws elsewhere. It has the support of local governments, veterans' organizations, and consumer groups.

State Rep. Kyle Koehler

But since the bill was introduced more than a year ago, the payday loan lobby has done everything in its power to block this necessary legislation.

Payday lenders have never provided specific feedback about how to protect consumers, make payments affordable, or bring down prices. Instead, they have provided misleading statements in the media to create confusion, distract from the truth and further derail the process. Some payday lenders recently tried to claim that they had tried to fashion a compromise plan for reform, but alleged that they were rebuffed by House leadership.

That supposed plan was never mentioned to me -- because it never existed. Instead of compromise, the payday lenders - protective of their practice of charging 400 percent and 500 percent interest in Ohio - have used various tactics to resist any kind of change.

The few suggestions they did make would have in fact solidified their harmful business practices within state law rather than make these loans fairer for Ohio families. The very industry accused of involvement leading to the resignation of the House speaker, causing turmoil in our chamber, is now trying to use his resignation as a reason not to pass HB 123. In fact, this more than anything should demonstrate the level of influence that has dominated this issue for far too long in Ohio and the pressing need to pass the bill as soon as the House resumes its business.

Here are the facts: today, our laws are being abused by lenders who trap borrowers in debt. More than 80 percent of two-week payday loans in Ohio are taken in quick succession because the loans are structured to have unaffordable payments. Borrowers thus can't both repay the loan and cover their expenses, leading them to take out another loan to help pay off the initial loan. Nine in 10 payday loan stores in Ohio are owned by large, multi-state companies. But they charge Ohio families more than they charge in other states because we're one of the only states in the U.S. where they operate without traditional rate limits. With the help of their teams of lawyers and lobbyists they have, for a decade, bucked Ohio's lending statutes. This is an affront to law and order, and to my values as an Ohioan, as a Republican, and as a Christian.

Here is what HB 123 would do: The bill would close the loophole in Ohio law that these companies use to charge borrowers unlimited prices, while keeping credit available for those who need it. It does so by putting reasonable guardrails in place without being overly burdensome. It ensures affordable payments without requiring excess paperwork. It requires fair prices that are still profitable for lenders. It ensures that borrowers have adequate time to repay, but it doesn't dictate a one-size fits all approach, so borrowers who want to repay faster can do so freely. Each loan would be structured to ensure that payments fit in a borrower's budget. These provisions are supported by 8 in 10 Ohio voters according to a respected Republican polling firm, and borrowers overwhelmingly favor these reforms that have worked elsewhere.

But the lenders and their allies are still trying to prevent a vote on payday lending reform, including spreading misinformation about the bill. Payday lending lobbyists would like me and my colleagues to be satisfied with lenders using a loophole to take advantage of our constituents. To hear the perspective of these companies, up is down and down is up - the companies charging 400 percent and 500 percent interest are the victims, not the working men and women who are being trapped in a cycle of unreasonable debt.

With HB 123, we have negotiated a better deal for Ohio. It provides common sense safeguards to protect Ohioans from predatory lenders. As a conservative, I have done my utmost to find an approach that will work for borrowers and lenders. I pray that my colleagues of good conscience will reject the spin of a handful of entrenched payday loan CEOs and their numerous lobbyists, and do what is right for Ohio.

State Rep. Kyle Koehler, a Springfield Republican, is a cosponsor of bipartisan House Bill 123 with State Rep. Mike Ashford, A Toledo Democrat.

Have something to say about this topic? Use the comments to share your thoughts. Then, stay informed when readers reply to your comments by using the "Follow" option at the top of the comments, and look for updates via the small blue bell in the lower right as you look at more stories on cleveland.com.