Leadership Team
Working together with the Board of Directors, the Clinton Foundation's leadership team is responsible for all aspects of the Foundation's work around the world. Our leadership team consists of our chief executive officer, our chief financial officer, the leaders of our programmatic work (generally called chief executive officer or executive director of individual Foundation initiatives and the Presidential Center), and the leaders of our essential support functions.

Leadership Team as of January 2019

Leaders of our Separate, Affiliated Entities



ALEX CHAN Chief Executive Officer, Clinton Health Matters Initiative

Alex Chan is the chief executive officer of the Clinton Health Matters Initiative (CHMI) at the Clinton Foundation. In his role, Alex oversees the initiative’s overarching goals of decreasing the prevalence of preventable diseases and closing health equity and health disparity gaps. Alex previously served as the director of National Health for CHMI and oversaw the portfolio of programs focused on chronic disease prevention and treatment. Included within this portfolio of work are programs that address critical needs or gaps in services across a broad array of domestic health issues, including health promotion on college campuses, addressing prescription drug abuse and misuse, providing technical support to employers to implement business practice changes aimed at improving employee health, and developing a scalable model of community engagement to increase the impact of youth-serving sports organizations. Prior to joining the Foundation, Alex worked in both the public and private sectors on projects designed to improve health outcomes through interventions in the built environment. He holds a master's in urban planning from the University of Michigan, as well as graduate degrees in public administration and communications management from the University of Southern California.



LISENA DESANTIS Director, CGI Commitments and Member Services

Lisena DeSantis is the director of commitments and member services for the Clinton Global Initiative, where she oversees the ongoing support and engagement of CGI commitment makers. This includes efforts to deepen the impact of existing CGI Commitments to Action and identify areas of opportunity for new commitment development by offering creative programming, curating networking opportunities, and providing facilitated introductions for commitment makers. Prior to this role Lisena served as the deputy director for CGI America, a two-day event promoting economic growth in the United States attended by 1,000 leaders from the nonprofit, government, and private sectors. Before joining CGI in 2012, Lisena worked at the Open Society Foundations in New York City and Physicians for Human Rights in Nairobi, Kenya. She received a bachelor's in history from Yale University in 2005. Back to top



JESSE GERSTIN Director, Clinton Climate Initiative

Jesse Gerstin is the director of the Clinton Climate Initiative, where he works across the Clinton Foundation’s climate and energy-related programs. In this role, he leads the Islands Energy Program, partnering with island governments and utilities to accelerate the transition to renewable energy, create resilient communities, and develop sustainable economic growth. Previously, he served as senior policy manager at the Clinton Climate Initiative leading a program on ocean protection, and managed forest conservation projects in Indonesia and East Africa. Prior to joining the Clinton Foundation, he worked for an impact investment company developing sustainable agroforestry and renewable energy projects in Indonesia, and at Echoing Green in New York City funding social entrepreneurs. Jesse studied international development at Oberlin College, environmental economics at SOAS, University of London, and is currently pursuing an M.B.A. in Sustainability from Bard. Back to top



JAMES JENKIN Chief Executive Officer, Clinton Giustra Enterprise Partnership

James Jenkin is the chief executive officer of the Clinton Giustra Enterprise Partnership (CGEP). James has been with CGEP since 2014, most recently in the role of chief operating officer. Before joining CGEP, James held various roles across more than 30 countries. He began his career as an international corporate attorney practicing in Australia and Europe before deciding to apply his skills towards building businesses. For 15 years he played critical roles in building one the world’s leading Fortune 500 logistics companies, TNT Express. Importantly, while at TNT, James managed TNT’s corporate social responsibility (CSR) function across three continents for 5 years, helping cement TNT as a Dow Jones Sustainability Index Supersector Leader. This included James’ managing corporate giving of 30+ philanthropic programs. In 2006, James co-founded the North Star Alliance, a social enterprise providing basic health care to long-distance truck drivers and other hard-to-reach communities in Africa. From 2010 to 2014, James was the executive director of the long-standing New York nonprofit arts organization, Printed Matter, Inc. James holds a combined Bachelor of Arts and Law (honors), majoring in political science, from the University of Tasmania. Back to top



ANDREW KESSEL Chief Financial Officer

Andrew Kessel is the chief financial officer of the Clinton Foundation, a role he has held since joining the Foundation in 2004. Andrew has played a role in managing the growth of the Foundation in its transition to a global organization. He has had a career of service in the corporate financial world, most recently with Barclays PLC as a managing director for nine years. He previously worked at Kidder Peabody and Co. and also in the capital markets division of Citibank. He holds a bachelor's in economics from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. Back to top



d. lance king Chief Development Officer

Lance King is the chief development officer at the Clinton Foundation, bringing to the role more than 25 years of experience in philanthropy and nonprofit management. In this capacity, Lance leads efforts to facilitate philanthropic gifts and grants to advance the mission of the Foundation and its programs and initiatives. A graduate of The University of Texas at Austin College of Pharmacy, Lance completed an executive residency in association management with the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) and has since held executive fundraising positions with the ASHP Research and Education Foundation, leading public research universities including UT Austin, the University of Colorado, and Stony Brook University as well as with the San Francisco Symphony, Gill Foundation, and Denver Zoo. As executive vice president at the Chicago-based Grenzebach Glier and Associates, Lance led a team of philanthropic management consultants and analysts in elevating the fundraising success of leading nonprofit organizations in the U.S. and abroad. A passionate advocate for the role that donors and funders can play in creating opportunity and improving lives, Lance resides in New York City with Molly, a basenji mix who he says “rescued him.” Back to top



BARI LURIE Chief of Staff, Office of Chelsea Clinton

Bari Lurie joined the Clinton Foundation in August 2011 as chief of staff to Chelsea Clinton. In this capacity she helps shape and implement the strategic direction of the office, including Chelsea’s engagement across the Foundation. Prior to the Foundation, Bari was chief of staff at Tribeca Enterprises, working on growth strategies and managing the company’s signature partnership with Qatar. Before moving to New York, Bari worked on Secretary Hillary Rodham Clinton’s presidential campaign as well as her 2006 Senate race and for her political action committee, HILLPAC. Bari holds a bachelor's in political communications from George Washington University. Back to top



PATTI MILLER Chief Executive Officer, Too Small to Fail

Patti Miller is the chief executive officer of Too Small to Fail for the Clinton Foundation. Too Small to Fail is a joint initiative of the Clinton Foundation and The Opportunity Institute to help parents and businesses take meaningful actions to improve the health and well-being of America’s youngest children, ages zero to five, and prepare them to succeed in the 21st century. Prior to joining the Foundation, Patti was the vice president of public policy for Sesame Workshop, the nonprofit producer of "Sesame Street". Patti previously served as vice president of the Children and the Media Program at Children Now. In that role, she led a broad coalition in advocacy and policy efforts to improve the media environment for children. Patti holds an master's in social sciences in education from Stanford University and a bachelor's in mass communications from the University of California at Berkeley. Back to top



GREGORY MILNE Chief Impact and Foreign Policy Officer

Gregory Milne is the chief impact and foreign policy officer at the Clinton Foundation. In this role, he oversees the Foundation's efforts on programmatic impact and evaluation, metrics, and information sharing; he also helps guide international strategy and plays a central role in shaping and executing President Clinton's foreign policy vision for the Foundation. Previously, he served as the deputy chief of staff and director of policy to President Clinton and chief executive office of the Clinton Foundation’s Haiti program. Prior to that he worked as the private sector advisor at the UN Office of the Special Envoy for Haiti, President Clinton’s UN office, assisting with economic development and reconstruction programs in Haiti. Before joining the Clinton Foundation, he was a senior associate at Shearman & Sterling, LLP in the New York Office where he specialized in international property transactions and mergers and acquisitions. Greg received his J.D. from Fordham University School of Law where he was a Crowley Scholar and a bachelor's from the University of Michigan. He is also an adjunct professor at Fordham Law School. Back to top



CRAIG MINASSIAN Chief Communications and Marketing Officer

As chief communications and marketing officer, Craig Minassian brings a unique background in strategic communications, content development, and brand marketing to helping advance the work of the Clinton Foundation through overseeing its communications, digital, and marketing efforts. Craig served as assistant press secretary and director of television news in the White House for President Clinton and on numerous presidential campaigns including Clinton/Gore ‘96 and Secretary Clinton’s 2008 campaign, as well as a senior advisor to the Democratic National Convention Committees in 2008 and 2012. Since 2005 he has worked with the Clinton Foundation, including as director of communications for the Clinton Global Initiative. Previously, Craig spent a significant portion of his career with HBO working on cause-related and topical programming including “Comic Relief" and the U.S. Comedy Arts Festival, and as a consultant and producer for networks including Comedy Central, MTV, and ABC. In 2006, he launched Minassian Media, which helps some of the most impactful global organizations in health, climate, media, technology, and social entrepreneurship tell their story. He also worked on World Cup USA‘94 and serves on the President's Council and School of Communication advisory board for the University of Miami, where he graduated in 1992. Back to top



MAURA PALLY Executive Vice President

Maura Pally is the executive vice president of the Clinton Foundation. In this role, Maura oversees the strategic and operational efforts of the Foundation’s initiatives, and fosters relationships with individuals, foundations, and corporations to support the life-changing work of the Clinton Foundation. Prior to her current role, Maura was responsible for the Foundation's women and youth programs including managing the creation, development, and implementation of No Ceilings: The Full Participation Project; Too Small to Fail; and Job One, an effort to help close the skills gap nationally. She has also served as acting chief executive officer. Maura joined the Clinton Foundation from Bloomberg Philanthropies where, as a member of the leadership team, she provided strategic direction for programmatic activities and oversight of operational management. Previously, she served as acting assistant and deputy assistant secretary of state for Educational and Cultural Affairs (ECA). As acting assistant secretary, Maura led a bureau of 450 employees and a $635 million annual budget to fulfill ECA's mandate of facilitating public diplomacy through exchange programs, including the flagship Fulbright Scholarship Program. Maura oversaw the Department's exchange activities and budget strategy ensuring programs furthered the Administration's foreign policy objectives, and created new programs, including smARTpower and TechWomen to empower the next generation of women leaders in technology. Prior to joining the U.S. Department of State, Maura held several positions in the government and the private sector, including as a special assistant in the Office of White House Counsel under President Clinton and as manager of politics and public policy at Oxygen Media. She earned a bachelor's from Brown University and a J.D. from the University of Southern California. Back to top





BILL RUSTRICK Chief Executive Officer, Clinton Development Initiative

Bill Rustrick is the chief executive officer of the Clinton Development Initiative (CDI), based in Malawi. He joined CDI as country director in Malawi and managing director of Tukula Farming Company in November 2015. Prior to CDI he was the operations director on a multi-estate tea production facility in Western Kenya, involving a large out-grower supply chain. He has also helped establish, develop, and manage both smallholder and commercial cropping operations in Mozambique, Brazil, Zambia, the Gambia, Papua New Guinea, and Malaysia. Back to top



AMY Sandgrund-fisher General Counsel and Chief Human Resources Officer

Amy Sandgrund-Fisher is the general counsel and chief human resources officer for the Clinton Foundation. Previously, she served as people counsel at AppNexus, where she was responsible for providing legal advice on employment matters and nonprofit partnerships, among other responsibilities. Prior to this role, Amy served in senior legal roles at several for-profit and nonprofit organizations, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Bristol-Myers Squibb/Bristol-Myers Squibb Foundation, and Tough Mudder. Amy also worked at Proskauer LLP for a number of years focused on litigation and at the Citizens Union of the City of New York as its advocacy director. In addition to her legal practice, Amy has also served on a number of New York City Bar Association committees focused on women in the law and issues related to New York City government. Amy received her bachelor’s degree from the University of Michigan and her J.D. from New York University Law School. Back to top



STEPHANIE S. STREETT Executive Director

Stephanie S. Streett is the executive director of the Clinton Foundation. In this role she oversees the day-to-day operations of the Clinton Presidential Center, including the development and implementation of its educational programs, special events, exhibits, and services as well as staff management. She establishes and cultivates strategic partnerships and cooperative arrangements with state and local governments, the nonprofit and private sector, community groups, and other organizations. Stephanie also serves as the corporate secretary for the Clinton Foundation Board of Directors. She is co-chair of the Board of Directors for City Year Little Rock and a past president of the University of Arkansas Alumni Association National Board of Directors. Stephanie serves on the Board of Directors for the Downtown Partnership of Little Rock, Arkansas, and is a member of the International Women’s Forum Arkansas, and the Rotary Club of Little Rock. During the Clinton administration, Stephanie was appointed assistant to the president and director of scheduling. Previously, she served as a staff member for the United States Senate Committee on the Budget. She received a bachelor's degree in political science from the University of Arkansas. Stephanie and her husband, Don Erbach, reside in Little Rock and have three daughters. Back to top



KEVIN THURM Chief Executive Officer

Kevin Thurm is the chief executive officer of the Clinton Foundation. He previously served as a senior counselor at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), where he worked with Secretary Sylvia Burwell and HHS senior leadership on a number of cross-cutting strategic initiatives, including continuing implementation of the Affordable Care Act. Prior to that role, Kevin held various leadership positions at Citigroup, including chief compliance officer and deputy general counsel. Before joining Citigroup, Thurm served as the deputy secretary and chief of staff for the Department of Health and Human Services under Secretary Donna E. Shalala. He received a bachelor's from Tufts University in 1983; a bachelor's/master's from Oxford University in 1986, where he was a Rhodes Scholar; and a J.D. from Harvard Law School in 1989. Back to top



BILL WETZEL Director, CGI University

As director of CGI University (CGI U), Bill oversees CGI's efforts to engage university students and the higher education community in addressing some of the world's most pressing challenges. This includes the annual meeting of CGI U, which brings together over 1,000 students from over 300 different schools, and the CGI University Network, a growing consortium of colleges and universities that support, mentor, and provide seed funding to leading student innovators and entrepreneurs on their respective campuses. Bill has worked with CGI since the launch of CGI U in 2007. Before joining CGI, Bill co-founded the Talk to Me Project, a civic engagement initiative that was featured in media outlets including The New York Times, The Washington Post, and This American Life. He studied sustainable development at Columbia University's Earth Institute. Back to top



eric white Chief Technology Officer

Eric White is the chief technology officer at the Clinton Foundation. He brings more than 25 years of experience in the technology industry, starting his career with Microsoft. Eric has served as the founder and CEO of Utopia Systems, a pioneering cloud-hosting service provider and most recently, he was the chief technology officer of Cloudscale365, a hybrid cloud and managed services provider. He has a deep understanding of cloud architecture, networks, and software development with a focus on the strategic use of innovative technology to create impact and improve the organization’s ability to perform its work. Back to top

Leaders of our Independent, Affiliated Initiatives



KATHY HIGGINS Chief Executive Officer, Alliance for a Healthier Generation Kathy Higgins, chief executive officer (CEO) of the Alliance for a Healthier Generation, is a national expert on health care and philanthropy, having previously served as the president and CEO of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina Foundation. At Healthier Generation, Kathy leads a team of nearly 100 professional staff across the nation taking action to improve child and adolescent health, with a particular focus on addressing critical child and adolescent health issues including nutrition, physical activity, social-emotional health, and sleep. Prior to taking on the role of Healthier Generation CEO in January 2019, Higgins spent more than 30 years at Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina, where her roles span leading public health engagement, corporate communications, community relations, and corporate affairs. Kathy holds a bachelor’s degree in education from West Virginia Wesleyan College and completed her master’s work in community health education at Virginia Tech. Back to top