Action Network - Haiti Action Network
In 2008, President Bill Clinton issued a call to action to address the pressing challenges Haiti faced in the aftermath of four devastating hurricanes, resulting in the formation of the Haiti Action Network. In response to the January 2010 earthquake, the network intensified their efforts toward long-term development in Haiti by addressing issues such as agriculture, cultural preservation, education, energy, enterprise development, health, and shelter, as well as water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH).

Clinton Global Initiative (CGI) members have made more than 100 Commitments to Action focused on Haiti, which will be valued at $500 million when fully funded and implemented. Now in its eighth year, the Haiti Action Network has a significant focus on creating sustainable jobs and encouraging investment in the country.

Objectives

Provide an opportunity for CGI members working in Haiti to discuss best practices and learn from one another.

Avoid a duplication of efforts by CGI members working in the country by sharing updates and specific areas of focus.

Network and explore partnerships, with a focus on cross-sector collaboration.

Liaise with the government of Haiti to allow for an open dialogue and to coordinate the work of CGI members with the priorities of the government.

Selected Commitments

Access to Funding for SME Construction Sector in Haiti

Commitment by: Build Change

Commitment Partner: Fonkoze

In 2015, Build Change and Fonkoze committed to address the lack of access to financing currently available to small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in the construction sector in Haiti, a factor which prohibits their ability to grow and produce higher quality products. Read more »

Rehumanizing Retail: Scaling Artisan Production

Committment by: West Elm

Commitment Partners: Caribbean Crafts; Heineken; PRODEV; The Aspen Institute; Craftmark; Craft Link; Fair Trade USA; Etsy, Inc; Swahili Imports; Raj; Rupalee; Everest

In 2013, West Elm committed $35 million in purchase order financing paid directly to artisans who use handcraft techniques. In addition, West Elm committed to collaborate with over 20 artisan groups in 15 countries, making three to five year commitments to artisan manufacturers by growing its existing network. Read more »

Contact

tracks@clintonglobalinitiative.org