As Obamacare twists in political winds, top insurers made $6 billion (not that there is anything wrong with that)
A patient is monitored in an examination room inside the Clinical Decision Unit at Kaiser Permanente's Capitol Hill Medical Center in Washington, D.C. Brooks Kraft LLC | Corbis | Getty Images

It's easy to think the nation's entire health insurance market is paralyzed by the nasty debate over Obamacare in Washington. But, while Congress battled over health reform this spring, the nation's largest health insurers racked up strong profits in the second quarter thanks partly to less exposure to the Affordable Care Act marketplaces.



Combined, the nation's top six health insurers reported $6 billion in adjusted profits for the second quarter. That's up more about 29 percent from the same quarter a year ago — far outpacing the overall S&P 500 health care sector's growth of 8.5 percent for the quarter, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S data.



"A lot of the companies have downsized their exposure to the public exchanges," said health care equity analyst A.J. Rice, a managing director at UBS. "The core business, which is providing coverage to large and mid-sized employers... and the established government programs, Medicare Advantage and Medicaid managed care, have all done well."



Aetna, Humana and Cigna all saw adjusted earnings rise more than 45 percent from the year ago quarter, despite the fact that they continue to experience losses on Obamacare individual plans. Centene and UnitedHealth Group's adjusted profits were up roughly 25 percent from a year ago; Anthem was the laggard, with its earnings up just 2 percent.



The strong earnings are driving share gains, with all six of the top insurers' stocks hitting all-time highs this summer. The S&P 500 Managed Care sector is up 25 percent year to date.



What's driving insurer profits?

Taming medical costs

One major tailwind has been their ability to control medical costs. Most see costs rising in the mid-single digit range again this year. Cigna, the nation's fifth largest health insurer, said that much of that is being driven by the changes in plan design in the large employer market, which covers nearly 180 million Americans.



"They're seeing the benefit of this lower medical cost trend for their respective portfolio based upon the actions we're driving and continuing to drive for them," said Cigna CEO David Cordani on the company's second-quarter conference call. Though, Cordani noted that even within the individual exchange business, medical costs growth is trending better than the company expected.

Analysts say that increasing use of high deductible plans is helping rein in medical spending, in part by driving down the use of hospital emergency rooms. A number of the hospital providers reported lower volumes this quarter.



"It's not so much that (insurers are) getting great concession from hospitals," explained Rice. "Employees have much more upfront costs... and maybe they're taking a look at some utilization."

Boost from government health plans

The Medicaid and Medicare markets are increasingly driving insurer topline growth, and that is where the plans are setting their sights on expansion. Aetna now derives more than half of its revenue from government plans, and after abandoning its merger deal with Humana, the insurer is focused on growing its Medicare Advantage market share on its own in 2018 and 2019.



"The general trend is growing the portion of health care claims that are directly or indirectly paid by the federal government," said health care ratings analyst Deep Banerjee, a director at S&P Global Ratings.



Beyond the appeal of the growing number of baby boomers aging into Medicare, Banerjee says the government health programs represent mature, more predictable markets for the large insurers, than the three-year old Obamacare program.



"If you look at Medicare Advantage, it's a public-private partnership," said Banerjee. "Even with a single payer in a public-private partnership, insurance companies are very involved in managing the costs, and actually running the program for the state or the federal government."



And as state and federal officials governments look to cut costs in programs like Medicaid, they are increasingly turning to the insurers.

Waiting out Obamacare uncertainty