Kanjorski, Sestak blame partisanship for stalemate
Article Tools Font size – + Share This

JAMIE PESOTINE / Times-shamrock Joe Sestak, who ran unsuccessfully for the U.S. Senate, last fall, said a compromise should have been reached several months ago that is good 'for the common American.' Warren Ruda / The Citizens' Voice Former U.S. Rep. Paul Kanjorski, who lost his re-election bid last year, calls the debt limit debate an 'artificial crisis' propelled by leaders making 'foolish decisions.'

Paul Kanjorski has no say in the matter. No vote to cast. No legislation to write. No colleagues to cajole. Still, he is worried. Like many Americans, the former 13-term U.S. House representative has been watching the debate over the federal debt limit with growing apprehension, fearing that a war of fractured ideologies in Washington could send the wounded economy into a death spiral.

"I'm not one of these people that believe that it can't happen," Kanjorski said in a recent interview in his Wilkes-Barre office. "It can, and it can happen not because it's intended to happen but only because people play the game too long - and we're getting too close to the end."

Congress must raise the debt limit by Tuesday or risk a government default that President Obama said could imperil monthly Social Security checks, veterans' benefits and payments to thousands of government contractors.

A default would almost certainly send the U.S.'s top-level credit rating plummeting, increasing the toll of interest on future government borrowing, and, Kanjorski said, irreparably harming the nation's footing in the global financial marketplace.

"With the full faith and credit of the United States, once it's lost - for whatever reason, political, philosophical, craziness, some one senator filibustering - we will never again rise to the epitome of what we are today in the finances of the world," Kanjorski said. "That's a loss of incredible value that you can't replace."

Kanjorski, a former member of the House Financial Services Committee, dismissed the high-drama surrounding the debt limit as "artificial crisis" propelled by partisan gamesmanship, particularly on the political fringes, where leaders are making "foolish decisions" with "un-thought-out consequences."

U.S. Sen. Jim DeMint, R-S.C., whom Kanjorski described as a friend, has threatened to filibuster any debt-limit compromise if Congress does not first approve an constitutional amendment requiring future federal budgets to include an equal balance expenditures and tax revenue.

Kanjorski, ushered out of office last fall in a wave that swept Republicans into control of the House, said he saw a DeMint filibuster as the doomsday scenario in the debt-ceiling debate, particularly if it were to carry on past the Tuesday default deadline.

"One senator can destroy the economy of the United States and the world," Kanjorski said. "I worry about that."

Former U.S. Rep. Joe Sestak, who lost in his campaign for the Senate last fall, blamed Congress and Obama for ceding to partisanship and failing to take action on the debt-limit sooner. The same kind of reluctance, he said, allowed Republicans to shape the debate over health-care reform, clouding public opinion with sound bites and misinformation and putting Obama on the defensive.

"Both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue, they should have grabbed a hold of this issue six, eight months ago and not been worried to touch it and come up with a decent compromise that maybe upsets the far left or the far right, but is good for the common American," Sestak said in an interview last week in Jenkintown, not far from his former district.

Sestak, while still in Congress last December, called on Obama to embrace the recommendations of the bipartisan Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform to achieve nearly $4 trillion in deficit reduction through spending cuts, health care cost containment and elimination of tax loopholes. Obama should have used the "power of his bully pulpit" at that time to sway public sentiment and compel a debt-level increase and long-term budgetary reform long before the Tuesday deadline, Sestak said.

"It's better to be the quarterback who comes out of the huddle to the line of scrimmage at the beginning of the game and not wait until the fourth quarter to enter it, because people in the stands right now are restless. They're upset. They're concerned and they're looking for strong leadership and politics be damned," Sestak said.

If he were still in office, Kanjorski said, he would favor a deficit reduction plan similar to one embraced by his fellow Democrats: a mix of feasible spending cuts and a stream of increased revenue through fair taxation all while maintaining the solvency of the Social Security and Medicare systems. Determining those spending cuts and tax code adjustments can come later, after a deal is reached to raise the debt limit and avoid fiscal chaos.

"We're arguing about a very, very, very big principle right now," Kanjorski said. "I wish we could be sane enough not to structure it on the debt limit or something as silly as that."

msisak@citizensvoice.com

570-821-2061