Challengers emerge for two more Austin City Council members
View Caption Hide Caption Austin City Hall is an early voting location. Tuesday May 3, 2016 is the last day for early voting for the election this Saturday on Prop 1, concerning the regulation of transportation network companies like Uber and Lyft. The Flawn Academic Center on the University of Texas campus is an early voting location. RALPH BARRERA/AMERICAN-STATESMAN

With the filing deadline still a month away, at least one challenger has filed to run against each of the City Council members up for re-election this November.

Alison Alter, a former University of Texas executive and member of the city’s parks board, is the most recent to throw her hat into the ring, the Austin Monitor first reported, filing to run in West Austin’s District 10 against Council Member Sheri Gallo.

The Harvard and Stanford grad previously oversaw UT’s Global Initiative for Education and Leadership and currently runs her own philanthropy consultation firm. Alter told the American-Statesman she’s jumping into the race because she believes Gallo is ignoring the needs and concerns of existing neighborhoods and is too pro-developer.

Exhibit A, she says: The Grove at Shoal Creek, the controversial central city development that would build 2.8 million square feet of office, retail and residential space on 75 acres of formerly state-owned land, near 45th Street and MoPac.

“Development is going to happen there. What I’m working towards is that we can have the best possible development that we can be proud of 30 years from now,” said Alter, who is active in the Rosedale neighborhood association, which opposes The Grove as it’s currently designed. “I’m pro-smart growth and this doesn’t feel every smart.”

Council Member Greg Casar has also attracted an opponent for the seat in North Austin’s District 4: Louis C. Herrin, III. Herrin named himself as his own campaign treasurer, an unorthodox move that is apparently allowed under state law. And Council Member Delia Garza, who is already facing boxer Casey Ramos for the Southeast Austin District 2 seat, has attracted another opponent, Wesley Faulkner.

“I feel like our district is a little underrepresented,” said Faulkner, who works as a social media manager at an Internet-related firm in Austin. “I feel like we get very much overlooked.”

He said he would like to see more focus on the district’s transportation issues, as well as support efforts to create an economic incentives program to encourage development in District 2.

These newly joined races are in addition to hot contests already underway: Jimmy Flannigan’s rematch with Council Member Don Zimmerman in District 6; and The Grove-fueled showdown between Council Member Leslie Pool, a project critic, and Natalie Gauldin, a project supporter.