Blue Cross phasing out some insurance plans due to ACA
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas, the state's largest provider of health insurance, says 35 percent of its customers on the individual market won’t have their health plans renewed in 2014 because the plans don’t conform to new federal requirements.

The changes affect about 9,450 of Blue Cross' 27,000 individual market customers, some of whom have already received letters informing them of the change and their options for plans that do meet the new federal guidelines.

The changes are part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, commonly called Obamacare, which requires health insurance plans to cover a list of "essential health benefits." Mary Beth Chambers, manager of corporate communications for Blue Cross, said the remaining 65 percent of individual market customers are in "grandfathered plans" that were written before the federal law was signed in March 2010 and they won’t be affected.

“That’s why folks got those letters, if they’re in a nongrandfathered plan,” Chambers said.

Starting in 2014, new plans are required to cover things like maternity care (an effort to pool risk and end large cost discrepancies based on gender), and co-pay-free preventative care, such as vaccines, prostate screenings and other tests.

Chambers said it would be impossible to say whether consumers whose plans are being phased out will pay more or less for new coverage.

"As a habit we do not give out average premium costs because there are so many varying factors in figuring a premium that it is impossible," Chambers said via email. "In this case it would not be an apple-to-apple comparison because the benefits are different. Also, how the premium is built for a person is totally different."

Chambers said the customers who received notice that their plans won’t be renewed will have the opportunity to shop for new coverage on the federal exchange, healthcare.gov, where they may be eligible for premium assistance.

But that website has been fraught with problems since going live Oct. 1, which led to U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius appearing before a U.S. House committee Wednesday.

While there, U.S. Rep. Mike Pompeo, a Republican from Wichita, questioned Sebelius about Kansans whose health coverage was being phased out, noting that some of the plans being eliminated were formed while she was Kansas insurance commissioner.

“Mrs. Sebelius, it’s a yes or no question, were they true insurance plans when you were the insurance commissioner?” Pompeo asked.

“A lot of them are not true insurance plans, no,” Sebelius said.

Republicans nationally have pointed to plan cancellations as a sharp contrast to President Barack Obama's repeated promise that those who like their insurance will be able to keep it under the health reforms.

Sheppard said the federal changes to individual marketplace requirements will affect a relatively small number of Kansans within an individual market that serves about 5.5 percent of the state's residents. Most Kansans get their health insurance either from an employer or from government programs like Medicare and Medicaid.

Uninsured Kansans have until March 31 to purchase a policy, or face the possibility of a $95 fine.

Linda Sheppard, director of health policy for the Kansas Department of Insurance, said Blue Cross could have put off the disruption in service for nongrandfathered plans by renewing them before the new requirements hit in January, rather than phasing them out now.

“There are a number of other companies that have decided not to do that and have renewed their members' policies for another year,” Sheppard said. “I guess Blue Cross just decided to move everybody under 2014 plans. That was not something required under law.”

Chambers called that characterization "a little challenging to hear."

"We believe it is important to follow the law to the letter, and we believe a faithful interpretation of the law was to move all individual plans to a calendar year renewal cycle," Chambers said. "Doing so resulted in nongrandfathered plans complying with the new elements of the law, such as essential health benefits and preventive services with no cost sharing as of Jan. 1, 2014.”

Anjie Coplin, director of communications for Aetna, the parent company of Coventry Health Care of Kansas, said Aetna is informing customers of new options for ACA-compliant plans, but not canceling plans based on the calendar.

"In general, members can stay on their current plan until their next renewal date, which in some cases could run well into 2014," Coplin said via email. "Once a member reaches the end of their current policy period, they will need to select an ACA compliant plan."