Trump misleads about military pay raises again
(CNN) President Donald Trump incorrectly told troops in Iraq on Wednesday that he gave them their first pay raise in more than 10 years -- a falsehood he has repeatedly told.

Speaking to troops at Al Asad Air Base during his surprise visit to Iraq, Trump told troops: "You protect us. We are always going to protect you. And you just saw that, 'cause you just got one of the biggest pay raises you've ever received. ... You haven't gotten one in more than 10 years. More than 10 years. And we got you a big one. I got you a big one. I got you a big one."

In fact, military pay has increased every year for more than three decades. It was raised 2.4% in 2018 and then 2.6% in the 2019 National Defense Authorization Act. The 2.6% pay raise is the largest in the past 9 years.

Photos: In photos: President Trump's holiday visit to US troops in Iraq President Donald Trump and first lady Melania Trump greet military personnel at the dining hall during an unannounced visit to Al Asad Air Base in Iraq on Wednesday, December 26. Hide Caption 1 of 10 Photos: In photos: President Trump's holiday visit to US troops in Iraq The Trumps walk onstage to speak at a hangar rally during their surprise visit. Hide Caption 2 of 10 Photos: In photos: President Trump's holiday visit to US troops in Iraq President Trump kisses the first lady during a hanger rally. Hide Caption 3 of 10 Photos: In photos: President Trump's holiday visit to US troops in Iraq President Trump delivers remarks to the troops. Hide Caption 4 of 10 Photos: In photos: President Trump's holiday visit to US troops in Iraq Members of the military cheer as President Trump speaks at the rally. Hide Caption 5 of 10 Photos: In photos: President Trump's holiday visit to US troops in Iraq President Trump signs "Make America Great Again" hats for US troops during his surprise visit. Hide Caption 6 of 10 Photos: In photos: President Trump's holiday visit to US troops in Iraq President Trump speaks to members of the media at Al Asad Air Base in Iraq. Hide Caption 7 of 10 Photos: In photos: President Trump's holiday visit to US troops in Iraq President Trump, accompanied by National Security Adviser John Bolton, third from left, first lady Melania Trump, fourth from right, US Ambassador to Iraq Doug Silliman, third from right, and senior military leadership, speaks to members of the media during his surprise visit to Iraq. Hide Caption 8 of 10 Photos: In photos: President Trump's holiday visit to US troops in Iraq President Trump, flanked by National Security Adviser John Bolton, near left, meets with military leaders during his unannounced visit. Hide Caption 9 of 10 Photos: In photos: President Trump's holiday visit to US troops in Iraq President Trump mingles with the troops. Hide Caption 10 of 10

The President and first lady quietly swept into Iraq on Wednesday to pay a holiday visit to US troops -- the first trip Trump has made to a war zone.

"They had plenty of people that came up, they said, 'You know, we could make it smaller. We could make it 3%, we could make it 2%, we could make it 4%,'" Trump told the troops about the latest pay raise. "I said, 'No. Make it 10%. Make it more than 10%.'"

Read More