Antibacterial Toothpaste, Triclosan Toothpaste
Colgate invented the multi-benefit toothpaste category more than 20 years ago with the introduction of Colgate Total with triclosan. Now we are replacing the formula with Colgate Total SF and a different active ingredient that delivers even more benefits.

Learn about the additional benefits offered by new Colgate Total SF

The earlier formula of Colgate Total® toothpaste is uniquely formulated with 0.3% of the antibacterial ingredient triclosan to fight harmful plaque germs, which are the cause of most common oral health problems.

It is supported by more published, peer-reviewed clinical studies than any other toothpaste in the world. The efficacy and safety of the earlier Colgate Total® is supported by more than 90 clinical studies, involving over 20,000 people, and a broad set of safety evaluations. Our research has been shared withregulatory agencies around the world who have accepted triclosan’s safe and effective use in toothpaste.



The earlier formula of Colgate Total® is clinically proven to reduce the germs that can cause gum disease. It is clinically proven to provide 12-hour protection against plaque germs that can lead to gingivitis, an early form of gum disease. Over 75% of American adults suffer from gingivitis. Plaque and gingivitis, if unchecked, can progress to periodontitis, a more serious and damaging stage of infection that can result in tooth and bone loss. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, almost half of American adults age 30 and over have serious periodontal disease.

Brushing with regular fluoride toothpaste does not provide the antibacterial protection of the earlier Colgate Total®toothpaste. On the US FDA’s website, updated as of September 2, 2016, the FDA states as follows regarding the earlier formula: "For some consumer products, there is evidence that triclosan provides a benefit." The FDA notes that it has “reviewed extensive effectiveness data on triclosan in Colgate Total toothpaste" and that the "evidence showed that triclosan in that product was effective in preventing gingivitis."

A thorough independent review was conducted and published by the Cochrane Oral Health Group on the oral health benefits of triclosan/copolymer, the active antibacterial system in the earlier Colgate Total® toothpaste. The Cochrane Review evaluated 30 studies dating from 1990 to 2012 and involving 14,835 participants (Riley & Lamont 2013). The resulting data highlighted the many clinical benefits of using a fluoride toothpaste containing triclosan/copolymer and concluded there was no evidence of any harmful effects associated with the use of triclosan/copolymer toothpastes in studies up to three years in duration.

View the full text of the Cochrane Review

More questions about Colgate Total®? Ask Here

Learn More About Colgate’s Ingredient Safety Policy links