Columbia’s October unemployment rate second lowest in nation
Columbia, Missouri’s unemployment rate ranked second lowest in the nation for October, according to a Bureau of Labor Statistics report published this week.

Ames, Iowa had the lowest unemployment rate, 1.4 percent, and Columbia followed close behind at 1.5 percent. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics released a report earlier this week detailing what the unemployment rate looked like in October.

Unemployment rates were lower in October compared to a year earlier in 341 of the 388 metropolitan areas. The unemployment rate was higher in 33 areas and unchanged in 14 areas, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

The national unemployment rate, not seasonally adjusted, in October was 3.9 percent, which is down from 4.7 percent the prior year. The bureau’s report also stated that 74 areas had jobless rates of less than 3 percent and two areas had rates of at least 10 percent.

Study shows TIF often not high return on investment

The Show-Me Institute published a new study which examined if Tax Increment Financing, or TIF, gives taxpayers in the state enough return on investment. The answer: not usually.

A TIF freezes sales and property tax revenues for 23 years, putting the additional tax dollars that would have been collected from the project’s construction toward the redevelopment costs.

To be eligible for TIF, a project has to pass a “but for” test showing the development could not occur without the tax incentive. The TIF Act also requires projects using the tax incentive to meet criteria under one of three outlined designations: blight, conservation area and economic development area.

The Show-Me-Institute’s study stated that “TIF is often used to get the same result that would have happened, anyway,” according to a Show Me Opportunity news release. If the development could happen without TIF, then the project technically fails the "but for" test.

Tax increment financing is designed to be awarded only if the development could not happen without the public support. The study also stated that economic activity in TIF areas is not much greater than economic activity where TIF projects were not approved.

T. William Lester and A. Rachid El- Khattabi from the Department of City and Regional Planning at the University of North Carolina–Chapel Hill wrote the study.

The study focused on Saint Louis and Kansas City TIFs and did not include an analysis on Columbia TIFS. The Broadway Hotel in downtown Columbia submitted an application for tax increment financing earlier this year and on Monday the Columbia City Council is set to hear further public comments and vote on the request. Broadway Hotel owner David Parmley is asking for about $2 million in TIF to help fund a second hotel tower, a $20 million project which mainly would add conference space Parmley says downtown needs.

MU Veterinary Health Center opens imaging suite, radiation isolation unit

The University of Missouri’s Veterinary Health Center last month celebrated the opening of its Pops and Tango McCosh PET/CT Imaging Suite and the Radiation Isolation Unit.

The space is housed in a new imaging core in the College of Veterinary Medicine. The combination positron emission topography (PET) scanner and computed tomography (CT) scanner will improve accuracy and the speed of diagnosis and treatment for cancer and heart disease, according to an MU news release. The system additionally will open new opportunities for plant science research.

mfavignano@columbiatribune.com

573-815-1719