BCRA Economic and Employment Consequences for States
Nine of the 10 states (Alaska, Florida, Kentucky, Maine, Nevada, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia) begin with positive economic and employment effects in 2018, but are worse off by 2026. Outcomes typically turn negative by 2022.

Michigan is worse off in 2018 and continues to decline through 2026. We assume Michigan will terminate its Medicaid expansion quickly because of a state law that automatically cancels the expansion if the federal matching rate changes. 15 Six other states (Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, New Hampshire, New Mexico, and Washington) have similar legislation and experience losses sooner than other states.

Six other states (Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, New Hampshire, New Mexico, and Washington) have similar legislation and experience losses sooner than other states. Most job losses are in health care. In seven states (Florida, Kentucky, Maine, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania and West Virginia), health care job losses begin in 2018, but all 10 states have large reductions in health employment by 2026. Looking at the U.S. overall, losses in health care jobs begin by 2019 in most states (Appendix A2).

States that expanded Medicaid tend to have deeper and faster losses. Having earned more federal funds under the ACA, they lose more when Medicaid matching rates are cut. In addition to cutting funds to states that expanded health insurance for low-income Medicaid populations, the bill also increases funding to states that did not expand Medicaid. Nonetheless, states that did not expand Medicaid, like Florida and Maine, experience job and economic losses after a few years. In fact, Florida has the sixth highest level of job loss in the nation by 2026.

Other factors that affect the size of economic and employment effects include:

the extent to which states gained coverage in the ACA health insurance marketplaces; states with higher marketplace enrollment tend to lose more



age structure; older people will find insurance less affordable



state population size; the population size of states magnifies their losses or gains



other factors that affect tax distribution, like number of residents with investment income or high incomes or whether medical device or pharmaceutical manufacturers are located in the state.

Every state except Hawaii experiences job and economic losses by 2026. The 10 states with the largest job losses by 2026 are: New York (132,000), California (117,000), Pennsylvania (110,000), Ohio (99,000), Michigan (86,000), Florida (78,000), Illinois (71,000), New Jersey (60,000), Massachusetts (54,000) and Indiana (39,000) (Appendix A1).

Conclusions

The Senate bill to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act would greatly reduce the number of people with insurance coverage, effectively reversing gains made since the ACA’s enactment. The BCRA would initially create more employment and economic growth, driven by increasing the federal deficit in 2018 and 2019, but the effects turn negative as coverage reductions deepen. Job losses and lower economic growth would begin in 2020 and continue to deepen. By 2026, 1.45 million jobs would disappear, gross state products would be $162 billion lower, and business output could fall by $265 billion.

Although the estimated effects of the BCRA on insurance coverage are similar to the effects of the AHCA, the economic consequences for states are much harsher. There are three principal reasons. First, although the BCRA delays the phase-down of federal matching for the Medicaid expansions, by 2026 it has deeper Medicaid reductions than the AHCA. These reductions would be decidedly harsher in the second decade of implementation. Second, the changes in premium tax credits result in deeper federal expenditure cuts. This is because the BCRA provides tax assistance to almost as many people as the AHCA, but the value of assistance is much lower because the actuarial value benchmark is lowered, especially for older Americans. As a result, the insurance coverage will offer less protection from high deductibles and cost-sharing. This results in fewer people enrolling and smaller tax credits for those who do enroll since the premiums are lower for this value coverage. Finally, the BCRA reduces the threshold of the medical care deduction from 10 percent to 7.5 percent, while the AHCA reduced it to 5.8 percent.

Health care has been one of the principal areas of job growth in recent years.16 Under the BCRA, the sector would lose jobs immediately—30,000 in 2018. By 2026, there would be 919,000 fewer health sector jobs, equivalent to about one out of every 22 health jobs. This would be a major reversal from current trends. While our analysis shows other employment sectors grow initially, by 2026 more than half a million jobs are lost in other sectors of the economy, too.

It may be useful to look at these findings in a macroeconomic context. The U.S. unemployment rate for May 2017 was 4.3 percent, the lowest in 16 years and about half as high as during the recent recession. When unemployment is low, additional job growth creates a tighter labor market, and businesses often have greater difficulties filling job vacancies. In turn, this can accelerate inflation.

It is likely that the business cycle will eventually slow down again in the future. In that event, the BCRA could accentuate job loss and economic contraction. Combined with major increases in the number of uninsured, this could contribute to a period of economic and medical hardship in the U.S. The BCRA could distort both the highs and lows of the business cycle. From a national policy perspective, it may be more useful to develop countercyclical policies that strengthen employment and the economy during times of contraction.

The combination of more uninsured and more unemployed people will increase the demand for social assistance, but weaker state economies and federal reductions in Medicaid spending will make it more difficult for states to respond to those needs. States will confront painful choices between raising taxes or slashing services.

This analysis has many limitations. We do not know whether or when the AHCA, the BCRA, or an alternative will be enacted into law. There have been discussions that the draft BCRA will be modified to add $45 billion in funding to address the opioid crisis. Other changes may be made as well. Since there are no available details, we have not been able to analyze those changes. However, modest changes are unlikely to markedly change the overall results.

These projections, like others, are fraught with uncertainty. Economic, technical, or policy changes could alter results. In particular, the BCRA grants substantial discretion to states in terms of Medicaid expansions, waivers of federal regulations, and use of new funds like the State Stability and Innovation Fund. While this analysis is aligned with the CBO’s national estimates, we developed state-level projections, introducing further uncertainty. Our approach conservatively spreads changes across states and may underestimate the highs and lows for individual states.