- CONFIRMATION HEARING ON THE NOMINATION OF BRETT KAVANAUGH TO BE CIRCUIT JUDGE FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT
[Senate Hearing 109-435] [From the U.S. Government Printing Office] S. Hrg. 109-435 CONFIRMATION HEARING ON THE NOMINATION OF BRETT KAVANAUGH TO BE CIRCUIT JUDGE FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT ======================================================================= HEARING before the COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY UNITED STATES SENATE ONE HUNDRED NINTH CONGRESS SECOND SESSION __________ MAY 9, 2006 __________ Serial No. J-109-73 __________ Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 27-916 WASHINGTON : 2006 _____________________________________________________________________________ For Sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; (202) 512�091800 Fax: (202) 512�092250 Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402�090001 COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY ARLEN SPECTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah PATRICK J. LEAHY, Vermont CHARLES E. GRASSLEY, Iowa EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts JON KYL, Arizona JOSEPH R. BIDEN, Jr., Delaware MIKE DeWINE, Ohio HERBERT KOHL, Wisconsin JEFF SESSIONS, Alabama DIANNE FEINSTEIN, California LINDSEY O. GRAHAM, South Carolina RUSSELL D. FEINGOLD, Wisconsin JOHN CORNYN, Texas CHARLES E. SCHUMER, New York SAM BROWNBACK, Kansas RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois TOM COBURN, Oklahoma Michael O'Neill, Chief Counsel and Staff Director Bruce A. Cohen, Democratic Chief Counsel and Staff Director C O N T E N T S ---------- STATEMENTS OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS Page Coburn, Hon. Tom, a U.S. Senator from the State of Oklahoma...... 28 Cornyn, Hon. John, a U.S. Senator from the State of Texas........ 39 prepared statement........................................... 93 Feingold, Hon. Russell D., a U.S. Senator from the State of Wisconsin...................................................... 37 Hatch, Hon. Orrin G., a U.S. Senator from the State of Utah, prepared statement............................................. 24 Kennedy, Hon. Edward M., a U.S. Senator from the State of Massachusetts, prepared statement.............................. 98 Leahy, Hon. Patrick J., a U.S. Senator from the State of Vermont, prepared statement............................................. 101 Schumer, Hon. Charles E., a U.S. Senator from the State of New York........................................................... 3 Sessions, Hon. Jeff, a U.S. Senator from the State of Alabama.... 35 Specter, Hon. Arlen, a U.S. Senator from the State of Pennsylvania................................................... 1 PRESENTERS Kozinski, Alex, Judge, U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, Pasadena, California, presenting Brett Kavanuagh, Nominee to be Circuit Judge for the District of Columbia....... 8 Stapleton, Walter K., Judge, U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, Wilmington, Delaware, presenting Brett Kavanaugh, Nominee to be Circuit Judge for the District of Columbia....... 7 STATEMENT OF THE NOMINEE Kavanaugh, Brett, of Maryland, Nominee to be Circuit Judge for the District of Columbia Circuit............................... 10 Questionnaire................................................ 13 QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS Responses of Brett Kavanaugh to questions submitted by Senator Feingold....................................................... 74 SUBMISSION FOR THE RECORD American Bar Association, Stephen L. Tober, Chair, Standing Committee on Federal Judiciary, Washington, D.C., statement and attachment..................................................... 80 NOMINATION OF BRETT KAVANAUGH, OF MARYLAND, TO BE CIRCUIT JUDGE FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT ---------- TUESDAY, MAY 9, 2006 U.S. Senate, Committee on the Judiciary, Washington, DC. The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:01 p.m., in room 226, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Arlen Specter, Chairman of the Committee, presiding. Present: Senators Specter, Hatch, Kyl, Sessions, Graham, Cornyn, Brownback, Coburn, Leahy, Kennedy, Feinstein, Feingold, Schumer, and Durbin. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ARLEN SPECTER, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA Chairman Specter. Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. It is two o'clock and the Judiciary Committee will proceed with the nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to be a judge for the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. At the outset, we welcome Judge Walter Stapleton, Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, and Judge Alex Kozinski, Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. We appreciate your coming in today. Mr. Kavanaugh is in an unusual circumstance of not having Senators to introduce him. He is a D.C.-Marylander, and as of this moment the Senators from his home State of Maryland are not available to make the introductions, and the Committee has asked Judge Stapleton and Judge Kozinski to do that since they have special knowledge of the nominee because he clerked for them. They have special insights into his background. Just a few words by way of introduction. Mr. Kavanaugh will take the witness stand and will be sworn, and will speak for himself, but I think it appropriate to make a few comments about his record and about my analysis of these proceedings. I have been surprised to see Mr. Kavanaugh characterized as not up to the job of judge for the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. I have taken a look at his record in some detail, and I had a long session with Mr. Kavanaugh, and have asked him all of the questions which have been posed on his nomination. The issue of the NSA surveillance program, a program that I have raised serious questions about, asked him about what, if anything, he had to do with it, and he will speak for himself in responding to that. I asked him about the issue of allegations of mistreatment of people on interrogation on the overlay of torture or rendition, and again, he will have an opportunity to speak for himself on that subject. At our Executive Committee session last week, the question was raised about Mr. Abramoff. He will have an opportunity to speak for himself about that question. In reviewing his record, I note that he was Yale College for his bachelor's degree, cum laude, and he was Yale Law School, where he was on the Yale Law Journal. Now, that takes some substantial academic qualification, something I know about, because I was there. And the only difference between Mr. Kavanaugh's tenure on the Yale Law Journal and being a high academic graduate from Yale Law School from my record is that when he was there, the competition was tougher. He is slightly younger than I am, and as the years have passed, Yale Law School has been more difficult to attain academic achievement, but that is something I know of firsthand. Then his record beyond law school was to clerk for Judge Stapleton, to clerk for Judge Kozinski, and they will speak for themselves. Then he was in the Office of Solicitor General, where he argued one case before the Supreme Court of the United States, and if he were on the Judiciary Committee, it would put him in second place, not too bad a place to be on the Judiciary Committee on Supreme Court arguments. Then he has had a number of arguments on the Court of Appeals and a number of arguments before District Courts on legal issues. Then he served in the Office of Independent Counsel, and that was a highly controversial office, beyond any question. And Mr. Kavanaugh will describe his activities there, but he was not counsel, he was not deputy counsel. He was one of a tier below, where there were 10 associate or assistant counsels there. I know he will be asked about what his participation was there, and we will hear from Mr. Kavanaugh himself of that. He has written two distinguished legal pieces published in the journals, one on the Independent Counsel and suggesting changes, hardly the mark of an ideologue who works as Independent Counsel that has tunnel vision as to what they did, but has expressed ways to improve the operation of Independent Counsel, by showing an open mind and showing some progressive thinking as to utilizing his experience. Then he wrote an article on the issue of peremptory challenges for African Americans and has a--very difficult to use the words ``liberal'' or ``conservative'' or ``progressive'' around here--but he is on the right side of that issue, an issue that I understand well. When I became District Attorney of Philadelphia, I did not need to have the Federal Courts tell me not to have peremptory challenge for blacks. I issued an instruction to my assistants that they could not ask for it, and finally the courts caught up with it. And Mr. Kavanaugh will speak to his views on that subject, but hardly the views of a cramped conservative, but he will describe his views on all of these matters. Then he went to Kirkland and Ellis, which is a very distinguished law firm. I do not how many people from the Judiciary Committee could be employed by Kirkland and Ellis today, let alone out of law school. Tough row to hoe. And he was taken in as a partner, not an equity partner--it is all complicated now with law firms--a non-equity partner, but that is an unusual call for a firm like Kirkland and Ellis or for any big firm of their nature because of how they evaluated his background and his experience. He has been Associate Counsel to the President, and now he is Staff Secretary to the President. And if he reflects the views consistent with the President, that is entirely consistent with having the President nominate judges. That is our system. That is decided by an election. But he will speak for himself as to where he stands in the spectrum as to being in the mainstream. Just a word about the American Bar Association rating. Early he was rated well qualified in the majority, and qualified with the minority camp. And then they reevaluated him 2 years later, and they took some additional interviews, and not surprisingly, the interviews varied. And now he has been rated in the majority, qualified and the minority, well qualified. So you have him moving from well qualified to qualified, qualified to well qualified, and not a tinker's bit of difference really in terms of our evaluation, because at minimal he is qualified, and a great many people think he is well qualified. Senator Schumer. STATEMENT OF HON. CHARLES E. SCHUMER, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK Senator Schumer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First let me thank you for holding this hearing, which many of us had requested, and we very much appreciate it. And second, I want to thank Mr. Kavanaugh for being back here. When we had our private meeting I asked him if he had any objections to come back to, what you good-naturedly referred to as the arena at our last hearing, and you said no, and very much appreciate that. I realize while this is not always the most pleasant exercise for a nominee, I think we can all agree it is a very important one, because we are talking about nothing less momentous than a lifetime appointment to what is generally regarded as the second-most important court in the land, a court of great importance to those of us who sit in the Senate or the House, because it has such jurisdiction over governmental issues, and years after this nomination, this court is going to influence a great deal what this Congress and future Congresses have done. Now, Mr. Chairman, you know how many of us have deep concerns about this nominee. Just yesterday they were given further voice in the form of the American Bar Association's followup report, which was made public yesterday, which explained why six members of the ABA Committee felt compelled to downgrade their rating. My concerns are twofold. First, although Mr. Kavanaugh has held several important and influential positions in Government, they have been almost exclusively political. There is no doubt that, Mr. Kavanaugh, you are a highly successful young attorney and your academic credentials, as certainly outlined by the Chairman, are top notch. But your experience has been most notable, not so much for your blue chip credentials, but for the undeniably political nature of so many of your assignments. For much of your career your considerable talents have been enlisted in partisan and polarizing issues. In short, you have been the ``go to'' guy among young Republican lawyers appearing at the epicenter of so many high-profile controversial issues in your short career, and it is only natural that such a record would give many Senators pause, particularly those of us on this side of the aisle. From the notorious Starr report, to the Florida recount, to the President's secrecy and privilege claims to post-9/11 legislative battles including the Victims Compensation Fund, to ideological judicial nomination fights, if there has been a partisan political fight that needed a very bright legal foot soldier in the last decade, Brett Kavanaugh was probably there. That kind of record is not dispositive, to be sure, but it feeds an impression of partisanship that is, to put it mildly, not ideal for a nominee to a critically important lifetime post as a neutral judge. Now, for those who question the good faith of these concerns, who suggest that some of us are reflexively or unalterably opposed to any Republican involved in the impeachment of President Clinton or other political causes, let me mention two names, Tom Griffith and Paul McNulty. Mr. Griffith, whom I voted to confirm to a seat on the very court to which Mr. Kavanaugh aspires, was Senate legal counsel during impeachment; and Paul McNulty, who I voted to confirm--many of us, I think all of us--voted to confirm to be the No. 2 official at the Department of Justice, was Chief Counsel and spokesman for the House Judiciary Committee Republicans during impeachment. Despite their blue-chip Republican credentials and participation in hot-button political issues, I was convinced that both of these men had substantial experience in professional and nonpartisan work, so that any concerns about inexperience, cronyism, and partisanship was, for me at least-- and I think for most of us on this side of the aisle--laid to rest. So, Mr. Chairman, we are all operating in good faith here, and we have demonstrated ourselves to be open-minded on the President's nominees to top judicial and executive posts. At last count, we have confirmed 240 of President Bush's nominees, and Democrats have voted for the vast majority of them. Then there is a second and related concern. Although Mr. Kavanaugh is extremely well credentialed, he is younger than and has had less relevant experience than almost everyone who has joined the D.C. Circuit in modern times. We would have fewer concerns if the President had nominated a mainstream conservative with a record of independence from partisan politics, who has demonstrated a history of nonpartisan service with a proven record of commitment to the rule of law, and who we could reasonably trust will serve justice, not political patrons or ideology if confirmed to this powerful lifetime post. Both Stephen Breyer and Ruth Bader Ginsberg, whose biographies are often cited at these proceedings, had substantial nonpolitical experience before they were nominated to appellate courts. Mr. Kavanaugh, if confirmed, I believe would be the youngest person on the D.C. Circuit since his mentor, Ken Starr. And if you go through the preconfirmation accomplishments of the active judges who currently sit on the D.C. Circuit, Mr. Kavanaugh's achievements, though impressive, are not on the same scale. Judge Sentelle, for example, had extensive practice as a prosecutor and trial lawyer, and experience as a State judge and as a Federal district court judge. Judge Randolph spent 22 years with Federal and State Attorneys General offices, including service as Deputy Solicitor General of the United States and a law firm partnership. Judge Rogers had 30 years of service in both Federal and State Governments, including a stint as the Corporation Counsel for the District of Columbia, and several years on D.C.'s equivalent of a State supreme court. Like Mr. Kavanaugh, many of the 9 active judges on this court held prestigious clerkships, including clerkships on the Supreme Court and involvement at the high levels of Government, that no doubt involved some partisan work. But they all had significant additional experience, nonpartisan experience, to help persuade this Committee that they merited confirmation. Now, of course, these concerns are echoed in a new report from the American Bar Association. They cannot be dismissed, as some of my colleagues suggest, as merely intemperate rants by Democrats on the Committee, and predictably, of course, some are already launching a campaign to denigrate the ABA, despite boasting of Mr. Kavanaugh's original rating 2 years ago, and attack the character of one of the ABA Committee members, and I hope we would refrain from doing that. According to the ABA report released yesterday, one judge who saw your oral presentation in court, Mr. Kavanaugh, said, ``You were less than adequate,'' that you had been sanctimonious, and that you had demonstrated experience on the level of an associate. A lawyer in a different proceeding had this to say: ``Mr. Kavanaugh did not handle the case well as an advocate and dissembled.'' That is a pretty serious statement. According to the report, other lawyers--and note the plural-- expressed similar concerns, repeating in substance that the nominee was young and inexperienced in the practice of law. Still others--again note the plural--characterized Mr. Kavanaugh as, ``insulated,'' and one in particular questioned Mr. Kavanaugh's ability ``to be balanced and fair should he assume a Federal judgeship.'' And yet another individual said this. He said that Mr. Kavanaugh is ``immovable and very stubborn and frustrating to deal with on some issues.'' These new concerns, apparently based on some 36 additional interviews, were so serious that six members of the ABA Committee changed their vote. On the phone call yesterday I asked Mr. Tober, the head of the Committee, was it rare for people to change their vote? And he said no. And I said, was it usual? And he said no. So it happens, but it does not happen all that often. We have other reasons for concern. I must say that I was disturbed by some of the answers I got from you, Mr. Kavanaugh, the first time around. On the issue of the role of ideology and judicial philosophy in the picking of judges by this administration, for example, you repeatedly insisted, totally implausibly, that such considerations played no role. That was simply not believable, and, frankly, put your credibility at issue. You began to clarify your statements in our meeting last week--and I hope we can have further dialog--but to say that an ideology had no effect, well, show me some nominees to high offices, high judicial offices who were Democrats, who were moderates, who were maybe strongly pro-choice-- Chairman Specter. Senator Schumer, you are past 10 minutes. How much longer will you be? Senator Schumer. I just have another minute and a half, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. It was not believable, that is the bottom line. And in addition, Senators will want to ask you, among other things, about your role in setting of policy relating to executive power and the separation of powers. You admitted to me, for example, that in your job as Staff Secretary, you had input on the controversial issue of Presidential signing statements. There will be questions about that. I expect you will also get questions about your involvement, if any, in this administration's detention policies, torture policies and rendition policies. These issues, among many others, deserve further scrutiny, and given the scant record we have, I hope no one will question the good faith we have in asking them. So, Mr. Chairman, I would say that many of my colleagues and I have a sincere and good faith concern about this nominee. We feel that the nominee is not apolitical enough, not seasoned enough, not independent enough, and has not been forthcoming enough. Maybe this hearing will remove those concerns, but it is certainly necessary. Last week, Mr. Kavanaugh, I asked you to think of ways to alleviate these concerns, and I look forward to hearing your testimony. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Specter. Thank you, Senator Schumer. Senator Schumer. I just want to say Ranking Member Leahy could not be here at the beginning of this hearing, but will be here in about an hour. Chairman Specter. Thank you, Senator Schumer. One addendum to my comments. Mr. Kavanaugh also clerked for Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy. Judge Stapleton and Judge Kozinski, it is our practice to ask our witnesses to be sworn at nomination proceedings, as we had a number of circuit judges sworn during the confirmation of Justice Alito. So with your consent, would you rise and take the oath? Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you will give before the Judiciary Committee will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Judge Stapleton. I do. Judge Kozinski. I do. Chairman Specter. Let the record show both witnesses answered in the affirmative. Judge Stapleton, you are the first circuit judge for whom Mr. Kavanaugh clerked, so we will begin with you. PRESENTATION OF BRETT KAVANAUGH, NOMINEE TO BE CIRCUIT JUDGE FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT, BY WALTER K. STAPLETON, JUDGE, UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT, WILMINGTON, DELAWARE Judge Stapleton. Thank you. Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I appreciate the invitation to introduce Brett Kavanaugh. That is not because I think he needs any introduction to this Committee, but rather because I believe I am in a position to share information that is quite probative with respect to the important issue that is before you. I have been a Federal judge for over 35 years, the last 20 of those years as a member of the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, and based on that experience, I believe I understand well what it takes to be able to serve well as a United States Circuit Judge. I have known Mr. Kavanaugh well for over 15 years. I first met him in March 1989 when I interviewed him for a clerkship. He had one of the most impressive resumes I have ever seen, and believe me, I have seen a lot of resumes. Among other things, as you noted, Mr. Chairman, he was editor of the Yale Law Journal, and at the point in time I met him, he had received an honors grade in every course he had taken at Yale Law School save one. Best of all, the professors who knew him well, assured me that--and I quote--``His work is uniformly of very high quality, thoughtful, independent-minded, yet very balanced, and always clearly written.'' I have recently resurrected the notes I made after our lengthy personal interview, and they say, ``extremely talented, mature, confident yet modest, good sense of humor.'' Now, in other words, a judge's dream of a law clerk, and I didn't have to ponder the decision about hiring him for very long. And he certainly did not disappoint, and I will always treasure the time that we shared. We worked very hard and we were asked to resolve many intractable controversies. Facing challenges like that together promotes a bonding process in which the participants get to know each other awfully well, and we talked at length, not only about the law, and about the challenges we faced, but about his hopes and aspirations for the future. Toward the end of the clerkship I urged him to consider the judiciary as a career if he should ever have that opportunity, and I did that because I believed he had the makings of my kind of judge. There was no trace of arrogance and no agenda. He applied his legal acuity and common sense judgment with equal diligence to every case, large or small, undertaking his evaluation of each without predilection. His ultimate recommendations were based on careful case-by-case analyses of the facts of each case, and objective application of the relevant precedents. It was clear to me that he understood the crucial role of precedent in a society that's committed to the rule of law. Brett thanked me for my advice, but in characteristically modest fashion, said he doubted that he would get the opportunity to so serve. Now, Mr. Kavanaugh, of course, has had a variety of opportunities since that time, as I knew he would. Anyone with his talents would have many opportunities. As a result, in addition to his impressive legal skills, I believe Mr. Kavanaugh has the sophistication, the insight and maturity that comes from having served in a variety of professional positions, noteworthy not only because of their variety but also because of the awesome responsibilities that each carried. While I believe all of his professional experience would serve him well as a judge, a substantial portion of that experience renders Mr. Kavanaugh, I believe, exceptionally well qualified in terms of experience. I refer, of course, to the fact that in addition to his exposure to private practice and his service to the President, Mr. Kavanaugh has had substantial litigation experience on both sides of the bench. As you're aware, and as the Chairman has mentioned, he's worked with a one-and-one relationship not only with the two Court of Appeals Judges that are here this afternoon, but also with a Justice of the United States of the Supreme Court and a Solicitor General of the United States. As you are also aware, Mr. Kavanaugh's litigation experience has included appearance before all levels of our Federal courts. Now, I have stayed in touch with Mr. Kavanaugh, and have followed his career with interest since he left my chambers. I have heard nothing from, and I've heard nothing about Mr. Kavanaugh in the intervening years that has caused me to question in any way my original judgment about the kind of judge he would be if he could have that opportunity. His responsibilities, it's true, from time to time, have called upon him to make--to take positions on issues which reasonable minds could differ about. That's part of being a lawyer. But I believe he has consistently served his client well, and in a thoroughly professional manner. In sum, members of the Committee, I believe Mr. Kavanaugh's intelligence, his common sense judgment, his temperament, and his dedication to the rule of law, make him a superb candidate for the position of United States Circuit Judge, and I can commend him to you without reservation. Thank you for this opportunity to address the Committee. Chairman Specter. Thank you very much, Judge Stapleton. Judge Kozinski. PRESENTATION OF BRETT KAVANAUGH, NOMINEE TO BE CIRCUIT JUDGE FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT, BY ALEX KOZINSKI, JUDGE, UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT, PASADENA, CALIFORNIA Judge Kozinski. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, members of the Committee. It's a great pleasure and honor for me to be back. Thank you for inviting me to introduce my good friend, my former law clerk, Brett Kavanaugh. I probably do not need to take my full 5 minutes, because I can just say ``me too'' to everything that Judge Stapleton said, but let me just take a few minutes, a couple minutes, if I can, to give my own personal view. I'm glad, Mr. Chairman, that you mentioned that Brett Kavanaugh went to Yale and you and he had that in common. We have that in common too. He went to Yale and I have a son named Yale. [Laughter.] Judge Kozinski. I tried to get in, but I wasn't as fortunate. I got rejected. But I have had a number of clerks from Yale and Harvard and many other fine law schools, and among them, Brett Kavanaugh was one of the finest. I met him about the same time that Judge Stapleton met him, in March `89. We both interviewed him for a job for clerkship right out of law school, but Judge Stapleton was just faster making an offer. So I had to pick him up the following year, because he accepted a clerkship with Judge Stapleton first. I must tell you that in the time that I had Brett clerk for me, I found him to be a positive delight to have in the office. He's really bright and he's really accomplished and he's really an excellent lawyer. But most, virtually all, folks who qualify for a clerkship with a circuit judge these days have those qualities. But Brett brought something more to the table. He first of all brought what I thought was a breadth of mind and a breadth of vision. He didn't look at a case from just one perspective. Like a good lawyer, like--Mr. Chairman, you were a prosecutor, you know this very well--you have to look at a case from different perspectives, not just one, and not early in the case take one perspective and then stick with it. Brett was very good in changing perspectives. Sometimes I'd take one position and he'd take the opposite, and sometimes we'd switch places. He was very good and very flexible that way. I never sensed any ideology or any agenda. His job was to serve me and to serve the court and serve the people of the United States in achieving the correct result at the court. And he always did it with a sense of humor and a sense of sort of gentle self-deprecation. He was always--my staff, my secretaries, his co-clerks all enjoyed having him and all enjoyed particularly the fact that he was not in any way pompous or in any way stuck on himself, but was always ready to help others or was ready to be friendly with others. And I think that's a very important quality in a judge. This may seem trivial and maybe seem like I'm mentioning things here that ought not to be mentioned in a committee, but part of what makes the job of judging different from other jobs is that it is not a mechanical process. It is ultimately a human process. You have to understand something about how people think, something about how people live, something about how people feel. And what I think Brett Kavanaugh brings to the table, what he brought to the table when he was my law clerk, is a sense of humanity and a sense of understanding. I will not speak to the question of confirmation or nonconfirmation. This obviously is something that is up to the committee. I can only say that I give Brett Kavanaugh my highest recommendation. I gave him my high recommendation when he applied to Justice Kennedy, my own mentor, and I continue to give him the highest recommendations. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Specter. Thank you very much, Judge Kozinski. I have just one question for each of you. Judge Kozinski, how old were you when you were appointed to the Ninth Circuit? Judge Kozinski. I was 35 years old, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Specter. Judge Stapleton, how old were you when you were appointed to the Federal bench, first to the district court? Judge Stapleton. Thirty-five years old. Chairman Specter. And may the record show that Justice Kennedy was appointed to the Ninth Circuit when he was 38 years old. Anybody have any questions for the judges? Senator Schumer? Senator Schumer. Just one question for both. Since Mr. Kavanaugh clerked for each of you right after, a year after law school, have either of you had occasion to have him appear before you in your court as a lawyer. Judge Stapleton. I have not. Judge Kozinski. Nor have I. Chairman Specter. Thank you very much, Judge Stapleton. Thank you very much, Judge Kozinski. Appreciate your being here. Judge Kozinski. My pleasure. Judge Stapleton. Thank you. Chairman Specter. Mr. Kavanaugh, would you step forward for the oath? If you would raise your right hand. Do you swear that the testimony you will give before the Judiciary Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Mr. Kavanaugh. I do. Chairman Specter. Before beginning your testimony, Mr. Kavanaugh, I note an infant in the audience and what appears to be a mother, and both appear to be wife and child, and perhaps other family. Would you introduce them, please? STATEMENT OF BRETT KAVANAUGH, NOMINEE TO BE CIRCUIT JUDGE FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT Mr. Kavanaugh. Yes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to appear here before the Committee. I'm grateful to the President for nominating me to this important-- Chairman Specter. Mr. Kavanaugh, there is a question pending, and the question was would you introduce your family. Mr. Kavanaugh. Yes. [Laughter.] Mr. Kavanaugh. And I thank my family for being here. Since I last appeared before the Committee, there have been two major changes in my record, and they're both sitting behind me. My wife, Ashley Estes Kavanaugh, and my 8-month-old daughter, Margaret Murphy Kavanaugh. She's watched a little C-SPAN in her day. This is her first live Senate hearing, however. I'm not sure--as you've probably already noticed, Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure she's going to make it very long, but she wanted to be here for the start. My uncle, Mark Murphy, is here. And my brother-in-law, J.D. Estes, is here. My mom and dad are here, Martha and Ed Kavanaugh. They are, and have been, an inspiration to me. They've been married for 43 years, and I am their only child. I'm just very proud that they're behind me today. My mom in particular, in terms of career path, has had a profound influence on my career choices. Throughout her life she's been dedicated to public service. When she was in her 20's, she taught public high school in the District of Columbia, at McKinley and H.D. Woodson high schools. She then decided to go back to law school in the 1970's and became a State prosecutor out in Rockville, Maryland. She was later appointed to the State trial bench by Governor Schaefer and then by Governor Glendening, in Maryland. She's instilled in me a commitment to public service and a respect for the rule of law that I've tried to follow throughout my career. Mr. Chairman, I'm a product of my parents; I'm also a product of my experiences, and I'd like to take a few minutes to share a few of those experiences and how I think they might shape how I would come to the bench as a judge. I attended Yale Law School in the late 1980's. It was a challenging yet collegial environment. It was a place that instilled a desire to make a difference. It was a place that encouraged public service. And while I was at Yale Law School I decided, as you know, to seek a judicial clerkship after my time there. I clerked for Judge Walter Stapleton on the Third Circuit. Judge Stapleton is a gentleman and a scholar. He's an experienced judge, and he's a great friend. If I am confirmed to be a judge, I will do everything in my power to bring to the bench the decency and the good judgment and the collegial manner of Walter Stapleton. And I thank him for being here today. After I clerked for Judge Stapleton, I clerked for Judge Alex Kozinski on the Ninth Circuit. Judge Kozinski, as many of you know, has a passion for the law. When we started as law clerks, he told us we work for the people and we should consider ourselves on the job 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year. And I can say from personal experience that Judge Kozinski lived up to that promise. We worked very hard, he was very thorough. I thank him for all he's done for me in my career and for coming here today from California. If I am confirmed to be a judge, I would seek to bring to the bench the thoroughness and the thoughtfulness and the dedication to the rule of law that Judge Kozinski has demonstrated on the bench for more than 2 decades. After I finished those two clerkships, I worked in the Solicitor General's Office at the Department of Justice. I experienced the ethic of that office, that the United States wins its point when justice is done. In that office I had the opportunity for the first time to argue a case in court before the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals. I was able to stand up for the first time and say Brett Kavanaugh for the United States, a moment that was very proud for me and remains so. In the October 1993 term of the Supreme Court, I clerked for Justice Anthony Kennedy. Justice Kennedy is a student of history, he's a student of the Supreme Court. He talks often about the compact between generations that the Constitution represents. And he conveyed to his clerks, and certainly conveyed to me--to use one of his favorite phrases--the essential neutrality of the law. I'm forever grateful to Justice Kennedy for the opportunity to clerk for him. After I finished that clerkship, I worked for Judge Starr in the Independent Counsel's Office. It was a difficult, it was a tough job, it was an often thankless job. In that capacity, I had the opportunity to argue cases before the Supreme Court of the United States and the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals. I learned some lessons in that office. I had some thoughts about how it all operated and, as the Chairman has noted, I tried to make a contribution, the improvement of the public legal system, by writing an article in the Georgetown Law Journal that identified better ways, in my judgment, to conduct investigations of high-level executive branch officials. I then went to Kirkland & Ellis, where I became a partner, represented institutional clients of the firm, and also did pro bono work for several years. In 2001, I joined the White House Counsel's Office under Judge Al Gonzales. In that office I did some of the standard work of the office--ethics issues, separation of powers issues. I also worked with many members of the staff of this Committee and other Members of Congress on civil justice issues, such as class action reform, medical liability reform, and the very important terrorism insurance legislation in 2002. I also worked on judges, on the nomination of judges, and I had the opportunity to help recommend judges to the President of the United States for him to nominate to the Federal courts. In that capacity, on the district court level I worked closely with many members of the Senate and their staffs in the States that I was assigned, including some members of this Committee. In July of 2003, I became staff secretary to President Bush. This is what I call an honest broker for the President, someone who tries to ensure that the range of policy views on various subjects in the administration are presented to the President in a fair and even-handed way. I've worked closely with the President and with the senior staff at the White House and other members of the administration for nearly 3 years. I think I've earned the trust of the President, I've earned the trust of the senior staff, that I'm fair and even-handed. This kind of high-level experience in the executive branch has been common for past judicial nominees, especially on the D.C. Circuit, which handles so many important and complicated administrative and constitutional issues. Mr. Chairman, I have dedicated my career to public service. I revere the rule of law. I know first-hand the central role of the courts in protecting the rights and liberties of the people. And I pledge to each member of this Committee, and I pledge to each member of the Senate, that, if confirmed, I will interpret the law as written and not impose personal policy preferences; that I will exercise judicial power prudently and with restraint; that I will follow precedent in all cases fully and fairly; and above all, that I will at all times maintain the absolute independence of the judiciary, which in my judgment is the crown jewel of our constitutional democracy. Mr. Chairman, I will be happy to answer any questions. Thank you. [The biographical information can be found in Senate Hearing No. 108-878, Serial No. 108-69, hearing date: April 14, 2004.] [The updated biographical information of Mr. Kavanaugh follows:] [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7916.001 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7916.002 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7916.003 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7916.004 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7916.005 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7916.006 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7916.007 Chairman Specter. Thank you very much, Mr. Kavanaugh. We now turn to 5-minute rounds for each Senator. Mr. Kavanaugh, I begin with the question as to what assurances can you give this Committee and the Senate and the American people about your independence from the President and the White House. I look at a long list of nominees who have voted against their Presidential nominator on many, many celebrated matters. Just a few: Justice Douglas dissented on the Korematsu case, the Japanese internment case, against President Roosevelt's policy. Famous decision by Justice Tom Clark turning against Truman on the Steel Seizure case not long after he was nominated. Justice Kennedy, Justice O'Connor disagreeing on a woman's right to choose from President Reagan. Justice Souter disagreeing with President Bush the elder. Famous disagreements that President Eisenhower expressed about Chief Justice Warren. Perhaps the most famous case, Salmon Chase had advocated policies as the Secretary of the Treasury, and then, after being appointed to the Supreme Court, declared unconstitutional the monetary policy he had implemented as President Lincoln's treasurer. What positive assurances can you give of your independence? Mr. Kavanaugh. Mr. Chairman, if confirmed to be a D.C. Circuit judge, I will call them as I see them, regardless of who the litigants may be. I know that independence of the judiciary, as I said in my opening, is a key part of our constitutional system. I would not hesitate in any case to rule the way I saw the case, regardless of who the parties were, regardless of whether the President was involved. Chairman Specter. Would you consider yourself independent in the tradition of the judges, justices whom I've just named? Mr. Kavanaugh. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman. I know that there's a long history in our constitutional system of judges being drawn from the executive branch, and I would-- Chairman Specter. Mr. Kavanaugh, let me interrupt you. There's a great deal to cover and I only have 5 minutes. Did you have anything to do with the issues of interrogation of prisoners relating to the allegations of torture in the so-called Bybee memorandum? Mr. Kavanaugh. No, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Specter. Did you have anything to do with the questions of rendition? Mr. Kavanaugh. No, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Specter. Did you have anything to do with the questions relating to detention of inmates at Guantanamo? Mr. Kavanaugh. No, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Specter. Did you have anything to do with Mr. Abramoff and the many visits which he apparently made to the White House? Mr. Kavanaugh. No, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Specter. Do you have anything to do with the President's policy on so-called signing statements? Mr. Kavanaugh. Mr. Chairman, signing statements come through the Staff Secretary's Office, and I help ensure that relevant members of the administration have provided input on the signing statements. In the first instance they're drafted in the Justice Department, but I do help clear those before the President sees them. Chairman Specter. That poses a very difficult and contentious issue which this Committee is going to have hearings on. And I can understand that in your role as coordinator you would have the responsibility for coalescing materials. Did you take any position as to the constitutional authority for the President to limit the substance of legislation by expressing limitations in the signing statements? Mr. Kavanaugh. Mr. Chairman, it is common for signing statements, this President and previous Presidents, to identify potential constitutional issues like Appointments Clause issues, Presentment Clause issues, or issues relating to INS v. Chaddha, for example, the line item veto case. On those matters, I make sure that they have been properly staffed to other members of the White House staff. They come up in the first instance from the Justice Department and the Office of Management and Budget. Chairman Specter. Were you called upon to give the President any advice as to the constitutional implications of the signing statements? Mr. Kavanaugh. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think, without discussing internal matters, I think it's common to explain the general parameters of signing statements, for example, that there's been a history of them, and identifying potential constitutional issues in legislation, particularly Appointments Clause, Presentment Clause, and the other issues identified. Chairman Specter. Mr. Kavanaugh, you wrote an article on peremptory challenges, where there had been a practice among prosecutors to issue what are called peremptory challenges-- which, for those who do not know, means that a prospective juror can be disqualified without stating any reason, where blacks were eliminated. My time is up and I will quit, but you can answer. Mr. Kavanaugh. Mr. Chairman, I think one of the great Supreme Court decisions ever decided was Batson v. Kentucky. It overruled Swain v. Alabama, and held that a prosecutor's use of race in striking potential jurors from the jury box was unconstitutional under the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment. One of the concerns I had--that was decided in 1986; I was in law school from 1987 to 1990--one of the concerns I had was what procedures will be used to help guarantee that right to be free of racial discrimination in the jury selection procedure. And I wrote a note that advocated certain procedures that help ferret out potential racial bias in the jury selection process. Chairman Specter. Senator Schumer. Senator Schumer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just when Senator Specter went over all of the issues, he mentioned torture in connection with the Bybee memo. Were you involved in any way in the Counsel's Office in opining about the proper use of torture? Mr. Kavanaugh. No, Senator. The first time I learned of that memo, I believe, was-- Senator Schumer. I did not ask about the memo. I asked just in general. Mr. Kavanaugh. No, Senator. Senator Schumer. Thank you. OK, I would like to ask you a few questions that you did not answer. These were submitted in writing or orally at the last hearing. I will tell you all of them. First, Senator Leahy asked you whether Karl Rove was involved in the judicial selection process at any point while you were there. I asked you how you would have voted on the impeachment of President Clinton. Senator Kennedy asked you whether you agreed with Judge Pryor, who called Roe v. Wade an abomination. And Senator Durbin asked you if you consider yourself in the mold of Scalia and Thomas, which is the mold that the President has said he is going to choose judges in. First, Rove. Was Karl Rove involved in any of the selection of judges while you were there? Mr. Kavanaugh. Mr. Chairman, I think that is a question that the Counsel to the President should answer in the first instance. I don't think as a judicial nominee here I should talk about who was involved. The Counsel to the President chairs the judicial selection committee, and if there is a question about who is involved in recommending judges-- Senator Schumer. What we are trying to determine, in the previous time you were here, you said that no ideology was involved in the selection of judges. I do not see why you cannot answer that question. What is improper about answering that question? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I will check whether I can answer that question. And if I can, I will provide the answer. Senator Schumer. What would come to mind which would prevent you from answering that question? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I just want to be careful that I check with the Counsel on something like that and be sure that there is not an issue before I disclose something in the context-- Mr. Kavanaugh. Is there any privilege that would prevent you that you can see, that would come to mind right now? Mr. Kavanaugh. I can check with the Counsel on that, Senator. Senator Schumer. Do you have knowledge of the answer? Mr. Kavanaugh. Well, I was involved in the judicial selection process. Senator Schumer. So you would know yes or no, you just choose not to answer? Mr. Kavanaugh. And I would be happy to provide the answer. I just want to check first. Senator Schumer. OK. Next, how would you have voted--I know you were involved in the impeachment of President Clinton--how would you have voted if you were a Senator? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I don't think it's appropriate for the office that submitted the report to comment on whether the House made the proper decision to impeach or whether the Senate made the proper decision not to-- Senator Schumer. When lawyers argue cases, all the time they say they are disappointed in the verdict, they are happy with the verdict. That is not a violation of anything, as far as I know, except your desire not to answer the question. Mr. Kavanaugh. I guess this gets to an ethic I've learned about prosecutors offices when I worked in the Solicitor General's Office, that it's not appropriate to comment on a jury verdict. And I don't think it's appropriate in this instance for me, as a member of the Independent Counsel's Office, to comment on whether the House decision was correct or whether the Senate decision was correct. Senator Schumer. In an op-ed in the Washington Post in 1999, you wrote a defense of Ken Starr, where you said ``Starr uncovered a massive effort by the President to lie under oath and obstruct justice.'' You also wrote that, ``The word that ordinarily describes such behavior is not `trapped' but `guilty.''' You were pretty clear to state your views in 1999, but you do not want to state them now? Mr. Kavanaugh. I think that was based on Judge Wright's finding of contempt, and there was also a censure resolution introduced in the Senate that used some more language. So I think the language there, it was a joint op-ed. Chairman Specter. But you just said you did not think it was appropriate to answer. And you felt it very appropriate, in a similar role, to answer, to make some very strong statements then. Mr. Kavanaugh. I think this goes to a key point, Senator, which is impeachment and then conviction take into account more than just the facts. As you know from participating on the House side at the time and the Senators know from participating on the Senate side, there were-- Senator Schumer. I participated in votes. Chairman Specter. Now, let him finish his answer, please. Senator Schumer [continuing]. On both sides. Mr. Kavanaugh. On both sides, that's right, Senator. And I think, as many of the Senators and House members discussed at the time, it wasn't just a simple question of whether there was a violation of law committed, but there were broader considerations for the country. And that's where it really gets, really gets, I think, improper for someone in the Independent Counsel's Office to say whether they think the President should have been impeached. Senator Schumer. I fail to see the distinction. Let me ask you to answer, since my time is ending here, the two other questions. Do you consider Roe v. Wade to be an abomination? And do you consider yourself to be a judicial nominee, like the President said he was going to nominate people, in the mold of Scalia and Thomas? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, on the question of Roe v. Wade, if confirmed to the D.C. Circuit, I would follow Roe v. Wade faithfully and fully. That would be binding precedent of the Court. It's been decided by the Supreme Court-- Senator Schumer. I asked you your own opinion. Mr. Kavanaugh. And I'm saying if I were confirmed to the D.C. Circuit, Senator, I would follow it. It's been reaffirmed many times, including in Planned Parenthood v. Casey. Senator Schumer. I understand. But what is your opinion? You're not on the bench yet. You've talked about these issues in the past to other people, I'm sure. Mr. Kavanaugh. The Supreme Court has held repeatedly, Senator, and I don't think it would be appropriate for me to give a personal view of that case. Senator Schumer. OK, you are not going to answer the question. How about being in the mold of Scalia and Thomas? Mr. Kavanaugh. I don't want to talk about current members of the Court, but I do think I can describe some of the justices or judges in the past that I think I would try, that have been role models to me, including Justice White, Justice Jackson, and for a couple of reasons. They were people who took an active part in our Government system, which is some-- Senator Schumer. I understand. Just explain to me why it is appropriate for the President to say that he will appoint nominees in a particular mold, but you cannot answer whether you would be part of that. Mr. Kavanaugh. As a potential inferior court judge, Senator, on the D.C. Circuit if confirmed, I just don't want to talk about currently sitting members of the Supreme Court. I'm happy to talk about Justice Jackson and Justice White, if you'd like. Senator Schumer. OK. I wish I could say it, but I do not think you have clarified any of these answers that we asked you the first time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Specter. Senator Hatch. STATEMENT OF HON. ORRIN G. HATCH, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF UTAH Senator Hatch. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome again to the Committee. You are one of the few who have had this great experience of being brought back here twice. Let me just take a-- Mr. Chairman, I would like to take most of my time to make just a few comments rather than to ask questions at this time. I think that during his first hearing 2 years ago in 2004 and his written submissions afterwards, Mr. Kavanaugh more than adequately answered all the questions that had been posed to him. The Committee already has a 159-page hearing record before it on this nominee. And I am confident in Mr. Kavanaugh's abilities and capacities in both the understanding and knowledge of the law. I suspect that he will continue to show his intellect, sound judgment, and judicial temperament. I have no doubt that Mr. Kavanaugh fully appreciates the proper role and limitations placed on Federal appellate judges in our constitutional system. And while I am not pleased with all the circumstances that have resulted in holding this unusual if not unprecedented second hearing, I take solace in the fact that Chief Justice Roberts, whom many in the public and a super-majority of Senators found to be an extremely capable individual after his confirmation hearings last September, was also subject to two confirmation hearings before he was able to sit on the D.C. Circuit. I hope that Brett Kavanaugh's confirmation will not be delayed as long as now- Chief Justice Roberts's was. He was delayed for 11 solid years, between the time that the first President Bush nominated him and the time that the second President Bush, our current President, renominated him. Now, while today's hearing will and should concentrate and focus on qualifications of Brett Kavanaugh to serve on the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, when you see nominees with the backgrounds of John Roberts and Brett Kavanaugh having been held up for so many years for so little reason, sometimes you have to ask yourself if there may be motivations at play that have nothing at all to do with the nominee's actual fitness to sit on the bench. To date it has been almost 3 years since Mr. Kavanaugh was first nominated. I think it is time to vote on his nomination, and frankly it is past time for the Senate to vote on Mr. Kavanaugh's nomination. So at this point, I would like to welcome you, Mr. Kavanaugh, your wife and baby and of course your family. Since the last time before this Committee, you have become a husband and father, and I join in welcoming Mrs. Kavanaugh here and your 8-month-old daughter Margaret to the Committee. I also want to acknowledge the presence of Mr. Kavanaugh's parents. I have known them for a long time. Ed Kavanaugh for many years, he headed up the major trade association, the Cosmetic, Toiletries, and Fragrance Association, and he is deservedly admired by many in this town. And his mother served with distinction as a State court judge in Maryland for many, many years. Sometimes in these confirmation hearings, in the rush to get to more controversial matters, there is a tendency to skip over too quickly on the qualities and attributes that led the President to nominate the individual--and in this case, Mr. Kavanaugh--in the first place. And I think Senator Specter has already given us an overview of the nominee's impressive educational and employment background. We have also heard the testimony of two excellent Federal court judges for whom he clerked, both of whom I know--Judge Kozinski of the Ninth Circuit and of course Judge Stapleton of the Third Circuit Court of Appeals. I think we should weigh their words very carefully. These are people of impeccable reputations and ability on the bench. Not only did you distinguish yourself as a clerk on two appellate courts, but you also served as a clerk on the Supreme Court. You had an academic career that was pretty impressive as well, at Yale. You've had a series of impressive and highly responsible jobs in both the executive branch and in the private sector. And you're a talented appellate advocate as well before the Supreme Court. Now, let me just say--my time is running out, but in addition to your three judicial clerkships, as you have mentioned, you worked in the Solicitor General's Office, in the Department of Justice, with Ken Starr, and of course with the Office of Special Counsel. And of course nobody should judge you as an attorney for having worked in something that was as unpleasant as that. Attorneys work on unpleasant matters in many ways, and you would be a pretty doggone poor attorney if you were not willing to work with distinction and with fairness when called upon to do so. And I think knowing you and knowing what happened in the Clinton matter, you served with distinction and fairness. My time is about up so I just--I will make some more comments if we have another round, but I just want to congratulate you for standing in there and being willing to serve on the circuit court of appeals. I know you could make a fortune on the outside, but you have made public service your life and I do not see how we can find a better person to serve and give public service than you. So I just want to personally express my fondness for you, my high admiration for you, and the fact that you will have my support in every step of this process. Chairman Specter. Thank you, Senator Hatch. Under the early bird rule, on the side for the Democrats are Senator Feinstein, Senator Durbin, Senator Kennedy, Senator Feingold, and on the Republican side are Senator Coburn, Senator Graham, Senator Sessions, and Senator Kyl. So under the early bird rule we now turn to Senator Durbin. Senator Durbin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Kavanaugh, thank you for returning. In 2003, Jay Bybee was confirmed to a seat on the Ninth Circuit. A year and a half later, we learned he had authored the infamous torture memo when he headed the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel. In the memo he claimed the President has the right to ignore the law that makes torture a crime and narrowly defined torture as abuse that causes pain equivalent to organ failure or death. The torture memo was requested by, addressed to the then- White House Counsel, Alberto Gonzales. So clearly the White House Counsel's Office knew that Mr. Bybee had authored the torture memo at the time of his nomination. Did you know that Mr. Bybee authored the torture memo or similar memos at the time of his nomination? Mr. Kavanaugh. No, Senator, I think you're referring to the August 1, 2002, memo. I was not aware of that memo until there was public disclosure of it in the news media, I think in the summer of 2004. Senator Durbin. The administration has now repudiated the memo. In retrospect, should the fact that Mr. Bybee authored the torture memo have disqualified him from consideration as a nominee? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I don't think, sitting here as a prospective judge, as a nominee to a court of appeals, I should talk about another sitting judge and whether that person should or should not have been nominated. I just don't think that's a proper role for me. Senator Durbin. But you see that is what we are struggling with here. We do not have a number of cases that you have argued before a court, because you haven't. We do not have trials that you have taken to a jury verdict, because there are none. We have to rely on what you have done with your life and where you have been to try to determine what your values are. Senator Schumer asked you a series of questions related to the work of your life, which you did not feel were appropriate to answer. And now I am trying to plumb that same type of well to find out what you really believe and who you are. And every time we get close, you say sorry, I can't answer. That is a problem for a person seeking a seat on the second-highest court in the land. I do not know where to go in questioning you. You do not want to talk about what you have done that might have any political implication. And frankly, when it comes to legal work, there is not much to turn to. Do you see the problem we are facing? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, on that memo, I can say that the administration has repealed that memo. I agree with that decision. I do not believe the analysis in that memo was correct. I think that memo did not serve the presidency or this President well. And I am willing to talk about the memo itself. Senator Durbin. Well, let me ask you. You were in charge of judicial nominations, or at least involved in judicial nominations with the White House. And that is why we are going into this. Let's go to another nominee and see if you might respond to this. In September 2003, the President nominated William Haynes to be a judge on the Fourth Circuit. As General Counsel to the Department of Defense, Mr. Haynes had been the architect of the administration's discredited detention and interrogation policies. For example, Mr. Haynes recommended that Secretary Rumsfeld approve the use of abusive interrogation techniques, like threatening detainees with dogs, forced nudity, and for forcing detainees into painful stress positions. During the 108th Congress, Mr. Haynes's nomination stalled after his involvement in this scandal came to light. Just this February, the President decided to renominate him. What was your role in the original Haynes nomination and decision to renominate him? And at the time of the nomination, what did you know about Mr. Haynes's role in crafting the administration's detention and interrogation policies? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I did not--I was not involved and am not involved in the questions about the rules governing detention of combatants or--and so I do not have the involvement with that. And with respect to Mr. Haynes's nomination, I've--I know Jim Haynes, but it was not one of the nominations that I handled. I handled a number of nominations in the Counsel's Office. That was not one of the ones that I handled. Senator Durbin. So let me try this approach and see if we can learn a little more. Manny Miranda was an employee of the Senate Judiciary Committee on the Republican staff and then on the Senate Majority Leader's staff. He hacked into the computers of the members and staff of this Committee, stealing thousands of documents and memoranda which were then shared with others. Did you know Manny Miranda, or do you know him today? Mr. Kavanaugh. I knew Manny Miranda because he was a member of Senator Hatch's staff and then Senator Frist's staff working on judicial nominations. Senator Durbin. Did you ever work with him in terms of judicial nominations? Mr. Kavanaugh. He was part of a group of Senate staffers that did work on judicial nominations with people at the Department of Justice and the White House Counsel's Office. We talked about this last time. I did not know about any memos from the Democratic side. I did not suspect that. Had I known or suspected that, I would have immediately told Judge Gonzales, who I'm sure would have immediately talked to Chairman Hatch about it. Did not know about it, did not suspect it. He was part, however, of the staff, of course, that worked on judicial nominations, including with--on both sides. Senator Durbin. My time is up. But I think one of the problems you had with the American Bar Association when they downgraded your rating was they thought you were dismissive of this, that you did not take this as a serious problem, that a Republican staffer had broken into the computers of Democratic Senators and their staff, were stealing documents and sharing them with those who were plotting the strategy for the White House. Would you like to respond as to whether or not you think this was a serious matter, perhaps criminal? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I don't know what the American Bar Association said about that, but I know what I told them and what I've told the Committee. Had I known or suspected anything like that, I would have immediately told Judge Gonzales, who I'm sure would have immediately called Chairman Hatch. I know the matter has been under investigation in the Senate. I know the matter has been under investigation by a special prosecutor. That is a serious matter. And that is what I said to the American Bar Association and that's what I'm saying to this Committee. So that's my view on the matter. Senator Durbin. Thank you. Chairman Specter. Thank you very much, Senator Durbin. Senator Coburn. STATEMENT OF HON. TOM COBURN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA Senator Coburn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to put a few points into the record. Of the 12 members of the D.C. Circuit and the two seniors, none have as broad experience in terms of measurement points as our nominee here today. Only five have clerked on the Federal appeals court out of the 14; only four have clerked on the Supreme Court; only six have argued before the court of appeals; only five have argued before the Supreme Court; only seven have had editorial positions on law review; only four have had previous judicial experience. Of everybody that is on there now, only four have had previous judicial experience and only four had any legislative branch experience. Again, I want to address the issues out in the open. I think what is happening here today I am somewhat embarrassed about. We have somebody who is obviously qualified. The ABA says he is qualified. He is not downgraded, he is recognized as qualified. He is extremely well qualified and well qualified. This time he is well qualified, with a minority extremely well qualified--or qualified and well qualified. But what it requires is ``qualified.'' And if you look at the ABA's position of what ``qualified'' is--and let me read it for you, should we have any questions regarding that--let me find it. It means that the nominee meets the committee's very-- this is ``qualified.''--means that the nominee meets the committee's very high standards with respect to integrity, professional competence, judicial temperament, and that the Committee believes that the nominee will be able to perform satisfactorily all of the duties and responsibilities required by the high office of a Federal judge. Everybody on that ABA says you are qualified. And I just read what it means. The idea that we are fishing around because we do not like something the Bush administration has done, or we are going to imply and impugn the integrity of somebody who has been in a position of responsibility and has offered his good services to fulfill the requirements of the executive branch, and anything you do not like about the executive branch you are going to try to tie to this gentleman, is improper. It also is dismissive of our open form of Government. And is exactly, again--I will say again--exactly what the American people are sick of, partisan sniping that is not about the issues but trying to score a point and trying to undermine somebody's integrity who has absolute integrity on these issues. They have answered the questions. We are here--we are here--to give a second look at somebody who has already answered the questions. And there is precedent to not give answers to questions about certain privileged communications within the White House. That does not mean that those are necessarily devious or wrong. It means you protect the Office of the Presidency. That is an appropriate role. There is nothing wrong with that. I will have one question for you. Why do you want to be a Federal judge? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I want to be a Federal judge because I know from experience and through my upbringing the role of the courts in protecting the rights and liberties of the people. I know how essential the rule of law is to our country. I know how the independence of our Federal judiciary is central to our constitutional form of Government. I think, based on my experience and my background, I can make a contribution to the administration of justice. I think I can be a good judge. And it's part of my commitment to public service that I've carried out for most of the 16 years since I graduated from law school. Senator Coburn. Do you think it makes any difference on your ability to be an appellate judge in this country which side of the issue you were on the impeachment or which side of the issue you were on any of these issues that have been raised? Your personal opinion, when you have testified that you are not going to allow a personal opinion to interfere in your interpretation of the law and the independence of the judiciary, does that have a bearing? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I absolutely believe in the idea that judges are neutral and impartial and that whatever activities may have occurred in someone's past life in terms of Government activities, those are good experience to have to become a good judge. But it also is true, once you put on the black robe, you're impartial and you represent the law. As Justice Kennedy used to tell us, the essential neutrality of the law. And I think that is a principle that I would seek to follow were I to be confirmed to the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals. I think it's essential to our entire system of Government. There's no such thing on the courts as a Republican judge or a Democratic judge. Once you're on the court, all the judges are there representing the justice system, representing the idea of justice. Senator Coburn. Thank you. My time has expired. Chairman Specter. Thank you, Senator Coburn. Senator Feinstein. Senator Feinstein. I am happy to yield to Senator Kennedy. My understanding is you wanted to go next? Senator Kennedy. I appreciate that. We have this health legislation on the floor now which we are trying to work through. If it is convenient for the Senator from California, I would just take the time. I thank the Chair. Congratulations to you, Mr. Kavanaugh, for gaining the President's confidence. The Circuit Court, as you know, has such special jurisdiction in terms of so many different areas of legislation that we pass--National Labor Relations Board, the relationship of workers and what happens to workers, discrimination against workers in the workplace, environmental kinds of issues they are working through. And their judgments on so many of these end up being the law, and so few go on to the Supreme Court. And we have seen very interesting trends that have taken place in the District court. So this has a special relevancy and importance. So that is at least why we spend as much time as we do on this particular nomination. Just on the--I want to just really focus in on this issue, again, of torture and rendition, your role there. I am on the Armed Services Committee and we have spent a lot of time. We have had 10 investigations of torture, and none of them have revealed what we are constantly seeing revealed now with newer reports that have come on up in the newspapers and exposed by Freedom of Information reports. So it is something that is--And we have a policy of rendition which is of enormous concern to many of us. And we also know that Mr. Gonzales was in touch with Mr. Bybee when he was over at OLC. I mean, we have gone through all of this. This was all through the Gonzales--when Mr. Gonzales was up for Attorney General. And we also know that Haynes was in touch with the White House at that time, good chance that he was in touch with OLC. So this is the background. Have you ever previously--as you well know, that Bybee memorandum effectively said that if you go on out, you are in the military service or under contract and you go out and torture someone, it does not make any difference how badly you torture or what pain you inflict, as long as your purpose is to get information rather than to hurt an individual, you are going to be vindicated in terms of any kind of protections. I mean, effectively. That also was included in the Bybee. And Mr. Gonzales repudiated it when he came up before the Committee to be Attorney General. Is this the first time you have every made a comment on the Bybee memorandum? You responded to Senator Durbin and said that, in sort of a followup question, that you did not agree with the reasoning or the rationale for it. Is this the first time that you have ever said anything about the Bybee? Mr. Kavanaugh. I believe it is. It is possible I have said something to people I work with, but this is the first time, certainly, I have been questioned about it. Senator Kennedy. But you have not, prior to this time, ever made a comment or statement to others indicating that you found it particularly offensive. Because it has been a major issue, an issue in question out there. Please. Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I know that Judge Gonzales in the summer of 2004 had a press conference where the memo was repealed and talked about this issue. I think also at his confirmation hearing in 2005, he said he disagreed, I believe, with the legal analysis in there, that the legal analysis in there was incorrect. And so I know members of the administration have repudiated that memorandum, or at least the legal analysis in that memorandum. Senator Kennedy. And your testimony is that you had nothing with the promotion of Bybee to the Ninth Circuit. Is that correct? Mr. Kavanaugh. That was not one of the nominations I worked on, and I knew he was, of course, being nominated but I didn't know some of the issues that you're talking about today. Senator Kennedy. Well, then you are saying that you did not know he wrote what we know is the Bybee memorandum at the time that he was being considered for the circuit? Mr. Kavanaugh. I first learned of the existence of that memo, I think, when there was a Washington Post story in the summer of 2004. I think that is the first--I'm pretty sure that's the first time I learned anything about the August 1 memo. Senator Kennedy. And for Mr. Haynes, have you expressed an opinion in terms of the legal counsel for the Defense Department, for promotion? I understand you have not handled the Haynes nomination? Mr. Kavanaugh. That's correct, Senator. And in terms of my portfolio in the Counsel's office, it involved a lot of civil justice issues--worked on nominations, some ethics issues, separation of powers issues. It did not involve the kinds of issues you're raising in your questions. Senator Kennedy. Well, are not most of those--I mean, the-- most of those issues, class actions, insurance reform, are not most of those handled in the various departments, or were they--are those not sort of policy issues handled in the departments? Those are the issues that you were working on? Mr. Kavanaugh. I worked, I would say, primarily on judicial nominations. In the wake of September 11th, there were a number of civil justice issues that I worked on, including the terrorism insurance litigation. Senator Kennedy. OK. Just finally, on the documents that were taken here from the Committee and that you have the familiarity--and you have indicated that you, in reviewing them, had no understanding or awareness that they had been taken, been stolen. Have you ever gone back, now that you are aware of it, and seen what decisions you may or might not have taken on the basis of documents that were illegally taken? To see whether you may have made some judgments or decisions to reach certain conclusions, now that you know that they were not properly taken? Have you ever thought, well, I ought to go back, I might have made some judgments or decisions when I was working for the President and I ought to take a look at this, since you know that these documents now were taken? Have you ever thought about that? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, there's a very important premise in your question that I think is incorrect, which is I didn't know about the memos or see the memos that I think you're describing. So I think-- Senator Kennedy. Oh, you never saw any of those? Mr. Kavanaugh. No, Senator, that's correct. I'm not aware of the memos, I never saw such memos that I think you're referring to. I mean, I don't know what the universe of memos might be, but I do know that I never received any memos and was not aware of any such memos. So I just want to correct that premise that I think was in your question. Senator Kennedy. OK. My time is up, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Specter. Thank you, Senator Kennedy. On the Republican side, we have, in sequence, Senator Graham, Senator Sessions, Senator Cornyn, and Senator Kyl. And on the Democratic side, we have, who has not questioned, Senator Feinstein and Senator Feingold. I had Senator Feinstein ahead of Senator Kennedy on the list. Senator Feinstein. Yes, I yielded to Senator Kennedy. Chairman Specter. OK, I just wanted to be sure that the list is correct. It is sometimes judgmental. Senator Feinstein was here first, but she left for awhile. Senator Kennedy came. But at any rate, Senator Feinstein yielded. But I wanted it known that that was the list that I had. And now Senator Graham. Senator Graham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to congratulate you for having the hearing, because I think it is appropriate. It is a lifetime appointment, that people be able to ask questions and he be able to answer within his ability to do so without compromising what he believes to be his ethics or any proper role he may have played as a lawyer. Do you believe you were treated fairly by the ABA? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, the American Bar Association has rated me three times. I'm going to get directly to the question, but I'm going to give you some background, if I could. I've been rated three times by the American Bar Association. And each time, there were 14 individual reviews conducted by members of the Committee. So there have been a total of 42 separate reviews conducted of me based on interviews with lots of people and review of lots of record. All 42 have found that I'm well qualified or qualified to serve on the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals. So I'm pleased with that and I'm proud of that. And to the extent--and none of the 42 has found that I'm not qualified, and I think the Chair of the Committee yesterday said that there's not been a breath of anyone saying that I'm not qualified. So I'm proud and pleased with the 42 of 42. Senator Graham. So do you think you were fairly treated? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I think, sitting here as a nominee, I would prefer not to talk about my--you know, about the American Bar Association other than to say that I'm pleased and proud to have 42 of 42 rating me well qualified or qualified. Senator Graham. Based on your going through that experience, would you recommend that we continue to consult the ABA when it comes to judges? [Laughter.] Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, again, I'm pleased and proud of the ratings. Their--in the future, maybe, will look back and have some observations, but right now I don't think I have any observations to offer the Committee about the American Bar Association. Senator Graham. Your time at the White House, you dealt with, I think you described your job. One of these constitutional questions that we are trying to wrestle with here is the inherent authority of the President in a time of war versus any designated role of the judiciary or the Congress in general. Do you agree with Justice Jackson's evaluation in the Youngstown Steel case that the President or the executive branch is at their strongest maximum power when they have concurrence of the legislative body? Mr. Kavanaugh. I agree completely with that, Senator. Senator Graham. Very specific question. Do you believe that at a time of war, the Congress has the ability to amend, pass the Uniform Code of Military Justice and not infringe on the President's inherent authority as commander in chief? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, that sounds like a specific hypothetical that could come before the court, so I'd hesitate to give an answer. In terms of Justice Jackson's framework, that of course for a half century has been the guiding framework. I think it's a work of genius, that opinion, in terms of setting out the different categories of Presidential power and Congressional power in times of war and otherwise, in terms of, as you say, category I, when the President and the Congress work together, that's when the power is at the strongest. And category II, that's what they call the twilight zone in the opinion. And then in category III, where a President acts against the express or implied will of Congress, that's where the President's power is at its lowest ebb and raises some very serious constitutional questions, according to Justice Jackson. I think that's an exceptional opinion that has guided American law, the relationship between Congress and the executive for about a half-century, and it's really been the foundation of these kinds of issues that I know you and the Committee have been working on. Senator Graham. Finally, and if you don't want to answer it, you don't have to, but are you a Republican? If so, why? Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I am a registered Republican. As I said before to Senator Coburn, I believe very much that it's good to have judges who've participated in Government. That's been part of our experience in the past, to have judges on the D.C. Circuit who've participated in the executive branch, who've worked in the executive branch; judges on the Supreme Court. Specifically, to answer your question, when I was first registering to vote, President Reagan was President and I agreed with him on some issues and registered Republican in the first election in--I guess 1984 was the first one I voted in. Chairman Specter. Thank you very much, Senator Graham. Senator Feinstein. Senator Feinstein. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Let me just say this. This is a difficult nomination. First of all, you're very young, which is, I think, a blessing for you. But in terms of an appellate judge, I think it is a detriment. Obviously, you've had a good education, you have done well. You have spent a lot of your life in at least a semi-political capacity. The question comes up, how can you assure us that you will be fair? Would you recuse yourself from any judgment that concerned this administration? Without a record either as a trial lawyer or as a judge, it's very difficult for some of us to know what kind of a judge you would be and whether you can move away from the partisanship and into that arena of objectivity and fairness. Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, thank you for the question. I think in the past, on the D.C. Circuit and on the Supreme Court and on other courts of appeals other than the D.C. Circuit, prior Government experience in the legislative branch or the executive branch has been seen as a very valuable asset, whether it was Judge Abner Mikva or Judge Patricia Wald, Judge John Roberts on the D.C. Circuit, Judge Merrick Garland, who President Clinton appointed to the D.C. Circuit. That kind of experience has been seen as very valuable experience and valuable background. And of course the question--I think only four of the last 21 judges on the D.C. Circuit have actually had prior judicial experience, so the norm on the D.C. Circuit, in fact the overwhelming norm, is for the judges on the D.C., Circuit since 1977, not to have had prior judicial experience. What they've had usually is Government experience in the legislative branches or the executive branches. And your question really goes to how do you assess someone's record. And I think that's done through an assessment of going back, in my case 16 years in my career, and looking at the things I've done. In the Staff Secretary's Office now, where I'm an honest broker, where I have to be fair and even- handed in the kind of role I perform for the President, some of the work I've done in the Counsel's Office on judges, I've worked with your office and Senator Boxer's office in the past on judges I know and worked closely on that. When I was in private practices, working on not just institutional clients, but pro bono cases. One of my proudest cases is I worked on a pro bono case for a synagogue in my home county that was seeking to build in a new location. Some of the neighbors didn't want it there. I represented them. They won in Federal district court. And the Independent Counsel's Office, I know, Senator, that that's controversial and that's raised some questions. And I think in that office, my record shows that I was fair and conducted myself responsibly. I've written an article about some reforms that I think would help avoid some of the problems that I think were systemic in the Independent Counsel's-- Senator Feinstein. I am running out of time. Answer the recusal question? Mr. Kavanaugh. On the recusal question, I know that there will be issues of recusal that I will face. There are standards in place under 28 U.S.C. 455, and I will analyze those closely were I to be confirmed to be a judge. There will be some difficult questions. I do not want to prejudge how I would rule on any recusal motion or how I would handle any particular case, but I do know, Senator, that it will be an issue in certain cases. I pledge to you that I'll take that seriously, that I'll study the precedents of people like myself who've come to the bench, that I will talk to my colleagues, were I to be confirmed, and that I'll make the judgment responsibly. I pledge that to you. Senator Feinstein. As you look back at the Kenneth Starr investigation today--I just read the op-ed you wrote in 1999-- what are your thoughts? What do you think? Mr. Kavanaugh. On the Independent Counsel Office investigation in general, I think a couple things, Senator. First of all, I think it was, in retrospect, probably a mistake for Judge Starr to be assigned additional investigations after the initial Whitewater and Madison investigations. So he got new jurisdiction over a Travel Office matter, an FBI files matter, and eventually the Lewinsky matter. I think it would have been better in retrospect for Judge Starr to have handled what he was initially assigned and, if there was a new Special Counsel needed in these other matters, for new people to be appointed. By adding to the jurisdiction, it created the impression that Judge Starr was somehow the permanent special investigator of the administration. He was assigned a very specific matter. So that's one thing in retrospect. And frankly, even at the time that I thought it was a concern, I think the way the report was released was a real problem. I thought that at the time. And I think the way that was released did not serve anyone well. And I've written in my law journal article about the problems with prosecutorial reports, the way people's reputations are damaged. So I've proposed some real reforms there. I also know that it was a very serious matter in terms of the underlying issue in 1998 in terms of the things that members of this body weighed and members of the House of Representatives weighed and that Judge Wright dealt with in terms of the contempt motion that she dealt with. So there was a serious underlying matter there; I believe that. I believe that there was--that Judge Starr tried to do it thoroughly. But again, to go back to the core problem, I think there was too much jurisdiction added to Judge Starr that created a mistaken public impression that harmed the credibility of the investigation. Senator Feinstein. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Specter. Thank you very much, Senator Feinstein. The next questioner on the Republican side is Senator Sessions. STATEMENT OF HON. JEFF SESSIONS, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF ALABAMA Senator Sessions. Mr. Kavanaugh, thank you for your thoughts on Senator Feinstein's question about the Starr investigation. I think you have provided some good insight and I think that probably is a reason why your reputation as a member of that prosecutorial team was very high, and people had a clear impression that you were a cool head and a wise member of that team. And that is the reputation I have heard, and I can see why you had that. I would note that Ken Starr was a former Solicitor General of the United States, a man of impeccable integrity, extraordinary legal skill, and anyone would have been proud to answer his call to serve him. Looking at the ABA evaluation, I think, first of all, you did extremely well, extraordinarily well to be rated well qualified by them, in the sense that you were relatively young and were working in the Bush administration. You were given the highest possible rating by them. And you have been there now in a less legal capacity and a few new members decided to give you the qualified rating instead of well qualified rating, but I do not think that is a big issue. In fact, I would quote Mr. Tober, Stephen Tober, the Chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary. This is what he said to me in a telephone conversation. He said this: ``Let me underscore, we did not find him unqualified. There's not a breath in that report or any earlier report. We found him qualified; minority, well qualified. What I said at the end is what in fact many people said, that he has a solid reputation for integrity, intellectual capacity--a lot of people refer to him as brilliant--and an excellent writing and analytical ability. Those are great skills to bring to the court of appeals. There's no question about that.'' You wouldn't object to them saying that about you, would you? Mr. Kavanaugh. As I said, Senator-- Senator Sessions. We will pass over that. Then he went on to say this: ``He is found to have high integrity. He is found to be brilliant. He is a very skilled writer and legal analyst. He has those components. He has those skills that will serve him well, certainly on a Federal court.'' And then he goes on to say: ``It is true''--I think maybe to Senator Hatch's question--``it is true there's not a single not-qualified vote in the picture.'' So I think the ABA rating, whether it is as high as it could be, and all of them did not vote you well qualified, the highest possible rating, but they did rate you qualified and the Chairman of the Committee gave some very interesting insights, I think. I would just like to note on the age question that you are 6 years older, I believe, than Judge Stapleton when he was appointed to the bench, the court of appeals, and 6 years older than Judge Kozinski when he was appointed to the bench, both of whom you clerked for. I think the Chairman made that earlier. And Justice Kennedy was appointed to the Ninth Circuit 3 years younger than you are today. I think those are qualities that--I think other qualities are at stake here. Let me just say this about my thinking of how you evaluate a nominee, that is, you consider the entire breadth of the gifts and graces they bring to the job. And if a person has less--I like a person who has been in private practice. I think that is fine. But if a person does not have private practice or a lot of--you were a partner in one of the country's best law firms; that ought to be some private practice experience. But whether you had a great deal of that experience or not, other factors are considered in here. You were editor of the Yale Law Journal, one of the editors of that. You clerked for two circuit judges, both of whom have testified for you. The first one said you should be a judge, he saw that in you when you first clerked for him and advised you of that as a career path. So you worked for two court of appeals judges. You sat at the right hand of two judges who hold the very position you will be holding today. And then you were given the rare honor of clerking for a justice on the U.S. Supreme Court, Justice Kennedy, a judge who is considered a moderate, middle-of-the- road judge, I guess. You served under his leadership. So those are things that I think are extraordinarily important. And you served in the Solicitor General's Office of the United States. That is the greatest law office in the world, where you represent the United States before the Federal appellate courts in the country arguing cases before the very court that you would sit upon, as well as arguing cases before the U.S. Supreme Court, an honor very few lawyers have. So I think it is a good experience and extraordinary academic record, Mr. Chairman, and I believe he should be confirmed. Chairman Specter. Thank you very much, Senator Sessions. Senator Feingold arrived earlier but has departed. Senator Leahy arrived later and is ranking, and Senator Leahy has agreed he will yield to Senator Feingold. Senator Leahy. Go ahead. After these tough, tough questions that Senator Sessions has been asking, where the nominee just sits there and is canonized, I am overwhelmed by that. So I yield to Senator Feingold. Chairman Specter. You should have been here earlier to hear Senator Hatch's tough questions. [Laughter.] Chairman Specter. Senator Feingold? Senator Leahy. He only asks tough questions of Democrats. He coordinates the others. Senator Sessions. Well, this is the second time around. STTEMENT OF HON. RUSSELL D. FEINGOLD, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN Senator Feingold. I thank both the Chairman and the Ranking Member. And I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing. It was obviously the right thing to do, given that it has been nearly 2 years since the first hearing and, frankly, in light of Mr. Kavanaugh's incomplete responses to written questions, even though he delayed providing those responses for 7 months. Among those written questions were several questions that I submitted concerning ethical issues that came up in connection with the nominations of three judges who I believe Mr. Kavanaugh assisted as part of his duties in the White House: Charles Pickering, who received a recess appointment and subsequently retired; and D. Brooke Smith and Ron Clark, who are currently on the bench. In his November 2004 responses, Mr. Kavanaugh essentially refused to answer my questions. I wrote him a letter on Friday explaining why I believe these questions are appropriate and asking him to supplement his responses. Late yesterday I received a response, not from Mr. Kavanaugh but from Mr. Moschella at the Justice Department, that said the following: ``As you know, Chairman Specter has scheduled a hearing on Mr. Kavanaugh's nomination on May 9, 2006. At that time, Mr. Kavanaugh will be available to respond to questions from all Senators on the Committee.'' Mr. Chairman, first, I would like to put in the record a copy of my letter and Mr. Moschella's response. Chairman Specter. Without objection, it will be made a part of the record. Senator Feingold. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Now, Mr. Kavanaugh, I assume you were consulted and approved of Mr. Moschella's response. I hope that you will now respond to my questions. Here is the first one for which I sought an additional response. During the Senate's consideration of Judge Charles Pickering's nomination to the Fifth Circuit, the Judiciary Committee learned that he solicited and collected letters of support from lawyers who had appeared in his courtroom and practiced in his district. It later became apparent that some of these lawyers had cases pending before him when they wrote the letters that Judge Pickering requested. Professor Stephen Gillars of NYU Law School has written, ``Judge Pickering's solicitation creates the appearance of impropriety in violation of Canon 2 of the Code of Conduct for U.S. Judges. The impropriety becomes particularly acute if lawyers or litigants with matters currently pending before the Judge were solicited.'' So, sir, my first question is this. Did you know that Judge Pickering planned to solicit letters of support in this manner before he did so? And if not, when did you become aware that Judge Pickering had solicited these letters of support? Mr. Kavanaugh. The answer to the first question, Senator, is no. This was not one of the judicial nominees that I was primarily handling. I became aware of suggestions of this sort, I assume, at some time during the proceedings, probably when it was raised. I don't know if it was raised in the media or raised by the Senate in the first instance. Without commenting on the facts and circumstances of that matter, because I really don't know the facts and circumstances, when a judge asks a lawyer who's got a case before him or her to do something, that does put the lawyer in a very awkward position and makes it difficult for the lawyer to say no. So just in terms of a hypothetical situation, there is a situation there. Again, I don't know the facts and circumstances of what was going on there. I only heard about it, really, from either the media or from when the members of this Committee were talking about that issue. Senator Feingold. Well, I would like to know if you think that Judge Pickering's conduct was consistent with the ethical obligations of a Federal judge. Mr. Kavanaugh. Senator, I don't know if there's been fact finding on what his conduct was. In terms of the hypothetical situation of a judge asking a lawyer who has a case before him or her to do something, I know that raises some questions. Again, I don't know the facts and circumstances of what Judge Pickering did. I've given you my general principle. Senator Feingold. Well, it's a good general principle, but the facts are pretty clear. I don't think he denied that he solicited these letters and that these were individuals that appeared before him. There was some debate about the significance of it, but-- Am I off track in suggesting that it looks like at least those set of facts, whether you think they occurred in this case, would be a violation of the Code of Ethics? Mr. Kavanaugh. I hesitate to comment on another judicial nominee. Again, Senator, I'm happy to state a general principle that I believe in. Again-- Senator Feingold. Let's go with the general principle, then. If a judge is up for nomination and he solicits letters from lawyers who have cases before him, is it not the general principle that that would be a violation of the Code of Ethics? Mr. Kavanaugh. I think that raises some questions that warrant some further questions to find out what happened. Senator Feingold. Mr. Kavanaugh, I--my time is up. Thank you. Chairman Specter. Thank you very much, Senator Feingold. The next questioner is Senator Cornyn. STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN CORNYN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS Senator Cornyn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome back, Mr. Kavanaugh. Mr. Kavanaugh. Thank you, Senator. Senator Cornyn. This is the second hearing 2 years, roughly, after your first hearing, and we have learned a lot has changed in your personal life. Mr. Kavanaugh. Yes, sir. Senator Cornyn. But I do not think a lo